L01 . Multiple Sulfatase Defi ciency: Molecular defect and properties of the autosomal forms of epigenetic mosaicism can be caused by missing enzyme. retrotransposon activity. K. von Figura, M. Mariappan, J. Peng, A. Preußer, B. Schmidt; X-linked epigenetic mosaicism: Different patterns of lyonization Biochemie II, Georg August Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. include Blaschko lines (many syndromes), checkerboard pattern (X- Based on purifi cation and peptide sequencing of the missing linked hypertrichosis), and lateralization (CHILD syndrome). enzyme (1) and complementation cloning using minicell mediated Autosomal epigenetic mosaicism: This concept may explain the chromosome transfer (2) the gene defective in multiple sulfatase exceptional familial aggregation of pigmentary mosaicism that would defi ciency (MSD) was identifi ed. The SUMF 1 gene encodes a visualize the action of a retrotransposon that is partly silencing and protein that is located in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, partly activating a pigment gene. Similar linear patterns are caused N-glycosylated and converts cysteine residue in the active site of by retrotransposon activity in plants such as petunia or in animals newly synthesized sulfatases into C(cid:302)-formylglycine (FGly). This FGly- such as mice or dogs. generating enzyme (FGE) is conserved from bacteria to man and Genomic mosaicismof lethal autosomal mutations: Some of these contains three subdomains, separated by protease sensitive linker phenotypes have been elucidated at the molecular or cytogenetic sequences. Two of the subdomains are linked by intramolecular level, but the genetic basis of Schimmelpenning syndrome and disulfi de bonds. The oxidation of cysteine to FGly is linked to the Proteus syndrome is still unclear. Phylloid hypomelanosis, a recently consumption of molecular oxygen. In the absence of FGE catalytically recognized neurocutaneous entity, is caused by mosaic trisomy 13. inactive sulfatase polypeptides are synthesized that contain cysteine Genomic mosaicismof nonlethal autosomal mutations: The hitherto instead of FGly , the biochemical hallmark of MSD. prevailing theory that mosaic forms of autosomal dominant skin Sequencing of 48 MSD-alleles of SUMF1 revealed in 44 alleles diseases always originate from a new mutation, is no longer valid. 21 different mutations. The spectrum of mutations comprises Today we distinguish two types of segmental manifestation. The missense and nonsense mutations, deletions and insertions of single type 1 refl ects heterozygosity, whereas the type 2 results from allelic nucleotides and splice-donor site mutations. The effect of these loss in a heterozygous embryo and shows pronounced lesions mutations on the synthesis, stability, location, processing and activity superimposed on the ordinary phenotype. This concept has now of FGE is presently under investigation. In mammals a close paralog been proven at the molecular level in Hailey-Hailey disease. of SUMF1 1 gene is observed. This SUMF 2 gene encodes a protein Revertant mosaicism giving rise to unaffected skin areas in that has a similar domain structure as FGE and is also located in the autosomal recessive cutaneous traits will certainly be recognized endoplasmic reticulum, but lacks FGE activity. The biological function more often when clinicians are bearing this concept in mind. Such of SUMF 2 remains to be determined. cases can be taken as examples of “natural gene therapy”. 1) T. Dierks et al, Cell 113 (2003) 435-444 2) M.P. Cosma, Cell 113 (2003) 445-456 
L04 . Regional differences in genetic testing and counselling in Europe - An overview 
L02 . Biogenesis of mitochondria: Human diseases linked to S. Aymé; protein transport, folding and degradation INSERM, Paris, France. W. Neupert; Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004 Adolf Butenandt-Institut Physiologische Chemie der Universität München, Mu- for submissions after the printing deadline. nich, Germany. Mitochondria are the „powerhouses“ of the cell. In these organelles 
L05 . Hereditary Breast/Ovarian Cancer risk: international energy present in oxidizable substrates is transduced into energy comparison of the acceptability of Preventive strategies stored in ATP. Mitochondria have an own genome. In humans it C. Julian-Reynier; encodes 13 proteins. However, the vast majority of proteins is INSERM 379, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France. encoded by nuclear genes, translated in the cytosol and then The availability of genetic tests for BRCA gene mutations prompted transported into the mitochondria. Proteins must then be folded cancer geneticists to give information about genetic risk and to and assembled to functional enzyme complexes. In addition, many assess many women with a personal or family history of breast or proteolytic processes are required in mitochondria to maintain the ovarian cancer to inform them of preventive measures. Previous steady state, such as processing of preproteins and proteolytic results have shown international variations in women’s theoretical turnover of proteins. A number of protein complexes exist that acceptability of the preventive strategies available. The highest level mediate these various rather intricate reactions. These include: of acceptability was obtained for by mammographic screening, and (i) Preprotein translocases which facilitate the transfer of proteins chemoprevention was the secondly preferred option. Prophylactic and the insertion of proteins across and into the mitochondrial oophorectomy and prophylactic mastectomy were thought to be membranes, the TOM, TIM23, Tim22, and OXA complexes. (ii) acceptable before the age of 35 by a minority of the samples A number of molecular chaperones and cochaperones, such as surveyed. A literature review will confront theoretical attitudes and mitochondrial Hsp70s, Hsp60/10 and Mge1. (iii) The mitochondrial actual behaviours of women at risk for HBOC observed in different processing peptidase (MPP) which cleaves off the N-terminal countries. Several hypotheses to explain these results will be targeting sequences, and the Lon and AAA-proteases which degrade assumed among which the cultural component will be discussed matrix and membrane proteins in a regulated ATP-dependent more in depth. manner. The morphology of mitochondria is highly dynamic. Mitochondria are 
