L01 . Multiple Sulfatase Defi ciency: Molecular defect and properties of the autosomal forms of epigenetic mosaicism can be caused by missing enzyme. retrotransposon activity. K. von Figura, M. Mariappan, J. Peng, A. Preußer, B. Schmidt; X-linked epigenetic mosaicism: Different patterns of lyonization Biochemie II, Georg August Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. include Blaschko lines (many syndromes), checkerboard pattern (X- Based on purifi cation and peptide sequencing of the missing linked hypertrichosis), and lateralization (CHILD syndrome). enzyme (1) and complementation cloning using minicell mediated Autosomal epigenetic mosaicism: This concept may explain the chromosome transfer (2) the gene defective in multiple sulfatase exceptional familial aggregation of pigmentary mosaicism that would defi ciency (MSD) was identifi ed. The SUMF 1 gene encodes a visualize the action of a retrotransposon that is partly silencing and protein that is located in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, partly activating a pigment gene. Similar linear patterns are caused N-glycosylated and converts cysteine residue in the active site of by retrotransposon activity in plants such as petunia or in animals newly synthesized sulfatases into Cŋ-formylglycine (FGly). This FGly- such as mice or dogs. generating enzyme (FGE) is conserved from bacteria to man and Genomic mosaicismof lethal autosomal mutations: Some of these contains three subdomains, separated by protease sensitive linker phenotypes have been elucidated at the molecular or cytogenetic sequences. Two of the subdomains are linked by intramolecular level, but the genetic basis of Schimmelpenning syndrome and disulfi de bonds. The oxidation of cysteine to FGly is linked to the Proteus syndrome is still unclear. Phylloid hypomelanosis, a recently consumption of molecular oxygen. In the absence of FGE catalytically recognized neurocutaneous entity, is caused by mosaic trisomy 13. inactive sulfatase polypeptides are synthesized that contain cysteine Genomic mosaicismof nonlethal autosomal mutations: The hitherto instead of FGly , the biochemical hallmark of MSD. prevailing theory that mosaic forms of autosomal dominant skin Sequencing of 48 MSD-alleles of SUMF1 revealed in 44 alleles diseases always originate from a new mutation, is no longer valid. 21 different mutations. The spectrum of mutations comprises Today we distinguish two types of segmental manifestation. The missense and nonsense mutations, deletions and insertions of single type 1 refl ects heterozygosity, whereas the type 2 results from allelic nucleotides and splice-donor site mutations. The effect of these loss in a heterozygous embryo and shows pronounced lesions mutations on the synthesis, stability, location, processing and activity superimposed on the ordinary phenotype. This concept has now of FGE is presently under investigation. In mammals a close paralog been proven at the molecular level in Hailey-Hailey disease. of SUMF1 1 gene is observed. This SUMF 2 gene encodes a protein Revertant mosaicism giving rise to unaffected skin areas in that has a similar domain structure as FGE and is also located in the autosomal recessive cutaneous traits will certainly be recognized endoplasmic reticulum, but lacks FGE activity. The biological function more often when clinicians are bearing this concept in mind. Such of SUMF 2 remains to be determined. cases can be taken as examples of “natural gene therapy”. 1) T. Dierks et al, Cell 113 (2003) 435-444 2) M.P. Cosma, Cell 113 (2003) 445-456 
L04 . Regional differences in genetic testing and counselling in Europe - An overview 
L02 . Biogenesis of mitochondria: Human diseases linked to S. Aymé; protein transport, folding and degradation INSERM, Paris, France. W. Neupert; Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004 Adolf Butenandt-Institut Physiologische Chemie der Universität München, Mu- for submissions after the printing deadline. nich, Germany. Mitochondria are the „powerhouses“ of the cell. In these organelles 
L05 . Hereditary Breast/Ovarian Cancer risk: international energy present in oxidizable substrates is transduced into energy comparison of the acceptability of Preventive strategies stored in ATP. Mitochondria have an own genome. In humans it C. Julian-Reynier; encodes 13 proteins. However, the vast majority of proteins is INSERM 379, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France. encoded by nuclear genes, translated in the cytosol and then The availability of genetic tests for BRCA gene mutations prompted transported into the mitochondria. Proteins must then be folded cancer geneticists to give information about genetic risk and to and assembled to functional enzyme complexes. In addition, many assess many women with a personal or family history of breast or proteolytic processes are required in mitochondria to maintain the ovarian cancer to inform them of preventive measures. Previous steady state, such as processing of preproteins and proteolytic results have shown international variations in women’s theoretical turnover of proteins. A number of protein complexes exist that acceptability of the preventive strategies available. The highest level mediate these various rather intricate reactions. These include: of acceptability was obtained for by mammographic screening, and (i) Preprotein translocases which facilitate the transfer of proteins chemoprevention was the secondly preferred option. Prophylactic and the insertion of proteins across and into the mitochondrial oophorectomy and prophylactic mastectomy were thought to be membranes, the TOM, TIM23, Tim22, and OXA complexes. (ii) acceptable before the age of 35 by a minority of the samples A number of molecular chaperones and cochaperones, such as surveyed. A literature review will confront theoretical attitudes and mitochondrial Hsp70s, Hsp60/10 and Mge1. (iii) The mitochondrial actual behaviours of women at risk for HBOC observed in different processing peptidase (MPP) which cleaves off the N-terminal countries. Several hypotheses to explain these results will be targeting sequences, and the Lon and AAA-proteases which degrade assumed among which the cultural component will be discussed matrix and membrane proteins in a regulated ATP-dependent more in depth. manner. The morphology of mitochondria is highly dynamic. Mitochondria are 
L06 . Variation in prenatal counselling in Europe: the example of highly motile within the cell. Quite a number of genes are involved Klinefelter in these processes which are closely linked to the inheritance and maintenance of the mitochondrial genome. T. M. Marteau; In recent years, an increasing number of human diseases have been Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom. identifi ed in which genes involved in the processes described above The organisation and delivery of prenatal counselling services varies are involved. We will report on experiments aiming at understanding across Europe. Focusing upon counselling for Klinefelter syndrome the biochemical basis of these diseases. (KS), three questions are considered: 1. Does the content of prenatal counselling vary across Europe? 
L03 . New aspects of genetic mosaicism 2. Is the variation in counselling associated with variation in R. Happle; termination rates? 3. To what extent is any variation to be reinforced or reduced? Department of Dermatology, Philipp University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Variation in counselling. Data from fi ve European countries reveal The skin is especially suitable for the study of mosaicism becauseESHG Plenary Lectures 57 Abstracts such phenotypes can be recognized most easily in the integument.  There are two main types of mosaicism: epigenetic or genomic  mosaicism. Recent research indicates that both X-linked and  
L01 . Multiple Sulfatase DeÜciency: Molecular defect and properties of the  autosomal forms of epigenetic mosaicism can be caused by  missing enzyme. retrotransposon activity. K. von Figura, M. Mariappan, J. Peng, A. Preu¦er, B. Schmidt;  X-linked epigenetic mosaicism: Different patterns of lyonization  Biochemie II, Georg August Universit\x89t G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany. include Blaschko lines (many syndromes), checkerboard pattern (X- Based on puriÜcation and peptide sequencing of the missing  linked hypertrichosis), and lateralization (CHILD syndrome). enzyme (1) and complementation cloning using minicell mediated  Autosomal epigenetic mosaicism: This concept may explain the  chromosome transfer (2) the gene defective in multiple sulfatase  exceptional familial aggregation of pigmentary mosaicism that would  deÜciency (MSD) was identiÜed. The SUMF 1 gene encodes a  visualize the action of a retrotransposon that is partly silencing and  protein that is located in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum,  partly activating a pigment gene. Similar linear patterns are caused  N-glycosylated and converts cysteine residue in the active site of  by retrotransposon activity in plants such as petunia or in animals  newly synthesized sulfatases into Cŋ-formylglycine (FGly). This FGly- such as mice or dogs. generating enzyme (FGE) is conserved from bacteria to man and  Genomic mosaicism of lethal autosomal mutations: Some of these  contains three subdomains, separated by protease sensitive linker  phenotypes have been elucidated at the molecular or cytogenetic  sequences. Two of the subdomains are linked by intramolecular  level, but the genetic basis of Schimmelpenning syndrome and  disulÜde bonds. The oxidation of cysteine to FGly is linked to the  Proteus syndrome is still unclear. Phylloid hypomelanosis, a recently  consumption of molecular oxygen. In the absence of FGE catalytically  recognized neurocutaneous entity, is caused by mosaic trisomy 13. inactive sulfatase polypeptides are synthesized that contain cysteine  Genomic mosaicism of nonlethal autosomal mutations: The hitherto  instead of FGly , the biochemical hallmark of MSD. prevailing theory that mosaic forms of autosomal dominant skin  Sequencing of 48 MSD-alleles of SUMF1 revealed in 44 alleles  diseases always originate from a new mutation, is no longer valid.  21 different mutations. The spectrum of mutations comprises  Today we distinguish two types of segmental manifestation. The  missense and nonsense mutations, deletions and insertions of single  type 1 reÝects heterozygosity, whereas the type 2 results from allelic  nucleotides and splice-donor site mutations. The effect of these  loss in a heterozygous embryo and shows pronounced lesions  mutations on the synthesis, stability, location, processing and activity  superimposed on the ordinary phenotype. This concept has now  of FGE is presently under investigation. In mammals a close paralog  been proven at the molecular level in Hailey-Hailey disease. of SUMF1 1 gene is observed. This SUMF 2 gene encodes a protein  Revertant mosaicism giving rise to unaffected skin areas in  that has a similar domain structure as FGE and is also located in the  autosomal recessive cutaneous traits will certainly be recognized  endoplasmic reticulum, but lacks FGE activity. The biological function  more often when clinicians are bearing this concept in mind. Such  of SUMF 2 remains to be determined. cases can be taken as examples of Ðnatural gene therapyÑ. 1) T. Dierks et al, Cell 113 (2003) 435-444 2) M.P. Cosma, Cell 113 (2003) 445-456 
L04 . Regional differences in genetic testing and counselling in  Europe - An overview 
L02 . Biogenesis of mitochondria: Human diseases linked to  S. Aym\x8d;  protein transport, folding and degradation INSERM, Paris, France. W. Neupert;  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  Adolf Butenandt-Institut Physiologische Chemie der Universit\x89t M\x9enchen, Mu- for submissions after the printing deadline. nich, Germany. Mitochondria are the ápowerhousesÐ of the cell. In these organelles  
L05 . Hereditary Breast/Ovarian Cancer risk: international  energy present in oxidizable substrates is transduced into energy  comparison of the acceptability of Preventive strategies stored in ATP. Mitochondria have an own genome. In humans it  C. Julian-Reynier;  encodes 13 proteins. However, the vast majority of proteins is  INSERM 379, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France. encoded by nuclear genes, translated in the cytosol and then  The availability of genetic tests for BRCA gene mutations prompted  transported into the mitochondria. Proteins must then be folded  cancer geneticists to give information about genetic risk and to  and assembled to functional enzyme complexes. In addition, many  assess many women with a personal or family history of breast or  proteolytic processes are required in mitochondria to maintain the  ovarian cancer to inform them of preventive measures. Previous  steady state, such as processing of preproteins and proteolytic  results have shown international variations in womenÓs theoretical  turnover of proteins. A number of protein complexes exist that  acceptability of the preventive strategies available. The highest level  mediate these various rather intricate reactions. These include:  of acceptability was obtained for by mammographic screening, and  (i) Preprotein translocases which facilitate the transfer of proteins  chemoprevention was the secondly preferred option. Prophylactic  and the insertion of proteins across and into the mitochondrial  oophorectomy and prophylactic mastectomy were thought to be  membranes, the TOM, TIM23, Tim22, and OXA complexes. (ii)  acceptable before the age of 35 by a minority of the samples  A number of molecular chaperones and cochaperones, such as  surveyed. A literature review will confront theoretical attitudes and  mitochondrial Hsp70s, Hsp60/10 and Mge1. (iii) The mitochondrial  actual behaviours of women at risk for HBOC observed in different  processing peptidase (MPP) which cleaves off the N-terminal  countries. Several hypotheses to explain these results will be  targeting sequences, and the Lon and AAA-proteases which degrade  assumed among which the cultural component will be discussed  matrix and membrane proteins in a regulated ATP-dependent  more in depth. manner. The morphology of mitochondria is highly dynamic. Mitochondria are  
L06 . Variation in prenatal counselling in Europe: the example of  highly motile within the cell. Quite a number of genes are involved  Klinefelter in these processes which are closely linked to the inheritance and  maintenance of the mitochondrial genome. T. M. Marteau;  In recent years, an increasing number of human diseases have been  Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom. identiÜed in which genes involved in the processes described above  The organisation and delivery of prenatal counselling services varies  are involved. We will report on experiments aiming at understanding  across Europe. Focusing upon counselling for Klinefelter syndrome  the biochemical basis of these diseases. (KS), three questions are considered: 1. Does the content of prenatal counselling vary across Europe? 
L03 . New aspects of genetic mosaicism 2. Is the variation in counselling associated with variation in  R. Happle;  termination rates? 3. To what extent is any variation to be reinforced or reduced? Department of Dermatology, Philipp University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Variation in counselling. Data from Üve European countries reveal  The skin is especially suitable for the study of mosaicism because ESHG Plenary Lectures 58 that information reportedly given during prenatal counselling varies by  chromosomal rearrangements, including reciprocal, Robertsonian,  specialty, country, and perceived quality of life: geneticists, German  and jumping translocations, inversions, isochromosomes and  and UK health professionals and those who perceive a higher quality  small marker chromosomes, may also involve susceptibility to  of life for people with KS report providing more positive information  rearrangements related to genome structure or architecture. In  about the condition. several cases, LCRs, AT-rich palindromes and pericentromeric  Variation in termination rates. The differences in reported counselling  repeats are located at such rearrangement breakpoints. Analysis of  are reÝected in termination rates observed in a cohort of 111 KS  the products of recombination at the junctions of the rearrangements  pregnancies from Üve Europe countries: women counselled by  reveals both homologous recombination and non-homologous end  geneticists as opposed to other health care professionals are less  joining (NHEJ) as causative mechanisms. Thus, a more global  likely to terminate an affected pregnancy (relative risk: 2.42, 95% CIs  concept of genomic disorders emerges in which susceptibility  1.14,5.92), with lowest termination rates seen in Germany. to rearrangements occurs due to underlying complex genomic  Judging the variation. The variation in counselling and outcomes  architecture. Interestingly, this architecture plays a role not only in  may reÝect cultural differences in health professionals and  disease etiology through constitutional rearrangements, but also  general populations across Europe and hence is to be reinforced.  in somatic rearrangement events associated with cancers and in  Alternatively it may reÝect care that militates against couples making  primate genome evolution. informed choices about the outcomes of pregnancies affected by fetal  abnormalities and hence is variation that should be reduced. The  
L09 . Chromosome territory arrangements in the cell nucleus: evidence needed to make this judgement will be discussed. probabilistic order and functional implications T. Cremer;  
L07 . Fact and Fiction Across Frontiers. Perceptions and  Department Biology II, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany. Attitudes of families across Europe towards genetic testing and  We present the Ürst complete 3D maps of higher order chromosome  counselling territory (CT) arrangements in nuclei of postmitotic (G0) human  L. Greene;  diploid Übroblasts. Our data demonstrate that the radial CT order,  Climb, The National Information and Advice Centre for Metabolic Diseases,  i.e. the location of CTs in the nuclear centre or towards the nuclear  Crewe, United Kingdom. periphery, is size dependent and highly non-random. In contrast,  As the Climb National information and Advice Centre for Metabolic  we note highly variable neighbourhoods of heterologous and  Diseases, we are regularly approached by families requesting  homologous CTs. This pattern deviates strongly from the gene  support from genetic services and more speciÜc knowledge about the  density correlated radial CT arrangements previously reported for  procedures for referral, genetic tests and the metabolic disease with  lymphocyte nuclei and several other normal, human cell types. In  which they are concerned. all cell types studied so far the detected order is probabilistic and  Since metabolic diseases are rare, Climb frequently networks on an  not rigidly deterministic. For a functional interpretation we propose  international basis for collaborative support with particular reference  the following hypothesis: In order to realize cell type speciÜc gene  to NORD and EURORDIS . expression and silencing patterns, transcribed, as well as non- Our experience at Climb suggests that some parents/patients have  transcribed, but potentially active genes must be positioned in  a greater anticipation of success and positive outcomes from genetic  euchromatic nuclear zones, permanently silent genes must be  tests than is actually the case, while for others there is inherent fear  located in heterochromatic nuclear zones. In case of a differentiation  and suspicion of the procedures involved. dependent switch of gene expression, nuclear zoning must change  Our experience also suggests that the speciÜc needs of parents/ accordingly either by a local change of the chromatin structure or by  patients such as knowing the potential beneÜts of genetic services,  a switch of gene positions from a heterochromatic to an euchromatic  appropriate information, timely access to specialists and support from  nuclear zone or vice versa. peer groups are not adequately addressed because of the lack of  A. Bolzer, G. Kreth, I. Solovei, K. Saracoglu, C. Fauth, S. M\x9eller, R.  appropriately trained personnel and lack of resources, both human  Eils, C. Cremer, M. R. Speicher, T. Cremer (2004) Complete 3D- and Ünancial. maps of chromosome positions in human male Übroblast nuclei and  Furthermore, ClimbÓs experience suggests that the ÐexpertÑ  prometaphase rosettes demonstrate a chromosome size dependent,  family can cause suspicion and resentment, inhibiting dialogue  probabilistic arrangement. Manuscript submitted. with practitioners where it should be enhanced. We also Ünd that  M. Cremer, R. Zinner, S. Stein, H. Albiez, B. Wagler, C. Cremer, T.  personality, levels of education and family and faith support systems  Cremer (2004) Three dimensional analysis of histone methylation  play a part in increasing or diminishing resilience to the demands of  patterns in normal and tumor cell nuclei. Eur. J. Histochem. 48, 11-23 handling the impact of genetic tests and counselling. Common themes around expectations, attitudes, needs and  
L10 . Williams syndrome perceptions therefore emerge. L. Perez Jurado;  Are any variations we experience based on geography, culture,  Unidad de Gen\x8dtica, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universitat Pompeu  health systems, attitudes or access? Climb is currently conducting  Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. a short survey in UK and Europe in collaboration with Eurordis to  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  conÜrm or disprove this theory. What we must aim for is a more  for submissions after the printing deadline. accessible, cohesive, sensitive and holistic service throughout  Europe. 
L11 . AAV vectors for the treatment of retinal and metabolic  disorders 
L08 . Genome architecture, rearrangements, evolution and  genomic disorders. A. Auricchio;  J. R. Lupski;  Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Napoli, Italy. Recombinant vectors based on adeno-associated virus (AAV)  Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. serotypes are efÜcient tools to transfer genes to a variety of  The term Ðgenomic disorderÑ refers to a disease that is caused  tissues, including retina, lung, liver and muscle. By exchanging the  by an alteration of the genome that results in complete loss,  surface proteins among various AAV serotypes, vector mediated  gain, or disruption of the structural integrity of a dosage sensitive  gene expression can be targeted to speciÜc cell types in vivo  gene(s). In most of the common chromosome deletion/duplication  inÝuencing the site, time and levels of gene expression. We are  syndromes, the rearranged genomic segments are Ýanked by large  currently testing AAV-mediated gene transfer of neurotrophic and  (usually>10kb), highly homologous low copy repeat (LCR) structures  anti-angiogenic proteins in animal models of retinal degenerations  that can act as recombination substrates. Recombination between  and neovascularization, resepectively. In addition, we are exploiting  non-allelic LCR copies, also known as non-allelic homologous  an ÐenhancedÑ gene therapy approach for lysosomal storage  recombination (NAHR), can result in deletion or duplication of  disease due to sulfatase deÜciencies and an innovative system for  the intervening segment. Recent Ündings suggest that other ESHG Plenary Lectures 59 pharmacological regulation of insulin activity in type I diabetes. has recently evolved to encompass an additional role in long-range  developmental gene regulation. 
L12 . Enzyme replacement for Pompe disease A. van der Ploeg;  LB2. A Molecular Pathogenesis for Transcription Factor  Associated Poly-Alanine Tract Expansions Department of Pediatrics, Sophia ChildrenÓs Hospital, University Hospital  A. N. Albrecht1, U. Kornak1, A. B\x99ddrich2, K. S\x9ering1, R. Lurz1, S. Stricker1, E.  Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Wanker2, S. Mundlos1;  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  for submissions after the printing deadline. 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Charit\x8d and Max-Planck Institute for Molecular  Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Delbr\x9eck Center, Berlin, Germany. 
L13 . Management of hereditary dyslipidemia; from  Synpolydactyly is caused by expansions of a poly-alanine (Ala)  pharmacogenomics to gene therapy tract in HOXD13 from 15 to 22-29 Ala. Subsequently, other disease  J. J. P. Kastelein;  causing Ala-expansions in transcription factors have been identiÜed  that cause developmental defects in humans and animals. Hoxd13  Dept. of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam,  protein is normally localized in the nucleus, but concomitant with  Netherlands. an increase of the Ala repeat above a certain treshhold (22 Ala)  Hereditary dyslipidemia has provided unique insights into the  localization shifts from nuclear to cytoplasmic where the protein forms  molecular basis of human lipoprotein metabolism. For example, the  large amorphous aggregates. The rate of cytoplasmic aggregation  elucidation of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) pathway by Brown  vs nuclear localization of Hoxd13 correlates with the length of the  and Goldstein, rewarded by a Nobel prize in 1985, was only possible  repeat. Similar aggregates were observed for other expansions  through the presence of patients with familial hypercholesterolemia  mutations in SOX3, RUNX2, and HOXA13 indicating a general  (FH). In addition, this research lead to the development of HMG  mechanism. We analyzed the mouse mutant spdh harboring a  CoA reductase inhibitors, the most widely prescribed agents for the  +7 Ala expansion in Hoxd13 as an in vivo model and were able  prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD). All this knowledge has  to show a reduction of mutant Hoxd13 and, in contrast to wt, a  been instrumental in the understanding of atherogenesis and the role  primarily cytoplasmic localization of the protein. Hoxd13 aggregate  LDL particles have in this process. formation results in recruitment of heat shock proteins Hsp70 and  On the other side of the spectrum, the HDL particle is seen as  Hsp40 and activation of the chaperone system by Geldanamycin  protective against cardiovascular disease. Using an extreme genetics  leads to a reduction in aggregate formation. Recombinant mutant  approach, mutations have been discovered in a number of novel  Hoxd13 protein forms aggregates in vitro demonstrating spontaneous  pathways leading to low HDL and a high risk for myocardial infarction.  misfolding of the protein. The length of the longest naturally occuring  This, in consequence, has prompted research into the signiÜcance of  repeat in the human genome (20 Ala) is close to the threshhold for  HDL as a novel target for coronary artery disease (CAD) prevention. aggregation (22 Ala) observed in this study indicating an evolutionary  Similarly, defects in the triglyceride pathways have led to an  restrain that, when exceeded, results in misfolding of the protein. Our  understanding of its most pivotal enzyme, lipoprotein lipase. results provide evidence that poly-Ala repeat expansions result in  Patients lacking this protein are not treatable by medication but  misfolding, degradation and cytoplasmic aggregation of the mutant  are excellent candidates for gene replacement therapy. So, in this  proteins. presentation; gene discovery, mutation detection, pharmacogenomics  and gene therapy of these intriguing hereditary disorders will be  LB3. Germline mutations of the Ephrin-B1 gene cause  discussed. Craniofrontonasal Syndrome I. Wieland1, S. Jakubiczka1, P. Muschke1, M. Cohen2, H. Thiele3, K. L. Gerlach4,  LB1. NIPBL, encoding a homologue of fungal Scc2-type sister  R. Adams5, P. Wieacker1;  chromatid cohesion proteins and Drosophila Nipped-B, is  mutated in Cornelia de Lange syndrome. 1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universit\x89t Magdeburg, Magde- E. T. Tonkin1, T. J. Wang1, S. Lisgo1, M. J. Bamshad2, T. Strachan1;  burg, Germany, 2Medizinische Genetik im Kinderzentrum M\x9enchen, Munich,  Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Martin-Luther-Universit\x89t Halle, Halle,  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle, International Centre for  Germany, 4Klinik f\x9er Mund-, Kiefer- und Gesichtschirurgie, Otto-von-Guericke- Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Pediatrics and  Universit\x89t Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 5Cancer Research UK London  Department of Human Genetics University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United  Research Institute, London, United Kingdom. States. Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS [MIM 304110] ) is an X- Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a multiple malformation  linked craniofacial disorder with unusual manifestation pattern  disorder characterised by dysmorphic facial features, mental  because affected females show multiple skeletal malformations like  retardation, growth delay, and limb reduction defects. We have  craniofacial asymmetry, hypertelorism as well as midline defects,  identiÜed and characterised a novel gene, NIPBL, that is mutated  whereas no or only mild abnormalities are manifest in male carriers.  in CdLS patients, and established its structure and that of rodent  Recently, we have mapped a gene for CFNS in the pericentromeric  and zebraÜsh homologues, naming its protein product delangin.  region of the X chromosome including the EFNB1 gene (MIM  Vertebrate delangins exhibit signiÜcant homology to orthologues in  300035) that encodes the ephrin-B1 ligand for Eph receptors. Since  Ýies, worms, plants and fungi, including Scc2-type sister chromatid  Efnb1 mutant mice display a spectrum of malformations and unusual  cohesion proteins, and also Drosophila Nipped-B, which is known  inheritance reminiscent of CFNS, we analysed the EFNB1 gene in  to regulate Ultrabithorax and cut. The pattern of embryonic NIPBL  three CFNS families. In one family, a deletion of exons 2 to 5 was  expression is generally consistent with the pathogenesis. Considering  identiÜed in an obligate carrier male, his mildly affected brother, and  known Nipped-B interactions, we propose that perturbed delangin  in the affected females. In two other families missense mutations in  function causes inappropriate activation of DLX genes, thereby  EFNB1 were detected leading to amino acid exchanges 
P54 L and  contributing to the proximo-distal limb patterning defects in CdLS.  T111I, respectively. Both mutations are located in multimerization  Very recently, Nipped-B has been shown to have a role in sister  and receptor interaction motifs within the ephrin-B1 extracellular  chromatid cohesion as well as in developmental gene regulation and  domain. In all cases, mutations were consistently found in obligate  we propose that vertebrate delangins also have a similar dual role  male carriers, clinically affected males and affected heterozygous  that suggests possible parallels with the Roberts syndrome gene.  females. We conclude that mutations in EFNB1 cause CFNS. This  The general role in sister chromatid cohesion could be satisÜed by a  shows for the Ürst time that mutations of the ephrin receptor/ephrin  basal level of expression but the role in target gene developmental  signal transduction system are associated with a Mendelian disorder  regulation could be expected to require high expression in tissues  and that ephrin signaling is involved in human skeletal development.  where the target genes are active. Genome analyses typically reveal  Finally, we propose an explanation of the sex dependent  individual delangin/Nipped-B-like orthologues in diploid metazoan  manifestation of CFNS. and plant genomes. The Scc2/Nipped-B/delangin family provides a  model system for dissecting how a general chromosomal function ESHG Symposia 60 
S01 . Long QT syndrome what it means to patients 
S04 . Using linkage disequilibrium patterns to map human  S. Priori;  complex trait loci L. Cardon;  Department of Molecular Cardiology, University of Pavia, Salvatore Maugeri  Foundation, Pavia, Italy. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  United Kingdom. for submissions after the printing deadline. Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  for submissions after the printing deadline. 
S02 . Genetic testing for Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: how and  what in clinical practice ? 
S05 . Human genetics of susceptibility to infectious agents: the  P. Charron;  example of mycobacterial infections L. Abel;  D\x8dpartement de G\x8dn\x8dtique, H\x98pital Piti\x8d-Salp\x8ftri\x8ere, Paris, France. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterised by unexplained  Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University of Paris Ren\x8d  hypertrophy of the left ventricle and remains a leading cause of  Descartes, INSERM U550, Paris, France. sudden death in teenagers and young adults, especially in athletes.  Although rarely pathogenic, poorly virulent mycobacteria, including  HCM is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in  live BCG vaccine and most environmental mycobacteria (EM),  more than ten sarcomeric genes. Genetic testing is now available  may cause a variety of clinical diseases, while Mycobacterium  in selected high trained laboratories, raising new questions for the  tuberculosis and M. leprae are more virulent, causing tuberculosis  clinician in clinical practice. and leprosy, respectively. Remarkably, only a minority of individuals  Genetic testing for HCM can be discussed in different situations, such  develop clinical disease, even if infected with virulent mycobacteria.  as diagnostic testing, prognostic stratiÜcation, predictive diagnosis,  The interindividual variability of clinical outcome is thought to result  and prenatal diagnosis, all of which are associated with a variable  in part from variability in the human genes that control host defense.  degree of complexity and psychological implications. In this presentation, I will review the different methods and strategies  Predictive testing is proposed to relatives of patients because it  that can be used to identify human genes controlling infectious  leads to the identiÜcation of relatives who will beneÜt from a speciÜc  diseases, and then the main Ündings concerning simple and complex  cardiological follow-up, which might help decreasing the risk of  inheritance of predisposition to mycobacterial diseases in humans.  sudden death. However, no medical treatment can be proposed  Rare patients with Mendelian disorders, affecting the IL-12/IFN-ȳ  at this stage. So, predictive genetic testing may result in adverse  pathway, have been found to be vulnerable to BCG, a few EM, and  psychological consequences. The previous psychological burden  M. tuberculosis. Substantial advances have been made in the genetic  because of uncertainty related to the genetic status could then be  dissection of leprosy with the recent identiÜcation on chromosome  replaced by a new psychological burden about the near certainty of  6q25 of two co-regulated genes (PARK2 and PACRG) strongly  developing the disease later, including the risk of sudden death. To  associated with the risk of developing leprosy per se (all clinical  take into account the complex medical and psychological implications  subtypes). The studies carried out to date have been fruitful, initiating  of this new approach, we developed a speciÜc, multidisciplinary, and  the genetic dissection of protective immunity against a variety of  multiple step procedure, including a cardiologist, a geneticist, and a  mycobacterial species in natural conditions of infection. psychologist. The procedure and our preliminary experience will be  described. 
S06 . The genetics of asthma and atopic dermatitis W. Cookson;  
S03 . Living with Marfan Syndrome: Perceptions of  Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,  Cardiovascular Risk and Events United Kingdom. B. B. Biesecker1, F. Kong2, R. Horne3, K. Peters4;  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States,  for submissions after the printing deadline. 2Westat, Inc, Rockville, MD, United States, 3University of Brighton, Brighton,  United Kingdom, 4Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United  
S07 . microRNA and RNAi machineries in mammalian cells States. W. Filipowicz, C. Artus, L. Jaskiewicz, F. Kolb, R. Pillai, H. Zhang;  Motivated by an interest in the effects of living with the cardiovascular  Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basle, Switzerland. risks of Marfan syndrome, we conducted a cross-sectional survey  In eukaryotes, dsRNA induces sequence-speciÜc inhibition of gene  of 174 adults. We assessed their perceptions of the condition  expression at the level of mRNA degradation, known as RNAi. During  and association to quality of life and adherence to medical  RNAi, dsRNA is processed to ~21-bp siRNAs, which are incorporated  recommendations. RespondentsÓ quality of life was signiÜcantly  into the RNA Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) to guide the  decreased in the psychological/spiritual domain. Forty four percent  cleavage of mRNA. miRNAs are ~21-nt RNA regulators interacting  reported clinical symptoms of depression independent of their use of  with 3Ó-UTRs of mRNAs and arresting translation by unknown  channel blockade medications. Eighty three percent of respondents  mechanism. ~300 miRNAs are predicted to function in mammals.  perceived Marfan syndrome as having had signiÜcant adverse  RNAi and miRNA pathways involve many proteins, either participating  consequences and this was correlated with pain (sore joints),  in siRNA and miRNA biogenesis, or functioning as components of  depressive symptoms, and striae. A history of aortic dissection, sore  RISC and miRNPs targeting mRNAs for degradation or translational  joints and depressive symptoms were each negatively correlated with  repression. the view that Marfan syndrome is a curable/controllable condition.  Dicer is a multidomain nuclease responsible for biogenesis of siRNAs  Eighty percent of respondents reported compliance with medication  and miRNAs. Dicer domains include an RNA helicase/ATPase,  use and exercise restrictions. Yet they were more skeptical about  DUF283 and PAZ and dsRBD domains, and two RNase III-like  the medications being essential for their health than reported for use  domains. Studies of human Dicer revealed its many interesting  of similar medications for other cardiovascular indications. Having  properties. In contrast to Drosophila and C. elegans enzymes,  to modify exercise was signiÜcantly correlated with an increased  cleavage of dsRNA by the human Dicer is ATP-independent. The  perception of Marfan syndrome as having negative consequences  enzyme has a strong preference for cutting off siRNAs and miRNAs  on respondentsÓ lives. Overall, cardiovascular risks and events  from substrate ends. Dicer is known to interact with Argonaute (Ago)  contributed to the perceptions of negative consequences of Marfan  proteins, established components of RISC. In collaboration with T.  syndrome but less than daily disruptions such as modiÜed exercise,  HobmanÓs group, we mapped domains responsible for the interaction.  joint pain and depressive symptoms. Dicer functions as a monomer, with its two RNase III domains  associating together to form a pseudo-dimer, which contains a single  processing center, generating siRNAs and miRNAs. To get more insight into the mechanism of translational repression  by miRNAs in HeLa cells, we uncoupled the miRNA generation/ESHG Symposia 61 assembly step from the direct effector step. We found that the  to obesity, diabetes, and cancer - a clear example of ánature via  miRNA-independent tethering of human Ago proteins to the 3Ó-UTR  nurture.Ð Thus, we are not only what we eat, but also potentially what  of mRNAs leads to the inhibition of translation by the miRNA-like  our mother ate when we were in the womb. Our Ündings provide  mechanism. Hence, a primary function of miRNAs is to guide miRNP  evidence that epigenetic alterations of transposons and imprinted  proteins to target mRNAs. Biochemical approaches to identify targets  genes can directly link environmental conditions during early  of miRNAs in mammalian cells will also be discussed. development to the etiology of adult diseases. Further understanding  these associations should make possible the development of  
S08 . The Human Epigenome Project early-life nutritional interventions or corrective therapies aimed at  S. Beck, on behalf of the Human Epigenome Consortium;  preventing chronic human diseases. (Supported by the NIH grants  CA25951 and E
S08823 , AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals and the  Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Dannon Institute) The Human Epigenome Project (HEP) is a public/private  collaboration that aims to identify, catalogue and interpret genome- 
S10 . Gene Expression networks in Breast Cancer wide DNA methylation patterns of all human genes in all major  A. B¾rresen-Dale;  tissues. Occurring naturally on cytosine bases at CpG sequences,  DNA methylation is intimately involved in diverse biological processes  The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway. and the aetiology of many diseases, particularly cancer. Differentially  Breast cancers are heterogeneous and consist of several pathologic  methylated cytosines give rise to distinct patterns thought to be  subtypes with different histological appearances of the malignant  speciÜc for gene activity, tissue type and disease state. Such  cells, different clinical presentations and outcomes, and the  methylation variable positions (MVPs) are udeful epigenetic markers  patients show a diverse range of responses to a given treatment.  and promise to signiÜcantly advance our ability to understand and  Furthermore, breast tumor tissue shows heterogeneity with respect  diagnose human disease. to its microenvironment including speciÜcally the types and numbers  As a prelude to the HEP, the Human Epigenome Consortium has  of inÜltrating lymphocytes, adipocytes, stromal and endothelial cells.  recently completed a pilot study of the methylation patterns within  The cellular composition of tumors is a central determinant of both  the human Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC), a region on  the biological and clinical features of an individualÓs disease. chromosome 6 that is associated with more diseases than any  By expression proÜling we have identiÜed Üve different subtypes of  other region in the human genome. This involved the development  breast cancer by their global variation in gene expression patterns.  of an integrated pipeline for automated bisulphite treatment of DNA  The genes used for this classiÜcation were selected by their robust  from minute tissue biopsies, gene-speciÜc bisulphite PCR and  and steady expression between pairs of samples taken from the  sequencing of PCR amplicons. MVP discovery is aided by custom  same tumor separated by weeks of chemotherapy treatment.  software and subsequent epigenotyping is carried out by MALDI  Survival analyses showed signiÜcantly different outcome for patients  mass spectrometry or microarray analysis. The pilot study entailed  belonging to the various subtypes. Differences in T
P53  mutation  the analysis of over 100,000 CpG sites at over 200 MHC loci,  frequency between the subtypes indicated an important role for  including promoter and other relevant regions in multiple tissues and  this gene in determining the gene expression pattern in the various  individuals. The generated data have been integrated with the human  tumors. genome annotation using the ENSEMBL interface and are publicly  Cluster analyses of two published, independent data sets  available at http://www.epigenome.org. representing different patient cohorts, uncovered some of the same  Beck S, Olek A, Walter J. (1999) From genomics to epigenomics: a  breast cancer subtypes. By including a group of tumors from BRCA1  loftier view of life. Nat Biotechnol. 17:1144. carriers in the analysis we found that this genotype predisposes to  Novik KL, Nimmrich I, Genc B, Maier S, Piepenbrock C, Olek A,  the subtype identiÜed as basal like. Beck S. (2002) Epigenomics: genome-wide study of methylation  Our results strongly support the idea that many of these breast tumor  phenomena. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 4:111-128. subtypes represent biologically distinct disease entities, and that  Denis C. (2003). Altered states. Nature 421:686-688. both the patients genotype and the tumor genotype have a strong  Bradbury J. (2003) Epigenome Project - Up and Running. PLoS Biol.  inÝuence on the expression pattern developed in a given tumor. 1:
E82 . Nature: 406, 747, 2000, PNAS: 98, 10869, 2001, Molecular  Intervention, 2 no. 2 , 101, 2002, PNAS: 99: 12963-12968, 2002,  
S09 . Imprinted Genes and Transposons: Epigenomic Targets  PNAS: 100: 8418-8423, 2003. Mol.Biol.Cell. In press 2004 (Zhao H.,  Linking Fetal Nutrition with Adult Disease Susceptibility Langer¾d, A. et al). R. L. Jirtle;  
S11 . Dependence receptors : cell death inducers and conditional  Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,  tumor suppressors NC, United States. P. Mehlen;  Human epidemiologic and animal data indicate that susceptibility  to adult-onset chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease,  Apoptose et Diff\x8drenciation. Centre de G\x8dn\x8dtique Mol\x8dculaire et Cellulaire.  diabetes, obesity, and cancer is inÝuenced by persistent adaptations  CNRS UMR5534. Universit\x8d Claude Bernard Lyon-1, Villeurbanne, France. to prenatal and early postnatal nutrition (Waterland and Jirtle,  Dependence receptors are receptors that display two totally different  Nutrition 20:63-68,2004). Two potential epigenomic targets for early  signal transductions depending on ligand availability (1-5). Indeed,  nutritional effects are imprinted genes and transposons. Imprinting  if in the presence of ligand, these receptors transduce a positive  is an epigenetic form of gene regulation that results in monoallelic  signal leading to differentiation/proliferation/migration, in the absence  parent-of-origin dependent gene expression (Murphy and Jirtle,  of ligand these receptors are not inactive but induce an active  BioEssays 25: 577-588, 2003). IGF2 loss of imprinting is associated  process of cell death. Thus, such receptors create cellular states of  with an increased incidence of cancer (Cui et al., Science 299: dependence on their respective ligands by inducing apoptosis when  1753-1755,2003), and Beckwith-Weidemann syndrome in children  unoccupied by ligand. The DCC (Deleted in Colorectal Cancer)  conceived by in vitro fertilization (Gosden et al., Lancet 361:1975- gene, a candidate tumor suppressor gene, encodes a receptor for  1977,2003). We have now demonstrated in mice that early postnatal  netrin-1, a laminin-related molecule involved in axon guidance. In  dietary methyl deÜciency, and even exposure to a nutritionally  1998, we reported that DCC is a dependence receptor since its  complete synthetic diet, high in fat but low in Über, causes biallelic  expression induces apoptosis, a pro-apoptotic activity blocked in  expression of the oncogene, Igf2. Using viable yellow agouti  the presence of netrin-1 (1). A similar behavior was also found for  (Avy) mice, which harbor a retrotransposon in the agouti gene, we  another netrin-1 receptor, UN
C5 H, hence suggesting that netrin-1  also showed that maternal dietary methyl donor supplementation  is not only a chemotropic factor but a survival factor via its receptor  during pregnancy alters coat color of the offspring via increased  DCC and UN
C5 H (3). Thus, these dependence receptors play the  CpG methylation at the Avy locus rather than by genetic mutation  role of a switch driving either a positive signal of differentiation (4,5)  (Waterland and Jirtle, Mol. Cell. Biol. 23:5293-5300,2003). This  or a negative signal of cell death. Remarkably both DCC and UN
C5 H  epigenetic change also reduces the susceptibility of the offspring  expression appear drastically inhibited in numerous carcinomas ESHG Symposia 62 including colorectal tumors (8). Here we will present evidence here  by two receptor families. Frizzleds and Lipoprotein receptor related  that UN
C5 H and DCC may be considered as tumor suppressors that  proteins 5 and -6 (LR
P5 /6) bind Wnts and transmit their signal by  limit tumor growth out of netrin-1 availability by inducing apoptosis. stabilizing intracellular Ȳ-catenin. Wnt/Ȳ-catenin signalling is inhibited  by the secreted protein Dickkopf1 (Dkk1), member of a multigene  
S12 . Methylation in cancer family, which acts as head inducer in the Spemann organizer of  M. Esteller;  amphibian embryos. Recently, Dkk1 was shown to inhibit Wnt  signalling by a novel mode of action, by binding to and antagonizing  Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, 3rd Floor, Molecular Pathology Program,  LR
P5 /6. We now describe the transmembrane proteins Kremen1 and  Spanish National Cancer Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. -2 as novel high afÜnity Dkk1 receptors, which functionally cooperate  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  with Dkk1 to block Wnt/Ȳ-catenin signalling. Kremen2 forms a ternary  for submissions after the printing deadline. complex with Dkk1 and LR
P6  and induces rapid endocytosis and  removal of the Wnt receptor LR
P6  from the plasma membrane.  
S13 . Photoreceptor biology in drosophila The results indicate that Kremens are components of a membrane  C. Desplan;  complex modulating canonical Wnt signalling through LR
P6  in  New York University, Department of Biology, New York, NY, United States. vertebrates. Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  for submissions after the printing deadline. 
S17 . Viral vectors as tool to create animal models of CNS  disorders 
S14 . The role of A2-E in Macular Degeneration N. Deglon1,2;  F. G. Holz;  1Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), ), Department of Medical Research,  Department of Ophthalmology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. URA CEA-CNRS 2210, Service Hospitalier F. Joliot, Orsay, France, 2Swiss  Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is now the leading cause  Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), Institute of Neurosciences,  of blindness in the industrialized world. Several lines of evidence  Lausanne, Switzerland. suggest that ageing changes of the retinal pigment epithelium  The identiÜcation of mutations implicated in familial forms of CNS  (RPE), a monolayer between the choroid and the neurosensory  diseases has led to the production of transgenic mice. Recently, the  retina with essential functions for normal vision, play a key role  injection in speciÜc brain areas of viral vectors encoding disease- in the pathogenesis of the disease. In postmitotic RPE cells  causing genes has been proposed as alternative strategy to create  autoÝuorescent lipofuscin granules accumulate with age in the  genetic models. This strategy holds various advantages. Viral vectors  lysosomal compartment in association with AMD as a complex,  are versatile, Ýexible tools to perform in vivo studies. Multiple genetic  multifactorial disease as well as in monogenetic macular dystrophies  models can be created in a short period of time. High transduction  including BestÓs and StargardtÓs disease. Lipofuscin accumulation as  efÜciencies, as well as robust and sustained transgene expression  a common downstream pathogenetic pathway is mainly a byproduct  lead to the appearance of severe functional and behavioral  of constant phagocytosis of membranous discs shed from distal  abnormalities. Targeted injections in different brain areas can be used  photoreceptor outer segments and posttranslational modiÜcations  to investigate the speciÜcity of the neuropathology and eliminate side  by oxidative damage. We were able to show that the major retinoid  effects associated with a widespread transgene overexpresssion.  compound of RPE lipofuscin, N-retinylidene-N-retinylethanolamine  Finally, models can be established in different mammalian species,  (A2-E), severely affects lysosomal functions of RPE. This effect is  thereby providing an opportunity to assess complex behavioral  mediated by the inhibitory action of A2-E on the ATP-driven lysosomal  changes and perform longitudinal follow-up by imaging in primates. proton pump. The resulting pH shift in the lysosomal compartment  The proof of principle of the approach was established with lentiviral  causes an inhibition of lysosomal hydrolytic enzymes, triggering  vectors encoding the gene causing HuntingtonÓs disease. Viruses  severe lysosomal dysfunction, which ultimately results in RPE cell  expressing the huntingtin (htt) protein with 19 (wild type) or 82  dysfunction and cell damage. Such sequence of events is likely to  (mutated) CAG repeats were injected in striatum of adult rats.  contribute to the biogenesis of drusen with release of incompletely  Lentiviral-mediated delivery of htt-82Q but not htt-19Q induced a  degraded material into the extracellular matrix of BruchÓs membrane  progressive pathology characterized by the sequential appearance  at the basal cell side. Furthermore, A2-E has been shown to possess  of ubiquitinated aggregates, followed by neuronal dysfunction,  phototoxic and detergent properties upon reaching critical levels.  astrogliosis, leading Ünally to a robust and selective degeneration of  Several animal models have been developed that display accelerated  striatal neurons. Recently, we have scale-up the approach in primates  RPE lipofuscin/A2-E accumulation including abcr(-/-) knockout and  and assessed whether behavioral deÜcits were associated with a  Ccl-2-deÜcient mice. These will be helpful to identify potential targets  striatal pathology. The unilateral overexpression of htt-82Q in the  for intervention. The pathophysiological role of lipofuscin in vivo is  dorso-lateral putamen was associated with an increase in locomotor  underscored by recent fundus autoÝuorescence Ündings with the  activity, an ipsilateral turning under apomorphine and the occurrence  use of confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy which showed that  of typical choreic-like, dystonic movements. These data demonstrate  excessive lipofuscin levels precede cell death in outer reinal layers  that lentiviral-mediated expression of mutated htt provides a  with subsequent loss of visual function. robust in vivo genetic model that will facilitate future studies on the  pathogenesis of cell death and experimental therapeutics for HD. 
S15 . From epithelial cell polarity to retinal degeneration: lessons  from Drosophila 
S18 . Combining HT-RNAi and high-content assays in human  cells and model organisms for target discovery and validation E. Knust;  B. S\x99nnichsen;  Institute of Genetics, Heinrich-Heine University, D\x9esseldorf, Germany. Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  Cenix BioScience GmbH, Dresden, Germany. for submissions after the printing deadline. We have established an automated platform for genome wide HT- RNAi screening in cultured human and Drosophila cells, as well as  
S16 . Kremens are novel Dickkopf receptors that regulate Wnt/Ȳ- C. elegans. Having completed several such projects using either  catenin signalling very high content readout assays (e.g. time-lapse microscopy), or  C. Niehrs1, B. Mao1, W. Wu1, G. Davidson1, J. Marhold2, M. Li2, M. Mechler2, H.  more focused, low content readouts (e.g. plate reader assays), case  Delius3, A. Glinka1;  studies using both approaches will be discussed to illustrate the  methodÓs overall potential. First, a high content screen for new cell  1Division of Molecular Embryology, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,  division genes was completed using systematic RNAi covering 99.2%  Heidelberg, Germany, 2Division of Developmental Genetics, Deutsches  of all predicted C. elegans genes. Double stranded RNAs (dsRNAs)  Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Division of Applied  were microinjected into adult worms and resulting phenotypes were  Tumorvirology, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany. recorded 24hrs later during the Ürst two divisions of F1 embryos using  Canonical Wnt signalling via the Ȳ-catenin pathway is transduced  timelapse DIC microscopy. Particular effort was put into standardizing ESHG Symposia 63 analysis of this high content screen. A second, more focused RNAi  of aberrant chromosomes have used array CGH and array painting  screen has covered 86% of the Drosophila genome, implicating 19  to analyze constitutional de novo apparently balanced translocations  genes in a novel cellular antiviral response pathway. Here, 
S2  cells  in patients presenting with abnormal phenotypes. The use of  were soaked in dsRNAs using 384 well plates followed by automated  microarrays to compliment cytogenetic analysis allows efÜcient  microscopy and image analysis. Third, systematic siRNA-based  screening and characterization of the whole genome for imbalance  screens in human cells have been carried out for deÜned panels of  as well as rapid identiÜcation of breakpoint regions. This greatly  genes. Results will be discussed at the meeting. facilitates Üner mapping by FISH and other methods. We have  identiÜed additional complexity or genome imbalance in 60% of  
S19 . Pharmacogenetics patients analyzed without knowledge of their phenotypes and these  K. Lindpaintner;  results sub-divided the patients into three groups: (1) translocation  breakpoints which appeared simple and balanced at the resolution  Roche Genetics and Roche Center for Medical Genomics, F. Hoffmann-La  used; (2) complex rearrangements, some including deletions,  Roche, Ltd., Basle, Switzerland. inversions and insertions at or near one or both breakpoints; (3)  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  cases in which the translocations appeared balanced but were  for submissions after the printing deadline. found by microarray analysis to have a previously unrecognized  microdeletion or duplication not associated with the translocation.  
S20 . Genetics of the antidepressant response These results, if generally conÜrmed in the study of further patients,  E. Binder, F. Holsboer;  will have a signiÜcant impact on current diagnostic investigations of  Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. this type and provide an argument for the more widespread adoption  Depression is a very common medical disorder, with lifetime  of microarray analysis or other high resolution genome wide screens  prevalences of up to 14%, thus affecting millions worldwide. While  for chromosome imbalance and rearrangement. antidepressants are the most effective treatment for depressive  disorders, there still is substantial need for improvement of  
S23 . Molecular analysis of breakpoint sequences in non- therapy. In the lack of objective criteria for the choice of the optimal  recurring balanced translocations antidepressant treatment depressed patients are treated on a trial  R. Giorda1, U. Pozzoli1, M. Bonaglia1, S. Giglio2,3, G. Gimelli4, G. Gregato2, T.  and error basis, resulting in a failure rate of a single treatment  Pramparo2, M. Sironi1, C. Baschirotto1, O. Zuffardi2,3;  attempt in up to 30-40%. Pharmacogenetic approaches may open  1IRCCS ÐE. MedeaÑ, Bosisio Parini, LC, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,  up an avenue for an individualized and improved antidepressant  3IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 4Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy. therapy. At the Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, we have  Gross rearrangements (deletions, duplications, translocations)  investigated about 70 candidate genes from systems potentially  are important causes of cancer and inherited disease, and for  involved in the mechanism of action of antidepressant drugs for their  this reason they have been the subject of intense study. These  association with response to antidepressant treatment. So far over  rearrangements are nonrandomly distributed in the human genome.  400 depressed in-patients have been recruited at our Institute within  One of the reasons is of course a sampling bias: in cancer, somatic  the Munich Antidepressant Response Signature (MARS) project and  rearrangements must confer a growth advantage in the affected  characterized in weekly intervals for their response to antidepressant  cells, while germ-line rearrangements are usually detected only when  treatment using the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. We found  they cause a clinical phenotype, either in the subject or in his/her  a strong association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in  descendants. FKB
P5 , a glucocorticoid receptor regulating co-chaperone of hsp90  A second reason is the presence of recombination ÐhotspotsÑ that  with response to antidepressant drugs (p = 5.5 x 10-6). These SNPs  have often been associated with some recurrent and non-recurrent  were also associated with a higher expression of FKB
P5  protein  rearrangements; these DNA sequences promote either homologous  in lymphocytes. We also found an association of a rare functional  unequal recombination or non-homologous recombination.  SNP in the glucocorticoid receptor itself that leads to a partial  Homologous unequal recombination is mediated by paralogous  glucocorticoid receptor resistance with response to antidepressant  regions on homologous or non-homologous chromosomes, and  treatment (p = 0.0049). Our results, as well as those from other  generates a variety of deletions, duplications and translocations.  research groups appear to be promising for the future development of  Recurrent non-homologous recombination seems to be related to  an individualized antidepressant pharmacotherapy. the presence of speciÜc, potentially unstable sequences, often due  to the presence of clustered repeated sequences named Low Copy  
S21 . The polypill Repeats (LCR); these recombinations yield breakpoints containing  M. Law;  short deletions and insertions. Department of Environmental and Preventive Medicine, Wolfson Institute of  Fewer efforts have been devoted to the analysis of breakpoints of  Preventive Medicine, Barts and the London, Queen MaryÓs School of Medicine  non-recurrent translocations, because they occur less frequently, they  and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom. are sometimes harder to discover and until recently their molecular  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  characterization was technically more demanding. for submissions after the printing deadline. We have analyzed the breakpoints of 26 germ line, non-recurrent,  balanced autosomal translocations, 10 of them characterized in our  
S22 . The complex nature of constitutional de novo apparently  laboratory, 16 obtained from published reports. The oligonucleotide  balanced translocations in patients presenting with abnormal  composition, presence of recombination-associated motifs and  phenotypes secondary structure of each breakpoint were compared and matched  N. P. Carter;  to a set of randomly generated reference sequences.The results  are consistent with a role for non-homologous recombination in the  The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,  genesis of non-recurrent autosomal translocations, while regional  Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. sequence structure may be involved in generating some of the  With the publication of the complete human genome sequence,  breakpoints. a complete set of mapped and sequenced DNA clones are now  available which can be utilised as a valuable resource for molecular  
S24 . Translocation breakpoints and disease genes cytogenetics. In particular, this resource has facilitated the production  V. Kalscheuer;  of high resolution DNA microarrays (Fiegler et al. 2003a) which most  commonly have been used to detect imbalances in whole genomic  Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. DNA using comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH). Recently,  Disease-associated balanced chromosomal rearrangements  we have reported a novel technique termed array painting, which  (DBCRs) that inactivate speciÜc genes form visible bridges  is a combination of technologies involving the hybridisation of Ýow  between genotypes and phenotypes. We and others have shown  sorted chromosome material onto DNA microarrays (Fiegler et al.  that the systematic study of DBCRs is a very powerful strategy for  2003b). We are using array painting to map rapidly the breakpoints  identifying genetic changes underlying human disease. To date ESHG Symposia 64 we have analysed more than 150 patients with DBCRs that were  should ultimately facilitate the understanding of complex cellular  available through close collaboration with the Mendelian Cytogenetic  networks. Network (N. Tommerup, Cophenhagen) and interactions with clinical  Boutros et al. (2004). Genome-wide RNAi Analysis of Growth and  geneticists worldwide. So far, we have identiÜed more than 35  Viability in Drosophila Cells. Science 306: 832-835 genes disrupted by the chromosomal rearrangement in patients  with mental retardation or related disorders. These genes code for a  
S28 . Genetic architecture of Hsp90-buffered traits wide variety of functionally interesting proteins, including regulators  S. Rutherford, K. F. Gorman, R. Howsmon, J. Biava, C. Carey, A. Aragaki, C.  of Rho GTPases, kinases, phosphatases, transcriptional regulators,  Kooperberg;  synapse-associated proteins, axon guidance molecules, transporters  Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States. and factors involved in protein degradation. Thus, DBCRs are a rich  Under low Hsp90 previously hidden genetic and epigenetic variation  source of genes that play a role in the development and function  for rare morphological abnormalities is revealed in Drosophila and  of the human brain and other organs, and their ongoing functional  other organisms, inspiring the ÒHsp90 capacitorÓ hypothesis for  characterization should shed more light on the role of these genes  morphological evolution. To understand Hsp90 genetic buffering,  in the etiology and pathogenesis of inherited disorders. In a small  we used QTL and deletion mapping to Ünd genes responsible for a  percentage of cases breakpoint Üne-mapping and cloning revealed  common, Hsp90-dependent deformed eye trait (dfe). Three replicate  the presence of a small deletion or complex rearrangement. In  Ýy lines started from a single deformed male and four related, but  other cases the clinical phenotypes can be explained by position  normal, females were selected over many generations, increasing  effects or by the disruption of long-range regulatory elements. More  the probability of dfe until nearly every Ýy in each line was abnormal.  recently, we have started to extend our systematic study of DBCRs to  Like human disease, dfe is a complex trait; a threshold sensitive to  rearrangements with complex and late-onset diseases. many genetic and environmental factors determines whether dfe  is expressed. Outside the threshold, phenotype is insensitive to  
S25 . AfÜnity Proteomics to Explore the Human Genome genotype and mapping power is poor. Over a small range of liability,  M. Uhlen;  risk increases sharply, and phenotype (disease or deformity) is  Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden. sensitive to even minor genetic effects. To map dfe near its threshold,  A systematic approach to convert genomics data into biological  we placed small random intervals from an inbred wild background  knowledge based on protein proÜling is described. The strategy relies  (normal eyes) into each high line to make isogenic recombinant  on a high-throughput method for the recombinant production of non- lines (IRLs). IRL penetrance was high unless recombinant intervals  homologous regions of the proteome selected by whole genome  contained dominant wild-type alleles of dfe genes that suppressed  bioinformatics. Such protein fragments are individually used to  its penetrance. This design powerfully identiÜed several shared  generate and enrich mono-speciÜc antibodies for systematic analysis  and unique QTL across the replicate mapping experiments and will  of protein proÜles (expression and localization) in different human  facilitate their unambiguous identiÜcation. Many QTL corresponded  organs using tissue arrays The results suggest that this AfÜnity  to one or more genes or regions found independently by mapping  Proteomics strategy can be used to produce a proteome atlas,  non-complementing deletions. Genes affecting Hsp90 pathways  describing distribution and expression of proteins in normal tissues as  accumulate as neutral variants in normal populations. The many  well as in common cancers and other forms of diseased tissues. The  Hsp90-buffered genes contributing interchangeably to dfe liability  implications for the development of protein arrays will be discussed. from variation in just a few Ýies suggest Hsp90-buffered variants  Agaton et al (2003) AfÜnity proteomics for systematic protein proÜling  affecting eye development, like genes accounting for a large  of chromosome 21 gene products in human tissues. Mol Cell  proportion of risk for human disease, are common but usually  Proteomics 2(6): p. 405-14. unexpressed. Many Hsp90 pathways are misregulated in cancer.  Cloning Hsp90 buffered variation from normal Ýy populations will  
S26 . Function prediction and protein networks identify new candidate genes for cancer and other complex diseases. P. Bork;  
S29 . Pituitary development EMBL Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. S. Amselem;  Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  for submissions after the printing deadline. Laboratoire de G\x8dn\x8dtique et de Physiopathologie, INSERM U468, H\x98pital  Henri-Mondor, Cr\x8dteil, France. 
S27 . Genome-wide Cell based RNAi Screens in Drosophila Text not available. Please check the website www.eshg.org/eshg2004  M. Boutros;  for submissions after the printing deadline. German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. 
S30 . Cholesterol Biosynthetic Disorders - What Can We Learn  A crucial aim upon completion of whole genome sequences is the  from Mouse Models? functional analysis of predicted gene products. Drosophila is one of  G. E. Herman;  the best-studied genetic model systems and has been instrumental  to the identiÜcation of conserved pathway components with important  Columbus ChildrenÓs Research Institute, Columbus, OH, United States. roles from Ýies to humans. Since 1998, Üve human disorders involving enzyme defects in  We have developed a RNAi library containing 21306 fragments  post-squalene cholesterol biosynthesis have been identiÜed -  against almost every predicted gene in the Drosophila genome.  desmosterolosis, X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata,  Treatment of cultured Drosophila cells with dsRNA leads to the  CHILD syndrome, lathosterolosis, and hydrops-ectopic calciÜcation- efÜcient depletion of the corresponding transcript and the generation  moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia. They join the most common disorder,  of speciÜc and penetrant phenotypes. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, whose underlying defect was identiÜed  We have here applied a high-throughput RNAi screen in  in 1993. All are associated with major developmental malformations  macrophage-like cells to characterize the function of nearly all  that are unusual for metabolic disorders. In 1999, we determined  predicted Drosophila gene in cell growth and viability. We found  that the X-linked, male lethal mouse mutation bare patches (Bpa)  several hundred dsRNAs that identiÜed essential genes, among  results from mutations in a novel 3Ȳ-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase  which 80% lacked mutant alleles in vivo. Quantitative analysis  (Nsdhl) involved in removal of C-4 methyl groups in a late step of  showed that mutant phenotypes allowed classiÜcation of phenotypes  cholesterol biosynthesis. We are employing this mouse model to  into distinct classes, ranging from growth inhibition to programmed  examine the pathogenesis of cholesterol biosynthesis disorders.  cell death. The NSDHL protein is localized on the surface of lipid droplets,  We now apply the combination of a genome-wide RNAi library and  in addition to ER membranes, suggesting that it may play a role  massively parallel phenotyping to systematically dissect a variety of  in intracellular cholesterol trafÜcking. Affected male embryos die  cellular pathways. The genome-wide RNAi library is adaptable for  in mid-gestation between 
E9 .5-
E12 .5, depending on the allele.  screening for many different cellular pathways and processes, which  Cholesterol and total sterol levels are normal in affected males at ESHG Concurrent Symposia 65 the time of death, suggesting that the fetal pathology is not caused  Due to elevated liver values, 7 probands had to be excluded. The  by a lack of cholesterol. In addition, while there are no consistent  Ürst 3 blood samples of the remaining probands were taken without  anomalies noted in affected embryos, the associated placentas are  medication. Then, treatment was started by administering 300 mg  always small and demonstrate a thinner, disorganized labyrinth and  of VPA/day, gradually increasing the dose up to 1200-1800 mg/day  fewer fetal vessels. Since most of the extraembryonic lineages in  to achieve a blood level of 70-100 Ⱥg VPA/ml (common in epilepsy  the mouse demonstrate non-random X-inactivation, we hypothesize  therapy). Blood levels of FL and truncated SMN mRNA were  that cells from extraembryonic mesoderm that demonstrate random  determined applying real-time quantitative PCR, at the same time  X-inactivation and contribute to the labyrinth are responsible for the  evaluating the suitability of several housekeeping genes for use as  severe, male lethal phenotype. These mesodermally derived cells  stably expressed standard. SMN protein levels in peripheral blood  contribute to the endothelial lining of fetal vessels in the labyrinth,  mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were analyzed by Ýow cytometry. Data  consistent with the abnormalities we have identiÜed. We are  will be presented to characterize the in-vivo effect of VPA on SMN  currently using techniques such as in situ hybridization, generation  gene expression in PBMCs as potential parameter for monitoring  of transgenic mice, and microarray expression analysis to further  further clinical studies. examine the male lethality and to help provide clues about the  pathogenesis of the human cholesterol biosynthetic disorders. 
C03 . In vivo enhancing effect of SUMF1, the Multiple Sulfatase  DeÜciency gene, on sulfatase activities M. Cosma1, A. Auricchio1, C. Settembre1, S. Pepe1, M. Doria1, A. Fraldi1, A.  Ballabio1,2;  
C01 . Phenylbutyrate increases SMN gene expression and motor  1TIGEM Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Medical  function in spinal muscular atrophy patients Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Federico II University,  F. D. Tiziano1, T. Vitali1, C. Angelozzi1, S. Messina2, F. Colitto3, A. M. Pinto1, E.  Naples, Italy. Bertini4, G. Neri1, E. Mercuri3, C. Brahe1;  Human sulfatases cleave sulfate esters from a wide range of  1Universit\x87 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore - Istituto di Genetica Medica, Roma,  substrates and deÜciencies of these activities cause at least eight  Italy, 2Universit\x87 degli Studi di Messina - II Clinica Neurologica, Messina, Italy,  human monogenic diseases. We have recently identiÜed the gene  3Universit\x87 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore - Istituto di Neurologia, Roma, Italy,  for Multiple Sulfatase DeÜciency (MSD) named SUMF1 (SUlfatase  4Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Ges\x9c, Roma, Italy. Modifying Factor 1) which is responsible for converting a cysteine  Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive  into formylglycine at the active site of all human sulfatases. Co- neuromuscular disease, characterized by degeneration of the anterior  transfection studies in cell lines demonstrated SUMF1 enhancing  horn cells of the spinal cord. SMA is caused by insufÜcient levels of  effect on sulfatase activities. To date, gene therapy protocols  survival motor neuron (SMN) protein. No cure for SMA is available  for sulfatase deÜciencies required unexpectedly high levels  at present. Increasing SMN expression could be of considerable  of exogenous sulfatases to correct the metabolic defect. We  therapeutic importance. hypothesized that simultaneous delivery of SUMF1 and sulfatase  Recently, we found that sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (PB), a well  genes results in a more effective treatment of diseases due to  tolerated FDA approved drug, enhances SMN gene expression in  sulfatase deÜciencies. We have delivered mono and bicistronic AAV  vitro. To assess whether PB is effective to increase SMN expression  vectors encoding the human IDS and ARSB genes with and without  also in vivo we have administered oral PB (triButyrate§, Fyrkl\x99vern  SUMF1 to murine liver, lung, muscle, CNS and HSC. Our preliminary  Scandinavia AB) to 6 patients for 7 days and determined leukocyte  results in transduced muscle show SUMF1 enhancing effect on  SMN mRNA levels by real-time PCR. We observed for all patients  ARSB activity which is secreted and uptaken by uninjected tissues,  a signiÜcant increase in relative SMN full length transcript levels  supporting the validity of this novel approach for gene therapy of  in one or more blood samples obtained during PB administration  sulfatase deÜciencies. compared to baseline (p<0.005). To evaluate tolerability and clinical  efÜcacy of PB we have performed a pilot study including 10 SMA  
C04 . Functional overlap between ABCD1 (ALD) and ABCD2  type II patients to whom oral triButyrate§ was administered for 9  (ALDR) transporters: a therapeutic target for X-linked  weeks using an intermittent schedule (7 days on and 7 days off).  adrenoleukodystrophy Changes in motor function were evaluated using the Hammersmith  A. Pujol1, I. Ferrer2, C. Camps1, E. Metzger1, M. Ruiz3, M. Giros3, T. P\x87mpols3,  functional motor scale. We found a signiÜcant increase in the scores  J. Mandel1;  of the Hammersmith functional scale at both 3 weeks (p<0.012) and 9  1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Hospital Universitary de Bellvitge, Barcelona,  weeks assessments (p<0.004) compared to baseline. Spain, 3IBC, Barcelona, Spain. Our results indicate that PB might be beneÜcial to SMA patients  X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), a devastating,  without producing any major side effect. Larger prospective  neurodegenerative disease, is the most common genetic cause  randomised placebo controlled trials are needed to conÜrm these  of leukodystrophy and AddisonÓs disease, and the most common  preliminary Ündings. peroxisomal disorder (1 in 17:000 males). X-ALD is the consequence  of mutations in the ABCD1 (ALD) gene that encodes a peroxisomal  
C02 . Pilot study of in-vivo effects of valproic acid on SMN gene  ABC transporter. Its closest homologue, ABCD2 (ALDR, 88%  expression in SMA carriers homology to ALD) is able to rescue the biochemical defect (very- L. Brichta1,2, K. Haug2, Y. Sun2, S. Stier3, T. Klockgether4, B. Wirth1,2;  long-chain fatty acid accumulation) when overexpressed in vitro. We  1University of Cologne, Institute of Human Genetics, K\x99ln, Germany, 2University  have recently uncovered a late-onset neurodegenerative phenotype  of Bonn, Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 3University of Bonn,  in the ageing ALD- mice, that resembles adrenomyeloneuropathy in  Medizinische Poliklinik, Bonn, Germany, 4University of Bonn, Department of  patients, or late-onset ALD. Using this model, we have addressed  Neurology, Bonn, Germany. the functional redundancy of both transporters in vivo, by generating  Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a frequent inherited motoneuron  in one hand, mice overexpressing ALDR and in the other hand,  disease caused by homozygous mutation of the survival motoneuron  knock-out mice for ALDR. Overexpression of the ALDR gene can  gene 1 (SMN1). An almost identical gene copy, SMN2, fails to  indeed prevent the clinical and histopathological phenotype, while the  compensate for the loss of SMN1 due to a silent mutation leading to  phenotype of mice deÜcient for both ALD and ALDR is more severe  skipping of exon 7 in the majority of SMN2 transcripts. These encode  and of earlier onset, and in particular these mice present signs of  a truncated, unstable protein that is not functionable. inÝammatory reaction. InÝammatory reaction in brain is a hallmark  Recently, we demonstrated that therapeutic doses of valproic acid  of the severe childhood form of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy,  (VPA), a drug successfully used in epilepsy treatment, increase  but had not been observed in the single ALD- mouse. We thus  full-length (FL) SMN2 mRNA and protein levels in SMA Übroblasts  demonstrate that the ALDR gene is a valid therapeutic target for  by stimulating transcription and promoting exon 7 inclusion. Based  adrenoleukodystrophy. As this gene is regulated by Ppara and  on these results, our group started a pilot trial with VPA in 17 SMA  Srebp transcription factors, and upregulated by thyroid hormone  carriers, each of them carrying 1 SMN1 copy and 1-3 SMN2 copies.  and inhibitors of histone deacetylases such as 4-phenylbutyrate, ESHG Concurrent Symposia 66 pharmacological upregulation of ALDR gene expression appears a  
C07 . IdentiÜcation of exonic splicing regulatory elements in  feasible approach towards treatment of adrenoleukodystrophy. CFTR and BRCA1 genes F. Pagani, M. Raponi, E. Goina, C. Stuani, F. E. Baralle;  
C05 . Paradoxical NSD1 mutations in Beckwith-Wiedemann  ICGEB, Trieste, Italy. syndrome and 11p15 anomalies in Sotos syndrome When sequence variants are identiÜed in genomic DNA, especially  G. Baujat1, M. Rio1, S. Rossignol2, D. Sanlaville1, S. Lyonnet1, A. Munnich1, C.  during routine analysis of disease-associated genes, the full  Gicquel2, V. Cormier1, L. Colleaux1;  implication of the molecular effect of the substitution might not  1Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Hospital Trousseau, Paris,  be immediately evident.Exonic sequence variations can result  France. unexpectedly in disease or mutant phenotype by affecting splicing.  Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by pre- The critical issue is to identify if a given nucleotide change is a  and postnatal overgrowth, macrocephaly, advanced bone age, typical  polymorphism or a splicing mutation. We have analyzed the CFTR  facial gestalt and variable degree of mental retardation. Aberrations  and BRCA1 to explore the frequency and mechanism by which  of the NSD1 gene account for largely 80% of Sotos syndrome, while  exonic substitutions affect splicing. Several changes in CFTR exon  the disease mechanism of other cases remains unknown. 12 (missense and silent) induce a variable extent of exon skipping.  Macrosomia, macroglossia, omphalocele, visceromegaly,  This phenomenon is due to the interference with a new regulatory  hypoglycemia and elevated risk of embryonal tumors characterize  element, the Composite Exonic Regulatory Element of Splicing  Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), genetically heterogenous  (CERES). On the other hand, in BRCA1, a G to T substitutions in  disorder caused by dysregulation of imprinted growth regulatory  exon 18 was shown to causes exon skipping and the mechanism still  genes within the 11p15 region. The molecular defect underlying a  controversial will be discussed. Multiple synonymous substitutions  signiÜcant proportion of BWS cases remains unknown. in exon 12 lead to changes in the splicing efÜciency suggesting that  Although Sotos and BWS are clinically distinct conditions, they share  the codon bias may be the result of natural selection of splicing, The  common features such as macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia or  effect of single nucleotide substitutions at CERES and at the BRCA1  cardiac and genito-urinary anomalies. Based on this phenotypic  exon 18, or changes at synonymous codons, were not predicted by  overlap, we tested whether unexplained Sotos cases could be related  SR matrices. to 11p15 anomalies and whether unexplained BWS could be related  Exonic variations that create new splicing regulatory elements or that  to NSD1 aberrations. Indeed, 2 anomalies of the 11p15 region  affect CERES may represent a frequent disease-causing aberrant  were identiÜed in a series of 19 Sotos patients carrying no NSD1  splicing defects. Our results also indicate that even the most benign  aberration. On the other hand, we identiÜed 2 NSD1 mutations in 51  looking polymorphism in an exon cannot be ignored as it may affect  BWS children with no 11p15 anomaly. These results suggest that the  the splicing process. two disorders may have more similarities than previously thought,  based on molecular genetic Ündings. We propose that NSD1 protein  
C08 . Is the mandibuloacral dysplasia, a progeroid laminopathy, a  could be involved in imprinting of the chromosome 11p15 region. new chromatin remodelling disease? F. Gullotta1, M. R. DÓApice2, A. M. Nardone1, G. Lattanzi3, P. Sbraccia4, I.  
C06 . Mutations in the VKOR
C1  gene cause warfarin resistance  Filesi5, S. Biocca5, R. Lauro4, N. M. Maraldi3, G. Novelli2;  and multiple coagulation factor deÜciency type 2 1Azienda Ospedaliera Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 2Department of  S. Rost1,2, A. Fregin1, V. Ivaskevicius3, E. Conzelmann4, K. H\x99rtnagel2, H. J.  Biopathology, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratory of Cell  Pelz5, K. Lappegard6, E. Seifried3, I. Scharrer7, E. G. D. Tuddenham8, C. R.  Biology and Electron Microscopy, Rizzoli Orthopedic Institute, Bologna, Italy,  M\x9eller1, T. Strom2,9, J. Oldenburg1,3;  4Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy,  1University of Wuerzburg, Dept. of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany,  5Department of Neuroscience, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 2GSF, Dept. of Human Genetics, Muenchen, Germany, 3Institute of Transfusion  Chromatin remodelling inÝuence a succession of processes  Medicine, DRK Blood Donor Service, Frankfurt, Germany, 4University of  including DNA modiÜcations, covalent histone modiÜcations, and  Wuerzburg, Dept. of Physiological Chemistry II, Wuerzburg, Germany, 5Federal  histone relocation. These processes control the chromatin structure  Biological Research Center for Agriculture and Forestry, Muenster, Germany,  and thereby gene expression, DNA methylation, replication,  6Dept. of Medicine, Nordland Hospital, Bodo, Norway, 7Center of Internal  recombination, repair, apoptosis and senescence. Numerous  Medicine, Frankfurt, Germany, 8MRC Clinical Sciences Center, Imperial  evidences have established the relationship between epigenetic  College, London, United Kingdom, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum  changes and the molecular pathogenesis of several monogenic  rechts der Isar, M\x9enchen, Germany. diseases involving chromatin remodelling. The mandibuloacral  Coumarin drugs are the therapy of choice for treatment and  dysplasia (MAD, OMIM 248370) is caused by a mutation in LMNA- prevention of thromboembolic events. Coumarins target blood  encoding lamin A/C. The lamins exert a profound inÝuence in the  coagulation via inhibition of the vitamin K epoxide reductase complex  maintaining the structural integrity of the nuclear lamina and on the  (VKOR). This complex recycles vitamin K 2,3-epoxide to vitamin K  organization of heterochromatin within the nucleus. In order to study  hydroquinone, an essential cofactor for the post-translational gamma- the nucleus architecture, we examined the nucleus morphology,  carboxylation of several blood coagulation factors. VKOR has been  the cytoarchitecture, the chromatin organization and the expression  puriÜed only paritally, and its gene has remained elusive. of its associated proteins in Übroblast cell lines from MAD patients  We hypothesized that VKOR is involved in two heritable diseases,  carrying the R527H homozygous mutation. Nuclear alterations mostly  combined deÜciency of vitamin K dependent clotting factors type 2  consisting with focal absence of peripheral heterochromatin were  (VKCFD2) and resistance to coumarins (warfarin resistance WR).  detected in non-degenerating Übroblasts. In the areas devoid of  WR has been mapped in rats in mice. We localised VKCFD2 by  peripheral heterochromatin, the nuclear lamina showed an irregular  homozygosity mapping to the pericentromeric region of chromosome  thickness when compared with normal areas. The major protein  16. Using these mapping information from three species, we  component of heterochromatin, heterochromatin protein 1 (H
P1 ),  performed a systematic mutation screen. Mutations in 2 VKCFD2  and histone H3 Lys9 methylated (H3Lys9) were found strongly  patients, 4 WR patients and a WR rat strain identiÜed a small  reduced in patientÓs cells compared to controls. Because H
P1  is an  transmembrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum, named vitamin  integral component of H3 Lys9-methylated chromatin, we suggest  K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 (VKOR
C1 ). Recombinant  that this reduction is a consequence of an impaired chromodomain  expression of the wild-type protein, but not the protein carrying the  function. In fact, no differences at RNA levels were detected for  VKCFD2 mutation leads to a striking increase in VKOR activity which  genes encoding these proteins. These results strongly suggest that  is sensitive to warfarin inhibition. chromatin remodelling is a key event in the cascade of epigenetic  VKOR
C1  is the Ürst component of the VKOR complex to be  events causing MAD and possibly other laminopathies. identiÜed at the molecular level. Mutations in VKOR
C1  contribute  to understanding the pathomechanism of VKCFD2 and WR. Our  Ündings may also provide a basis for a rational design of novel  anticoagulant drugs targeting VKOR.ESHG Concurrent Symposia  67 
C09 . Impaired calmodulin binding of Myosin-7A causes  
C11 . PA26 is a candidate gene for human heterotaxia autosomal dominant hearing loss (DFNA11) H. Peeters1, M. L. Voz2, H. Pendeville2, B. Peers2, M. Gewillig3, W. Van de  H. J. Bolz1,2, S. Bolz3, G. Schade4, C. Kothe4, G. Mohrmann1, M. Hess4, A. Gal1;  Ven1, J. Fryns1, K. Devriendt1;  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Ham- 1Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratoire de  burg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne,  Biologie Mol\x8dculaire et de G\x8dnie G\x8dn\x8dtique, Universit\x8d de Li\x8ege, Belgium,  Germany, 3Institute of Physiology, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Ger- 3Department of Paediatric Cardiology, University Hospital Leuven, Belgium. many, 4Department of Phoniatrics and Pediatric Audiology, University Hospital  Heterotaxia is a congenital disorder characterised by a reversed left- Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. right polarity of one or more organ systems and is often associated  We identiÜed a heterozygous missense mutation (R853C) in a  with congenital heart defects. Whereas several genes involved in  family with autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss that  left-right axis determination have been identiÜed in animal models  changes an evolutionarily invariant residue of the Üfth IQ motif (IQ5),  little is known about the genes controlling this process in humans.  a putative calmodulin (CaM) binding domain, of myosin-7A (MYO7A).  We here report on the identiÜcation of a candidate gene for human  Functional effects of the R853C mutation were investigated in  heterotaxia and on functional studies of this gene in zebraÜsh.  a physiological cellular environment by expressing wildtype or  The gene PA26 was disrupted by a translocation breakpoint in a  mutant MYO7A IQ5-containing peptides in smooth muscle cells of  patient with heterotaxia and a de novo reciprocal translocation  microarteries. Overexpression of wildtype IQ5 (with intact calmodulin  t(6;18)(q21;q22). Northern blot analysis showed a decreased  binding) would be expected to compete for CaM with myosin light  expression of the PA26 gene in an EBV-cell line of this patient.  chain kinase (MLCK). Indeed, analysis of calmodulin-dependent  Mutation analysis of the human PA26 gene in 40 unrelated individuals  vasoconstriction suggests constitutive binding of the wildtype, but  with unexplained heterotaxia failed to identify mutations. Analysis of  not the R853C-mutated, IQ5 motif to CaM at all physiologically  the PA26 gene structure resulted in the identiÜcation of a novel PA26- relevant Ca2+ concentrations. Both CaM and MYO7A are mandatory  related gene family which we named the sestrin family, comprising  for transduction and adaptation processes in inner ear hair cells.  the three closely related genes in humans as well as in mouse and  A role of myo7a in slow adaptation has been suggested based  in zebraÜsh. We identiÜed the PA26 zebraÜsh orthologue and proved  on investigation of the congenitally deaf mouse mutant shaker-1  syntheny with the human PA26. By means of morpholino knockdown  resulting from recessive deleterious myo7a mutations. Our data  technology we showed an alteration in the situs of the pancreas in  suggest a disturbed CaM/MYO7A binding in R853C heterozygotes.  35% of the knockdown zebraÜsh embryos. We conclude that our  This defect may represent the pathogenetic mechanism resulting  zebraÜsh knockdown model supports a role of PA26 in human situs  in impaired adaptation to environmental stimuli and progressive  determination. deterioration of hearing transduction. Our results support the still  controversially discussed view that, in addition to its role in providing  
C12 . Heterozygous missense mutations in BSC
L2  are associated  structural hair cell integrity, MYO7A is a constitutive element of the  with distal hereditary motor neuropathy and Silver syndrome hair bundleÓs adaptation machinery. Importantly, the CaM/MYO7A  C. Windpassinger1, M. Auer-Grumbach1, J. Irobi2, H. Patel3, E. Petek1, G.  interaction represents an attractive molecular target for therapeutical  H\x99rl1, R. Malli1, J. A. Reed3, I. Dierick2, N. Verpoorten2, T. T. Warner4, C.  interventions aimed to delay or prevent the onset of hearing loss in  Proukakis4, C. Proukakis4, P. Van den Bergh5, C. Verellen5, L. Van Maldergem6,  families with mutations in myosin IQ domains. L. Merlini7, P. De Jonghe2, V. Timmerman2, A. H. Crosby3, K. Wagner1;  1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerpen,  
C10 . SCA14 in the Dutch ataxia population Belgium, 3St. GeorgeÓs Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom,  D. S. Verbeek1, B. P. C. van de Warrenburg2, D. Dooijes3, C. C. Verschuuren- 4Royal Free and University College Medical School, London, United Kingdom,  Bemelmans4, H. P. Kremer2, R. J. Sinke1;  5University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 6Center of Human Genetics,  1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University Medical  Loverval, Belgium, 7Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy. Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether- Distal hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN) or distal spinal muscular  lands, 4Academic hospital Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. atrophy (OMIM #182960) is a heterogeneous group of disorders  ADCAs are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of  characterized by an almost exclusive degeneration of motor  neurodegenerative disorders. A molecular analysis in the SCA1, 2,  nerve Übers, predominantly in the distal part of the limbs1. Silver  3, 6 and 7 genes cannot be made in one-third of the ADCA families.  syndrome (OMIM #270685) is a rare form of hereditary spastic  One way to identify additional SCA genes is to use linkage analysis.  paraparesis mapped to chromosome 11q12-q14 (SPG17) in which  However, this requires large pedigrees and most of the Dutch  spasticity of the legs is accompanied by amyotrophy of the hands  ADCA families are too small. We have therefore used an alternative  and occasionally also the lower limbs2,3. Silver syndrome and  approach. most forms of dHMN are autosomal dominantly inherited with  Recently we were able to demonstrate the existence of detectable  incomplete penetrance and a broad variability in clinical expression.  founder effects for the SCA3 and SCA6 genes in the Netherlands.  A genome-wide scan in an Austrian family with dHMN-V (ref. 4)  Therefore, we believed there may well be founder effects for the other  showed linkage to the locus SPG17, which was conÜrmed in 16  SCA loci for which no speciÜc gene or associated mutation have yet  additional families with a phenotype characteristic of dHMN or Silver  been identiÜed. To make use of this phenomenon, we set out to use  syndrome. After reÜning the critical region to 1 Mb, we sequenced  a shared haplotype analysis (SHA) to localize and identify novel SCA  the gene Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy (BSC
L2 ) and  genes in the remaining SCA loci. identiÜed two heterozygous missense mutations resulting in the  We report a six-generation Dutch ADCA family in which linkage to  amino acid substitutions N88S and 
S90 L. Null mutations in BSC
L2 ,  the SCA14 locus on chromosome 19q13.4-qter was found by using  which encodes the protein seipin, were previously shown to be  SHA. Recently, missense mutations in exon 4 of the PKCgamma  associated with autosomal recessive Berardinelli-Seip congenital  gene were reported in 2 ADCA families. We sequenced the  lipodystrophy5 (OMIM #269700). We show that seipin is an integral  PKCgamma gene and identiÜed a novel missense mutation in exon  membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The amino acid  4. Alternatively, we sequenced the complete Dutch ataxia population  substitutions N88S and 
S90 L affect glycosylation of seipin and result  and identiÜed additional individuals whom showed the Gly118Asp  in aggregateformation leading to neurodegeneration. mutation. Genealogical research was able to link all individuals to the  initial large SCA14 family. This Ünding strengthens our hypothesis  
C13 . IdentiÜcation and detailed characterization of intragenic  that seemingly independently referred ADCA families can be linked to  human single-exon genes, that arose late in evolution larger pedigrees by combining genealogical research with a shared  A. Rump, I. Thielke, A. Herr;  haplotype approach. Institute of Clinical Genetics, Dresden, Germany. Goal: We want to show that retropositional gene formation has been  a valuable source for novel genes in late evolution, i.e. after the  whole genome duplications had already taken place and the ray-ESHG Concurrent Symposia 68 Ünned Üsh (Actinopterygii) had been formed. likely to serve as useful intermediate markers, providing a more direct  Approach: 1326 single-exon genes are listed at the ÐUCSC Genome  link between sequence variation and phenotypic outcomes. Informatics SiteÑ. We screened all these genes for those that reside  We are investigating the extent and pattern of gene expression  within an intron of another, well-deÜned, multi-exon gene (called  variation in forty-one chromosome 21 genes, using lymphoblastoid  Ðhost-geneÑ). In order to Ünd those single-exon genes that arose  cell lines from the CEPH families collection. The genes were selected  recently (i.e. do deÜnitely not exist in the puffer-Üsh Fugu), we  on the basis their expression in lymphoblastoid cells, and were  identiÜed the Fugu orthologs of the human host-genes (by amino acid  studied 6 CEPH Utah families. Precise mRNA quantiÜcation was  similarity and by syntheny of the neighbouring genes) and checked  performed using Taqman real-time PCR and the Illumina system.  the introns of these host-gene orthologs for the presence of the  We performed 6 replicates for each measurement in order to obtain  corresponding single-exon gene. accurate error calculations. Results: Up to now, we have identiÜed 117 intragenic human single- We will present our results concerning the levels of gene expression  exon genes, many of which are deÜnitely absent from the Fugu  variation observed, the heritability of the gene expression differences,  genome, i.e. have been generated recently. Furthermore, these  genome-wide eQTL mapping, and a comparison between Taqman  genes have a clear, spliced precursor gene, and so it is very likely  and Illumina methodologies. These results provide a Ürst step for  that they arose from a retrotransposition event. Examples for such  identifying the molecular mechanisms underlying gene expression  novel, intragenic single-exon genes are: CHML (derived from CHM /  variation. invaded into OPN3 / absent in the Fugu OPN3 orthologue / essential  biological functions in mammals, implicated in Usher-Syndrome type  
C16 . Functional analysis of Conserved Non-Genic sequences  II); LDHL (derived from LDHA / invaded into Myo1E / absent in the  (CNGs) Fugu Myo1E orthologue / expressed in human brain) and OXCT2  C. Attanasio1, E. T. Dermitzakis1,2, R. Lyle1, A. Reymond1, S. E. Antonarakis1;  (derived from OXCT / invaded into BM
P8  / absent in any of the Fugu  1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2The Wellcome  BMPs / expressed in human brain). Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. The description of the functional characteristics of the various  
C14 . Microarray analysis of fetal human neocortex: candidate  sequences of the human genome is of primary importance for  genes for brain development and function the understanding of the contribution of each sequence variant to  E. Wei¦1, U. Zechner1, T. Tralau2, C. Neuser1, T. Haaf1, D. Galetzka1;  human disease phenotypes. A powerful way to recognize functionally  1Institut of Human Genetics, Mainz, Germany, 2Department of Paediatric Patho- important sequences is by comparative analysis of various  logy, Mainz, Germany. genomes. Our comparison between the entire 33.5 Mb long human  Development of the human neocortex depends on spatially and  chromosome 21 and its mouse homologous regions for sequences  temporally correct expression of numerous genes. Disturbances  with >70% identity over >100bp, revealed that there exist a large  of this highly coordinated process are an important cause of  number of conserved genomic regions that are not protein-coding  mental retardation, epilepsy and many other brain disorders. It is  genes. More recently, we have shown that these conserved non- plausible that the same set of genes also contributes signiÜcantly to  genic sequences (CNGs) are signiÜcantly more conserved than  cognitive variation. IdentiÜcation of genes involved in human brain  protein coding genes and noncoding RNAs. The function of these  development and characterization of their spatiotemporally regulated  regions is unknown, but they may be involved in transcription,  expression patterns may provide a better understanding of cognitive  chromosome replication, or structural elements of chromosomes. processes. Microarrays allow monitoring the expression of numerous  In order to assess for the potential functions of the CNGs, we are  candidate genes for cognition during human brain development  currently testing a fraction of these CNGs for their ability to modulate  in parallel. To this end we have developed a cDNA chip with  transcription of a reporter gene (luciferase assay), their ability to  approximately 600 genes that are known to inÝuence some aspect of  interact with mammalian proteins (1-hybrid assay, ChIP-chip and  cognition in humans, mice and/or Drosophila, along with 100 control  bandshift experiment) and their DNase I hypersensitivity. Additional  house keeping genes. This customized gene chip is used to quantify  experiments include chromatin structure analysis (DNA methylation  the mRNA expression levels in fetal (weeks 15-25 of gestation) brain  and histone modiÜcation). Preliminary results suggest that  samples from frontal cortex (prospective area A10 ). Approximately  transcriptional regulation may not be the main role of the conserved  300 genes on the chip displayed detectable expression levels.  sequences. Interestingly some CNGs may function through binding  A subset was expressed differentially at different time points of  with proteins, and this binding is in some cases cell type-speciÜc. gestation. In addition, we showed distinct expression patterns in  brains from Down syndrome fetuses. Microarray results will be  
C17 . Evolutionary fragile sites: implications for hominoid  validated with reverse Northern blots and real time PCR. Because  chromosome evolution the topography of gene expression during early human cortical  T. Haaf1, B. Grossmann1, E. Tsend-Ayush2, F. Gruetzner2, M. A. Ferguson- development is largely unknown, immunolocalisation the protein  Smith3, F. Yang3, Y. Yue1;  products of genes of interest in fetal brain sections to speciÜc cell  1Institute for Human Genetics, Mainz University School of Medicine, Germany,  types is underway. Collectively, our results will provide new insights  2Comparative Genomics Group, Australian National University, Canberra,  into the genetics of human brain development (corticogenesis) and  Australia, 3Centre for Veterinary Science, Cambridge University, United  cognitive processes. Kingdom. Comparative FISH mapping of some 150 large-insert clones revealed  
C15 . Gene Expression Variation In The Human Genome:  at least 14 independent evolutionary breakpoints between human  Dissecting Regulatory Variation. chromosome 3 and the genomes of Üve representative primate  S. Deutsch1, R. Lyle1, C. Gehrig1, S. Hunt2, L. Parand1, M. Forrest2, M. Gagne- species. Many rearrangements, i.e. the pericentric inversions leading  bin1, P. Deloukas2, E. T. Dermitzakis1,2, S. E. Antonarakis1;  to orangutan 2, were not simple breakage and reunion events, but  1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Insti- involved microduplications and/or microdeletions. The breakpoint  tute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. regions that distinguish human 3p25.1, 3p12.3 and 3q21.3 from  Extensive sequence variation is present in human populations, but  orangutan 2 contain paralogous sequence blocks, which were also  only a fraction of this is of functional signiÜcance. One way in which  duplicated at many subtelomeric regions during hominoid genome  sequence variation can be functionally active is by modulating gene  evolution. FISH of fully integrated BAC maps to orangutan, siamang  expression. Correct RNA levels are important for the proper function  gibbon and silvered-leaf monkey chromosomes combined with  of a cell and many human disorders are a result of changes in the  precise breakpoint localization by PCR analysis of Ýow-sorted  abundance or pattern of speciÜc transcripts. Recent studies have  chromosomes localized three independent rearrangements of  reported signiÜcant gene expression variation in humans, mice and  the human 3q21.3-syntenic region within a <250 kb BAC contig.  other organisms, and an important fraction of this variation appears  Approximately 200 kb of the human 3q21.3 segment were not present  to be genetically determined. Natural variation in gene expression is  on the homologous primate chromosomes, suggesting a genomic  suspected to be involved in the etiology of complex disorders, and is  DNA insertion into the breakpoint region in the lineage leading to ESHG Concurrent Symposia 69 humans and African great apes. The inserted segment represents  
C20 . Human sequence variation and disease - The HapMap  part of an ancestral duplication of 3q21.3-paralogous sequences. The  project three breakpoint regions between human 3p25.1, 3p12.3, 3q21.3 and  P. Deloukas1, P. Whittaker1, S. Hunt1, X. Ke2, J. Morrison1, M. Delgado1, L.  orangutan 2 also represent breaks of chromosomal synteny between  Cardon2, D. Bentley1;  the human and rodent genomes. Collectively our data suggest reuse  1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2The  of the same short fragile sites in primate and mammalian evolution.  Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. Large-scale chromosome rearrangements, microduplications and  The HapMap project aims to generate a haplotype map of the human  microdeletions can be considered as different aspects of an inherent  genome, a tool that will facilitate disease and other genetic studies.  instability of these regions. Evidently, genome architecture, in  The projectÓs study-design includes four population samples namely  particular low-copy repeats have played an important role during  CEPH and Yoruba trios as well as unrelated Japanese and Chan  speciation. Chinese. The consortium adopted a hierarchical strategy and in the  Ürst phase is generating a map of evenly spaced SNPs (1 per 5kb)  
C18 . In silico functional analysis of human disease associated  with minor allele frequency >= 0.05. Assessment of local LD patterns  genes in each population will identify both haplotype blocks and regions that  A. Fritz, Y. Palchaninava, K. Wenger, K. Albermann;  require additional SNPs. The latter will be the focus of phase 2; we  Biomax Informatics AG, Martinsried, Germany. anticipate testing over 1.6M SNPs in total. Data are being released  We present an in silico functional analysis of the human genome by  regularly at http://www.hapmap.org; the January release Ügures data  combining computer-assisted text mining with automatic and manual  on 323,723 SNPs. annotation of the human genome. Our approach combines results  SangerÒs contribution to the HapMap project includes chromosomes  from automatic text mining with manual and automatic functional  1, 6, 10, 13, and 20. Genotyping is carried out on the Illumina  annotations of human genes with respect to functional categories  platform (1536-plex reactions). A study of 10,000 SNPs across  (including biological process, molecular function and localization)  20q12-13.2 was used to assess accuracy vs multiplexing; we  and domains of gene products. Such data integration allows the  estimated that the average error rate is <0.3% and is not inÝuenced  computation of multilevel correlations among diverse, independent  by the level of multiplexing. experimental information. These multilevel correlations provide  In parallel, we have undertaken an in depth analysis of chromosome  stronger evidence for causal relationships among genes than  20. 60,000 SNP assays were designed and genotyped at Illumina  correlations based on single experimental approaches. In addition,  across multiple populations. We obtained over 30,000 SNPs with  new and unexpected correlations may be identiÜed. m.a.f >=0.04 and are in the process of assessing common patterns of  We integrated automatic and manual annotations of approximately  LD, haplotype blocks and recombination. 40,000 genes in the BiomaxTM Human Genome Database (Sch\x9eller  We are also conducting a case/control association study for type II  and Fritz, 2002) with results generated by the Biomax text-mining tool  diabetes with 4608 of the validated SNPs in 20q12-13.2. áRelateÐ. The text-mining tool preprocesses any text database using a  speciÜc knowledge base to standardize and summarize the contents.  
C21 . Comparative haplotype diversity among European  We have analyzed the complete MEDLINE database for human  populations: implications for gene mapping studies genes associated with diseases using the text-mining tool. We will  J. C. Mueller1, E. Lohmussaar1, R. M\x89gi2, M. Remm2, T. Bettecken1, P. Licht- discuss the distribution of the disease-associated genes with respect  ner1, T. Illig3, P. Pramstaller4, G. Romeo5, H. Wichmann3, C. Zoccali6, A. Met- to functional categories and protein domains. spalu2, T. Meitinger1;  Endy and Brent (2002). Modelling cellular behaviour. Nature, 409,  1Institute for Human Genetics, GSF, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Molecular  391-395 and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Estonian Biocentre, Estonia, 3Institute of  Sch\x9eller and Fritz (2002). An enhanced Human-Genome Database.  Epidemiology, GSF, Munich, Germany, 4Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy, 5Chair  GEN 22,38 of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, Italy, 6Laboratory of Nephrology,  CNR, Reggio Calabria, Italy. 
C19 . Developing a screening tool for complex diseases using  Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is fundamentally important in association  multiple genetic tests: how many genes are needed? studies, whereby disease variants can be detected through  A. C. J. W. Janssens1, Y. S. Aulchenko2, E. W. Steyerberg1, C. M. van Duijn2;  correlation with adjacent markers. The aim of this project is to  1Erasmus MC, Department of Public Health, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus  compare the LD patterns in European populations with respect to  MC, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Rotterdam, Netherlands. gene mapping approaches. We selected several genomic regions  Introduction: Population screening tools for complex diseases will  adding up to more than one Mb of sequence, which contain candidate  need to include multiple genes, since the effects of single genes are  genes for complex traits. Evenly distributed markers with an average  weak. We aim to determine how many genes are needed to develop  spacing of about 2-5 kb were genotyped in 8 population samples  a useful tool. across Europe including standard control collectives. The CEPH trios  Methods: Usefulness was evaluated by the accuracy of the tool in  of the HapMap project are used as a reference population. discriminating between (future) patients and non-patients, which  We assessed the heterogeneity in LD block boundaries and  is indicated by the area under the ROC curve (AUC). AUC ranges  haplotype frequencies. We show that the main LD block structure  from 0.5 (no discrimination) to 1.0 (perfect discrimination). The  is similar across populations and common haplotypes occur in  discriminative ability was investigated for different combinations of  all populations. In contrast frequencies of single haplotypes can  disease frequency (d), risk allele frequency (f) and odds ratio (OR)  differ considerable among populations. We therefore estimated  of the risk allele. For each combination, we simulated a population of  the proportion of haplotypes we would miss in each population  100000 subjects using S-Plus software. when haplotype tagging markers are selected only in the reference  Results: When the frequency of disease and risk alleles are both  population. We propose recommended tresholds for marker densities  10%, at least 8 genes with strong effects (OR = 4.0) are needed in  and strategies for haplotype tagging in order to support the design of  the tool to obtain good discriminative ability (AUC = 0.80). At least 33  European association studies. genes are needed when all ORs are 2.0, and 99 genes when ORs  are 1.5. For multiple genetic tests that include genes with different  
C22 . Investigation of Genetic Variation in 111 Candidate Genes  frequencies and ORs, the discriminative ability is higher when ORs  for Drug Response Shows Relevance of Rare Variants and frequencies of risk alleles are higher. Each additional gene has  Y. Freudenberg-Hua1, J. Freudenberg1, J. Winantea1, N. Kluck1, S. Cichon2, P.  a smaller effect on the discriminative ability of the tool, also in the  Propping1, M. M. N\x99then2;  hypothetical case that all ORs are equal. 1University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. Conclusions: Good discriminative ability can be obtained when the  Pharmacogenetic studies searching for genetic factors that may  screening tool includes genes that are strongly associated with the  underlie inter-individual differences in drug response require the  disease. When all genes have weak effects, a considerable number  knowledge of variation in candidate genes. In order to identify single  will be needed to obtain sufÜcient discriminatory power.ESHG Concurrent Symposia 70 nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and analyze their characteristics  association analysis of frequent gene variants with QT-interval in the  in a set of 111 candidate genes, we re-sequenced exons and Ýanking  general population. METHODS: In n=702 population based probands  regions covering more than 292 kb of genomic regions in an average  we recorded ECGs and calculated a QT-time corrected for age, sex  of 170 chromosomes of European origin. A total of 729 SNPs were  and heart rate (QTCN). Probands were genotyped for 61 SNPs in  identiÜed. SNPs predicted to be functionally important by changes  a 600 kb region. LD-structure was characterized by determining LD  in the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein were enriched  measures DÒ and r2. Haplotypes in the individual blocks of LD were  among rare variants. Only a small fraction of these rare variants is  determined statistically. Probands with ventricular pacemakers,  represented in the public SNP databases illustrating the need of  complete bundle branch blocks or brady- or tachyarrhythmia were  re-sequencing. This might be true especially for the investigation  excluded from association analysis. In the remaining probands  of severe side effects, for which rare variants may be plausible  (n=657) the corrected QTCN-interval was associated with genetic  candidates. In non-coding regions, a lower minor allele frequency  variants. RESULTS: The genomic region of the KCNQ1 gene extends  was observed for SNPs in interspecies conserved regions compared  over 10 haplotype blocks measured at a coverage of 1 SNP / 10kb.  to non-conserved regions, suggesting that SNPs in conserved  The strongest association to the QTCN-interval was between two  regions include a signiÜcant number of functional variants. For each  SNP markers in Intron 1 (AFmin = 0.37) and in Exon 15 (AFmin =  gene locus we computed htSNPs that capture common haplotype  0.10) (p=0,0085 and p=0,02 resp.) explaining 1,52% and 0,87% of  diversity. Although the knowledge of htSNPs reduces the genotyping  the entire variance of QTCN. Both SNPs were in complete linkage  effort to capture common haplotype diversity, for certain genes this  equilibrium and independent with respect to their effects (p=0.004).  may only account for a low fraction of total haplotype diversity. Their combined effect explained 2,25 % of the variance of QTCN.  In conclusion this study shows that re-sequencing is important for  CONCLUSION: In the genomic region of the KCNQ1 gene at least  pharmacogenetic hypotheses, particularly with respect to side effects  two frequent genetic variants exist in separate LD-blocks that  of drug, since individual drug response appears to be preferentially  independently and additively inÝuence myocardial repolarization. determined by rare variants. Supported by the German Human Genome Project (DHGP). 
C25 . Shprintzen-Goldberg Syndrome: Fourteen New Patients  and a Clinical Analysis 
C23 . A large-scale association study reveals novel breast cancer  S. Tinschert1, P. N. Robinson2, S. Demuth3, H. Enders4, U. Jung5, R. K\x99nig6, B.  susceptibility genes Mitulla7, D. M\x9eller8, P. Muschke9, L. Pfeiffer10, M. Somer11, L. M. Neumann12;  A. Braun1, S. Kammerer1, R. Roth1, M. Nelson1, L. GrifÜths2, U. Schwarz-Boe- 1Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik,Medizinische Fakult\x89t Carl Gustav Carus,TU  ger3, M. Kiechle3, F. Ebner4, J. Rehbock4;  Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Medizinische Genetik, Universit\x89ts- 1Sequenom, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States, 2Genomics Research Centre,  klinikum Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 3Geschwister-Scholl-Str. 6, Erfurt, Germany,  GrifÜth University, Queensland, Australia, 3Technical University, Munich, Ger- 4Medizinische Genetik, Universit\x89t T\x9ebingen, T\x9ebingen, Germany, 5Klinikum  many, 4Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. Buch, 2. Klinik f\x9er Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 6In- Over 210,000 individuals are diagnosed with breast cancer annually  stitut f\x9er Humangenetik, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit\x89t,  in the U.S., with an expected death rate of nearly 20%. For more than  Frankfurt, Germany, 7Humangenetische Beratungsstelle, Zentralklinikum Suhl,  10 years, two genes (BRCA1, BRCA2) have been known to harbor  Suhl, Germany, 8Klinikum Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany, 9Institut f\x9er Human- highly penetrant mutations that increase breast cancer susceptibility  genetik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universit\x89t, Magdeburg, Germany, 10Praxis f\x9er  many-fold. However, very few genes have been identiÜed that  Medizinische Genetik, Frankfurter Allee 231 A, Berlin, Germany, 11Department  inÝuence risk of sporadic breast cancer, which represents the  of Medical Genetics, The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 12Ins- majority of incident cases (>90%). In an attempt to identify genes that  titute of Human Genetics, Charit\x8d University Hospital, Berlin, Germany. inÝuence breast cancer risk, we tested over 25,000 single nucleotide  The Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is a disorder of unknown  polymorphisms located within 10 kb of nearly 50% of known and  cause characterized by craniosynostosis and a marfanoid habitus, as  predicted genes. Using 272 cases and 276 age-matched controls of  well as skeletal, neurological, cardiovascular, and connective-tissue  German descent, we identiÜed over 50 gene regions with evidence  anomalies. There are no pathognomonic signs for SGS and diagnosis  of breast cancer association. One of the genes identiÜed is DLC- depends on recognition of a characteristic combination of signs.  1, a tumor suppressor gene previously described as a candidate  In this report we describe 14 persons with SGS and compare their  for sporadic breast cancer. Replication of these regions in two  clinical Ündings with those of 23 previously reported individuals. independent case-control collections provided additional genetic  Analysis of the 14 persons with SGS presented in this work  support for several novel candidates. One of the regions contained  together with the 23 cases previously described in the literature  a cluster of genes encoding adhesion molecules that has been  lets a relatively comprehensive view of the clinical and radiographic  previously suggested as being involved in the etiology of several  abnormalities commonly or occasionally seen in persons with SGS  forms of cancer. In an independent study we demonstrated that the  emerge, which may be useful for clinical decision making. There is  breast cancer-associated alleles are also associated with prostate  a characteristic facial appearance in SGS, with more than two thirds  cancer. We are currently characterizing the patterns of haplotype  of all individuals having hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral  variability and re-sequencing targeted regions to identify the  Üssures, a high-arched palate, micrognathia and apparently low-set,  genetic variations that are etiologically responsible for disease risk.  posteriorly rotated ears. Other commonly reported manifestations  Furthermore, we demonstrate how these combinations of variations,  include hypotonia in at least the neonatal period, developmental  each with modest, marginal inÝuences on disease risk, can be useful  delay, and inguinal or umbilical hernia. The degree of reported  for predicting individual risk in clinical practice. intellectual impairment ranges from mild to severe. The most  common skeletal manifestations of SGS were arachnodactyly, pectus  
C24 . High Resolution LD-mapping of the Myocardial Ikr Channel  deformity, camptodactyly, scoliosis, and joint hypermobility. None of  Subunit Gene KCNQ1 reveals two independent Effects of Gene  the skeletal signs alone is speciÜc for SGS. Variants on the QT-Interval Our study includes 14 mainly German individuals with SGS evaluated  A. S. Pfeufer1, M. Hinterseer2, S. Perz3, S. Jalilzadeh1, J. M\x9eller1, G. Goppel2,  over a period of 10 years. Given that only 23 other persons with SGS  T. Illig3, H. L\x99wel3, H. E. Wichmann3, M. N\x89bauer2, G. Steinbeck2, S. K\x89\x89b2, T.  have been reported to date worldwide, we suggest that SGS may be  Meitinger1;  more common than has been previously assumed. 1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, TUM, Munich, Germany, 2Medizinische Klinik I, LMU  
C26 . Autosomal recessive congenital cutis laxa: further evidence  Klinikum Gro¦hadern, Munich, Germany, 3GSF Forschungszentrum, Neuher- for heterogeneity and delineation of the Debr\x8d type with eight  berg, Germany. new cases AIM: Cardiac arrythmias are frequently caused by delayed  L. Van Maldergem1, E. Seemanova2, S. Giurgea3, M. Greally4, J. Vigneron5, M.  repolarization under control of voltage gated potassium channels.  Yuksel-Apak6, M. Salih7, Y. Gillerot1, S. Mundlos8;  Extreme phenotypes are the monogenic long QT Syndromes  (LQT1-LQT6). We undertook LD mapping of the KCNQ1 Gene  1Institut de Pathologie et de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Loverval, Belgium, 2Charles University,  (LQT1, 400kb, alpha-subunit of myocardial Iks current) followed by  Motol hosp., Prague, Czech Republic, 3CHU Tivoli, La Louvi\x8ere, Belgium, ESHG Concurrent Symposia 71 4Arabian Gulf Univ., Manama, Bahrain, 5Matern. R\x8dg. A. Pinart, CHU, Nancy,  
C28 . Homozygous missense mutation in the lamin A/C gene  France, 6Instit. Of Child Health, Univ. of Ankara, Turkey, 7King Khaled Univ.  causes autosomal recessive Hutchinson-Gilford progeria  Hosp., Ryiad, Saudi Arabia, 8Inst. f\x9er Med. Genetik, Charit\x8d, Campus Virchow,  syndrome Berlin, Germany. M. Plasilova1, C. Chattopadhyay2,3, P. Pal2,4, N. Schaub5, S. Buechner5, H.  Autosomal recessive cutis laxa has been subdivided until now  Mueller1, P. Miny1, A. Ghosh2, K. Heinimann1;  between a type with pulmonary emphysema and a type with  1Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics, University  growth retardation and dislocation of the hips. We describe eight  ChildrenÓs Hospital and Department of Research, Basel, Switzerland, 2Institute  new patients of the latter type and provide a critical review of the  of Child Health, Calcutta, India, 3Calcutta Project Foundation, University  45 similar clinical reports published until now under the names of  of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 4S.B. Devi Charity Home, Calcutta, India,  cutis laxa or wrinkly skin syndrome. This lead us to reconsider the  5Department of Dermatology, University Clinics, Basel, Switzerland. nosology of congenital cutis laxa and to suggest splitting of the  Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is an extremely rare  growth retardation subtype in Debr\x8d type with megafontanelles and a  genetic disorder with children displaying features reminiscent of  distinctive facial dysmorphia (that includes telecanthus and downward  premature senescence. Recently, heterozygous, recurrent de novo  slant of palpebral Üssures) and another type lacking these features.  point mutations in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C, a component  Differences between the pulmonary emphysema and the Debr\x8d  of the Ülamentous meshwork of the nuclear lamina, have been  subtypes in terms of life expectancy, intellectual development and  reported to cause HGPS, supporting the prevailing hypothesis that  cutaneous phenotype indicate a poor prognosis, normal intelligence  HGPS represents a sporadic autosomal dominant disorder. In this  and worsening of the cutis laxa in the former while prolonged survival,  study on a consanguineous HGPS family we provide molecular  moderate to severe mental retardation and improvement of cutis  evidence for autosomal recessive inheritance of HGPS. Genome- laxa are the rule in the latter. Central nervous system involvement  wide linkage analysis, performed before the recent identiÜcation  is also exempliÜed by the occurrence of brain dysgenesis (frontal  of the gene excluded all chromosomal regions except for 1p13.3- polymicrogyria) and intractable seizures in a female patient and  1q23.3 where the LMNA gene is located. Subsequent screening of  Dandy-Walker malformation in another one. Interestingly, an  the HGPS family indicated that all 4 living affected children share  unreported ÒEhlers-Danlos likeÓphenotype with pseudo-ecchymotic  the same homozygous missense mutation G1626C (K542N) in  pretibial skin lesions was observed in two unrelated affected patients. LMNA. Both parents as well as one healthy daughter were found to  be asymptomatic, heterozygous K542N mutation carriers. Besides  
C27 . Multicentric study of Baraitser-Winter syndrome: critical  HGPS, germline mutations in LMNA have been shown to cause  review, further delineation and re-deÜnition in 19 patients 7 different dominantly and/or recessively inherited disorders. Our  A. Verloes1, P. Blanchet2, P. Bitoun3, H. Brunner4, A. David5, A. Moncla6, J.  Ündings indicate that HGPS represents, in addition to the Emery- Roume7, C. Rusu8, P. Sarda9, M. Till10, R. Winter11, W. Dobyns12, D. Pilz13;  Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), the second laminopathy in  1Clincal Genetics Unit, Paris, France, 2Clincal Genetics dept, University  which germline mutations in the Lamin A/C gene can cause disease  Hospital, Montpellier, France, 3Clincal Genetics Unit, J Verdier Hospital, Bondy,  in both a dominant and recessive mode of inheritance. Given the  France, 4Clincal Genetics Dept, Nijmegen, Paris, Netherlands, 5Clincal Genetics  phenotypic overlap commonly observed among the laminopathies  Dept, University Hospital, Nantes, France, 6Clincal Genetics Dept, La Timone  and the extent of skeletal lesions present in this HGPS kindred,  Hospital, Marseille, France, 7Clincal Genetics Unit, Intercommunal Hospital,  our observations raise the question whether autosomal recessive  Poissy-St Germain, France, 8Clincal Genetics Dept, Iassi, Romania, 9Clincal  mandibuloacral dysplasia (MAD) and HGPS represent essentially the  Genetics Dept, University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 10Clincal Genetics  same genetic disorder albeit with varying degrees of disease severity. Dept, University Hospital, Lyon, France, 11Institute for Child Health, London,  United Kingdom, 12Human Genetics Dept, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL,  
C29 . Clinical and Mutational spectrum of Mowat-Wilson  United States, 13Clincal Genetics Dept, Cardiff, United Kingdom. syndrome Baraitser-Winter syndrome is an exceptional disorder characterized  C. Zweier1, F. Beemer2, B. Dimitrov3, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach4, P. Meinecke5, O.  by short stature, hypertelorism, broad epicanthus, bilateral ptosis,  Rittinger6, H. Seidel7, C. Thiel1, M. Zenker1, B. Weschke8, A. Rauch1;  coloboma, metopic ridge and pachygyria. Fryns-Aftimos syndrome  1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nu- is deÜned by hypertelorism, ptosis, large nose, neck webbing,  remberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Biomedical Genetics, University  low posterior hairline, broad thorax, frontal pachygyria, preaxial  Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Institute of Human Genetics,  anomalies and seizures. An unusual body habitus is present, with  Leuven, Belgium, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Essen, Essen,  truncal obesity, tip-toe walking, limited extension of knees and  Germany, 5Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, Germany, 6Kinderspital,  shoulder propulsion. Both disorders are reminiscent of Noonan  Salzburg, Austria, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilian University,  syndrome and both are usually associated with mild to severe mental  Munich, Munich, Germany, 8Department of Paediatric Neurology, Charit\x8d Cam- retardation. pus Virchow-Klinikkum, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. We report a series of 19 patients (including update on 4 previously  Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a distinct recognizable multiple  reported cases) with a phenotype overlapping Baraitser-Winter  congenital anomalies-mental retardation syndrome caused by  and Fryns-Aftimos syndromes, suggesting that both disorders are  mutations or deletions in the zinc Ünger homeo box 1B gene. identical (but reported at different ages: youngsters in Baraitser- Until now 53 patients have been published with deletions or  Winter, teen-agers in Fryns-Aftimos) and possibly less exceptional  truncating mutations of ZFHX1B. Common phenotypical aspects  than previously thought. PTPN11 screen was negative in 3 of our  are distinct facial dysmorphism and severe mental retardation in all  cases, and telomere screen in several of them. Facial Gestalt  cases, seizures in 77%, Hirschsprung disease in 72%, congenital  of Baraitser-Winter seems the most reliable clue for diagnosis.  heart defects in 48%, agenesis of corpus callosum in 49% and  Predominantly frontal pachygyria and coloboma are common but  variable multiple congenital anomalies. inconstant. Urinary tract defects, biÜd hallux, deafness are repeatedly  However, Yoneda et al. (2002) described a patient with milder and  reported. Mental retardation is variable and may be inÝuenced by  late-onset mental retardation and absence of Mowat-Wilson facial  epilepsy and/or cortical defect. Contrasting with Noonan syndrome,  gestalt, who had a novel in frame 3-bp deletion. heart is not a target. Most cases are sporadic. Based on this new  In order to further delineate the clinical and mutational spectrum  series, we review the earlier literature and propose a renewed  of Mowat-Wilson syndrome we analysed 31 patients with variable  deÜnition of Baraitser-Winter syndrome, discussion boundaries  symptoms of the MWS spectrum. While 14 had the characteristic  with C syndrome, CHARGE association, LE-Marec-Odent-Urvoy or  facial phenotype and other typical multiple anomalies, the remaining  M\x8dgarban\x8d syndromes, and the frontofacionasal syndromes. patients had either questionable facial features (4) or non-speciÜc  dysmorphism and clinical features (13). In the group of ÐtypicalÑ Mowat-Wilson syndrome patients we  detected ZFHX1B deletions or nonsense mutations in 13 of 14  patients. 11 of the mutations are new and distributed over the whole  coding region. In the cases without the typical Mowat-Wilson facial ESHG Concurrent Symposia 72 phenotype and with questionable or non-speciÜc clinical symptoms  the European XLMR consortium. The full-length ORF and splice sites  we could identify neither deletions nor missense- or nonsense  of the SL
C6 A8 gene were investigated by DNA sequence analysis.  mutations. In 9 patients we found three common and three rare  Four missense mutations, 1 single amino acid deletion and one  SNPªs. nonsense mutation were identiÜed in a total of 288 XLMR patients,  Thus we further conÜrm that at least null-or nonsense mutations of  showing a prevalence of at least 2.1% (6/288). Our data indicate that  the ZFHX1B gene result in the distinct, clinically well recognizable  the frequency of SL
C6 A8 mutations in the XLMR population is close  Mowat-Wilson syndrome. to that of CGG expansions in FMR1 responsible for the fragile X  syndrome. 
C30 . Clinical variability of Cohen and Mirhosseini-Holmes- SL
C6 A8 sequence analysis, creatine/creatinine measurement  Walton syndromes caused by mutations in COH1 in urine, magnetic H-MRS of brain, and creatine uptake assay in  D. Horn1,2, A. Rauch3, W. Seifert4,5, G. Tariverdian6, K. H. Chrzanowska7, A.  Übroblasts appear all to be valuable primary diagnostic tests for the  Reis3, H. Hennies4;  evaluation of SL
C6 A8 deÜciency, and should be considered for all  males with mental retardation of unknown cause. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Genetics,  Berlin, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 4Gene  
C32 . Severe X-linked mental retardation caused by mutations in  Mapping Centre and Department of Molecular Genetics, Max Delbr\x9eck Centre  the gene for the thyroid hormone transporter MCT8 for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 5Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, and  Pharmacy, Free University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Institute of Human  S. Lenzner1, M. D. Rosenkranz1, A. Grueters2, H. Biebermann2, J. Chelly3, C.  Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 7Department of Medical Genetics, ChildrenÓs  Moraine4, J. Frijns5, H. van Bokhoven6, T. Visser7, H. Ropers1;  Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. 1MPI for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric En- Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder whose  docrinology, Charit\x8d Childrenªs Hospital, Humboldt University Berlin, Berlin,  diagnosis is based on a variable clinical picture of psychomotor  Germany, 3INSERM U129-ICGM, Facult\x8d de M\x8dd\x8dcine Cochin, Paris, France,  retardation, microcephaly, typical facial dysmorphism, progressive  4INSERM U316, Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Tours, France, 5Center for Human Ge- pigmentary retinopathy, severe myopia, and intermittent neutropenia.  netics, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 6Department of Human Genetics,  Recently, mutations of the gene COH1 were identiÜed in a Finnish  University Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Department of Internal Medicine,  and Northern European cohort of patients with Cohen syndrome.  Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. The present study describes the phenotypes in 20 patients with  X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a highly heterogeneous  Cohen syndrome from 12 non-Finnish families, originating from  condition, including >140 syndromic and non-syndromic forms, and  Brazil, Germany, Lebanon, Oman, Poland, and Turkey. These  there is evidence for pericentromeric clustering of non-syndromic  families also included two with an overlapping phenotype of Cohen  XLMR genes. The gene for the recently identiÜed thyroid hormone  and Mirhosseini-Holmes-Walton syndromes. All patients were  transporter MCT8 maps to Xq13 and is a plausible candidate gene  homozygous or compound heterozygous for novel mutations in  for XLMR because thyroid hormones play an important role in the  COH1. The clinical characterisation of the patients analyzed here  development and function of the brain, and very recently, MCT8  revealed high variability with developmental delay of variable degree,  mutations have been found in patients with complex developmental  early onset myopia, and facial dysmorphism as the only features  disorders and mental retardation (Friesema, Visser, Gr\x9eters;  present in all patients, whereas microcephaly, retinopathy at school  submitted). Here we report on MCT8 mutation screening in a large  age, short stature, truncal obesity and neutropenia were lacking in  cohort of patients with XLMR from the EURO-MRX Consortium,  part of them. The diagnosis of Cohen syndrome, particularly based  including patients from 16 families with linkage intervals overlapping  on the typical facial features, was also conÜrmed in two 24-month  the MCT8 locus and 180 unrelated XLMR patients for whom no  old patients, otherwise too young for presenting the complete  linkage information was available. So far, we have found 3 sequence  ophthalmologic phenotype. IdentiÜcation of COH1 mutations in  variants in the coding region of MCT8 which were not observed in  two families with an overlapping phenotype of both Cohen and  normal controls, a 1 bp insertion in exon 1 leading to a premature  Mirhosseini-Holmes-Walton syndromes demonstrated that the two  stop codon in patients with severe MR, hypotonia and seizures, as  conditions can be in fact allelic. Our Ündings indicate that mutations  well as two different missense mutations, which co-segregate with  in COH1 are also responsible for the Cohen syndrome phenotype  MR in the respective families. To conÜrm the functional relevance of  in patients from outside Northern Europe and that the phenotype is  these mutations, relative concentrations of bound and free serum  much more variable than initially proposed. tri-iodiothyronine will be determined in all three families, and mutation  screening is being expanded to include all 450 EURO-MRX families.  
C31 . High prevalence of SL
C6 A8 deÜciency, a novel X-linked  Depending on the outcome of these studies, screening of serum  mental retardation syndrome tri-iodothyronine levels may have to be considered as a fast and non- G. S. Salomons1, E. H. Rosenberg1, L. S. Almeida1, T. Kleefstra2,3, R. S.  expensive routine test in all families with XLMR. deGrauw1, H. G. Yntema2,3, N. Bahi4,3, C. Moraine5,3, H. H. Ropers6,3, J. P.  Fryns7,3, T. J. deGrauw8, C. Jakobs1;  
C33 . Impairment of the renin receptor prevents ERK1/2  activation in a patient suffering from mental retardation and  1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical  epilepsy Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3The European XLMR consortium, .,  J. Ramser1,2, C. Burckle3, F. Abidi4, C. Lenski1, G. Wen5, H. Toriello6, S. Engert1,  Netherlands, 4Institut Cochin de G\x8dn\x8dtique Moleculaire, Centre National de la  C. E. Schwartz4, G. Nguyen3, A. Meindl1,2;  Recherche ScientiÜque/INSERM, CHU Cochin, Paris, France, 5INSERM U316,  CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 6Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics,  1Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 2Technical University,  Berlin, Germany, 7Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, 8Cincinnati  Munich, Germany, 3College de France, Paris, France, 4Greenwood Genetic  ChildrenÓs Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States. Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 5Institute for Molecular Biotechnology,  Recently, a novel X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) syndrome,  Jena, Germany, 6Genetics Services, Spectrum Health, Grand Rapids, MI, Uni- SL
C6 A8 deÜciency, due to creatine deÜciency in the brain caused by  ted States. mutations in the creatine transporter gene (SL
C6 A8) (MIM 300036)  Within the scope of the DHG
P2  project, we have identiÜed and  was identiÜed. The clinical presentation of affected males is XLMR,  functionally characterized a novel disease gene located in Xp11.4  expressive speech and language delay, epilepsy, and autistic  causing mental retardation-epilepsy syndrome (XMRE). In addition  behavior. In approximately 50% of the female carriers, learning  to severe mental impairment, affected members of the XMRE family  disabilities of varying degrees have been noted. Affected males have  developed seizures between 4 and 14 months of age. In the course  a reduction of the creatine signal in the proton magnetic resonance  of identifying a candidate gene for XMRE, a gene catalogue for  spectroscopy (H-MRS) of brain, increased creatine/creaitinine  the linkage interval between markers DX
S1049  and DX
S8054  in  excretion in urine and have impaired creatine uptake in cultured  Xp11.4 was completed. Large scale mutation analysis revealed a  Übroblasts. translationally silent variant in exon 4 in a putative exonic splicing  We have studied the prevalence of SL
C6 A8 mutations in a panel of  enhancer (ESE) site of the AT
P6 A
P2  gene. This variant could not  290 nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation patients archived by  be found in 1200 X chromosomes and results, as demonstrated in ESHG Concurrent Symposia 73 real time PCR experiments, in inefÜcient inclusion of exon 4 in 50%  the etiologically relevant isoform in RTT, we screened 19 females  of AT
P6 A
P2  mRNA in the patient. The AT
P6 A
P2  gene encodes  diagnosed with typical RTT, but with no known mutation identiÜed,  the renin receptor, which binds renin to enhance the cleavage of  and identiÜed one patient with an 11 bp deletion within the newly  angiotensinogen. Renin has been known for a long time to be the  identiÜed coding region, which results in a frame-shift and premature  rate-limiting enzyme for angiotensin peptides generation and the  truncation of the protein. Since MEC
P2 A is unaffected by the 11 bp  renin-angiotensin system, essential for blood pressure and water- deletion, this conÜrms that MEC
P2 B is likely to be the etiologically  electrolyte control. Functional studies revealed that the mutated  relevant isoform. receptor failed to activate the MAP kinases ERK1/2, despite binding  renin and increasing renin catalytic activity. These Ündings suggest  
C36 . Arhgef6-deÜcient mice, a model for non-speciÜc X-linked  a speciÜc role for the renin receptor via the ERK1/2 system in brain  mental retardation, show a decrease of mature dendritic spines development and cognitive function. Further studies will focus on the  K. Kuchenbecker1, E. J. M. van Galen2, R. E. Baker2, G. J. A. Ramakers2, A.  isolation of proteins interacting with the renin receptor to activate in  Gal1, K. Kutsche1;  concert with other ligand/receptor systems the MAP kinases ERK1/2.  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89tsklinikum, Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germa- Additionally, knockout experiments in rat are in progress. ny, 2Neurons and Networks, Netherlands Institute for Brain Research, Amster- dam, Netherlands. 
C34 . New insights from a mouse model for Anderman syndrome Mutations in ARHGEF6, the gene encoding a guanine nucleotide  M. B. Rust1, J. Faulhaber2, C. Pfeffer1, H. Maier3, T. Boettger1, R. Schubert4, F.  exchange factor for the Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42, are  X. Beck5, H. Ehmke2, T. J. Jentsch1, C. A. H\x9ebner6,7;  associated with nonspeciÜc X-linked mental retardation. We  1Zentrum f\x9er Molekulare Neurobiologie Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 2Institut  generated an Arhgef6 knock-out mouse that will help to elucidate  f\x9er Physiologie, Hamburg, Germany, 3HNO-Klinik, Hamburg, Germany, 4Institut  and understand the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the  f\x9er Physiologie, Rostock, Germany, 5Institut f\x9er Physiologie, M\x9enchen, Germa- human phenotype. By Western blot analysis, we showed that the  ny, 6Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Hamburg, Germany, 7Zentrum f\x9er molekulare  Arhgef6 protein (~87 kD) was present in thymus, spleen, heart, liver,  Neurobiologie, Hamburg, Germany. kidney, and brain in wild-type mice whereas the protein was absent  Anderman syndrome (ACCPN) is an autosomal recessive disorder  in these tissues of the Arhgef6-deÜcient mice. Remarkably, we have  characterized by agenesis of the corpus callosum, mental retardation,  also detected four smaller Arhgef6 isoforms in thymus, spleen,  and peripheral neuropathy. It is caused by mutations in the Sl
C12 A6  liver, kidney, and brain of wild-type mice with molecular weights  gene encoding a K-Cl cotransporter (KC
C3 ) (Howard et al., Nature  between 61 and 80 kD. In the Arhgef6-deÜcient mice, we have also  Genetics, 2002, 32: 384-92). We disrupted Sl
C12 A6 in the mouse. As  investigated spine morphology and density. Spines were visualized  in the human disease, Kcc3-/- mice show severe motor abnormalities  by Golgi staining, followed by quantitation of their density along  that correlate with a progressive neuronal degeneration in the  the dendrites of pyramidal neurons in the visual cortex. In Arhgef6  peripheral and central nervous system. Kcc3-/- mice also present  knock-out mice, the density of mushroom spines (the mature type  with slowly progressive deafness and arterial hypertension, features  of spines) along basal dendrites was decreased by 25 %, compared  not described in Anderman syndrome patients so far. Hearing loss  to that of wild-type mice, whereas the density of Üliform spines (an  is much slower than in mice deÜcient for the homologous K-Cl  immature spine morphology) was not altered. These data are in  cotransporter KC
C4 , which is speciÜcally expressed in supporting  line with observations made in patients with mental retardation that  cells of outer hair cells and is essential for ensuring proper ionic  showed decreased dendritic complexity and dendritic spine density  environment of outer hair cells. KC
C3  was detectable in type I and  suggesting that mental retardation results from abnormal neuronal  type III Übrocytes cells of the inner ear K+ recycling pathway that  connectivity causing deÜcient information processing. Currently,  underlie the stria vascularis. These cells slowly degenerated, as did  Arhgef6-deÜcient mice are being tested for behavioural and cognitive  sensory hair cells. We conclude that KC
C3  creates a K+ gradient  deÜcits. within the Übrocyte gap junction system. KC
C3  expression in the  smooth muscle cell layer of arterial vessels prompted us to measure  
C37 . Detection of subtelomeric rearrangements in 173 patients  arterial blood pressure. Indeed, arterial blood pressure was elevated  with unexplained mental retardation using MLPA (118°2 mmHg) in Kcc3-/- mice compared to control animals (100°2  D. A. Koolen, W. Nillesen, D. Smeets, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij, C. G. de  mmHg; p < 0.0001). Kovel, B. B. A. de Vries, E. A. Sistermans;  University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. 
C35 . A novel open reading frame for the MEC
P2  gene is mutated  Background: Subtelomeric rearrangements signiÜcantly contribute to  in Rett syndrome and deÜnes the MeC
P2  isoform relevant to the  idiopathic mental retardation and result in several mental retardation  disease syndromes. However the majority of subtelomeric defects lack a  J. B. Vincent1, S. E. Alfred1, G. Mnatzakanian2, H. Lohi2, T. Yamada2, I.  characteristic phenotype. In this study we tested the diagnostic  Munteanu2, J. R. Jones3, M. Friez3, S. W. Scherer2, P. J. M. MacLeod4, N. C.  capacity of multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliÜcation (MLPA)  Schanen5, B. A. Minassian2;  for screening for subtelomeric aberrations in mentally retarded  1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Hospital for  patients. Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood,  Participants and methods: 173 mentally retarded patients (IQ <70),  SC, United States, 4Victoria General Hospital, Victoria, BC, Canada, 5Alfred I.  with a normal G banded karyotype at a 550 band level and no clinical  duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, Canada. recognisable syndrome were tested by MLPA, using a new set of  Rett syndrome (RTT) is a pervasive developmental disorder  subtelomeric probes, the SALSA 
P036  Human Telomere Test Kit.  characterized by onset, in girls, of a gradual slowing of  Rearrangements were validated and checked for de novo occurrence  neurodevelopment in the second half of the Ürst year of life towards  by FISH. The sensitivity of the technology was characterized on  stagnation by age four, followed by regression and loss of acquired  cytogenetically veriÜed positive controls. Üne motor and communication skills, and ultimately results in  Results: Subtelomeric aberrations were detected in 6.4% (11/173) of  profound mental retardation. Eighty percent of patients with RTT have  the patients: 6 deletions (1p [2x], 4p, 15q, 22q [2x]) and 5 duplications  mutations in exons 3 or 4 of the gene encoding the transcriptional  (5q, 10q [2x], 12p, 22q). Four deletions and one duplication were  repressor MEC
P2 . In the known transcript of the gene all four exons  validated by FISH, whereas two duplications were not detectable. We  are utilized, with the translation start site in exon 2. However, we have  are currently in the process of conÜrming the remaining aberrations  recently discovered that another isoform of MEC
P2  exists, namely  and testing the parents of the affected individuals. MEC
P2 B, in which exon 2 is spliced out and translation is initiated  Conclusions: This study shows that MLPA analysis is a fast,  from a START codon in exon 1, thus resulting in a slightly larger  reliable and relatively inexpensive technique to detect subtelomeric  protein with a very different N-terminal end (Mnatzakanian et al,  rearrangements. In our series, a subtelomeric aberration was detected  Nature Genetics, April 04). This newly identiÜed isoform of MEC
P2 B  in 6.4% (11/173) of the patients. The simplicity of the technique makes  appears to be the predominant isoform in brain tissues, with ~10-fold  it a highly suitable for routine diagnostic screening for submicroscopic  higher expression. In further support of our theory that MEC
P2 B is  telomeric copy number changes in mentally retarded patients.ESHG Concurrent Symposia 74 
C38 . Application of the Universal Linkage System to genomic  and allows 10-100 times more genotypes to be performed in a single  microarrays reaction with the Ýexibility to address any user selected set of SNPs. J. A. Veltman1, I. Janssen1, E. Meershoek2, E. F. P. M. Schoenmakers1, R.  We will discuss use of the technology and brieÝy, provide background  Schaapveld2, A. Geurts van Kessel1;  on the company and founders, previously scientists at the Stanford  Genome Technology Center. We will also present results from a case  1Human Genetics, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands,  study run in collaboration with a large pharmaceutical company that  2Kreatech Biotechnology, Amsterdam, Netherlands. underlines the importance of discovering and scoring both rare and  Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) onto  common variation to identify the genetics associated with complex  BAC arrays (genomic microarrays) is rapidly becoming the method  metabolic diseases. Additionally, we expect to be able to discuss  of choice for genome wide DNA copy number screening. We  results on the discovery of a gene shown to be associated with  have recently shown that this technology can be applied not only  Autism. This case control study scored all rare variation as well as  in research settings but also in diagnostic settings because of its  mutations in the cohort under a linkage peak. high resolution (Vissers et al. 2003). Key issues that determine  the success of this approach are the sensitivity and speciÜcity.  
C41 . Gene mapping by linkage analysis with large SNP marker  In addition, the approach should be very robust, high-throughput  panels and cost-effective. The labelling procedure is one of the steps in  F. R\x9eschendorf1, C. Becker1, K. Strauch2, P. N\x9ernberg1,3;  the arrayCGH procedure that is time-consuming and expensive.  In this project we have compared standard enzymatic random- 1Gene Mapping Center at MDC, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Biometry,  prime labelling with chemical labelling using the Universal Linkage  Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of  System (ULStm). We will show that ULS can easily be incorporated  Medical Genetics, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany. in arrayCGH experiments and that it offers several advantages over  In the last decade gene mapping was mainly based on genome  conventional labelling procedures. scans with microsatellite markers. These markers are highly  Vissers et al. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization  polymorphic but their analysis is technically demanding. Single  for the genome wide detection of submicroscopic chromosome  nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may be a better alternative since  abnormalities. American Journal of Human Genetics, 73: 1261-1270  their analysis can be easily automated. However, 3-5 SNPs have to  (2003). be analysed to get equivalent information for one microsatellite. This  inÝation of markers may cause a risk of stumbling when using current  
C39 . Microdeletion/duplication scanning using whole genome  versions of linkage programs. We tested the limitations of standard  SNP Chip-Arrays linkage programs with respect to their capability of analyzing large  A. Rauch1, F. Rueschendorf2, J. Huang3, U. Trautmann1, C. Becker2, K. Jones3,  families with a large number of markers given the limited memory  A. Reis1, P. Nuernberg2;  size of common computers. Our test sample comprised genotype  data obtained with the GeneChip§ Mapping 10K Array (Affymetrix)  1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nu- from several large families segregating either recessive or dominant  remberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Gene Mapping Center, MDC Berlin, Berlin-Buch,  traits. We used a moving window approach to analyse the genotype  Germany, 3Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, United States. data of >10,000 SNPs. A Perl/Tk script (ALOHOMORA) was written  Subtle segmental chromosomal aneusomies (SCA) are a major  which uses the linkage programs Genehunter, GRR, Merlin, Mega2,  cause of MR/MCA syndromes. With current techniques only a fraction  PedCheck and Simwalk2 for quality control and linkage analysis.  of these aberrations can be detected, mainly those associated  Optional Ülters remove genotypes with Mendelian errors, non  with characteristic clinical phenotypes or with subtelomeric  Mendelian errors and non informative SNPs. Three genetic maps,  rearrangements. New approaches to achieve a higher genome- DeCode, MarshÜeld and SLM1 as well as allele frequencies of three  wide detection rate of such aneusomies are mainly focused on  ethnic populations, AfroAmericans, Asians and Caucasians can  matrix comparative genome hybridisation (CGH). However this  be selected. Using this convenient tool, we have performed >20  technique is still under evaluation and is not routinely available for  mapping projects. We could demonstrate that the information content  a high density genomewide screening. Therefore we evaluated an  of the 10K SNP scans was substantially increased as compared  alternative method using commercially available, easy to handle  with a conventional 400-microsatellite scan. We will present data  SNP genotyping chip-arrays for parallel interrogation of 11,256 SNPs  of several successful genome scans in families with monogenetic  for the detection of such SCAs. We investigated 20 patients with 21  diseases. previously conÜrmed cryptic aberrations of varying size and location  together with both parents. Deletion sizes varied from 192 kb to  
C42 . Parallel Genotyping of over 100,000 SNPs Using a One  12 Mb, duplication size was 5 Mb. While the analysis of mendelian  Primer Assay on a Pair of High Density Oligonucleotide Arrays errors in the trios produced a high rate of false positive and false  R. Mei;  negative results, we were able to detect 11 of 12 deletions and the  duplication covered with at least 3 SNPs with a single experiment  Affymetrix, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, United States. using the meta-p-value analysis of hybridisation intensities of  The analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) is  individual patientsÓ chip hybridisations. One deletion covered by 4  increasingly utilized to investigate genetic causes of complex human  SNPs was only discovered by repeating of chip-array hybridisation.  diseases. Here we present a high throughput genotyping platform  Thus, the 11.5 k SNP Array is already a valuable tool to detect cryptic  that uses a one primer assay to genotype over 100,000 SNPs per  chromosomal deletions. However, deletions larger than 200 kb should  individual on a pair of oligonucleotide arrays. This approach uses  have been detectable using a denser array with 120K SNPs, which is  two restriction enzymes to fractionate the genome and subsequent  currently under development. ampliÜcation of a speciÜc subset of the genome. The resulting  reduction in genome complexity enables allele speciÜc hybridization  
C40 . Using a highly-multiplexed approach to quickly score tens  to the arrays. The selection of SNPs was based on computer  of thousands of SNPs and scale up to whole genome studies predictions of restriction fragments that are likely to contain the  T. Willis;  SNPs, and further driven by strict empirical measurements of  accuracy, reproducibility and average call rate, which we estimate  ParAllele Bioscience, South San Francisco, CA, United States. to be > 99.5%, > 99.9%, and > 95%, respectively. With median  Discovering the genetic basis of complex phenotypes requires new  heterozygosity of 0.30 and median inter-SNP distance of 7.98kb  technologies that are sensitive to the full spectrum of human genetic  across genome, the SNP array provides a viable tool for studying the  variation and scalable to enable whole genome studies. genetic basis of disease and drug response. ParAllele BioScience has developed a suite of highly multiplexed  assays to allow researchers to quickly and easily score tens of  thousands of SNPs utilizing universal DNA tag arrays for readout,  and to scan thousands of target regions for novel mutations in a  single-reaction. This platform scales easily to whole genome studies ESHG Concurrent Symposia 75 
C43 . Expression proÜling of Wilms tumors reveals novel  as Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, MIM 142623) and/or congenital  prognostic markers central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS, OndineÓs curse, MIM  B. Zirn1, O. Hartmann2, B. Samans2, M. Krause3, S. Wittmann1, M. Eilers3, M.  209880). In particular, CCHS patients have a high predisposing  Gessler1;  risk to develop a tumour of the sympathetic nervous system (NB,  ganglioneuroblastoma and ganglioneuroma, 5-10% versus 1/ 1Physiological Chemistry I, W\x9erzburg, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Statistics  10,000 in the general population). We recently identiÜed the paired- and Biometry, Marburg, Germany, 3Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor  like homeobox 2B (PHOX2B, MIM 603851) gene as the major  Research (IMT), Marburg, Germany. disease causing gene in CCHS with an autosomal dominant mode  Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) is the most frequent renal neoplasm  of inheritance and de novo mutation at the Ürst generation. We  in children. It arises from embryonic kidney cells and most frequently  therefore regarded PHOX2B as a candidate gene in both familial and  presents as unilateral and sporadic tumor. Tumorigenesis is  syndromic NB. Here we report on heterozygous missense mutations  associated with mutations in WT1 and ¦-catenin in only a minority of  located in the homeodomain of PHOX2B in both a familial case of NB  the affected children. Both mutations are frequently associated with  and an isolated case of NB associated with HSCR. Although recent  each other, but do not have a predictive value. results suggest that hereditary neuroblastoma is heterogeneous with  We performed cDNA microarray experiments using 77 primary  the mapping of predisposing genes in familial NB to either 16p or  Wilms tumors with the aim of detecting new candidate genes  4p, PHOX2B is the Ürst gene predisposing to NB for which germline  responsible for malignancy, tumor progression and prediction of  mutations have been identiÜed. Further studies are needed to  outcome. For a subset of differentially expressed genes microarray  investigate its putative role in sporadic NB. data were conÜrmed by real time RT-PCR on the original set of  tumors. The stratiÜcation of expression data according to clinical  
C46 . Expression of SPO
C1 , a novel gene encoding a putative  criteria allowed a clear distinction between different subsets of Wilms  transcriptional regulator, is associated with ovarian carcinoma  tumors. Most signiÜcant differences in expression patterns were  patient survival discovered between relapse-free as opposed to relapsed tumors and  G. Mohrmann1,2, J. G. Hengstler3, T. G. Hofmann2, S. U. Endele1, C. Stelzer4, B.  intermediate risk as opposed to high risk tumors. Several differentially  Zabel4, H. Will2, A. Winterpacht1;  expressed genes, e.g. PRAME, CRAB
P2 , EGR1, CTGF, RARRE
S3   and EZH2, were identiÜed as important predictors of outcome.  1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Heinrich-Pette-Institute,  CRAB
P2  and RARRE
S3  are retinol-related genes and may represent  Hamburg, Germany, 3Center for Toxicology, Leipzig, Germany, 4Childrenªs  potential therapeutic targets. Our data suggest that expression  Hospital, Mainz, Germany. proÜling constitutes a novel molecular tool for prediction of relapse  Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal gynecologic  and outcome in Wilms tumors. malignancy among women in developed countries, yet little is known  about the molecular events that drive the initiation and progression  
C44 . Expression analysis of WilmsÒ Tumor specimens by high  of this disease. Especially for early diagnosis of EOC, prognostic  density oligonucleotide arrays factors, which may be used to identify groups of patients in whom  C. Ulger1,2,3, G. A. Toruner1,2,3, A. Galante4, P. Soteropoulos4, J. J. Dermody1,3,  more speciÜc biological treatments or more aggressive therapy is  M. N. Schwalb1,2,3, M. Alkan1,3;  indicated, are of great medical importance. We report the identiÜcation of a novel human gene (SPO
C1 ) which  1The Center for Human and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ- New Jersey Medical  encodes a protein with a putative chromatin interacting domain. The  School, Newark, NJ, United States, 2David Jurist Research Center, Hacken- gene is located in chromosome region 1p36, a region implicated  sack University Medical Center, Hackensack, NJ, United States, 3Department  in tumor development and progression. SPO
C1  mRNA expression  of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,UMDNJ- New Jersey Medical School,  was quantiÜed in tumor tissue of 103 patients with epithelial ovarian  Newark, NJ, United States, 4Center for Applied Genomics, International Center  cancer. Large interindividual differences in SPO
C1  expression were  for Public Health, Newark, NJ, United States. observed. Interestingly, SPO
C1  expression was clearly associated  Wilms tumor is the most common cancer of the urinary tract affecting  with worse prognosis. The univariable (p=0.001) and multivariable  children. In order to determine the gene expression proÜle Wilms  (adjusted to FIGO-stage, residual tumor, histological grade and type:  tumor, we analyzed 15 specimens collected in The ChildrenÒs  p=0.064) proportional hazards model showed an association between  Hospital at Westmead, Australia between 1989-2001 by high density  SPO
C1  expression and survival. Median survival time was 1596  oligonucleotide microarrays. RNA was isolated from pure tumor  days for patients with low SPO
C1  expression versus only 347 days  cells obtained after laser capture microdissection (LCM). Then the  for patients with high expression. Subcellular localization studies of  isolated RNA was ampliÜed and labeled using T7 polymerase based  SPO
C1  showed a nuclear speckled-like Ýuorescence that partially  in vitro trancription. The hybridization was performed on Affymetrix  co-localizes with RNA-polymerase II. SPO
C1  is strongly expressed  HU133A GeneChips on which oligonucletides representing ~22500  in spermatogonia, a rapidly proliferating cell type, and functions  human mRNA sequences are present. Compared to the reference  as a transcriptional regulator as evidenced by a GA
L4 -luciferase  sample (normal kidney), the expression of 16 genes were found to  reporter assay. Thus, the data indicate that SPO
C1  may represent a  show two fold or more difference (up-regulated: 9, down-regulated: 7)  novel prognostic factor for epithelial ovarian cancer which probably  consistently across all the tumors. The up-regulated genes in tumors  functions as a transcriptional regulator in proliferating cells. are CRYZ, DPYD, BLNK, ENP
P2 , SEMA3D, PTPRB, SNA
P29 ,  KLH
L2 , SAMSN1, and GJA4. The down-regulated genes are LTF,  
C47 . Molecular Genetic ProÜling of Normal Prostate, Benign  HE
S1 , PDYN, GPR51, NCAM1, TRIM33, and AQ
P3 . Prostatic Hyperplasia, Dysplasia and Gleason Grade 3, 4  Prostate Cancer 
C45 . Germline mutations of the paired-like homeobox 2B  J. Palma1, M. Mahadevappa1, X. Guo1, Z. Zhang1, M. C. Caldwell2, Z. Chen2, Z.  (PHOX2B) gene in neuroblastoma. Fan2, J. E. McNeal2, R. Nolley2, T. A. Stamey2, J. A. Warrington1;  J. Amiel1, D. Trochet1, F. Bourdeaut2, I. Janoueix-Lerosey2, L. de Pontual1, G.  1Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Department of Urology, Stanford  Schleiermacher2, A. Deville3, C. Coze4, N. Philip4, T. Fr\x8dbourg5, A. Munnich1, O.  University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. Delattre2, S. Lyonnet1;  Prostate cancer (PC) is by far the most prevalent of all human  1Necker, Paris, France, 2Curie, Paris, France, 3Fondation Lenval, Nice, France,  malignancies with the exception of skin cancer. A serum prostate- 4La Timone, Marseille, France, 5Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France. speciÜc antigen (PSA) level of between 2-10 ng/ml has been widely  Neuroblastoma (NB, MIM 256700) is a tumour of the sympathetic  used in the U.S. as a marker for PC. However, in this range, serum PSA  nervous system that accounts for about 10% of all neoplasms in  is largely related to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and correlates  childhood. Although no predisposing gene(s) have been identiÜed  poorly with PC curative outcome. Gene expression characterization  thus far, several lines of evidence support the involvement of genetic  of prostate cancers could aid in the development of new PC serum  factors in NB, namely rare familial cases with vertical transmission  markers in the form of an array-based diagnostic. In addition, gene  and multifocality, and, the association of NB with other genetically  expression analysis of responsiveness to drug treatment for prostate  determined congenital malformations of neural crest origin such  cancer could result in more effective treatment decisions.ESHG Concurrent Symposia 76 More than 80 labeled targets from the prostate central zone, prostate  Weill and Langer syndrome. Functional analysis of these missense  peripheral zone, BPH, Dysplasia, Gleason grade 3 (GG3)and GG4  mutations showed that the mutated SHOX protein carrying either of  prostate cancer were hybridized to high-density DNA microarrays,  these mutations is unable to translocate to the nucleus. Conversely,  containing probes representing ~22,000 full-length human genes.  we can demonstrate that insertion of the identiÜed signal adjacent  A group of genes were identiÜed for classiÜcation and prediction  to the mutant site can restore its nuclear translocation. Our data  of different zones of prostate tissue and prostate cancer. The  explain L\x8dri-Weill and Langer syndrome conditions on a molecular  candidates included genes previously associated with PC, as well as  and cellular level and strengthen the growing awareness that mis- genes associated with oncogenesis, transcription, signal transduction  regulation of subcellular localization contributes to clinically relevant  and apoptosis. We will explore results obtained from various analysis  phenotypes. methods and their relationship to other work. These expression  proÜles have the potential to improve the staging and sensitivity for  
C50 . Mutations in the human TBX4 gene cause small patella  detection of prostate cancer within an aging population. syndrome E. M. H. F. Bongers1, P. H. F. Duijf1, S. E. M. van Beersum1, J. Schoots1, A. van  
C48 . Organizing genetic counselling for cancer in Finland - 10  Kampen2, A. Burckhardt3, B. C. J. Hamel1, F. LoĀan4, L. H. Hoefsloot1, H. G.  years experience of the Finnish Cancer SocietyÒs three-stage  Yntema1, H. van Bokhoven1, N. V. A. M. Knoers1;  model 1Dept Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen,  M. H. P\x99yh\x99nen1,2, M. Rautalahti2, A. R. Aro3,4, H. A. K\x89\x89ri\x89inen5,6;  Netherlands, 2Dept Orthopaedic Surgery, University Medical Centre Nijmegen,  1Dept of Medical Genetics, V\x89est\x99liitto, Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki,  Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Dept Orthopedic Surgery, Kantonsspital Olten, Olten,  Finland, 2Cancer Society of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3National Public Health  Switzerland, 4Genetika Plzeĳ, Plzeĳ, Czech Republic. Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept of Public Health, Erasmus Medical Center,  Small patella syndrome (SPS; MIM 147891) is an autosomal  Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Dept of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku,  dominant skeletal dysplasia characterized by patellar aplasia or  Finland, 6Clinical Genetics Unit, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland. hypoplasia and pelvic anomalies, including disrupted ossiÜcation  The Cancer Society of Finland, a third sector organization, started in  of the ischia and inferior pubic rami. In addition, femur and foot  1994 to organize genetic counselling for cancer in close association  anomalies may accompany SPS. We identiÜed an SPS candidate  with the existing public health care system in the country. The  region of 5.6-cM on chromosome 17q22 by haplotype analysis.  motivation was to offer easy access to counselling at one of the 12  Inspection of genes in the SPS critical region revealed the TBX4  regional Cancer Society OfÜces to anyone who was worried about  gene as a positional candidate. TBX4 belongs to the T-box gene  their hereditary predisposition to cancer. family, encoding transcription factors characterized by a strongly  At the Ürst level of this three-stage counselling system, a specially  conserved DNA-binding motif. Mutations in several T-box genes are  trained nurse at one of the regional cancer societies asks for  associated with human developmental disorders, including TBX3  information about the possible cancer cases in the family and draws  mutations in ulnar-mammary syndrome and TBX5 mutations in Holt- a pedigree. Using the predeÜned criteria, the nurse then decides  Oram syndrome, both characterized by severe upper limb anomalies.  whether the situation requires consultation with a doctor. The notiÜed  TBX4 is known to play a crucial role in lower limb development in  risk is divided into low, moderate and high. Those with moderate or  chicken and mice. In chicken, misexpression of dominant-negative  high risk are referred to the second level where a designated medical  Tbx4 results in legless phenotypes and in deformed and hypoplastic  doctor asks for more detailed cancer history of the family, and in a  pelvis. We found putative loss-of-function mutations in TBX4 in 6  high-risk situation sends the patients to a medical genetics unit. At  families with SPS, including one nonsense, two missense-, one  this third level, the actual genetic counselling and possible gene test  frameshift- and one splice-site mutation, and skipping of exon 7.  are organized. All three levels also organize individual follow-ups for  HaploinsufÜciency appears to be responsible for dominantly inherited  each patient according to the risk level. SPS in at least some of the families. The phenotype associated with  A great majority of the clients are cared for by the cancer organization  heterogzygous TBX4 mutations suggest that this gene is involved in  nurse at the Ürst level and they do not need any further consultation.  late stages of skeletal developmente. The present identiÜcation of  Only about 1/3 of the clients are sent to the medical genetics units  TBX4 mutations in SPS patients together with the resembling skeletal  at university hospitals. In a large and sparsely populated country like  phenotype of animals lacking Tbx4 establish the importance of TBX4  Finland a three-stage model like this is democratic and justiÜable. in the developmental pathways of the patella, pelvis, and feet in  humans. 
C49 . Novel point mutations R173C and A170P in the SHOX  homeodomain deÜnes impaired nuclear translocation as a  
C51 . Three candidate genes for autism with a possible role in  molecular cause for L\x8dri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and Langer  neuron vesicle trafÜcking dysplasia D. Castermans1, J. R. Vermeesch2, C. T. Schrander-Stumpel3, J. P. Fryns2, W.  N. Sabherwal1, R. J. Blaschke1, K. U. Schneider1, A. Marchini1, D. Heine-Su- J. Van de Ven1, J. Steyaert2, J. W. Creemers1, K. Devriendt2;  ner2, J. Rosell2, W. F. Blum3, G. Rappold1;  1Department of Human Genetics, Division of Molecular Oncology, Leuven,  1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Seccio de Genetica,  Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Leuven,  Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 3Elli Lilly Research  Belgium, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Research Institute Growth and De- Laboratories, Bad Hamburg and University ChildrenÒs Hospital, Giessen, Ger- velopment, Maastricht, Netherlands. many. Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of unknown cause and  The short stature homeobox gene SHOX resides within the  pathogenesis. To identify candidate genes for autism, we initiated  pseudoautosomal region of the sex chromosomes and encodes  a positional cloning strategy starting from phenotypically normal  two isoforms of a paired-related homeodomain protein. SHOX  persons with idiopathic, non-familial autism carrying a de novo  haploinsufÜciency leads to phenotypically heterogeneous short  chromosomal translocation. We identiÜed, in three individuals, three  stature conditions including idiopathic short stature and L\x8dri-Weill  different genes of which the corresponding proteins have a possible  dyschondrosteosis and is involved in growth retardation and skeletal  function in vesicle trafÜcking in the brain. Neurobeachin (NBEA) is  abnormalities in Turner syndrome. SHOX has been shown to encode  a neuron-speciÜc A-kinase anchoring protein (AKAP), that recruits  a cell type speciÜc transcriptional activator that localizes to the  the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) to endomembranes  nucleus. Here we report the identiÜcation of the Nuclear Localization  near the trans-Golgi. NBEA is believed to be implicated in neuronal  Signal (NLS) within the homeodomain of SHOX. Deletion mapping  membrane trafÜcking. The CLI
C4  gene was disrupted in an individual  identiÜed a non-classical type basic signal, AKCRK, in the recognition  with moderate mental retardation and autism. CLI
C4  belongs to the  helix of the homeodomain. Fusion of this Üve amino acids stretch to  chloride intracellular channel protein family, and has been localized  a cytoplasmic reporter protein resulted in its nuclear translocation.  in the perinuclear dense-core vesicles. It may have a role in vesicle  During a large scale SHOX mutation analysis study, we identiÜed  acidiÜcation. The Amisyn gene expression was disrupted in all cells  two different mis-sense mutations, R173C (
C517 T) and A170P  in an individual with a 46,XY t (14;16)(q12;tel). The interpretation of  (G508C), within the identiÜed SHOX-NLS in three families with L\x8dri- this Ünding is hampered by a mosa\x94cism, with loss of the derivative ESHG Concurrent Symposia 77 14 in 30% of the cells. However, Amisyn is thought to be involved in  by reduced protein dosage rather than dysfunction of the mutant  regulating SNARE complex formation, by binding to syntaxin-1 and  wolframin. SNA
P25 , components of this complex. Taken together, these Ündings suggest that vesicle trafÜcking  
C54 . Loss of desmoplakin isoform I causes severe  in neurons may be involved in the pathogenesis in a subset of  arrhythmogenic left and right ventricular cardiomyopathy,  individuals with autism. The involvement of these three genes in the  palmoplantar keratoderma and woolly hair regulated secretory pathway is currently under study by means of  E. E. Norgett1, A. Uz\x9emc\x9e2, O. Uyguner2, A. Dindar3, H. Kayserili2, K. Nisli3, E.  RNAi-mediated gene knock-down. Dupont4, N. Severs4, M. Yuksel-Apak2, D. P. Kelsell1, B. Wollnik2;  1Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School  
C52 . Functional characterization of mutations found in the  of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 2Division of Medical  PTPN11 gene in patients with Noonan syndrome Genetics, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey,  L. Musante1, P. Wechner2, H. Ropers1, S. Schweiger1, V. Kalscheuer1, R.  3Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul,  Schneider2;  Turkey, 4NHLI, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. 1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of  Desmosomes are cellular junctions important for intercellular  Biochemistry, Innsbruck, Austria. adhesion and anchoring the intermediate Ülament (IF) cytoskeleton  Recent studies have identiÜed missense mutations in the human  to the cell membrane. Desmoplakin (DSP) is the most abundant  PTPN11 gene as the cause of Noonan syndrome (NS), a relatively  desmosomal protein with 2 isoforms produced by alternate splicing.  common, but genetically heterogeneous autosomal dominant  Mutations in desmoplakin have been found to underlie dilated  malformation syndrome. Characteristic features are proportionate  cardiomyopathy associated with skin and hair phenotypes. short stature, dysmorphic face, and congenital heart defects. This study describes a patient with recessive arrhythmogenic left  PTPN11 encodes the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase  and right ventricular cardiomyopathy, epidermolytic palmoplantar  SHP-2, which is an important molecule in several intracellular signal  keratoderma, and woolly hair. The patient showed a severe heart  transduction pathways that control diverse developmental processes,  phenotype with an early onset and rapid progression to heart failure.  such as cardiac semilunar valvulogenesis. Almost all mutations  A homozygous stop-mutation, R1267X, was found in exon 23 of  identiÜed to date cluster in the amino N-src homology 2 (SH2)  the desmoplakin gene in this patient which results in truncation of  domain and the phosphotyrosine phosphatase domain, which are  the larger DSP I isoform. The loss of most of the DSP I speciÜc  both involved in switching the protein between its inactive and active  rod domain and C-terminal was conÜrmed by western blotting and  conformation. immunohistochemistry. The pathomechanism underlying NS in patients with mutations in  These Ündings are the Ürst to describe a phenotype caused by a  SHP-2 protein is presently unknown. Crystal structure analysis of  mutation affecting only one DSP isoform and they further emphasize  SHP-2 predicted that the mutations would result in a gain of function.  the importance of desmoplakin in epidermal and cardiac function.  To conÜrm this, we have selected four mutations, including the  DSP I is reported to be an obligate constituent of desmosomes and  common Tyr63Cys and Asn308Asp exchanges present in patients  the only isoform present in cardiac tissue. This mutation suggests  with NS. Following cloning of the complete coding sequence of  that the cardiac system could develop initially without desmoplakin/ PTPN11, we introduced these mutations in vitro. Subsequently,  desmin IF interactions mediated by the DSP C-terminus. To address  wild type and mutant SHP-2 proteins were expressed in E. coli  this, we have revisited the expression of DSP isoforms in the heart.  and puriÜed. An elisa-based phosphatase assay speciÜc for SHP-2  Preliminary data suggests that speciÜc compartments may express  activity revealed a signiÜcantly higher activity of the mutant proteins  different combinations of isoforms with the absence of DSP II in atria.  compared to the wild-type. A similar assay with an auto-activating  Our study implicates the importance of the different DSP isoforms  peptide shall further distinguish between increased basic-activity  during development and cardiac remodelling. or auto-activation in the mutants. Our results are an important step  towards a better understanding of the pathomechanism of NS. 
C55 . Tiling path resolution mapping of 1p36 deletions by array- CGH: contiguous gene deletion or àdeletion with positional  
C53 . Functional characterization of wild-type and mutant  effectÒ syndrome? wolframin, the WF
S1  (wolfram syndrome 1) gene product R. Redon1, M. Rio2, N. P. Carter1, L. Colleaux2;  S. Hofmann1, K. Gerbitz2, M. F. Bauer2;  1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2H\x98pital  1Institute of Diabetes Research, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical Che- Necker - Enfants Malades (INSERM U393), Paris, France. mistry, Molecular Diagnostics and Mitochondrial Genetics, Munich, Germany. The constitutional 1p36 deletion is the most common terminal  Mutations of the WF
S1  gene are responsible for Wolfram  deletion syndrome, affecting 1 out of 5,000 newborns. It results in  syndrome, a rare recessive disorder characterized by early-onset,  the association of a characteristic facial dysmorphy (including: large  non-autoimmune diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy and further  anterior fontanel, deep-set eyes, Ýat nasal bridge, asymmetric ears  neurological and endocrinological abnormalities. The WF
S1  gene  and pointed chin), congenital anomalies and mental retardation.  encodes wolframin, a novel multispanning membrane glycoprotein  Previous studies suggested that this syndrome was caused by  of the endoplasmic reticulum. In order to functionally characterize  haploinsufÜciency of several contiguous genes and proposed  wolframin, we have generated polyclonal antibodies against both  potential critical regions for certain clinical Ündings observed in  hydrophilic termini of the protein. Wolframin was found to be  patients. To further delineate genotype-phenotype correlations  ubiquitously expressed with highest levels in brain, pancreas, heart  in monosomy 1p36, we applied array-CGH using an overlapping  and insulinoma beta-cell lines. Analysis of the structural features  clone microarray covering the whole of chromosome 1 at tiling path  provides experimental evidence that wolframin is embedded in the  resolution. Eight patients showing clinical features characteristic  membrane in an N-cyt/C-lum topology and oligomerizes into higher  of monosomy 1p36 were tested and deletion was conÜrmed in all  molecular weight complexes. cases. Two patients were particularly interesting. The Ürst one had  In addition, we investigated the molecular mechanisms that cause  a deletion restricted to the most terminal 2.5 Mb of 1p36.33. The  loss-of-function of wolframin in affected individuals. The effect of  second one had a deletion of 7 Mb in length, starting 3 Mb from  different types of WF
S1  mutations on wolframin expression and  the terminal region. Considering that the two patients exhibit very  stability was analyzed in mutant cell lines. Most WF
S1  mutations  similar features (facial characteristics and mental retardation), the  investigated here appear to severely affect steady-state levels of  occurrence of non-overlapping 1p36 deletions strongly suggests  wolframin. In patients harboring nonsense mutations complete  that monosomy 1p36 may be a Òdeletion with positional effectÓ rather  absence of the mutated wolframin is caused by instability and rapid  than a Òcontiguous gene deletionÓ syndrome. Altogether, our results  decay of WSF1 nonsense transcripts. Pulse-chase experiments  indicate that concomitant FISH screening of several 1p36 loci or the  of mutants expressed in COS-7 cells indicated that also missense  use of high resolution array-CGH will be required for full diagnosis of  mutations of WF
S1  lead to instability and strongly reduced half- this syndrome. life of wolframin. Thus, Wolfram syndrome appears to be caused ESHG Concurrent Symposia 78 
C56 . Non-random asynchronous replication at 22q11.2 and the  The 8p duplication is a recurrent chromosome anomaly usually  human 22q11.2 deletion associated with the deletion of the distal 8p portion: inv dup(8p). This  A. Baumer, M. Riegel, A. Schinzel;  rearrangement derives from non-allelic homologous recombination  between two olfactory receptor (OR) gene clusters (REPP- proximal,  University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. REPD-distal: Giglio et al, 2001) resulting in a dicentric chromosome.  The analyses of the replication timing at 22q11.2 were prompted  An asymmetric breakage between the two centromeres of the  by our Ünding of a statistically signiÜcant bias in the origin of the  dicentric results in the formation of the inv dup(8p) that is deleted for  regions Ýanking the deletion site in patients with 22q11.2 deletions;  the 8p23 portion distal to REPD and duplicated for a region proximal  the proximal region being in the majority of cases of grandmaternal  to REPP. Through the molecular deÜnition of two cases of 8p  origin. We hypothesised that asynchronous replication may be  duplication having a phenotype different from that of the inv dup(8p)  involved in the formation of the 22q11.2 deletion, the most frequently  subjects, we discovered a new recurrent chromosome rearrangement  occurring interstitial deletion in humans, by favouring the mispairing  consisting in the interstitial direct duplication of 8p23.1-p23.3. Both  of low-copy repeats. cases have the proximal breakpoint at REPP, between clones R
P11 - Replication timing during S phase at 22q11.2 was investigated by  303g3/R
P11 -351i21 and the distal breakpoint between clones R
P11 - Ýuorescent in situ hybridisation on interphase nuclei. We report  715m14/R
P11 -1049h7. The distal breakpoint does not contain any  on the detection of non-random asynchronous replication at the  OR gene cluster but two inverted copies of another class of repeats  human chromosome region 22q11.2, an autosomal locus believed  in the proximity of the MYOM gene. In both cases the rearrangement  not to contain imprinted genes. Asynchronous replication at 22q11.2  occurred at the maternal meiosis. Both patients have mental  was observed without exception in all 20 tested individuals; these  retardation and dysmorphisms. Although the duplication region of  comprised individuals with structurally normal chromosomes 22 (ten  these two patients involves the recently deÜned Kabuki duplication  cases), individuals with translocations involving the locus 22q11.2  region (Milunsky, 2003) (10 MB against 3.5 Mb) none of our patients  (eight cases) and patients with a 22q11.2 deletion (two cases). The  have the Kabuki phenotype. Our Ündings demonstrate that recurrent  non-random nature of the asynchronous replication was observed in  chromosome rearrangements could be due to mechanisms other  all individuals for whom the chromosomes 22 were distinguishable.  than non-allelic homologous recombination. The earlier replicating allele was found to be of paternal origin in all  cases where the parental origin of the translocation or deletion was  
C59 . Cytogenetic and molecular characterisation of  known. balanced chromosomal rearrangements in patients with limb  malformations and breakpoints in chromosome band 2q31 near  
C57 . Age-related skewing of X chromosome inactivation is not a  the HOXD complex stochastic process B. Dlugaszewska1, A. Silahtaroglu2, C. Menzel1, S. Kuebart1, S. Mundlos1, N.  K. H. Orstavik1,2, M. Kristiansen1, G. P. S. Knudsen2, L. Bathum3, T. I. A. Soren- Tommerup2, H. Ropers1, V. Kalscheuer1, H. Neitzel3;  sen4, T. Brix3, A. J. Svendsen3,5, K. Christensen3, K. Ohm Kyvik3;  1Max Planck Insitute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Wilhelm  1Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute  Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Medical  Group of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3The Danish Twin  Genetics, IMBG, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,  Registry, Section for Epidemiology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,  Denmark, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Charite, Campus Virchow-Klinikum,  Denmark, 4Institute of Preventive Medicine, Kommunehospitalet, Copenhagen,  Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany. Denmark, 5Medical Department C, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Den- Characterisation of disease-associated balanced chromosome  mark. rearrangements has proven to be a promising starting point in the  A skewed X inactivation may be due to chance, to genetic factors or  search for candidate genes and regulatory elements. We have  to a selection against or in favour of cells with a speciÜc genotype.  identiÜed and investigated 3 patients with limb abnormalities and  Elderly females have a much higher frequency of a skewed X  chromosomal breakpoints in band 2q31. In patient 1, the balanced  inactivation pattern than younger females in peripheral blood cells.  t(2;10)(q31.1;q26.3) translocation is associated with skeletal  We have analysed the frequency of skewed X inactivation in females  malformations including severe brachydactyly and syndactyly. Other  aged 18-101 years, including 200 MZ and 258 DZ twin pairs. A  clinical features present in this patient include mental retardation,  skewed X inactivation was arbitrarily deÜned as a pattern where  hypoplasia of the cerebellum, scoliosis, and ectopic anus. Patient  80% or more of the cells have a preferential inactivation of one of  2, who carries a similar t(2;10)(q31.1;q23.33) translocation, shows  the two X chromosomes. The frequency of skewed X inactivation  hypoplasia of the ulna only. Patient 3 carries a pericentric inversion  increased from 15% at mean age 55 years to 67% at age 100 years.  of chromosome 2, inv(2)(p15q31). Her phenotype is characterized by  This increase in skewing continued throughout life, since a lower  bilateral aplasia of the Übula and the radius, bilateral hypoplasia of  frequency was found also for females aged 95 years (45%) compared  the ulna, unossiÜed carpals bones, and hypoplasia and dislocation of  to females aged 101 years (67%). There was no parent-of-origin  both tibiae. effect of the preferentially active X chromosome in DZ twins where  By Ýuorescence in situ hybridisations, we have mapped the  the paternal X chromosome could be identiÜed. Biometric analysis  breakpoints to intervals of approximately 100 kb. Additionally, we  showed that dominant genetic effects accounted for about 60% of  have cloned the breakpoint of patient 1. Computational analysis of  the variance in X inactivation pattern in both young and elderly twins.  the breakpoint regions revealed that all breakpoints in 2q31 map in  We found a high intraclass correlation of the X inactivation pattern in  the vicinity of the homeodomain transcription factor D (HOXD) cluster,  the younger MZ twins (0.6), which may in part be due to the shared  known to play important functions in limb patterning and growth, and  intrauterine environment for monochorionic MZ twins. However, a  provided no indication for a disrupted gene. HoxD gene expression  similar high correlation was also found in the elderly MZ twins, and  in the mouse has been shown to be regulated by cis-acting DNA  indicates that the age-related increase in skewing is not a solely  elements acting over distances of several hundred kilobases.  stochastic process. Therefore we suggest that in all 3 reported cases the rearrangement  events most likely exerted deleterious effects by disturbing normal  
C58 . A new recurrent 8p duplication mediated by an olfactory  HOXD gene regulation. receptor gene cluster and the MYOM genes: which relationship  with the Kabuki syndrome? 
C60 . 22q11.2 microdeletion Syndrome: small deletions (1.5-2 Mb)  R. Ciccone1, R. Giorda2, G. Gimelli3, S. Giglio4, T. Pramparo1, G. Gregato1, G.  are more frequent in familial cases than in sporadic. Neri5, M. Genuardi6, J. Argente7, O. Zuffardi1;  L. Fern\x86ndez1, P. Lapunzina1, I. L\x96pez Pajares1, G. Rodr\x91guez Criado2, J.  1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Universit\x87 di Pavia, Pavia, Italy,  P\x8drez1, L. Garc\x91a Guereta1, A. Delicado1;  2IRCCS La Nostra Famiglia, Bosisio Parini, Italy, 3Lab. Citogenetica, Ospedale  1Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Virgen del Roc\x91o,  Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 4Servizio Genetica Clinica, Osp. San Raffaele, Milano,  Sevilla, Spain. Italy, 5Genetica Medica, Universit\x87 Cattolica, Roma, Italy, 6Genetica Medica,  22q11.2 microdeletion Syndrome has a frequency in the general  Universit\x87 di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 7Universidad Aut\x96noma. Hospital Infantil  population of 1:4000-6000 newborns. Molecular studies have  Universitario Ni\x95o Jes\x9bs, Madrid, Spain.ESHG Concurrent Symposia 79 revealed a common large deletion (3 Mb) in 90% of the cases, a  
C62 . Acromesomelic chondrodysplasia with genital anomalies  common small deletion (1.5-2 Mb) in 8%, and atypical deletions in  due to a homozygous mutation in BmpR1b 2%. S. T\x9erkmen1, O. Demirhan2, G. Schwabe3, P. Seemann3, H. Krude4, S. Mund- FISH studies were done using D22
S75  and TUPL
E1  locus-speciÜc  los1,3, K. Lehmann1;  probes. Molecular analyses were carried out by PCR-ampliÜcation  1Institute of Medical Genetics, Humboldt University, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany,  of 12 to 16 polymorphic markers of 22q11.2 region. By FISH, 59  2Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Cukurova University, Adana,  patients were found to have the microdeletion 22q, and 6 of them  Turkey, Adana, Turkey, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin,  (10%) were familial cases. Five of these families were subjected to  Germany, 4Pediatric Endocrinology, Otto Heubner Center for Pediatrics, Hum- molecular studies, together with their relatives (19 individuals in total). boldt University, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany. Cytogenetic and molecular results conÜrmed in all cases a maternal  We report on a 16 year old Turkish girl, offspring of consanguineous  inheritance of the deletion. In a family with three affected generations,  parents, who presented with a severe form of limb shortening,  the deletion was transmitted by the probandÓs maternal grandfather. hand/foot malformation, and infertility. The limb deformities showed  By microsatellite genotyping, we identiÜed 1 family with the common  an increasing severity in a proximo-distal gradient, Übula aplasia,  large deletion (3 Mb) and 3 families with the common small deletion  severe brachydactyly with absent phalanges as well as fusion and  (1.5-2 Mb). In another family, the lack of parental data didnÓt allow the  deformation of the carpal/tarsal bones. These features resembled  deletion size to be determined. the phenotype spectrum of Grebe syndrome, Hunter Thompson  These results suggest a common small deletion predominance  syndrome and DuPan syndrome, disorders which are due to  in 3/4 familial cases (75% vs. 8% reported in the general deleted  homozygous mutations in the Growth Differentiation Factor 5 (GDF5).  population). This supports the hypothesis of a bigger tolerance for  Beside the typical features of GDF5-related syndromes, hypoplasia of  small deletions in inherited cases. Thus we recommend to check for a  the uterus and absence of the ovaries were additionally demonstrated  possible familial aggregation of the syndrome, when a common small  on the pelvic ultrasound study. The hormonal status of the patient  deletion (1.5-2 Mb) or an atypical deletion is found. was consistent with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Sequencing of GDF5 revealed no mutation; thus a mutation analysis  
C61 . Mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein  in Bone morphogenetic protein Receptor 1b (BmpR1b), which is a  Ülamin B affect skeletogenesis, vertebral segmentation and joint  receptor for GDF5, was performed. A homozygous 8 bp deletion  formation in humans. (del376-383) was detected in BmpR1b. S. P. Robertson1, D. Krakow2, L. M. King2, T. Morgan1, E. T. Sebald2, C.  This is the Ürst description of acromesomelic chondrodysplasia and  Bertolotto2, S. Wachsmann-Hogiu2, D. Acuna2, S. S. Shapiro3, T. Takafuta4, S.  infertility in a patient caused by a homozygous mutation in BmpR1b. Aftimos5, C. Ae Kim6, H. Firth7, C. E. Steiner8, V. Cormier-Daire9, A. Superti- Furga10, A. Grix11, L. Bonafe10, J. M. Graham2, C. A. Bacino12, J. Allanson13, M.  
C63 . A novel X-linked leukodystrophy with metaphyseal  G. Bialer14, R. S. Lachman2, D. L. Rimoin2, D. H. Cohn2;  chondrodysplasia maps to Xq25-q27 1Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand,  C. A. H\x9ebner1, U. Orth1, I. Stefanova1, A. Kohlsch\x9etter2, B. A. Neubauer3, A.  2Cedars-Sinai Research Institute, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Jefferson  Gal1;  Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Yamanashi Medical  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Hamburg, Germany, 2Kinderklinik Universit\x89tskran- University, Yamanashi, Japan, 5Northern Regional Genetics Service, Auckland,  kenhaus Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Neurop\x89diatrie, Gie¦en, Germany. New Zealand, 6Instituto da Crianca, Faculdade de Medicina da Universade  Leukodystrophies are progressive diseases characterized by  Sao Paulo, Brazil, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital,  defective central nervous system myelination. Here we report on  Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8State University of Campinas, S\x8ao Paulo,  a family with four affected males in three generations. All patients  Brazil, 9H\x98pital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10Centre Hospitalier  presented with a unique phenotype consisting of symptoms of  Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 11Permanente Medical Group,  a slowly progressive leukodystrophy and that of a metaphyseal  Sacramento, CA, United States, 12Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX,  chondrodysplasia. The pedigree is strongly suggestive for an X- United States, 13Eastern Ontario Regional Genetics Program, Ottawa, ON,  linked recessive trait. First symptoms (tremor, spacticity, ataxia, and  Canada, 14NYU Medical Center, Manhasset, NY, United States. walking difÜculties) were usually noted in early childhood. Physical  The Ülamins (encoded by the genes FLNA, FLNB and FLNC) are  examination of the two living patients, now 15 and 17 years old,  cytoplasmic actin cross-linking proteins that regulate cell shape and  showed various dysmorphic features such as hypertelorism and  migration. They link transmembrane proteins to the cytoskeletal  broad, depressed nasal bridge with anteverted nose. The patients  actin network and modulate intracellular signaling and protein  were severely handicapped from a progressive visual impairment  trafÜcking. Using positional mapping/candidate gene screening and  and mental deterioration. MRI showed a severe leukodystrophy  direct candidate gene mutation analysis, mutations were identiÜed  with almost complete loss of white matter. X-ray analysis of the  in FLNB underlying four human skeletal disorders. Homozygosity  joints demonstrated metaphyseal alterations with Ýaring. Both a  or compound heterozygosity for stop codon mutations were found  maternal uncle and great-uncle of the patients died of a debilitating  to underlie autosomal recessive spondylocarpotarsal syndrome,  neurological disorder at the age of 36 and 26 years, respectively.  a disorder characterized by vertebral malsegmentation and carpal  A gross structural aberration of the X chromosome was excluded.  and tarsal bone coalition. Missense mutations were associated with  Two-point linkage analysis yielded positive lod scores for a total  autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome, a phenotype characterized  of 5 loci on Xq with maximum z values of 1.31, 1.41, and 1.62 at  by multiple large joint dislocations with vertebral and craniofacial  theta=0.00 for DX
S1047 , DX
S6855 , and HPRT, respectively. Analysis  anomalies, and in the perinatal lethal atelosteogenesis I and III  of individual recombinants mapped the disease locus between  phenotypes, which feature widespread and severe defects of  DX
S8093  and DX
S1232  in Xq25-q27 and deÜned a region of  skeletal development and joint formation. Immunohistochemical  approximately 14 Mb that harbours the putative disease gene. and immunoÝourescence studies show that Ülamin B is expressed  in growth plate chondrocytes and in the developing vertebral  
C64 . Functional analysis of the receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2 in  bodies. Together these data reveal an unexpected role in vertebral  mouse and chick segmentation, joint formation, and endochondral ossiÜcation for  S. Stricker1, N. Verhey van Wijk1, K. Suering1, S. Mundlos2;  FLNB. Filamin B becomes the second member of the Ülamin family  to be shown to mediate critical functions in morphogenesis in  1Max Planck Institut fuer molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut fuer  humans, especially those that relate directly to skeletogenesis. The  Medizinische Genetik Charite, Berlin, Germany. molecular pathology of disorders caused by mutations in genes  Truncation mutations of the orphan receptor tyrosine kinase ROR2  encoding Ülamins suggests a novel and essential role for cytoskeletal  cause dominant brachydactyly type B (BDB) which is characterized  architecture in skeletogenesis. by hypoplasia or aplasia of distal phalanges and nails. Recessive  Robinow syndrome (RRS), exhibiting a different phenotype, was  shown to be allelic to BDB. While RRS is likely to be caused by  loss of function mutations in ROR2, the functional consequences ESHG Concurrent Symposia 80 of the mutations in BDB remain elusive. To characterize the Role  skeletal dysplasias. of Ror2 in cartilage condensation and growth, we took different in  2. To develop effective approaches to diagnose skeletal dysplasias. vitro and in vivo approaches. Yeast two-hybrid screening provided  The ESDN provides a diagnostic service which includes clinical  novel intracellular association partners linked to receptor signaling  review of all skeletal dysplasias and the molecular analysis of 21  and signal modulation. Additionally, we performed Affymetrix chip  genes associated with more than 28 skeletal dysplasias. In 2002, the  hybridization with RNA from Ror2-/- and wildtype mice to identify  ESDN received approximately 500 patient referrals from 17 European  downstream targets of Ror2. Automated in-situ hybridization of  countries. 290 diagnostic tests were performed and causative  the candidate genes on mouse limbs indicates a high number  mutations were identiÜed in 120 patients. In 2003, these Ügures  of genes co-expressed with or expressed adjacent to Ror2. In  increased to 527 referrals from 22 different European countries, 359  order to analyze the consequences of BDB mutations in vivo, we  tests performed and mutations identiÜed in 193 patients. overexpressed mutant constructs in chicken embryonic limbs using  The ESDN is continuing to develop their diagnostic referral and  a retroviral system. Unexpectedly, the overexpression did not result  quality systems and in February 2004, the ESDN case management  in a brachydactyly phenotype, but in a severe growth retardation  web-portal was launched. This secure electronic system allows the  of all cartilage elements accompanied by a deranged growth plate  ESDN to manage the diagnostic network to a high level of efÜciency  architecture. Similarly, expression of Ror2 truncated at a position  whilst at all times protecting the conÜdentiality of patient referrals  comparable to human BDB in a knock-in mouse (De Chiara et al.  and ensuring that adequate consent procedures are in place. All  2000) was reported to result in loss of middle rather than terminal  information about the ESDN and access to the case manager  phalanges. This points towards remarkable differences in the  can be found at www.esdn.org. Ultimately, this integrated and  molecular mechanisms underlying digit formation and especially  multidisciplinary approach will promote the correct diagnosis of many  differentiation of the terminal phalanx in human, mouse and chick. skeletal dysplasias. *EU: QLG1-CT-2001-02188 / Swiss: OFES 01.0258. 
C65 . Hereditary nanism with autosomal recessive inheritance in  Yakut population (Russia) 
C67 . Fast estimation of critical values of correlated genome  N. R. Maximova1, A. Sukhomyasova2, A. Nogovitsina2;  scans for linkage 1Yakutsk Science Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences and the  S. Bacanu;  Government of the RS(Y), Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2National Medical  University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. Estimates of study speciÜc critical values for linkage scans  The Yakuts (Sakha) is the nation, which is populated in the Republic  (suggestive and signiÜcant thresholds) are important to identify  of Sakha (Yakutia)(Siberia,Russia). One of the most frequent reasons  promising regions. Often, scientists must perform multipoint linkage  of referring for medical-genetic consultation in the region is the  scans for several correlated traits or the same trait under different  growth retardation of children. One form of autosomal recessive  statistical models. Consequently, the outcome consists of several  nanism among the Yakuts was observed. 40 patients from 34  correlated multipoint linkage trace and many researchers chose  families, including 22 female and 18 male, from 0 till 57 years were  to present the signal peaks from all traces, i.e. they report the  examined during this observation. This syndrome is characterized  performance of the pointwise maximal linkage trace. In this paper  by prenatal growth failure (weight at birth - 2300 g., growth - 42 cm).  I propose a fast and concrete recipe for Ünding study speciÜc  Intelligence is normal. The average height of the patients by the age  critical values for the maximal linkage trace. Critical values could  of 3 is 75 cm and weight is 9,75 kg, the average height by age of  be derived theoretically or empirically. Theoretically-derived values  7 is 96,1 cm and weight -13,9 kg, by the age of 11 - 115,5 cm and  are often conservative due to their assumption of fully informative  weight -25,0 kg. The height of the patients at the age of 18 and older  transmissions. Empirically-derived values are computer and skill  is about 133-138 cm. Facial dysmorthism reminiscent of Three M  intensive and may not even be computationally feasible for large  syndrome. Clinical features include short proportional stature, pre  pedigrees. I propose a method to estimate critical values for  and post-natal growth failure, hydrocephaloid skull, triangular face,  correlated multipoint linkage traces using standard, widely used  epicanthus, hypoplasia of cheekbones, short neck, short and wide  statistical software. The proposed method estimates study-speciÜc  thorax with deformation, muscle hypotonia, lordosis, huge stomach,  critical values by using autoregressive models to estimate the  brachydactylia, Ýat-footedness and ledgy heels. Sexual development  correlation between standard normal statistics at adjacent map points  is normal. Laboratory researches of a mineral exchange are without  for each trace and then use it, along with cross correlation with the  any pathology, thyroid and growth hormone concentration is normal.  other traces, to estimate study-speciÜc critical values. The method  The bone age corresponds to passport age. Children usually enter  is evaluated using different family structures and density of markers,  the school with one-year delay because of growth delay and study  under both the null hypothesis of no linkage and the alternative  in general schools. The patients with very low height experience  hypothesis of linkage between marker and disease locus. Overall, the  difÜculties in social adaptation. proposed method appears very accurate in predicting critical values  especially when the AR models are applied to the differenced time  
C66 . The European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN)  series. [www.esdn.org contact: info@esdn.org] J. Taylor, ESDN Project Administrator, on behalf of:1, R. Elles1, G. Mortier2,  
C68 . Accounting for strong age-speciÜc sex-limitation in IgE  P. Coucke2, M. Wright3, J. Goodship3, J. Bonaventure4, M. Le Merrer4, V.  QTL linkage analysis Cormier-Daire4, L. Ala-Kokko5, M. Mannikko5, M. Majava5, B. Zabel6, J.  M. A. R. Ferreira, D. L. Duffy, N. G. Martin;  Spranger6, G. Wildhardt6, A. Superti-Furga7, L. Bonafe7, A. Zankl7, M. Briggs8;  Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia. 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Ghent  We have measured levels of total serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) and  University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3International Centre for Life, Newcastle- other asthma related phenotypes in 934 sib-pairs from 803 Australian  upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,  twin families ascertained via one asthmatic twin proband. A genome  5University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 6ChildrenÓs Hospital, University of Mainz,  scan (~10cM) was performed with subsequent Üne mapping (1-5cM)  Mainz, Germany, 7Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne,  of candidate regions. Overall, the sib correlation for logIgE was  Switzerland, 8Wellcome Trust Centre For Cell Matrix Research, The University  0.25, with no signiÜcant differences between same-sex (SS) and  of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. opposite-sex (OS) sib pairs, nor between young (both sibs ±20) or  The European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN) is a pan- older sib-pairs. In spite of this apparent covariance homogeneity, a  European referral and communication network, which allows access  strong age-speciÜc sex-limitation was found: young OS sib-pairs had  to diagnostic and research services from any country within the  an IgE correlation (r=0.04, 95% c.i.: -0.12-0.20) signiÜcantly lower  European Community. The ESDN has been established for two years  than young SS pairs (r=0.35, 95% c.i.: 0.21-0.47). This sex-speciÜc  and is funded by the European Union and the Swiss Government*.  effect was no longer observed at a later age, with old OS pairs having  The aims of the ESDN are two-fold: a logIgE correlation (r=0.23, 95% c.i.: 0.09-0.36) similar to older  1. To identify the cellular, molecular and genetic factors that cause  SS pairs (r=0.21, 95% c.i.: 0.08-0.33). Thus, young OS sib-pairs ESHG Concurrent Symposia 81 displayed a degree of atopic discordance larger than expected from  
C71 . Effects of population substructure on association studies:  their degree of relatedness. If unaccounted for, this can signiÜcantly  Calpain-10 in patients with diabetic nephropathy reduce the power of linkage analysis under the hypothesis of linkage.  T. H. Lindner1, M. Berger1, H. H. Stassen2, K. K\x99hler3, C. Wanner1, K. Hoff- A similar effect was observed for the skin-prick test data. Since ~25%  mann4, M. Zimmer1, H. Bickeb\x99ller3;  of our sib-pairs consist of OS pairs with at least one young sib, this  1Medical University Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2University of Zu- sample provides appropriate data to compare the power of linkage  rich, Dept. of Psychiatry, Zurich, Switzerland, 3University of Goettingen, Dept. of  analysis under different genetic models, namely sex-speciÜc age-of- Genetic Epidemiology, Goettingen, Germany, 4Charit\x8d Berlin, Campus Virchow,  onset, classical sex-limitation and parental imprinting. Fine mapping  Dept. of Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany. data from chromosome 11 will be used to test these models, namely  Type 2 diabetes and diabetic nephropathy are a result of an  at the known asthma gene FCER1B and near the candidate genes  interaction between genetic and non-genetic factors. A range of  ELF5 and EHF. genome-wide scans has been performed in order to identify diabetes  susceptibility loci. In a Mexican-American population a diabetes  
C69 . IdentiÜcation of genes linked to complex disease susceptibility region was found on chromosome 2q37.1. The  E. Roschmann1, A. Philippi1, P. Brooks1, F. Tores1, S. Friedel2, A. Hinney2, J.  responsible haplo(geno)type was identiÜed and consisted of SNPs  Hebebrand2, J. Hager1;  UCSNP-43, -19, -63 within intron 3 of the calpain-10 gene. We tested  1IntegraGen, Evry, France, 2Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. whether our two groups of type 2 diabetic patients on dialysis and  We have developed a novel technology for gene identiÜcation in  healthy controls (German ancestry) contained individuals interfering  complex disease called GenomeHIP§ which overcomes many of the  with the results by a hidden diverse ethnic origin. We identiÜed four  limitations of more traditional linkage mapping methods. different Ðgenetically comparable subsetsÑ of cases and controls  GenomeHIP compares the genomes of pairs of related individuals  (group 1: n=547 cases/101 controls, group 2: n=39/13, group 3:  with the same disease and eliminates the DNA segments that are  n=26/13, group 4: 0/87). We tested the three UCSNPs and any  not identical between the individuals. The GenomeHIP regions are  possible haplogenotype for association with type 2 diabetes in the  mapped by hybridisation of the DNA segments that are identical  total groups and in the identiÜed subgroups of cases and controls.  between the two related individuals onto a BAC microarray  The analyses in all individuals revealed no evidence for association.  representing the human genome at a 1 Mb resolution. Analysis of the  However, we found association of the common allele 1 of UCSNP- microarray data allows the identiÜcation of short regions, spanning on  63 in group 1 (P=0.002) when analyzing the groups separately. In  average 2 Mb, that are shared between the different pairs of related  this group the haplotype 112 occurred more often in cases than  individuals. As the individuals share the same disease, these regions  controls (P=0.006). This effect was due to haplogenotype 112/121  will most likely contain the disease-linked genes. (OR=0.27, 95% CI=0.13-0.57). Our results indicate that testing for  GenomeHIP was applied to 167 sib pairs affected with obesity and  population substructure in an apparently homogeneous population  116 sib pairs affected with autism. This allowed the identiÜcation  can severely affect the outcome of association analyses. We propose  of six narrow regions linked to obesity. Analysis of three of the  our procedure for any genome scan, based on linkage or association,  loci revealed a G-protein coupled receptor, involved in energy  in order to increase the chances for the identiÜcation of causative  metabolism, to be associated with obesity. The association was  sequence variants. supported by functional data showing a loss of function of the  receptor expressing the associated haplotype. Two other genes  
C72 . Disregulation of multiple LOX-1/OLR1 mRNA isoforms as  active in the same pathway also appear to be associated with obesity.  risk factor in myocardial infarction. At least Üve statistically signiÜcant loci with strong candidate genes  R. Mango1, F. Clementi1, P. Borgiani1, L. Vecchione1, G. B. Forleo1, F. Amati1,  have been identiÜed in autism. One new synaptic modulator gene  M. DÓApice1, A. Botta1, C. Cola1, A. Amato1, F. Del Vecchio1, F. Sangiuolo1, F.  has already been conÜrmed in association studies. Romeo1, J. L. Mehta2, G. Novelli1;  1Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment in Multifactorial and  
C70 . Dissecting the ApoE locus with respect to AlzheimerÒs  Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy,  disease using novel association statistics 2Department of Internal Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,  S. B\x99hringer1, E. R. Martin2, A. Steland3;  Little Rock, AR, United States. 1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89t Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Cen- Myocardial infarction (MI) is a signiÜcant cause of mortality.  ter for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United  Substantial data support a role for oxidized LDL (oxLDL) in  States, 3Lehrstuhl f\x9er Stochastik, Ruhr-Universit\x89t Bochum, Bochum, Germany. the etiology of MI. The human LOX-1/OLR1 gene encodes the  A major challenge in genetic studies of complex traits is the  endothelium-derived lectin-like oxidized-LDL receptor, which is  characterization of small genetic effects at potentially many loci.  involved in binding, internalization, and proteolytic degradation of  AlzheimerÒs disease is one of few examples where a predisposing  oxLDL, suggesting that it may play signiÜcant role in atherogenesis/ causal effect of an allele (ApoE\\epsilon_4) could be replicated  MI. We previous identiÜed a group of SNPs contained in a speciÜc  in numerous samples. The ApoE locus can therefore be used to  disequilibrium block within this gene that are associated with the risk  evaluate statistical procedures with respect to their capability of  to develop coronary atherosclerosis (CAD)/MI (Mango et al. J Med  detecting a causal locus and exploring further information like  Genet 2003 Dec;40(12):933-6.). As the disease-associated SNPs  haplotype frequencies or penetrance parameters. We apply novel  identiÜed did not affect the LOX-1/OLR1 aminoacid sequence, we  statistical procedures to a data set of AlzheimerÒs disease containing  investigated their functional effect . Using isolated mononuclear cells  nuclear families (Martin et al., AJHG 2000). Using likelihood based  from randomly selected patients, we promoted their transition to  methods we show, that haplotype frequencies in the region can  mature dendritic cells by stimulation with oxLDL . We were able to  be estimated consistently even if the causal locus is unobserved,  demonstrate the existence of multiple LOX-1/OLR1 transcripts. One  i.e. linkage disequilibrium (LD) of observed haplotypes with the  of these forms, ÝOLR1 corresponded to the full length transcript,  unobserved causal locus can be reconstructed. Furthermore,  while the other, named ÐLoxinÑ, was lacking exon 5. To quantify each  the effect of unlinked, unobserved loci which also inÝuence the  isoforms, an isoform-speciÜc kinetic RT-PCR analysis was carried  phenotype can be estimated. It is therefore possible to assess the  out. A signiÜcant difference between gene expression and genotype  relative contribution of the ApoE\\epsilon_4 allele with respect to  was observed. We found that the ratio of loxin/ÝOLR1 mRNA in  AlzheimerÒs disease, even if it is not observed. We also investigate  dendritic cells was signiÜcantly lower in IV
S4 -73 T/T-positive disease- nonparametric methods to test contributions of loci with respect to  susceptible individuals compared to C/C protected individuals  phenotypes. These methods are more robust since they are based  (P=0.001). Consistent with a semi-dominant mode of inheritance  on fewer assumptions about the genetic situation. As shown by  of the disease locus at LOX-1/OLR1, the heterozygous genotype  simulation they might be less powerful than the LR-tests and provide  expressed more loxin mRNA that the homozygous susceptible  less information about parameters of interest. genotype (P=0.03). Our results suggest that the 1.1 Kb region,  containing the linkage disequilibrium block, determines the efÜciency  of the splicing.Clinical genetics 82 ESHG Posters mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) gene, and it has classically  been divided into two subgroups according to severity; complete  (CAIS) and partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS). In the  
P0001 . Selective antibody immune deÜciency in a patient with  complete form, the 46XY individual presents as a phenotypically  Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome normal girl, except for absence of sexual hair. These patients have  D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, R. M. Jacobson, C. R. Weiler;  intra abdominal testes and , due to regression of mullerian ducts,  a short vagina, no uterus and lack oviduct. Partial forms of AIS  Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. present as varying degrees of under masculinization, ranging from a  Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive  predominantly female phenotype to boys with genital malformations,  disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies and  such as hypospadias or cryptorchidism. It has also been speculated,  various degrees of cognitive deÜcits. This condition results from  that subtle androgen receptor defect could cause impaired  deÜciency of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, a critical step in  spermatogenesis without genital malformations. cholesterol biosynthesis. Children with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome  Two Hundred patients from 65 families were examined . All patients  have frequent infections, particularly of the respiratory tract.  were examined clinically and classiÜed according to the degree of  ImmunodeÜciency, however, is not recognized as a part of this  symptoms. In 49% of the patients several chromosomal abberations  metabolic condition. Frequent infections are usually attributed to a  were identiÜed. In addition ten missense mutations are described  decreased patient mobility and reduced respiratory effort secondary  in the AR gene of patients phenotypically ranging from complete  to muscular hypotonia and mental retardation, which are often  androgen insensitivity to men with preserved fertility. Mean age of  present in affected individuals. We describe a patient with Smith- referral patients is around 17 years which causes a lot of pressure  Lemli-Opitz syndrome and recurrent respiratory infections who was  both on councellor and also patients and their families for accepting  found to have a variant of common variable immune deÜciency,  the test results and living new condition. selective antibody deÜciency. The immunologic diagnosis was based  on absent immune response to 12 pneumococcal serotypes and  
P0004 . Dominantly inherited progressive pseudorheumatoid  hepatitis B vaccine and on the inability to break down red cells with  dysplasia with hypoplastic metatarsals isoagglutinin B. Therapy with intravenous IgG was initiated. Infections  were less severe, although still occurred in the similar frequency  O. MaĹ\x91kov\x861, I. A. MaĹ\x91k2, M. F. J. Kukl\x91k1, K. S. Kozlowski3, D. Zemkov\x861;  after initiation of the IVIG therapy. This Ünding prompts the need for  1Ambulant Centre for Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague, Czech  a higher index of suspicion for an underlying immunodeÜciency in  Republic, 2Ambulance Centre for Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague,  patients with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome who present with recurrent  Czech Republic, 3Dept. of Radiology, New Childrenªs Hospital, Westmead NSW  and chronic infections. Early recognition and appropriate therapeutic  2145, Sydney, Australia. interventions may decrease severity of infections, prevent potentially  We present four related patients with Progressive Pseudorheumatoid  fatal infections and eventually improve the quality of life in these  Dysplasia(PPsRD) each with distinctive history, unique phenotype  patients. and some peculiar radiographic Ündings. The history was  characterised by weather dependent articular pain. The unique  
P0002 . Detection of novel notch3 mutations by DGGE and direct  phenotypic features were hypoplasia/dysplasia of one or two toes.  sequencing in patients with CADASIL Peculiar radiographic Ündings were hypoplasia of 3rd and 4th  H. Gabriel, A. Staab, A. Gencik;  metatarsals, platyspondyly with rectangular shape of the lumbar  spinal canal, progressive narrowing of the joint spaces and early  Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany. synovial chondromatosis. Finally, the condition was inherited as  CADASIL syndrome (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy  a dominant trait. This constellation of abnormalities constitutes  with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) is a hereditary  a distinct form of PPsRD. PPsRD must be differenciated from  autosomal disorder which is caused by mutations in the notch3  other bone dysplasias speciÜcally spondyloepiphyseal dysplasias,  gene. The disease is characterized by recurrent ischemic episodes,  autosomal dominant spondylarthropathy, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis  migraine with aura, progressive subcortical dementia and early onset  and osteoarthritis. strokes. Due to clustering of notch3 mutations in exon3 and 4 screening  
P0005 . Familial hypodontia associated with supernumerary  protocols mainly focused on detection of missense mutation in these  teeth: a genetic link? exons. Therefore standard procedures miss 30-40 % of notch3  mutations . To achieve higher sensitivity we established a DGGE- E. Severin, L. Boboc;  screening protocol for detection of mutations in all exons of the  ÐCarol DavilaÑ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. notch3 gene. Congenitally missing teeth and teeth formed in excess are opposite  Up to now we were able to detect 13 mutations/polymorphisms in our  tooth number anomalies. A concomitant occurence of hypodontia and  ongoing screening. One mutation (
C402 Y) was a novel nucleotide  hyperdontia in the same dentition is a quite rare dental phenotype in  change leading to a cysteine to tryptophan amino acid change in  man. As an isolated trait, both hypodontia and supernumerary teeth  the EGF-like domain. In one family, we identiÜed a novel cysteine to  have a genetic basis, but can also be caused by disturbances during  serine mutation (
C449 S). tooth development. The genetic etiology of concomitant hypodontia  Additionally, we found a novel splice site mutation (IV
S6 ds+5G>A)  and hyperdontia generates much debate. The aim of our study  in a 59 year old patient who was originally thought to present with  was to investigate the genetic cause of hypodontia associated with  multiple sclerosis. A skin biopsy was tested positive for CADASIL. So  ÐextraÑ teeth because a genetic link was suspected. In a sample of 76  far, this is the second report of a disease-causing splice site mutation  patients with familial hypodontia we analyzed dental phenotype and  of the human notch3-gen. the inheritance pattern of the condition. Three cases were selected  Our preliminary data indicate that DGGE is a highly sensitive  based on their distinct clinical phenotypic association: simultaneous  screening method for CADASIL diagnosis. Our results underline the  presence of hypodontia and supernumerary teeth in the permanent  importance of a screening program, which is capable to detect notch3  dentition. Intraoral and radiographic examinations were performed.  mutations in all exons. Index cases have shown variability in expression of clinical  manifestations including the type, number and location of affected  
P0003 . Androgen insensitiviy syndrome teeth. Family studies of the index cases have shown an autosomal- M. Omrani, F. Azizi-Malamiri, S. Saleh-gargari;  dominant manner of inheritance with lack of penetrance and variable  expression for hypodontia. Only index cases expressed both tooth  Mottahary hospital, Uromieh, Iran (Islamic Republic of). number defects.Our data suggested that hypodontia is aetiologically  The androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is the single most  distinct from supernumerary teeth and the dental anomalies  common cause of male pseduohermaphroditism, i.e., deÜcient  association is coincidental. More cases showing similar phenotypes  masculinization which is not explained by disturbed testis  will be required to permit deÜnitive conclusions. development. In its most severe form it affects at least 1/20 000  newborn 46XY males. This X-linked recessive disorder is caused by Clinical genetics 83 
P0006 . Four potassium channel mutations account for 73% of  GYN, National Cheng-Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of  the genetic spectrum underlying long QT syndrome (LQTS) and  China. provide evidence for a strong founder effect in Finland Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a relatively common genetic  H. M. Fodstad1, H. Swan2, P. Laitinen1, K. Piippo1, K. Paavonen1, M. Viitasalo2,  disorder characterized by distinctive facial appearance, vascular  L. Toivonen2, K. Kontula1;  stenoses, growth retardation, mild mental deÜciency, characteristic  personality proÜle, and some other physical and behavioral  1Department of Medicine and Research Program in Molecular Medicine,  abnormalities. It occurs in ~1 of every 20,000 births. We herein  University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Cardiology, University  report on one 4-year-10-month-old male patient with this syndrome,  of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. whichÓs conÜrmed by FISH study using the digoxigenin-labeled  Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited arrhythmic disorder  Oncor WBSCR probe containing the elastin gene. He also has a  characterized by a prolonged QT interval on ECG, ventricular  very rare pulmonary anomaly, i.e. bilateral intralobar pulmonary  arrhythmias and risk of sudden death. Mutations in Üve cardiac  sequestration and horseshoe lung which is correlated with congenital  voltage-gated ion channel genes, including KCNQ1, HERG,  pulmonary venolobar syndrome (CPVS). We raise the question  SCN5A, KCN
E1  and KCN
E2 , constitute the principal cause of this  of the relation between WBS and CPVS, and suggest a possible  disorder. Typically, each family carries its own private mutation,  association between the two. There are at least 17 genes identiÜed  and the disease manifests with varying phenotype and incomplete  in the WBSCR and neighboring region at 17q11.2, most of them are  penetrance, even within particular families. We had previously  not clariÜed with their functions. The report of this case brings up  identiÜed 14 different LQTS-causing mutations in 92 Finnish families.  an additional argument for related vascular and bronchopulmonary  In the present study, we conducted a systematic search for mutations  abnormalities or interaction with growth defect in the pathogenesis of  in the Üve LQTS genes among 188 additional unrelated probands.  WBS. The screening was performed by denaturing high-performance liquid  chromatography (dHPLC) and DNA sequencing. Nineteen novel  
P0009 . X-linked Dominant Chondrodysplasia with hydrocephaly and 12 previously described mutations were identiÜed. Collectively,  these data extend the number of molecularly deÜned affected Finnish  D. Lacombe1, N. Chassaing1, D. Carles1, A. Delezo\x94de2, B. Gilbert3, R. Saura1;  LQTS families and patients at present to 150 and 939, respectively.  1CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU Robert Debr\x8d, Paris, France, 3CHU  Four presumable founder mutations (KCNQ1 G589D and IV
S7 - Limoges, Limoges, France. 2A>G, HERG R176W and 
L552 S) together account for as much  We describe a family with an X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia.  as 73% of all established Finnish LQTS cases. In conclusion, the  Four males and six females are affected through four generations.  extent of genetic homogeneity underlying LQTS in Finland is unique  IdentiÜcation of skeletal anomalies and hydrocephaly during  in the whole world, providing a major advantage for screening and  the pregnancy of three male fetuses led to termination of the  presymptomatic diagnosis of LQTS, and constituting an excellent  pregnancies. A fourth affected male died at 6 days of life. The four  basis to study the role of genetic and nongenetic factors inÝuencing  children had chondrodysplasia, hydrocephaly and facial dysmorphism  phenotypic variability in this disease. with microphthalmia. X-rays showed severe platyspondyly and  various bone anomalies with a particular cupuliform shape of the  
P0007 . 22 Cases with Williams Beuren Syndrome : Clinical  phalanges. The carrier females are less affected and have a small  Ündings and management guidelines stature, sometimes associated with hemihypertrophy and mild mental  S. Balci, S. Ozer, C. Tumer, B. Boke, M. Alikasifoglu;  retardation. This condition appears to represent a new X-linked  dominant chondrodysplasia. Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. Williams Beuren Syndrome is characterized by typical facial  
P0010 . Tuberous sclerosis in large pedigree with variable  appearance (elÜn face), cardiac malformations, mental retardation  expression and infantile hypercalcaemia caused by submicroscopic chromosome  deletion that includes the elastin gene at 7q 11.23. Clinical and  M. Massoudi, M. Habibi Roudkenar, F. RishseÜd Zenozi, S. Shreghi, M.  laboratory Ündings of 22 patients with Williams Beuren Syndrome  Sarhadi;  which were followed at Hacettepe University Dept. of Pediatrics  Deputy of welfar , Tehran province, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). Genetic Unit between 1983 and 2003, were reviewed. Characterized  A25 years old woman was referred to genetic clinic because of a  facial Ündings and developmental delay were found at 96%, mental  skin disorder. She had hypomelanic macules in abdomen and lumbar  retardation and dental anomalies at 86%, behavioral disorders at  region, a small angiÜbroma, a skin tag on the back of the neck and  77%, cardiac malformations (supravalvular aortic stenosis was the  axillary. In addition she had psychological and behavioral problems.  most common) at 41%, conductive hearing loss at 33%, central  These symptoms had Ürst been noted at 12 years of age. A skin  nervous system malformations at 31%, infantile hypercalcaemia at  biopsy conÜrmed the diagnosis of T.S. Drawing of the pedigree  4% of the patients. Deletion of 7q11.23 region was detected at all  demonstrated that another 20 cases were present in the family with  of the nine patients whom analysis of FISH had been performed.  a variable degree of skin abnormality, epilepsy, depression, suicide,  Evaluation of dental problems of patients showed the most common  clonic seizures, shagreen patch, behavorial and psychological  features are malocculusion size and shape anomalies. Also in one  problems, mental retardation and learning disability. T.S is inherited  patient a talon cusp was observed in the mandibular incisor tooth. as an autosomal dominant with variable expression and locus  Early recognition of Williams Beuren Syndrome is very difÜcult  heterogeneity. There are major and minor features in T.S. Major  because development of clinical Ündings is progressive.  features are facial angioÜbroma or forehead plaque, hypomelanic  Understanding of genotypes-phenotypes relationship of Williams  macules, shagreen patch, subependimal nodules, and epilepsy. The  Beuren Syndrome will supply new methods of early diagnosis and  most important minor feature is dental pits. Approximately 60-70%  pre / postnatal treatment. We have reviewed the published literature  of cases are due to new mutation. In our family, the origin of the  and reevaluated the diagnostic and management guidelines of  mutation was in one of the mothers grandparents. Mutations in two  this syndrome. We conclude that clinical use of these guidelines  genes, TS
C1  and TS
C2  are responsible for 70% cases of T.S. is important both for the treatment and rehabilitation of the current  problems and preventing of the complications. 
P0011 . Gapo Syndrome:Ürst Report Of Two Cases In Iran R. Varsei, M. Shariati, A. Bahramshahi, M. Mosavizade;  
P0008 . Williams-Beuren Syndrome and Congenital Pulmonary  Behzisti Medical Genetic Counseling Center, Qom, Iran (Islamic Republic of). Venolobar Syndrome: A Coincidental Finding or True  Association? GAPO syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder. The  primary signs of this syndrome are as follows: Growth retardation,  J. L. Yen1, S. P. Lin2, M. R. Chen2, P. L. Kuo3;  Alopecia totalis, Pseudodentia and Optic atrophy. GAPO syndrome  1Dept. of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital and Taipei Municipal WomanÒs  was Ürst reported in 1947 and 24 cases have been diagnosed by the  and ChildrenÒs Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Dept of Pediatrics,  year 2000. Here we report a 21 year-old male with additional signs  Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Dept of OBS/ including peculiar facial appearance, proportionate short stature, Clinical genetics 84 frontal bossing, keratoconus, prominent eyes, anteverted nares,  at birth. Proband aged about 6 had some distinctive features that  prominent /everted lower lip, prominent upper lip etc. The parents of  were typical for Beals syndrome: his length was 127cm (97centile),  the reported case are Ürst cousins and they have another daughter  his weight was 22.5kg (50centile), Marfanoid habitus, frontal bossing,  with this syndrome in their family. small mandible, crumpled ears, high-arched palate, pectus carinatum,  arachnodactyly and camptodactyly, Ýexion contractures of proximal  
P0012 . Trigonencephaly, Variable Limb Anomalies, Cutis Laxa: A  interphalangeal joints and multiple joint contractures. Spina biÜda  new Autosomal Recessive Syndrome? posterior displastica 
S1  and spina biÜda posterior occulta 
L5  were  N. A. Al-SannaÒa1, M. A. Al-Khunaizi2, A. S. Teebi3;  shown on X-ray Ülms. Orthopedics operations were accomplished  at the proband age of 9mo, 3yr, 4yr and 5.5yr. Our proband and  1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahrab, Saudi Arabia, 2Dhahran Health Center,  his father are very much alike, but father has milder phenotype:  Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 3The Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. Marfanoid habitus, frontal bossing, crumpled ears, myopia (-4), mild  Here we report two Saudi Arab brothers born to a phenotypically  Ýexion contractures of proximal interphalangeal joints. We suppose  normal Ürst cousins couple. Both displayed a very characteristic  to diagnose Beals syndrome for our proband and his father. It is very  clinical manifestations including trigonencephaly caused by  important to have a chance of molecular investigation for correct  premature closure of the metapoic suture, narrowing of coronal  diagnosis and genetic counseling. sutures, variable limb defects (cutaneous syndactyly, pre-axial  polydactyly, and brachydactyly), cutis laxa, and developmental  
P0015 . Hereditary deafness and palmoplantar keratoderma  delay. The karyotype on the amniotic Ýuid on the Ürst child showed  associated to the A7445G mtDNA mutation in a Portuguese  a balanced reciprocal (46, XY,t(2;6)(p15;q23). However, the second  family childÓs karyotype was normal on the amniotic Ýuid. The parentÓs  H. Caria1,2, T. Matos1, R. Oliveira-Soares3, A. Santos4, I. Galhardo4, L. Soares- chromosomal study on the blood lymphocytes was normal. We  Almeida3, ì. Dias4, M. Andrea4, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1;  believe the constellation of anomalies in this family most likely  represent a new autosomal recessive disorder. 1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon,  Portugal, 24Higher School of Health, Polytechnic Institut of Set\x9bbal, Set\x9bbal,  
P0013 . Binder syndrome associated with maternal biliary  Portugal, 3University Clinic of Dermatology, HSM, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Center of  lithiasis in early pregnancy: a possible role for vitamin K  ORL, HSM, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. deÜciency. Over the last several years, some forms of sensorineural hearing loss  J. Jaillet1, E. Robert-Gnansia2, M. Till1, D. Boggio1, P. Edery1;  have been found to be associated with mutations in mitochondrial  DNA (mtDNA). However, dermatoses associated to mitochondrial  1Medical Genetics Unit, Lyon, France, 2European Genomutations Institute,  mutations are rare. Non-epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma  Lyon, France. (NEPPK) refers to a keratinization disorder characterized by  Binder syndrome is a maxillonasal dysplasia characterized by  hyperkeratosis on the palms and soles without epidermolysis.  midfacial hypoplasia, lack of anterior nasal spine, and malocclusion,  Mitochondrial DNA A7445G point mutation in the tRNASer(UCN)  associated in some patients with short terminal phalanges of Üngers  gene has been shown to be responsible for familial NEPPK  and toes and radiologic features of chondrodysplasia punctata. It has  associated to deafness, without any additional features.To date, just a  been suggested (Howe et al, Am J Med Genet. 1995;58:238-44, Am  few cases have been described. J Med Genet. 1997;71:391-6) that vitamin K-deÜciency during human  We report a Portuguese pedigree presenting an inherited  pregnancy can be caused by the therapeutic use of warfarin or  combination of NEPPK and sensorineural deafness compatible  phenytoin, causing abnormal development of the cartilaginous nasal  with maternal transmission. Clinical expression and age of onset of  septum. It was proposed (Howe et al, Teratology. 1992;46:379-90),  NEPPK and deafness were variable. All affected members have Ürst  on the basis of a rat model, that the septal growth retardation occurs  been screened for GJB2 mutations with negative results. Molecular  because the drug-induced extrahepatic vitamin K deÜciency prevents  analysis then focused on mtDNA A7445G point mutation. Screening  the normal formation of the vitamin K-dependent protein (Bone  for this mutation was performed by amplifying a 215 bp fragment  gla Protein) in the embryo. We report what is, to our knowledge,  followed by digestion with XbaI. The ampliÜed fragment looses a  the Ürst published observation of a child with facial and distal limb  XbaI restriction site in the presence of A7445G mutation, therefore  characteristics of Binder syndrome, whose mother was operated  only DNA not containing the mutation is cleaved. Restriction analysis  upon for biliary lithiasis in early pregnancy. Because of hyperemesis  showed that XbaI site was absent in all the affected members of  this mother was hospitalized at 13 weeks of pregnancy and a  the family revealing the presence of the mutation in homoplasmy.  biological screening revealed a prothrombin time at 27%, a decrease  Bidirectional sequencing of puriÜed PCR products conÜrmed the A  in clotting factors II, VII, and X, while factor V was at 162%. These  to G substitution. The mutation was absent in 386 individuals of the  are indications of vitamin K deÜciency. Abdominal ultrasonography  control sample. To our knowledge, this is the Üfth family described  revealed several biliary lithiases and the mother was operated at 18  where this type of NEPPK is caused by the mutation A7445G. weeks of pregnancy. We suggest that this biliary lithiasis-induced  vitamin K deÜciency, like anticonvulsant- or warfarin-induced vitamin  
P0016 . Cases of rare sex chromosomesÒ anomalies K deÜciency might have caused abnormal development of the  M. Sumina, N. Nikitina, V. Sorokina;  cartilaginous nasal septum and distal phalanges in this child. Medical genetic center, Ekatherinburg, Russian Federation. 
P0014 . Genetic counselling of the family with a proband with  We observed two cases of abnormality of sex chromosomes.  Beals syndrome Karyotypes were similar. They were mosaic and the Ürst clone was  E. L. Katsanda1, O. E. Agranovich1, S. I. Prokopovich1, A. B. Oreshkov1, S. I.  45,X in both cases, the second clone was 46,Xidic(Y) in one case,  Goliana1, M. O. Mkheidze2;  and 47,XYY in another case. But phenotypical expression differed in  this cases. 1ScientiÜc research institute of pediatric ortopaedy named after H.I. Turner,  First proband was a 12-years old girl. She was consulted because  Pushkin, Russian Federation, 2Medical Academy for Postgraduate Education,  of short stature and retarded puberty. There were no similar cases in  St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. the pedigree. Short stature was observed from the early childhood.  Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA, Beals syndrome,  The common phenotypic features of Turner syndrome were revealed:  MIM121050) is a rare disease with autosomal dominant type of  proportional short stature, palpebral Üssures slant up, epicanthic  inheritance. The proband with CCA and his parents are under our  folds, short webbed neck, low posterior hairline, broad thorax, wide- observation. Proband was born after the Ürst pregnancy to a 21-yr- spaced nipples. IQ was normal. Genitalia was formed as female, but  old female and 25-yr-old male by spontaneous vaginal delivery. His  mild hypertrophy of clitoris and hyperpigmentation were presented.  parents are nonconsanguineous. This pregnancy was complicated  Sonography showed the absent uterus and streak ovaries highly  with early and late toxemia and direct contact with chickenpox patient  situated in the pelvis. Elevated gonadotropins were found. Cytogenetic  at 8 weeks. Proband birth weight was 2850 (25centile). His length  analysis revealed mosaic abnormality of sex chromosomes: 45,X/ was 50cm (25centile). Multiple dysmorphic features were observed  46,Xidic (Y)(p1.1). The parentsÒ karyotypes were normal.Clinical genetics 85 Another patient was a 1-year old child, had been registered as a  
P0019 . Mutations in Caveolin-3 gene causing different  male at a birth. The reason of consultation was ambiquous type of  phenotypes genitalia. It was a sporadic case in the pedigree. He was the only  L. Al\x91as1, E. Gallardo2, M. Oliv\x8d3, A. Freixas1, L. Casellas2, M. J. Rodr\x91guez1, I.  child from the pregnancy complicated with toxicosis . His parents  Illa2, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1;  were young and healthy. He had urogenital sinus, signiÜcant  1Genetics Dept, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurology Dept,  hypertrophy of clitoris, formed as a penis, enlarged labia, surrounded  Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neuropathology Dept, Hospital de  the clitoris. Testes were not palpated. Sonography revealed an  Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. uterus. Gonades were not visualized. The child had proportional  Caveolin-3 is the skeletal and cardiac muscle-speciÜc protein of  short stature. No other dismorphological features were revealed. The  the caveolin gene family and the major component of the caveolae  karyotype was 45,X/47,XYY. complex. Mutations in the CAV-3 gene cause Limb girdle muscular  dystrophy type 1 (LGMD1C), Rippling muscle disease (RMD), Distal  
P0017 . Exclusion of NOG as the cause of medial talus-calcaneus  Myopathy and Hypercekemia. We report 3 families presenting  coalition with short stature: Genetic heterogenity in Tarsal- LGMD1C, 1 family suffering from RMD, 1 family with Distal Myopathy  Carpal Coalition syndrome (TCC). and 2 families with Familial Isolated Hypercekemia. The evaluation  K. W. Kjaer1, H. Eiberg2, N. Tommerup1;  of the patients was performed with clinical examination, EMG  1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen N,  measurement and serum CK analysis. Denmark, 2Dept. of Medical Genetics, Copenhagen N, Denmark. Muscular biopsies from the patients were analysed by  Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome (TCC) is an autosomal dominant  immunohystochemistry and Western blot with antibodies against  disorder characterized by fusion of the carpals, tarsals, and  dystrophin and dysferlin (Novocastra Laboratories), and caveolin-3  phalanges; short Ürst metacarpals causing brachydactyly; and  (BD Transduction laboratories, Lexington). Caveolin-3 was reduced in  humeroradial fusion (MIM 186570). The OMIM entry includes medial  the immunohistochemical and Western blot studies whereas dysferlin  talus-calcaneus coalition with short stature, reported in a Danish  was reduced in the immunohistochemical analysis but normal in  family (Gregersen and Petersen, 1977). We have retraced the family  Western blot. and updated the pedigree. Re-examination of the family conÜrms  We sequenced the two exons of the CAV-3 gene using the primers  the initial clinical data reported, and full penetrance. Mutations in the  and conditions described by Minetti et al. To date, A G ŗ A transition  NOG gene in TCC patients have shown that the condition is allelic  at nucleotide position 169 in exon 2 in the CAV-3 gene, generating  to Proximal Symphalangism (MIM 185800) (Dixon et al., 2001), but  a Valŗ Met change at 57 codon (V57M) of the aminoacide chain in  direct sequencing did not reveal any mutations in this family. The  heterozygous state was detected in one of the families affected by  absence of proximal symphalangism or hearing loss in our family  isolated hypercekemia. prompted us to test markers Ýanking NOG, which showed that a  The fact of the existence of clinical heterogeneity associated to  common haplotype is not shared by affected family members. A  CAV-3 gene mutations could be due to the speciÜc alterated protein  genome wide scan is now being performed. We conclude that TCC is  domain. Nevertheless, there are a few mutations described in that  genetically heterogenous, and further families should be included in a  gene to conclude about phenotype-genotype correlations. future mutation screening effort. Gregersen HN, Petersen GB. Congenital malformation of the feet  
P0020 . Tar syndrom with low body height: a new syndrome, caused by an autosomal  B. Bozorgmehr;  dominant gene. Clin. Genet. 12: 255-262, 1977. Shahid Beheshti Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). Dixon ME, Armstrong P, Stevens DB, Bamshad M. Identical  Tar syndrome is considered to be an autosomal recessive trait.  mutations in NOG can cause either tarsal/carpal coalition syndrome  The cardinal clinical features are thrombocytopenia (usually with  or proximal symphalangism. Genet. Med. 3: 349-353, 2001. symptoms in the newborn period) and bilateral absence of the radius  with the presence of both thumbs. 
P0018 . New cases of autosomal recessive Silver-Russell  The thrombocytopenia is congenital and hypomegakaryocytic.Th syndrome rombocytopenia gradually improves over the Ürst two years, and  E. Meyer1, C. Obermann1, E. Korsch2, H. A. Wollmann3, T. Eggermann1;  platelets may even be in a normal range in adulthood. Viral illness,  1Institute of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Childrenªs Hospital, Cologne,  particularly gastrointestinal viral illness, will often aggravate the  Germany, 3University Childrenªs Hospital, T\x9ebingen, Germany. thrombocytopenia. Silver-Russell syndrome is a heterogeneous malformation syndrome  The radius is absent bilaterally in all cases. Anomalies of legs  characterised by severe intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation.  and hips are seen. Congenital cardiac abnormalities are seen in  SRS patients show a small triangular face, relative macrocephaly,  one-third of cases, the most frequent being tetralogy of Fallot and  asymmetry of head and limbs, clinodactyly V and other less constant  septal defects. Complications are related to thrombocytopenia and  features. In 7-10% of patients maternal uniparental disomy (UPD)  symptomatic bleeding. In the past, death occurred before one year  of chromosome 7 can be determined. In other cases different  of age in 35% to 40% of patients, mostly because of intracranial  chromosomal rearrangements have been observed, but no common  bleeding. This could be preventable by proper platelet transfusion.  type of aberration can be identiÜed. However only chromosomes  Patients seem to have an increased incidence of allergy to cowÒs  7 and 17 have been consistently implicated in these cases. The  milk. majority of cases of SRS are sporadic, occasionally a familial  The differential diagnosis includes Holt-oram syndrome, Nager  occurence with autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X-linked  syndrome, pseudothalidomide syndrome and Fanconi anemia.  inheritance is reported. Prenatal diagnosis can be made by ultra sound demonstration of  Here we report on three families with two or three affected individuals  absence of the radius and cordocentesis for platelet counts have  indicating an autosomal recessive transmission of the disease. The  resulted in accurate prenatal diagnosis. families were ascertained as part of our ongoing studies on genetic  Our case was a 4 month infant who died because physician was  causes of SRS. For these families linkage for the chromosomal  unable to offer appropriate management. He had absent radius,  regions were carried out for which an involvement in SRS etiology  clubfoot, clubwrist, DDH , and ASD. No check was made of the CBC  has been hypothesized. While other loci could be excluded, data  and the patient died because of intracranial hemorrhage. are compatible with linkage for the microsatellite marker D7
S500   in 7q33 for all three families, a region which has been described to  
P0021 . Synostosis of metacarpals IV and V: a diagnostic  be affected by segmental UPD. Further analyses on SRS candidate  challenge genes will be focused on this area. E. Prott1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, F. Majewski2, P. Meinecke3;  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, D\x9es- seldorf, Germany, 3Medizinische Genetik, Hamburg, Germany. Metacarpal synostosis (MS) IV-V may represent one anomaly among Clinical genetics 86 others in several malformation syndromes, e.g. Apert syndrome, TAR  methylation analysis to uncover the change in methylation pattern,  syndrome or FFU complex. On the other hand, non-syndromic cases,  which is present in cases of deletion, UPD and IM. Out of 34 children  uni- or bilateral, not only show genetic heterogeneity (autosomal  with suspected PWS only methylated maternal locus was detected  dominant versus X-linked recessive inheritance) but also marked  in 10 (30,3 %) children, 9 had microdeletions ~4Mb (FISH). In 1  clinical variability hampering a correct diagnostic classiÜcation. case the maternal heterodisomy was found and conÜrmed by STR  We report a total of 6 patients from 3 families. Clinically, the three  analysis. Out of 10 AS suspected patients 1 showed inheritance of  index cases show the characteristic MS IV-V with hypoplastic and  paternal unmethylated locus only. In this case the paternal isodisomy  abducted 5th Ünger and concomitant cutaneous syndactylies of  was prooved by STR analysis. Üngers and toes. Partial duplication of the ring Ünger in the daughter  Three families were provided by prenatal FISH test to exclude  of typically affected index patient 2 allows further subclassiÜcation  microdeletion in the fetus. (Kemp-Ravn type). The index patient 3 presented with bilateral  We performed molecular examinations aimed at loci of concern in  V-shaped MS IV-V while her paternal grandmother and her son  three cases with cytogenetic visible aberration of chromosome 15. demonstrated non-characteristic Ündings only. This strikingly wide  ConÜrmed PWS patients are provided by growth hormone therapy  range of manifestations can be a challenge with regard to the  which can alleviate many of the somatic morbidities associated with  diagnostic classiÜcation including appropriate genetic counselling and  this condition. may also explain apparent non-penetrance and ásporadicÐ occurrence  in several families reported. 
P0024 . Clinical variability in a large family with Waardenburg  syndrome type 1 carrying a splice site mutation within the PAX3  
P0022 . Congenital Heart Defects In Down Syndrome:  gene Investigation Of Prevalance And Importance Of Diagnostic  A. Kujat, V. P. Veith, U. G. Froster;  Methods In 356 Patients. Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany. B. \x84zt\x9erk, B. T\x9eys\x9ez, L. Saltòk;  Waardenburg syndrome type 1 (WS 1) is an autosomal dominant  Istanbul University, ĕstanbul, Turkey. disorder causing congenital deafness. At present it is considered to  We investigated the prevalence, classiÜcation and the diagnostic  be the most frequent cause of congenital sensorineural deafness  value of physical examination and echocardiography of congenital  in humans. Mutations within the PAX3 gene are responsible for the  heart disease in 356 children with Down syndrome (206 male,  clinical phenotype. Here we represent a four generation family with  150 female) aged between 1 day-8 years. All patients with Down  multiple affected members showing various symptoms of WS who  syndrome followed up in our clinic were included in this prospective  did not suffer from hearing impairment. The phenotype showed a  study. 30% of the patients were admitted during the newborn  wide intra-familial clinical variability of pigmentary disturbances, facial  period and 48.6% were admitted during 1-6 months period. All  features and developmental defects. The primary diagnosis was  patient.s, either with or without a cardiac murmur, were suggested  made within the scope of prenatal diagnosis of a spina biÜda in an  echocardiogram individually. However, only 72% of the patients could  affected fetus. Molecular studies identiÜed a novel splice site mutation  be evaluated with an echocardiogram. within the PAX3 gene in intron 5 in all affected family members. We  The prevalence of congenital heart disease in our patients were  assume, that this particular splice site mutation IV
S5 +2 T>C may be  43.5% ; 31.6% of the patients had atrioventricular septal defect  not associated with hearing loss in Waardenburg patients. (AVSD), 25.1% ventricular septal defect (VSD), and 22.6% atriyal  septal defect (ostium secundum). Female infants with DownÓs  
P0025 . Mutations of the TBX5 gene in patients with Holt-Oram  syndrome had increased risk for CHD (p<0.05). However; there was  syndrome no statistical relationship between advanced maternal age and the  W. Heinritz1, A. Kujat1, S. Spranger2, H. Heilbronner3, S. Demuth4, A. Bier5, M.  presence of CHD. Tihanyi6, S. Mundlos7, C. Gruenauer-Kloevekorn8, U. G. Froster1;  Sixteen patients had normal physical examination but an abnormal  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Private  echocardiogram; 9 patients had ASD secundum, 2 had isolated VSD,  Practice of Human Genetics, Bremen, Germany, 3Olga Hospital, Stuttgart,  2 had inlet VSD and one had pulmoner stenosis. We noticed that  Germany, 4Private Practice of Human Genetics, Erfurt, Germany, 5University of  these defects were not serious cardiopathies. Technology, Dresden, Germany, 6Zala County Hospital, Zalaegerszeg, Hungary,  In conclusion; every patient with DS should have cardiac evaluation  7Institute of Medical Genetics at the Charite - Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germa- including the echocardiographical examination, especially during  ny, 8Dept. of Ophthalmology at the Martin-Luther-University, Halle, Germany. the newborne period. However; in cases when echocardiographical  Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM #142900, McKusick 1986) is a rare  examination can not be performed due to economical and social  autosomal dominant inherited disorder involving developmental  reasons, the patients may be followed with physical examination  defects of the heart and upper limbs. Main symptoms are variable  Ündings, electrocardiography and telecardiography beyond the  cardiac malformations, most of them septation deÜciencies and  newborn period. defects of the thumb and radius. The disorder is associated with  mutations in the TBX5 gene which plays an important role in the  
P0023 . Molecular-genetic testing in the group of patients  morphogenesis of heart and limbs in vertebrates. To date there  suspected of Prader-Willi (PWS) and Angelman (AS) Syndromes. are 34 different pathogenic point mutations in the TBX5 gene  P. Capkova1, R. Vrtel1, A. Santava1, J. Zapletalova1, J. Hyjanek1, J. Krsiakova2,  published but the relationship between genotype and phenotype still  J. Santavy1;  remains unclear. We report the results of mutation analysis by direct  1University Hospital of Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic,  automated sequencing of the entire coding region of TBX5 including  2Martin University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia. intronic boundaries in 42 patients with phenotype of Holt-Oram  Prader-Willi Syndrome is characterized by infantile hypotonia,  syndrome. Phenotype analysis in these patients (13 familial and 29  hypogonadism, psychomotoric retardation and obesity.Angelman  sporadic cases) demonstrates a high intra- and interfamilial variability.  Syndrome is disorder with developmental delay, severe speech  In 11/42 (26%) patients (3 familial and 8 sporadic cases) we could  impairment, gait ataxia and tremulouseness of the limbs and unique  identify a sequence alteration in TBX5, that is possibly predicted to  behavior. Both disorders are caused by loss of paternally (PWS)  cause the disease. There was no missense-mutation in our cohort.  or maternally (AS) derived gene expression of chromosome region  Eight of these mutations are novel mutations, not described before.  15q11-q13. Five mutations result in a truncated protein product and two are  As the most prevealing cause of these disorders is microdeletion  located in intronic splice sites and are most likely of pathogenic  15q11-q13 (70 %) the Ýuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) is  importance. Another mutation (3Ó-UTR +40 A>G), that has been detec- powerful tool for its diagnoses. The testing should by completed by  ted in two non-consanginous patients, has an yet unknown effect  molecular analysis of DNA to exclude uniparental disomy (UPD),  on the predicted gene product. With our results we can upgrade the  imprinting mutations (IM) and mutations at UB
E3 A locus in cases of  number of mutations in TBX5 in HOS patients and further contribute to  suspected AS. the understanding the pathogenesis of Holt-Oram syndrome. In cohort of 44 individuals suspected of PWS and AS, we used DNA Clinical genetics 87 
P0026 . Molecular genetic and clinical survey of Finnish families  consequtively: congenital epilepsy, congenital cataract, colobomas  with dominant optic atrophy (DOA) with vermis aplasia, complex cyanotic heart malformation and Bartter  A. Puomila1,2, R. Paananen1, P. H\x89m\x89l\x89inen1, M. M\x89ntyj\x89rvi1, E. Sankila3, M.  syndrome with diabetes mellitus. Somer4, M. Savontaus1, E. Nikoskelainen1, K. Huoponen1;  
P0029 . Variation of X inactivation pattern in different tissues in  1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku Graduate School of Biomedical  women aged 19-90 years Sciences, Turku, Finland, 3Helsinki University Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland,  G. P. S. Knudsen1, J. Pedersen1, I. Lygren2, K. H. ®rstavik1;  4Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland. Several linkage studies localise dominant optic atrophy (DOA) to  1Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2Ullev\x8bl hospital, Oslo, Norway. chromosome 3 (3q28) and mutations in the OPA1 gene encoding a  The majority of normal females have a random distribution of the X  large mitochondrially located dynamin-related GTPase protein have  inactivation pattern (XIP). A skewed XIP may arise due to chance,  been detected in DOA patients. We have screened all 30 coding  genetic factors or a selection against or in favour of cells with a  OPA1 exons and exon-intron boundaries from 14 Finnish DOA  speciÜc genotype. The frequency of skewed XIP increases with age  families by direct sequencing. In ten out of 14 families (71%), eight  in blood, but the effect of age on XIP in other tissues or the tissue  pathogenic mutations have been identiÜed. Three families share  variation of XIP is not established. We investigated XIP in blood,  the same mutation as well as a common haplotype surrounding the  buccal smear and duodenal biopsies from 92 females aged 19-90  OPA1 region suggesting that they most probably have a common  years after informed consent. The correlation between X inactivation  ancestor. The other mutations are restricted to one family only,  and age was 0.200 for blood (p=0.056), 0.243 for buccal smear  as seen in other populations. Various types of mutations were found Î  (p=0.02) and 0.003 for duodenal biopsies (p=0.979). The XIP was  missense, nonsense, and splice site mutations and a small deletion.  signiÜcantly correlated between all tissues (0.528 -0.798, p<0.001).  As there seems to be no clear mutational hotspot in the OPA1 gene,  The frequency of skewed XIP (²80:20) was signiÜcantly higher in  simple rapid DNA testing can be offered only to those families where  blood (22%) than in buccal smear (7%) and duodenal biopsies (0%)  the mutation is known. The penetrance of DOA in our family cohort  (p<0.001) in the elderly females (> 50 years) but not in the younger  was slightly reduced. No clear genotype-phenotype correlation could  females (± 50) (frequencies 9%, 3% and 0% respectively). Our  be assigned but intra- and inter-familial variability in the clinical  results demonstrate a high correlation of XIP between the tissues, a  outcome was noticeable. higher frequency of skewed XIP in blood in elderly females and an  apparent effect of age on XIP in blood and buccal smear, but not in  
P0027 . Further evidence of genetic heterogeneity in Autosomal  the duodenal biopsies. Under the assumption that mitotic activity is  Dominant Distal Motor Neuronopathy lower in duodenal biopsies than the other tissues, the results indicate  A. Magariello1, M. Muglia1, L. Passamonti2, M. Bellesi2, F. L. Conforti1, R.  that selection may cause the increase in skewed X inactivation with  Mazzei1, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, T. Sprovieri1, G. Peluso1, C. Ungaro1, M.  age. Caracciolo1, E. Medici2, F. Logullo2, L. Provinciali2, A. Quattrone1,3;  
P0030 . Chromosome 3 In The Genetic Clinic 1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Piano Lago di Mangone, Cosenza,  Italy, 2Institute of Neurological Sciences, Ospedale Regionale ÐTorretteÑ,  B. G. Kousseff;  University Ancona, Ancona, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University ÐMagna  University of South Florida Regional Genetics Program, Tampa, FL, United  GraeciaÑ, Catanzaro, Italy. States. Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy (distal HMN) is a genetically  Between 1/2/81 and 12/31/02 through busy (2002 patient volume  and clinically heterogeneous disorder. To date three loci have been  2,797) prenatal and pediatric genetics clinics at the University of  identiÜed on chromosomes 7p14, 9q34 and 12q24.We describe  South Florida 42,795 probands/families were evaluated. Thirty-Üve  a four generation Italian family with distal HMN starting at around  had anomalous chromosome 3. Twenty-three had translocations;  30 years of age with weakness and atrophy of distal leg muscles  3 each had t(3;5) and t(3;13) respectively; all with different break  and pyramidal features. We performed genetic linkage analysis  points. One of them was 47,XXY,t(3;5) mat. Two each had t(1;3),  with microsatellites on chromosomes 7p14, 9q34 and 12q24.  t(2;3),t(3;4),t(3;9),t(3;10),t(3;15), and t(3;17) respectively; and, all with  Negative LOD scores excluded any evidence of linkage to the  different breakpoints. One with t(3;10) was 47,XX,t(3;10) mat, +18.  above-mentioned chromosomes in our family. Moreover, because of  One each had t(3;6),t(3;8) and t(3;18). Six were maternal, 3- paternal,  pyramidal features in our patients, we performed the linkage analysis  6- de novo and 8 had a Ürst degree relative with translocation.  to all the known loci for autosomal dominant hereditary spastic  Five had complex chromosome rearrangements (CCR): two had 6  paraparesis (ADHSP). The analysis was negative thus excluding that  breaks each (Clin Genet 42: 135), another had 3 breaks and was  our patients were affected by a complicated form of ADHSP. These  the offspring of parents who each had a balanced translocation,  data further conÜrm a genetic heterogeneity within inherited motor  mother- t(3;6) and father- t(3;11). (J Med Genet 25: 631). The fourth  neuronopathy disorders. was de novo with 6 breaks and had t(3;11), inv(3) and t(15;21).  (J Med Genet 30: 167). The Üfth CCR was with 4 breaks resulting  
P0028 . Evolving phenotype in pyruvate dehydrogenase complex  in del(7)(q22q31.3) with t(3;6). The 3 inversions were: 2 maternal  deÜciency and 1 paternal. There were 2 de novo dup(3) (p24.3;p26) and  E. Morava, R. Rodenburg, L. van den Heuvel, J. A. M. Smeitink;  dup(3)(q23;q24), one del (3)(q11q21), and 1 del (3)(q25.3). The latter  was maternal and the phenotypes of mother and child were normal.  UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Nineteen were evaluated through the pediatrics clinic and 13 were  Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc) is an intra-mitochondrial  prenatal. Additional 3 were seen prior to conception for a relative  multi-enzyme complex essential for the aerobic oxidation of glucose.  with anomalous chromosome 3. This study demonstrates the wealth  The disorder is genetically heterogeneous, however, the majority  of information available in busy genetics clinics having cytogenetics  of patients with a PDHc defect have abnormalities in the major  laboratory as part of the genetic program. catalytic and regulatory subunit, 
E1  alpha, which is encoded on  the X chromosome. The clinical spectrum of PDHc deÜciency is  
P0031 . Dysferlinopathies in Spanish families: clinical and  heterogeneous, particularly in heterozygous females and therefore  molecular studies the diagnosis may be difÜcult. The phenotypic presentation generally  A. Freixas1, E. Gallardo2, L. Al\x91as1, N. de Luna2, M. J. Rodr\x91guez1, M. Baiget1, I.  includes lactic acidemia, muscle hypotonia, central nervous system  Illa2, P. Gallano1;  involvement, developmental delay, seizures and characteristic  dysmorphic features. Patients may have other congenital  1Genetics Dept, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurology Dept,  malformations including corpus callosum hypoplasia or ventricular  Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. septal defect. We report on Üve patients with a PDHc defect, two of  Mutations in dysferlin gene (DYSF) cause different muscular  which carry a previously undescribed mutation in the gene coding for  dystrophy phenotypes including Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2B  the 
E1  alpha subunit of the enzyme complex. The patients, three girls  (LGMD2B), Miyoshi Myopathy (MM) and Distal Anterior Compartment  and two boys demonstrated the following unique clinical symptoms  myopathy (DAT). These disorders are characterized by autosomal Clinical genetics 88 recessive inheritance, adult onset and elevated levels of serum  compared three-dimensional MRI imaging with three-dimensional  creatine kinase. DYSF gene, that maps to chromosome 2p13, has  photographic imaging (which we had previously shown to be at  55 exons and codiÜes a protein of about 237 kD that is located in  least as accurate as physical anthropometry). No difference was  the sarcolemma. The function is unknown but recent studies have  detected between the three dimensional coordinates derived from  demonstrated the involvement of dysferlin in membrane reparation  photogrammetry and those deduced from MRI. events. MRI imaging also permits analysis of other parameters of facial  We report the study of 27 families clinically diagnosed as  structure. We have analyzed the tissue depth over the anatomical  MM, LGMD2B and DAT. Dysferlin expression was studied by  landmarks in the ten subjects. Work on the precision of measurement  immonohistochemistry in muscle biopsies and by Western blot  and inter- and intra-observer variability is in progress. There are  analysis in peripheral blood monocytes CD14+. The absence  some interesting differences between tissue depths previously  of dysferlin in monocytes always correlated with absence of the  reported on ultrasound and those observed by us on MRI. sarcolemmal staining in the muscle biopsy. We did not Ünd reduction  In addition, work is in progress to relate intracerebral structures to  of expression either in the monocytes or the muscle biopsy in any of  external facial structures. the patients with conÜrmed dysferlinopathy. The screening of mutations in DYSF gene was performed using the  
P0034 . Increased recurrence risk in congenital disorders of  analysis of genomic DNA extracted from total peripheral blood and  glycosylation (CDG) due to a transmission ratio distortion. cDNA was obtained from monocytes. Obtained cDNAs were ampliÜed  E. Schollen1, S. Kjaergaard2, T. Martinsson3, S. Barrot4, L. Keldermans1, N.  using primers that covers the 55 exons in 14 fragments and directly  Seta4, G. Matthijs1;  sequenced. Study of genomic DNA was done to check mutations  1UZ Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Rigshospitalet,  found in monocytes RNA. Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3G\x99teborg University,  We identiÜed 12 different mutations: 5 missense, 3 in-frame and 4  Department of Clinical Genetics, G\x99teborg, Sweden, 4H\x98pital Bichat Claude  stop codon mutations.Three of them were never described elsewhere  Bernard, Paris Cedex 18, France. and in some cases the three different phenotypes are caused by the  Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation type Ia (CDG-Ia), the most  same mutation. frequent, recessive inborn error of glycosylation, is caused by  mutations in the phosphomannomutase gene PMM2. The high  
P0032 . Mutation analysis of the CREBBP gene in patients with  carrier frequency (1/79) of the frequent R141H mutation, is in  Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome contrast with the severity of the disorder. We have now evidence  O. Bartsch1, M. Richter1, S. Schmidt1, E. Seemanov\x862, G. Wiebe3, S. Rasi1;  that a transmission ratio distortion is at the basis of this high carrier  1Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, Technische Universit\x89t Dresden, Dresden, Ger- frequency. many, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Motol Hospital, Charles University,  In 81 pregnancies among carriers of PMM2 mutations, genotyped in  Prague, Czech Republic, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and  the context of prenatal diagnosis, the percentage of affected foetuses  Genetics, Dresden, Germany. (37%; 30/81 Binomial Distribution p (X>=37%)=0.011) is higher than  Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a well-deÜned autosomal  expected based on MendelÓs second law. This means a positive  dominant disorder featuring short stature, typical face and skeletal  selection of 59.2% (Binomial Distribution p (X>=59.2%)=0.011) for the  anomalies (broad angulated thumbs and halluces), and mild to  mutation bearing alleles compared to the normal alleles. SpeciÜcally,  moderate mental retardation. Occasional signs include microcephaly  carriers of R141H also transmit their mutation in 58.8% (Binomial  and visceral malformations. RTS is caused by mutations of the gene  Distribution p(X>=58.8%)=0.09) of the pregnancies. for CREBBP, a nuclear protein that modulates the chromosomal  It suggests that the drive of the mutated alleles relates to a  structure by histone modiÜcations and controls the initiation of DNA  reproductive advantage at the stage of gametogenesis, fertilization or  transcription. Extending a previous report (J Med Genet 2002,39: embryogenesis rather than to a resistance to environmental factors  496-501), we report here the results of genomic sequencing in 45  during infant or adult life. Such a transmission ratio distortion has not  unrelated subjects. Clinical diagnoses included RTS (Group A; 30  been described for any recessive or metabolic disorder before. Given  subjects), possibly RTS (Group B, ²1 typical sign(s) subtle or absent;  the importance of glycosylation at all stages of human reproduction,  8 subjects), and probably not RTS (Group C, isolated features  the positive selection might be explained by hypo- or aberrant  of RTS; 7 subjects). Causative molecular mutations of CREBBP  glycosylation. were found in 16 subjects from Group A (53%) and in 2 individuals  The practical implication of this segregation distortion is an increased  from Group B (25%), but not in Group C. The majority of CREBBP  recurrence risk in CDG-Ia families ranging from 43% in Scandinavian  mutations were unique and distributed throughout the CREBBP gene,  families to 37% in other European families. with no real hot spots. Eleven mutations found in Group A were novel,  i.e. have not been described previously. In Group B, Ündings included  
P0035 . The Genetics of Vesicoureteral ReÝux. two de novo substitutions (Y1175C, N1978S) in conserved domains,  H. R. Kelly1,2, A. Yoneda1,2, S. Kelly1, D. Shields3, C. Molony3,4, A. Green1, P.  supporting the existence of incomplete/mild RTS (atypical face in  Puri2, D. Barton1;  one subject, normal stature and low-normal intelligence in the other).  1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin 12, Ireland, 2ChildrenÓs Research  Two other substitutions (
L551 I, Q2208H), both novel, represented  Centre, Dublin 12, Ireland, 3Dept of Pharmacology, Royal college of Surgeons,  polymorphisms without clinical signiÜcance. Although a FISH-based  Dublin 2, Ireland, 4Dept of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,  test for RTS is generally available, complexity has hindered the  PA, United States. clinical implementation of a molecular-based test.We suggest a tiered  Vesicoureteral reÝux (VUR), the reverse Ýow of urine from the  approach may be desirable. bladder into the ureter and kidney, is a common disorder, found in  Grant sponsor: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Ba-1397/5-1) 1-2% of children. VUR can cause kidney damage and is the most  common cause of end-stage renal failure and severe hypertension  
P0033 . Assessment of tissue depths over anatomical landmarks  in children. It is caused by a shortening of the segment of the  on the face ureter which runs through the submucosal layer of the bladder wall.  J. S. Bamforth, O. Beattie, A. Peterson, C. Beaulieu, Z. Taher;  The milder grades of reÝux commonly resolve with time but more  University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. severe grades require medical or surgical intervention. VUR occurs  Recognition of the majority of syndromes requires the ability of the  frequently in families, suggesting that it is inherited but the mode of  clinician to be able to Ürstly remember previous patients (or patient  inheritance is unknown. descriptions) and to be able to relate these to the patient in question.  We have collected 750 DNA samples from over 165 families with  This process is relatively inefÜcient and many different techniques  more than one child affected with VUR. We are using this resource  have been developed to try and improve this process. in an affected-sib-pair approach to search for VUR gene(s). Although  We have used three-dimensional MRI imaging of the face in ten  no VUR genes have yet been identiÜed, we have excluded all the loci  normal subjects as a preliminary investigation into the possible use of  suggested by the genome scan reported by Feather et al (Am J Hum  this technology to assist in syndrome identiÜcation. The initial study  Genet 66:1420-5, 2000) and generated several exciting new leads. Clinical genetics 89 Some of the candidates we have looked at to date are the uroplakins,  in the CHRB2 gene coding for the Ȳ 2 subunit of the nAChR. a family of proteins that physically strengthen the bladder wall. We  In this study we report a new 10-member, three-generation family  also looked at the KA
L1  gene which causes Kallman syndrome,  from Calabria with ADNFLE. All index patients were screened for  a condition sometimes associated with VUR. We have recently  CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 mutations by sequencing. We sequenced  started a complete genome scan using 4,500 SNP, to identify the loci  the exons and the corresponding exon-intron boundaries of  involved in VUR. This analysis will map VUR susceptibility gene(s),  CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 genes in the patients of the family ADNFLE  which will a be the Ürst step towards determining the molecular basis  and identiÜed polymorphisms but no mutations. These data,  of this disorder. suggested that CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 gene are not involved in the  aetiopathogenesis of ADNFLE in this family. 
P0036 . Prader-Willi syndrome in Taiwan: Diagnosis and  Management 
P0038 . Fetal Alcohol Syndrome - Clinical study of 21 pacients S. P. Lin1, J. L. Yen2, L. P. Tsai3, D. M. Niu4, Y. C. Chen1, P. L. Kuo5;  M. C. Panzaru1, C. Rusu1, M. Volosciuc1, L. Butnariu2, E. Braha1, L. Caba2;  1Depts of Pediatrics & Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,  1University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania, 2Sf. Maria ChildrenÓs Hospital, Medical  Taiwan Republic of China, 2Dept of Pediatrics, Mackay Memorial Hospital &  Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania. Taipei Municipal WomanÓs and ChildrenÓs Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of  Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the result of ethanol teratogenesis.  China, 3Dept of Pediatrics, Taipei Municipal WomanÓs and ChildrenÓs Hospital,  Clinical expression is extremely variable, the main features being  Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Dept of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General  dysmorphic face, CNS abnormalities, pre and postnatal growth  Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 5Depts of Obs/Gyn, National  retardation. Cheng-Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China. We have studied 21 patients (13 females and 8 males) with FAS in  Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex disorder affecting multiple  order to appreciate the frequency of different clinical features and to  systems with many manifestations. We report on our experience  present some particularities. The study revealed high incidence of  in PWS in Taiwan. A three-phase screening protocol has been  threatening miscarriage (9,09%), prematurity (41,17%) and IUGR  launched since 1999. Patients with clinical suspicion are referred  (59,09%). Growth deÜciency accentuated with age. The frequencies  to IdentiÜcation Centers for further evaluation, and their samples  of different clinical signs were: epicanthal fold (18,18%), ocular  are sent to the Diagnostic Center. M-PCR is used as 1st-phase  (18,18%) and auricular (13,6%) defects, microretrognathia (40,9%),  screening. If M-PCR was positive, FISH is to be done for detecting  cardiac (40,9%), renal (9,09%) and genital (13,6%) anomalies,  deletion. When FISH is negative, microsatellite analysis will be  nipples anomalies (18,18%), hernia (13,6%), sacro-coccygeal sinus  performed to detect UPD. We cannot identify imprinting center  (13,6%), hipertrichosis (4,54%), clinodactyly of V Ünger (22,72%),  mutation. All the cost is fully supported by government subsidiary and  hypoplastic nails (22,72%), talipes (4,54%). Some of the particular  a research fund. features will be illustrated. From Jan. 1995 to Dec. 2003, forty-seven cases (M:F=22:25,  In conclusion, we have found a high incidence of prematurity  age 2M-21Y) were collected. Birth history, clinical presentation,  (especially for girls), a higher frequency of heart defects in girls  laboratory and cytogenetics/molecular study results were analyzed.  compared to boys and a higher frequency of sacro-coccygeal sinus  Mean birthweight was 2433gm. Obvious overweight was found  in boys. in 21/44(48%), and GH deÜciency in 20/27(74%). GH therapy is  applied in 7/47. Age at diagnosis before age 3M was 16/47(34%),  
P0039 . Classical Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in a 6 months old  and the rate increased to 67% in recent 5 years. All patients had  girl with only borderline 8-dehydrocholesterol elevation neonatal hypotonia and hypogonadism. Other symptoms were as  L. M. Neumann1, S. Armbrust2, K. M\x9ehlmann2, B. W\x9erfel3, D. Haas4, C. Fusch2,  follows: characteristic facial features 31/47(66%); rapid weight gain  J. Zschocke5;  after age 1Y 38(81%); developmental delay 42(89%); hyperphagia  1Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 2Neonatology, University Childrenªs Hospital, Greifs- 39(83%); behavior problems 33(70%); short stature in 24(51%);  wald, Germany, 3Kreiskrankenhaus Wolgast, Wolgast, Germany, 4University  hypopigmentation in 42(89%); small hands/feet in 44(94%); skin  ChildrenÒs Hospital, Department of General Pediatrics, Heidelberg, Germany,  picking 28(60%) and speech problems 26(55%). 5Institute of Human Genetics University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Molecular study revealed deletion in 33/35(94%), one UPD (3%), one  Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive  probable IC mutation (3%). The progress in early diagnosis helps  malformation syndrome characterized by mental retardation,  improve quality of care and better prognosis. GH therapy is still a  congenital anomalies, and growth deÜciency. The incidence is  controversial issue in our country. approximately 1 in 40000 to 1 in 60000. The syndrome is caused by a  block in cholesterol biosynthesis at the level of 7-dehydrocholesterol  
P0037 . Mutational analysis of the CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 genes  reductase (7-DHCR), which results in elevated levels of the  in a family with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe  cholesterol precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) and its isomer  epilepsy 8-dehydrocholesterol (8-DHC). Recently, three patients with a very  G. Annesi, S. Carrideo, F. Annesi, I. C. Cir\x97 Candiano, D. Civitelli, P. Tarantino,  mild form of SLOS were identiÜed with slight elevation of 7-DHC and  E. V. De Marco, F. E. Rocca, G. De Cicco, A. Gambardella;  8-DHC (Langius et al. Am J Med Genet 122A, 24-29, 2003). National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy. We report a 6-months old German girl with classical features of  Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE)  SLOS: microcephaly, bilateral postaxial hexadactyly, bilateral  is included among idiopathic epilepsies. This syndrome often  cutaneous 2nd and 3rd toe syndactyly. Subsequent biochemical  misdiagnosed as nightmares or parasonnies, is characterized  analysis by gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS)  by clusters of brief nocturnal motor seizures with a frontal lobe  revealed normal cholesterol concentration, a 7-DHC level in the  semiology, occurring during non-REM sleep. ADNFLE is clinically  upper normal range and a slight elevation of 8-DHC. Cholesterol  homogeneous, even though intra- and interfamilial variability in  levels of the parents were normal. We requested molecular analysis.  seizure severity, age of onset (usually in childhood) and speciÜc  The result revealed compound heterozygosity for the known  frontal lobe seizure manifestations can be observed. It is transmitted  mutation, W151X, and a novel mutation, I178F, in the 7-DHCR gene.  as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. Three  To our knowledge, this is the Ürst case with slightly elevated 8- loci, ENF
L1 , ENF
L2 , and ENF
L3  have been associated with  dehydrocholesterol and veriÜed mutations in classical SLOS. Enzyme  ADNFLE. The locus ENF
L1  contains the CHRNA4 gene, three  measurements in cultured skin Übroblasts are pending. different mutations in the CHRNA4 gene have been described,  Our Ündings give evidence that in a patient with a suspicious  this gene coding for the alpha subunit of the neuronal nicotinic  phenotype of SLOS, the biochemical analysis of plasma sterols  acetylcoline receptor (nAChR) and located on chromosome 20q13.2.  may be equivocal even in the classical phenotype. Therefore, in  The ENF
L2  locus have been mapped by linkage analysis in a single  such cases, mutation analysis or determination of enzyme activity in  family to chromosome 15q24 region. More recently, a third locus for  Übroblasts is indicated. The incidence of SLOS may be higher than  ADNFLE, ENLF3, has been identiÜed on chromosome 1q21. Two  predicted. different mutations, affecting the same aminoacid residue, were found Clinical genetics 90 
P0040 . Poland Syndrome - Clinical study of 15 patients screening for segmental UPD requires a larger number of informative  L. I. Butnariu1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc3, M. Panzaru3, L. Caba1;  markers for a given chromosomal interval. In this study, we made  a whole genome UPD search based on a microarray genotyping  1Sf. Maria ChildrenÓs Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine and  technique. We analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)  Pharmacy, Department of Human Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 3University of  using GeneChip§ Mapping 10K Arrays in three unrelated families  Medicine and Pharmacy , Department of Human Genetics, Iasi, Romania. with children having Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS, maternal UPD15,  Poland syndrome is a disruption expressed as unilateral absence  OMIM 176270), Angelman syndrome (AS, paternal UPD15, OMIM  of sternal head of pectoralis major, ipsilateral limbs defects (usually  105830), and Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS, maternal UPD7,  synbrachydactyly), chest wall defects, absence of nipple/breast and  OMIM 180860), respectively. SNPs showing opposite homozygosity  heart defects when the abnormalities are located on the left side;  in the child and in the parent not involved in UPD were indicative  hand defects may occur without absence of pectoralis muscle. for UPD. Our results demonstrated the presence of UPD in these  We have studied 15 patients with Poland syndrome in order to  patients with the diagnosis of maternal UPD15, paternal UPD15 and  appreciate the frequency of different features and their importance for  maternal UPD7 as expected. In cases of AS and SRS, reduction to  the diagnosis. The group is formed of 12 boys and 3 girls, aged 0- homozygosity of all SNPs along the chromosome was indicative for a  27y. Most of the cases were diagnosed in the Ürst year of life. complete isodisomy due to a somatic error. In case of PWS, clusters  Our study showed that males are more frequently affected than  of homozygous and heterozygous SNPs along the chromosome 15  females (12:3), right side is more frequently affected ( right/ left  indicated a meiotic error. side : 7/5). The absence of pectoralis muscle was associated with  We conclude that array-based SNP genotyping is a fast, cost- synbrachydactyly (12 cases), short upper limb (5), absent phalanges  effective and reliable approach for whole genome UPD screening. (1), absent nipples (3), rib abnormalities (1), microcephaly (1),  macrocephaly (1), facial asymmetry (2), facial palsy (1 case),  
P0043 . Multiple circumferential skin creases, facial  auricular anomalies (3), vertebral abnormalities (1), mental  dysmorphism and mental retardation - a new patient and familial  retardation (2), epilepsy (1), and nephrotic syndrome (1). Family  observation history was negative in all the cases. Pregnancy was abnormal in 6  S. Strenge, U. G. Froster;  cases. In conclusion, we present a clinical study of 15 patients in order  Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Faculty of Medicine, Leipzig,  to appreciate the most suggestive and important features for this  Germany. diagnosis. Congenital circumferential skin creases of the limbs are a rare  feature. They are seen as part of the áMichelin tire baby syndromeÐ.  
P0041 . Interstitial deletions in chromosome 7q - two case  Amniotic band sequence can also result in circumferential skin  reports creases. M. H. Kr\x9eger, E. Brude, M. Anker, R. K\x99nig;  We report on a girl with skin creases, dysmorphic facial signs and  psychomental retardation. The girl was born in the 39th gestational  Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Frankfurt / Main, Germany. week with a birth weight of 2360 g (<3rd centile), and a length of 45  Several cases with distal deletion in the long arm of chromosome  cm (< 3rd centile). She was the Ürst child of non-consanguineous  7 are described in the literature; most of them include the terminal  parents. The skin showed symmetrical semicircumferential creases  end of the 7q-arm. The clinical features found in the literature are  on the limbs. On physical examination at the age of 1 5/12 years  very variable; frequent Ündings are short stature, microcephaly, prae-  height was 77,5 cm (10th centile), and head circumference 45,5 cm  and postnatal growth retardation, mental retardation, cleft lip and/or  (10th centile). Craniofacial anomalies included blepharophimosis,  palate up to holoprosencephaly (Schinzel, 2001). So far thereªs no  epicanthal folds, broad nasal tip, puffy cheeks, small posteriorly  phenotype-genotype correlation for a (7q-) syndrome apparent. angulated and low-set ears. Psychomotor development was retarded.  Interstitial deletions of 7q35 are rare (Fryns, 1988; Verma, 1992;  Cytogenetic analysis revealed a normal female karyotype 46,XX. Fagan, 1994). Here we report on two new cases. Facial appearence of the mother was similar to that of the patient.  Case1 is a newborn girl who was referred for karyotype analysis  A maternal aunt had skin creases in infancy by history. The mother,  with a suspected diagnosis of cri-du-chat-syndrome. Examination  maternal aunt and uncle visited a school for mentally retarded  at 5 months showed several dysmorphic features (deep infraorbital  children. creases, small nose with anteverted nares, long philtrum, retro- Symptoms in the girl reminiscent of the patient reported by Cohen  /micrognathia, high palate, short neck; muscular hypertonia). et al. (Clin Dysmorphol 2:39-46, 1993) and reviewed by Elliott et  The karyotype analysis showed an interstitial deletion on one  al. (Am J Med Genet 62:23-25, 1996) and the patient reported by  chromosome 7 with the proximal breakpoint in 7q34 and a distal  Leonard (Am J Med Genet 112:91-94, 2002). Their male patients  breakpoint in 7q36. had congenital anomalies, psychomotor retardation and circum- Case 2 is a newborn boy with tetralogy of Fallot and mild dysmorphic  ferential skin creases. Facial features of their patients were similar.  facial features (long philtrum, retro-/micrognathia, low-set slightly  Our familial observation suggests the possibility of an autosomal or  posteriorly rotated ears, short neck). Standard karyotype analysis and  X-chromosomal dominant inheritance. FISH for CATCH22 should be done for exclusion of a del(22)(q11.2). Our analysis results in the following karyotype: 
P0044 . New detection methods identify atypical deletions in  46,XY,del(7)(q34q36.1).ish7(wcp7x2),10(wcp7-2x) Williams-Beuren Syndrome patients Examination of his parentªs chromosomes revealed that the 7q35- A. Reymond1, G. Merla1, C. Howald1, R. Lyle1, M. Digilio2, S. Deutsch1, R.  deletion was due to a balanced insertion [ins(10;7)(q22.1;q34q36.1)]  Mingarelli2, U. Choudhury1, S. E. Antonarakis1, B. Dallapiccola2;  in the probandªs mother. 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2CSS Mendel  
P0042 . A rapid microarray based whole genome analysis for  Institute, Roma, Italy. detection of uniparental disomy The incidence of Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS, OMIM#194050)  O. Altug-Teber1, M. Bonin1, A. Dufke1, U. A. Mau-Holzmann1, S. Poths1, G.  is estimated to be 1/20,000 and sporadic de novo occurrence is  Gillessen-Kaesbach2, T. Eggermann3, O. Riess1;  usual. Molecular basis of the syndrome is either a heterozygous  microdeletion, or rarely inversion at chromosome band 7q11.23. WBS  1Department of Medical Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Institute of Human  is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mental retardation  Genetics, Essen, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany. with a unique cognitive and personality proÜle. The cognitive hallmark  To date, uniparental disomy (UPD) with phenotypic relevance is  of WBS individuals is a dissociation between language (relative  described for different chromosomes. It is likely that additional not  strength) and visual-spatial cognition (profound impairment). We  yet identiÜed UPD phenotypes exist. Due to technical difÜculties and  hypothesize that the absence of one copy of certain but not all of the  limitations of time and resources, molecular analyses for UPD using  approximately 25 genes that map within the WBS common deletion  microsatellite markers are performed only in cases with speciÜc  region contribute to the neurodevelopmental abnormalities of the  phenotypical features and only a few markers are used. Especially  complex WBS phenotype. Hence, detailed molecular characterization Clinical genetics 91 of the deletion together with precise cognitive proÜling will enable us  In addition, a small ventricular septal defect, a right-sided multicystic  to investigate the molecular basis of a complex cognitive behavior. dysplastic kidney, and hypoplastic labia minora were present. The development of alternative methods for faster, higher throughput,  Osteodysplastic abnormalities included bowed femora and humeri,  accurate and semi-automated diagnosis of cytogenetic abnormalities  dysplastic pelvis with hip dysplasia, and instability of the knees with  is highly desirable. We have developed and compared two novel  abnormal movements and dislocation, which has not been reported  methods for the detection of aneuploidies based on pyrosequencing  in MOPD I/III. of paralogous sequences and quantitative real-time ampliÜcation of  genomic DNA. Both methods have advantages over microsatellite- 
P0047 . Hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD) in a  based detection of aneuploidies, since the tests work on all DNAs,  Dutch family irrespective of informativeness of polymorphisms, and the detection  A. M. A. Lachmeijer1, J. A. E. van Wijk2, M. Vervloet3, L. Jaspars4, J. M. van  of deletions does not require the parental DNAs. Using these  Hagen1;  methods we studied a cohort of 162 Italian WBS patients and readily  1Dept of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,  identify three patients with atypical deletions. This molecular analysis,  Netherlands, 2Dept of Child Nephrology, VU University Medical Center,  alongside physical examinations and cognitive tests allows to  Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept of Nephrology, VU University Medical Center,  pinpoint, which genes contribute to which WBS deÜcit. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept of Pathology, Leiden University Medical  Center, Leiden, Netherlands. 
P0045 . Fraser syndrome - the clinical Ündings in a mildly  Glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD) is a rare renal disorder  affected 6-year-old girl. which occurs in a sporadic form and a familial form with autosomal  I. Naumchik, N. Rumyantseva, R. Chmel;  dominant transmission. It is characterized by cystic dilatation of the  Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. Bowman space and the initial proximal convoluted tubule. GCKD  Fraser syndrome (FS) is an autosomal recessive (MIM 219000)  can be associated with either hypoplastic or normal sized kidneys.  well delineated multiple malformation complex characterised by  Glomerular cysts are seen in various renal cystic diseases, such as  cryptophthalmos, cutaneous syndactyly, malformations of the larynx  autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), cystic renal  and genitourinary tract, craniofacial dysmorphism, orofacial clefting,  dysplasia and the autosomal recessive ARPKD. In diagnosing GCKD  mental retardation, musculoskeletal anomalies. McGregor (2003)  exclusion of other cystic renal disorders is therefore important. located the FS gene to 4q21 and identiÜed 5 mutations in the FRA
S1   There is genetic heterogeneity in familial GCKD. A subgroup of  gene. familial hypoplastic GCKD has recently been found to be caused by  We present the clinical Ündings of a 6-year-old girl affected with FS.  mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1-beta  The patient is the only child of a healthy nonconsanguineous couple,  (HNF1B). In addition to GCKD all affected family members suffer  her two elder halfsibs are healthy. The pregnancy was uneventful,  from maturity onset diabetes of the young subtype 5 (MODY5). birth weight was 3250 g, length 51 cm, OFC 34 cm. First examination  Here we report on the clinical and pathological features of a father  of the newborn girl detected rightsided microphthalmia, coloboma of  and daughter from a Dutch family who are both heterozygous for  upper eyelid, symblepharon; malformed and mild hypoplastic ears,  the 477delT(
P159 fsX) mutation in the HNF1B gene. Renal biopsies  atresia of the right external auditory canal; syndactyly of hands and  of the fatherÒs kidneys show hypoplastic GCKD on histopathological  feet. examination. Renal function is moderate to severely impaired.  Reexamination at the age of 6 years showed good physical and  Histologic examination of a nonfunctional removed kidney of the  mental development, microphthalmia, coloboma of upper eyelid and  daughter shows a histologically distinct pattern of multicystic renal  symblepharon of the right eye, malformed ears, atresia of the external  dysplasia rather than glomerulocystic disease. The remaining  auditory canals and moderate conductive hearing loss. There were  kidney, with relatively normal renal function, shows multiple small  syndactyly II-IV of hands and II-V of feet. Ultrasonography detected  cortical cysts and echodensity with impaired cortical and medullar  aplasia of the right kidney and mildly enlarged left kidney. The girl had  differentiation on ultrasound. This family will add to our knowledge of  also hypoplasia of the labia majora, but US-examination of uterus  the variable clinical expression of mutations in the HNFB1-gene. and gonads presented normal results. Our patient deÜnitely Ütted three of the major and two of the minor  
P0048 . Clinical evaluation of 49 patients with Oculo-Auriculo- diagnostic criteria of FS, proposed by Thomas, et al.(1986), although  Vertebral Spectrum (OAVS) - development of a clinical scoring  all symtoms are mild or moderate. system and a new classiÜcation These Ündings evidence the clinical variability, associated with Fraser  D. Wieczorek, C. Tasse, S. Fischer, H. J. L\x9edecke, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach;  syndrome. Genetic heterogeneity of FS will be discussed. Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89tsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral Spectrum (OMIM164210) is a  
P0046 . Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarÜsm  phenotypically heterogenous disorder characterized by hemifacial  (MOPD I/III) in a newborn girl with urogenital anomalies and  microsomia, anomalies of the eye (e.g. epibulbar tumours) and the  unusual joint malformations ear (e.g. microtia), and defects of the vertebral column. Most often,  E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, D. Kotzot2;  only one side is affected, and in patients with bilateral OAVS, one  1Department of Neonatology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute  side is often more severely affected than the other. Most cases are  for Humangenetics, Innsbruck, Austria. sporadic, but rare familial cases as well as the transgenic Hfm mouse  Microcephalic and osteodysplasic primordial dwarÜsm (MOPD)  model suggest that OAVS may have a genetic basis. belongs to the genetically heterogeneous and autosomal recessively  We evaluated the clinical data and photographs of 49 non-related,  inherited Seckel syndrome group. According to the literature MOPD I  cytogenetically normal patients with OAVS, all presenting with  and III were considered to represent the same disorder, share clinical  microtia as a minimal diagnostic criterion. According to the additional  and radiological manifestations, and are clearly different to type II  signs, the patients were divided into Üve subgroups: based on radiological and clinical signs. Subgroup Clinical Ündings Number of pa- Here we report on a newborn girl affected by MOPD I/III. The  tients patient is the Ürst child of healthy, consanguineous Turkish parents.  1 Microtia u: 3 Retrospectively, a sister of the mother, who died at the age of 4  b: 9 2 Microtia + mandibular hypoplasia u: 14 months, was diagnosed as also affected by MOPD I/III. b: 8 The pregnancy was complicated by severe growth retardation and  3 Microtia + mandibular hypoplasia +  u: 2 oligohydramnios. The girl was born at term by cesarean delivery.  vertebral anomalies b: 3 Birth weight (1060g), length (31,5cm), and OFC (22,3cm) were all  4 Microtia + mandibular hypoplasia +  u: 2 far below the 3rd centile. The most striking features were severe  epibulbar tumours b: 4 5 Microtia + mandibular hypoplasia + epi- u: 0 microcephaly with sloping forhead, nearly closed anterior fontanelle,  bulbar tumours + vertebral anomalies b: 4 prominent occiput, alopecia, prominent eyes, and small ears. The  Total: 49 brain showed microlissencephaly and agenesis of corpus callosum. Clinical genetics 92 u: unilateral, b: bilateral involvement We describe a large nonconsanguineous German family with  Patients of subgroups 3 to 5 more often present with additional  48 members over 5 generations of which 16 are affected with a  malformations, including other anomalies of the eye, congenital heart  hitherto unrecognized autosomal dominant genodermatosis. The  defects, brain anomalies, microcephaly, short stature, oral clefts,  clinical picture consists of distinct painful purple-red inÝammatory  anomalies of extremities and the genito-urinary system. Male to  lesions in acral locations such as Üngers, toes, nose, cheeks,  female ratio and ratio of left to right sided mandibular hypoplasia both  and knees induced by a combination of cold temperature and  were 2:1. A scoring system was developed to estimate the severity of  moisture. The lesions may ulcerate, are associated with arthralgias,  the condition. and may become hyperpigmentated after healing. The disease  Supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. onsets in early childhood and tends to improve in late adulthood.  Histologically, lesions are characterized by unspeciÜc vasculitic  
P0049 . BloomÓs Syndrome in a Iranian family changes with deposits of complement and immunoglobulin and  M. RaÜei, H. Azimi, P. Kabiri;  absent hyperkeratosis. Thus, the clinical and histological Ündings are  consistent with either perniosis or Chilblain lupus, a rare cutaneous  Welfare Organization, Arak, Iran (Islamic Republic of). form of lupus erythematodes. Extensive clinical, histological, and  The patients are two children in a family. The boy was 3-year-old  serological investigations of 3 patients could exclude the presence  and the girl was 4.5-year-old.Their parents are third degree family  of antinuclear antibodies, complement deÜciency, cryoglobulinemia,  relationship. In these cases clinical features include severe growth  cold agglutinins, Raynaudªs disease, infections, traumatic injury,  retardation, small face, big nose, photosensitivity, telangiectatic  keratolytic winter erythema, or Lupus pernio. There are no apparent  erythema, high pitched voice and dolichocephaly. Cytological studies  associated systemic changes or manifestations in internal organs. revealed chromosomal aberrations and the high frequency in sister  To the best of our knowledge, this is the Ürst description of perniosis  chromatid exchanges. or Chilblain lupus as an autosomal dominant genodermatosis.  Their mother was pregnant when she referred to us, she had a twine  IdentiÜcation of the genetic causes underlying this phenotype may  pregnancy but spontaneous abortion occurred at 17 wk gestational  shed light onto the pathogenesis of common forms of collagen  age. The incidence of spontaneous abortion increased in affected  vascular disease such as vasculitis or lupus erythematodes. fetuses. The patients are also at a high risk for malignancy. Although early  
P0052 . Asymmetric Crying Face Syndrome with a proximal  diagnosis of leukemia does not elevate the chance for curative  22q11.2 deletion - a case report treatment, but these children that now are 5.5 and 7 years old are  A. Bier, M. Linneª, W. Werner;  permanently observed for early diagnosis of malignancies included  any type of leukemia. Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany. A 3 year-old patient was referred to us because of facial palsy in  
P0050 . Mutation analysis of MEC
P2  and determination of the X- combination with mental retardation especially affecting language  inactivation pattern in Hungarian Rett Syndrome Patients development. He had a persistent foramen ovale. Because of  J. K\x86rteszi1, J. Bene2, K. Holl\x96dy3, \x82. Morava1, K. Hadzsiev1, M. Czak\x962, B.  the facial signs such as up-slanting palpebral Üssures, broad  Melegh1, A. T\x8dsz\x86s1, G. Kosztol\x86nyi1;  nasal bridge, and broad nasal tip we suspected a microdeletion  on chromosome 22q11.2. By Ýuorescent in situ hybridization we  1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of P\x8dcs,  detected a proximal 1.5 Mb deletion in this region. This type of  P\x8dcs, Hungary, 2MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group, P\x8dcs, Hungary,  deletion accounts for less than 10 % of the 22q11.2-deletions while  3Department of Pediatrics, University of P\x8dcs, P\x8dcs, Hungary. in more than 90 % the common large deletion spanning 3 Mb is  Mutations in the gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein  observed. 2 (MeC
P2 ) have been associated with the causation of Rett  The phenotype of the patient and the demonstration of the deletion  syndrome, an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder with  led to the diagnosis of Cayler cardiofacial syndrome which is  characteristic, although variable phenotype. Since no consistent  characterised by congenital cardial defects and an asymmetric crying  correlation is known yet between the type of mutation and the  face due to unilateral absence or hypoplasia of the depressor anguli  clinical manifestation or outcome, other modulating effects have  oris muscle. Thus, the initial diagnosis of facial palsy was revised. been investigated to understand genotype-phenotype correlation.  In our knowledge this is the Ürst patient with asymmetric crying face  It was suggested that the type or domain location of the mutation,  syndrome caused by a proximal 1.5 Mb deletion in 22q11.2. and X-inactivation might inÝuence the phenotype through complex  interactions. Recently, a higher rate of skewed X-inactivation than  
P0053 . Genetic aspects of Spermatogenic Impairment- expected was reported (Weaving et al, 2003). This Ünding prompted  Correlation with Clinical Phenotype us to report on our similar observation. We performed mutation  R. Dada, K. Kucheria;  analysis of MEC
P2  in 27 Hungarian Rett syndrome patients and  found mutation in 19 cases (70%). Nine previously described  AIIMS, New Delhi, India. mutations were detected in 16 patients (R294X in three patients,  Microdeletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome, are associated  R106W, R133C, R168X, T158M and R270X in two patients each,  with spermatogenic failure and have been used to deÜne three  
P152 R, R255X and 1157del41 once each) and three novel mutations  regions on Yq (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc) which are critical for  in 3 patients (276insG, 1160del7, 1121del191; 1332del9). Of the 19,  spermatogenesis. 15 patients have the classical and 4 the atypical form of the disease.  195 infertile males with idiopathic oligozoospermia and azoospermia  X-inactivation analysis was performed in 15 patients with mutation.  were included in this study. Cytogenetic and semen analysis was  In 3 patients X-inactivation pattern was not informative, in 5 patients  done in each case. Testicular FNAC was collected whenever  random, and in 7 patients non-random X-inactivation was found. The  possible. Of the 195 cases, 22 were identiÜed as Klinefelter  incidence of skewed X-inactivation (7/15) is similar to that reported  Syndrome (KFS), 14 cases were mosaic KF and 6 cases were  by Weaving et al. Our results support the suggestion that in Rett  variant KF, 4 cases had other cytogenetic abnormalities. In  syndrome patients with conÜrmed mutation skewed X-inactivation is a  cytogenetically normal cases (n=136) microdeletion analysis  signiÜcant modulating factor in about half of the cases. was done using STS-PCR approach using primers sY84, sY86  (AZFa); sY127, sY134 (AZFb); sY254, sY255 (AZFc). The STS  
P0051 . Familial perniosis Î a newly recognized autosomal  was considered as absent after 3 ampliÜcation failures. Twelve of  dominant genodermatosis the 136 cases showed deletion of at least one of the AZF loci. Six  M. Lee-Kirsch1,2, M. Meurer3, M. Gahr1, M. Linn\x8d2;  cases had AZFc deletion, Üve cases had AZFa and AZFb deletion  and one case showed AZFb deletion alone. Two cases with AZFa  1Klinik f\x9er Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universit\x89t Dresden, Dres- and AZFb had SCO Type 1 syndrome and 2 cases of AZFc deletion  den, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, Technische Universit\x89t Dresden,  showed hypospermatogenesis and 1 case showed maturation arrest.  Dresden, Germany, 3Klinik f\x9er Dermatologie, Technische Universit\x89t Dresden,  Variation in testicular phenotype in cases with AZFc deletion is due  Dresden, Germany. to multiple copies of the gene presence of autosomal genes. Cases Clinical genetics 93 with AZFc microdeletion show a progressive decline in semen quality  by a dysmorphic face, Moebius and Robin sequences, congenital  thus these cases are counselled to go in for semen cryoconservation.  myopathy, and growth retardation. Skeletal anomalies and  Deletion on Y chromosome make the Y chromsome more prone  developmental delay are occasionally present. Only 6 patients have  to secondary larger deletions resulting in worsening of testicular  been described so far, two sporadic cases and two pairs of siblings  phenotype. suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. We report a 9-year old  girl with remarkably similar anomalies. Her unusual facial features  
P0054 . The Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome (CMS) mutation  included high forehead, prominent metopic suture, antimongoloid  RAPSN N88K is an ancient founder mutation eye slanting, strabism, high myopia, low-set, poorly shaped ears,  J. S. Mueller1, G. Burke2, P. Richard3, S. K. Baumeister1, R. Stucka1, B.  hypoplastic alae nasi, short philtrum, cupid shaped, short upper lip,  Eymard3, D. Hantai3, D. Beeson4, H. Lochm\x9eller1, A. Abicht1;  small mouth with receding angles, and Robin sequence. She also  had Moebius sequence resulting in distinct functional abnormalities  1Gene Center and Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Dept. of Neurology, LMU M\x9enchen,  involving eye movement, facial expression, mouth closure, speech,  Munich, Germany, 2Department of Clinical Neurology, Weatherall Institute of  and swallowing. During early infancy difÜculties in sucking, failure to  Molecular Medicine, The John Radcliffe, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3INSERM  thrive and marked hypotonia were noted. She had bilateral talipes  U.582, Institut de Myologie, H\x98pital de la Salp\x8ftri\x8ere, Paris, France, 4Neuros- equinovarus with hyperlaxity of other joints. Neurological evaluation  ciences Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, The John Radcliffe,  showed multiple lesions of the cranial nerves, predominantly n.  Oxford, United Kingdom. abducens, and bilateral facial nerve palsy, striking atrophy of the  Mutations in various genes expressed at the neuromuscular junction  lower leg muscles, reduced deep-tendon reÝexes and signs of  may cause congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS). The protein  lower motor neuron lesion on EMG which have not been observed  rapsyn is involved in clustering acetylcholine receptors (AChR),  in reported patients so far. Her mental development was within the  and mutations in the RAPSN gene result in AChR deÜciency at the  normal range, although motor deÜcit, slow speech development, short  motor endplate leading to impaired neuromuscular transmission.  attention span, hyperactivity and disturbances of visual and motor  Recent reports by ourselves and others identiÜed a speciÜc missense  organization and integration were noted. Our patient delineates the  mutation (RAPSN N88K), either homozygously or compound  features of Carey-Fineman-Ziter syndrome conÜrming the Moebius- heterozygously, in the vast majority of those patients. Robin sequence association to congenital neuromuscular disorders. In order to corroborate the hypothesis that N88K might be an ancient  founder mutation we collected 21 patients carrying N88K. Patients  
P0057 . Elicited repetitive daily blindness: a new familial disorder  originated from Germany (n=5), Austria (n=1), Italy (n=1), France  related to migraine and epilepsy (n=2), UK (n=10), and India (n=2). Analyzing 21 single nucleotide  D. Le Fort1, A. B. Safran2, F. Picard2, I. Bouchardy2, M. A. Morris2;  polymorphisms (SNPs) neighboring RAPSN on chromosome 11p11  revealed a common haplotype for N88K encompassing a distance of  1Neurology Practice, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Geneva University Hospital,  about 360 kb. Our Ündings provide strong support for the supposition  Geneva, Switzerland. that the occurrence of N88K in different European populations is  We report a family affected by a new syndrome combining a  derived from of an ancient founder event. previously undescribed form of transient total visual loss, Ðelicited  The frequent occurrence of RAPSN N88K will greatly facilitate the  repetitive daily blindnessÑ (ERDB), with familial hemiplegic migraine  diagnostic process in European CMS patients. and epilepsy, apparently segregating as an autosomal dominant  condition. 
P0055 . Proportionate shortness of upper limbs and  The ERDB phenotype is characterized by multiple daily episodes of  macrocephaly in L\x8dri-Weill syndrome. transient total visual loss, which are most commonly bilateral. The  A. Bohring1, I. Kennerknecht1, G. Rappold2, J. Horst1;  episodes can be reproducibly triggered by changes in light intensity  or in ocular pressure (rubbing, orthostasis) and last 3 to 10 seconds.  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Westf\x89lische Wilhelms-Universit\x89t, M\x9enster, Germa- They are consistently followed by a 30-second period during which  ny, 2Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89t Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. amaurosis cannot be reprovoked. The phenotype has an onset early  The major clinical Ündings in L\x8dri-Weill syndrome are short stature  in life and a benign course over many decades, essentially excluding  with mesomelia of upper and lower limbs, bowing of radius,  a vascular origin. Madelung deformity, and muscular hypertrophy. The syndrome is  In this family, ERDB cosegregates with clinically typical familial  caused by deletions or mutations of the SHOX gene located on the  hemiplegic migraine; furthermore, several affected individuals  pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y chromosome. The girl we  suffered from epilepsy in childhood before developing FHM. We  describe here was born at term with birth weight 2800 g and length  propose that that ERDB, FHM and childhood epilepsy represent  49 cm. At age 5 month disproportionate shortness was reported to  different manifestations of the same underlying disorder, caused by  become signiÜcant. At age 14 years, her length was 149 cm (3rd- a single, autosomal dominant defect. It is at present impossible to  10th centile) with sitting height 82 cm (50th centile), weight was 56  explain this remarkable phenotype, which is perhaps suggestive of a  kg (75th-90th centile), and OFC was 56,5 cm (>97th centile). The  calcium channelopathy; linkage to the CACNA1A gene, the Ürst gene  general aspect with disproportionate shortness, palpable bowing of  associated with FHM, was excluded. radius, wrist deformity, and athletic habitus was suggestive for the  diagnosis of L\x8dri-Weill syndrome. The diagnosis was conÜrmed be  
P0058 . Fetal valproate syndrome in monozygotic twins. molecular studies; a complete heterozygous deletion of the SHOX  S. Kivirikko1,2, M. Somer1, K. Aittom\x89ki2,3;  gene was detected. In contrast to the common opinion that both,  upper and lower limbs are mesomelic short in L\x8dri-Weill syndrome,  1Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Clinical  anthropometric measurements showed that in our patient this was  Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of  evident for the legs only. The upper legs length was -2 SD and  Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. the lower legs length was -3.2 SD. The arms, however, showed  A pair of monozygotic twins was exposed to sodium valproate during  proportionate shortness with upper and forearm length of -4.6 SD  the pregnancy with a daily dose of 1300 mg (500 mg + 800 mg).  both. Another Ünding was the presence of macrocephaly which as far  Repeated measurements of sodium valproate levels of the mother  as we know was not described before. These unusual Ündings in our  were within the therapeutic range. No folic acid supplementation was  patient underline the highly variable phenotype in L\x8dri-Weill syndrome  used. The twins were born at 38+5 weeks of gestation. The birth  and may extend the clinical spectrum of SHOX-related disorders. weight of twin A was 2930 g (22 %), length 49.5 cm (35 %) and head  circumference 32 cm (15 %). Apgar score was 9. He had muscular  
P0056 . Carey-Fineman-Ziter syndrome: a report of a new patient  VSD, undescended right testis, postaxial polysyndactyly of right foot,  and phenotype delineation and obstructed lacrimal ducts. The birth weight of twin B was 2585  I. Barisic, G. Petkovic;  g (16 %), length 48.5 cm (23 %) and head circumference 32 cm (15  %). Apgar score was 6/8. After birth he had feeding problems and  Childrens Univ. Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. a nasogastric tube was needed. His heart defect was much more  Carey-Fineman-Ziter syndrome is a very rare disorder characterized  severe with a double outlet right ventricle (DORV), pulmonal stenosis Clinical genetics 94 (PS) and large VSD. In addition, he had postaxial polysyndactyly  
P0061 . Study of the WF
S1  gene and mitochondrial DNA in  of feet, which was bilateral, and undescended left testis. At 2 years  Spanish Wolfram syndrome families of age his motor skills were delayed but speech development was  E. Dom\x8enech, M. G\x96mez, V. Nunes;  normal. Both boys have distinctive facial features of fetal valproate  Institut de Recerca Oncol\x97gica (IRO), LÓHospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. syndrome. Their monozygosity was conÜrmed by a DNA test.  Wolfram syndrome (WS) is an autosomal recessive  Previously fetal valproate syndrome has been reported in dizygotic  neurodegenerative disorder characterised by early onset diabetes  twins. To our knowledge, this is the Ürst report of monozygotic twins  mellitus and progressive optic atrophy. Patients with WS frequently  with fetal valproate syndrome. develop deafness, diabetes insipidus, renal tract abnormalities and  diverse psychiatric illnesses, among others. A gene responsible for  
P0059 . MASA - Is it Time for a New Acronym? WS was identiÜed on 4p16.1 (WF
S1 ). It encodes a putative 890  D. Schmidt, T. Haaf, N. Kohlschmidt;  amino acid transmembrane protein present in a wide spectrum of  Institute of Human Genetics, University of Mainz Medical School, Mainz, Ger- tissues. A new locus for WS has been located on 4q22-24, providing  many. evidence for the genetic heterogeneity of this syndrome. MASA is an easy to remember and therefore clinically useful term  Six Spanish families with a total of seven WS patients were screened  for X-linked hydrocephalus (OMIM 303350) and summarizes the  for mutations in the WF
S1  coding region by direct sequencing.  features Mental retardation, Aphasia, ShufÝing gait, and Adducted  We found three previously undescribed mutations c.873C>A,  thumbs. It was coined in 1974 by Bianchine and Lewis, long before  c.1949_1950delAT and c.2206G>C, as well as the duplication c.409_ the diagnosis could be delineated by molecular studies (1992) which  424dup16, formerly published as 425ins16. showed that mutations in the 
L1 CAM gene cause this special kind of  Several groups had detected deletions in the mitochondrial DNA  hydrocephalus. (mtDNA) of WS patients. For this reason, we also studied the  Although case reports suggested a wide phenotypic variability no  presence of mtDNA rearrangements as well as LHON, MELAS and  study so far has given a survey of the clinical course with respect to  A1555G point mutations in the WS families. No mtDNA abnormalities  this distinct form of cerebral malformation. were detected. We managed to retrieve follow-up data from cases who had been  reported to or seen in our institution, either because relatives had  
P0062 . The adult phenotype in Costello syndrome. sought for genetic counselling or via support groups. S. M. White1,2, J. M. Graham Jnr3, C. Cytrynbaum4, R. Weksburg4, F. J.  Data of 13 boys were analysed: Stewart5, B. Kerr6, M. Edwards7, K. W. Gripp8, M. Wilson9, A. Bankier2;  All affected individuals have adducted thumbs and talipes, two have  1Clinical Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street  additional malformations (cleft palate, clinodactyly). Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Genetic Health Services Victoria,  Three individuals did not survive beyond the neonatal period, all  Melbourne, Australia, 3Medical Genetics Birth Defects Center, Ahmanson Dept  remaining cases received a ventricular shunt. of Paediatrics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre, Los Angeles, CA, United States,  4/10 surviving are able to walk. 4Division of Clinical & Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,  6/10 can eat on their own. ON, Canada, 5Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, United  6/10 are able to talk. Kingdom, 6Regional Genetic Service and University Department of Medical  A rough genotype/phenotype correlation can be derived from the  Genetics, Central Manchester and Manchester ChildrenÓs University Hospitals  position of the mutation. NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Hunter Genetics, Newcastle,  In our opinion the term MASA needs to be modiÜed as it suggests  Australia, 8Division of Medical Genetics, A.I. duPont Hospital for Children,  severe disabilities and may lead to an incorrect prognosis for affected  Wilmington, DE, United States, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, ChildrenÓs  fetuses and infants. Two thirds of boys with x-linked hydrocephalus  Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia. are not affected by aphasia but another two thirds are unable to walk.  Over 100 cases of Costello syndrome have been reported but only  For future use we propose the acronym BATH: Boys with Adducted  ten cases published of individuals sixteen years and older, so little  Thumbs and Hydrocephalus. is known about the natural history of the condition in adult life. We  report 12 adults with Costello syndrome ranging in age from 16 to  
P0060 . Novel mutation affecting SRY-DNA binding activity  40 years. In adult life, health problems included benign tumours:  associated with 46,XY pure gonadal dysgenesis multiple ductal papillomata in two women and a fourth ventricle mass  M. Simandlov\x861, A. KĹepelov\x861, Z. MuĀov\x861, D. Novotn\x861, E. Koě\x86rek1, K.  in one man, thought to be a choroid plexus papilloma. One patient in  Bl\x86hov\x862, V. Skalick\x862, L. Lis\x862, P. Goetz1, M. Havlovicov\x861;  this series has previously been published with a bladder carcinoma.  1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University  There were no other malignancies. Endocrine problems included  Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric Clinic, 2nd Medical Faculty,  delayed puberty and osteoporosis. Other health problems were  University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. symptomatic Chiari malformations in two patients and adult-onset  The SRY gene ( sex determining region of the Y chromosome)  gastro-oesophageal reÝux in three patients. Nine adults had mild to  initiates the process of male sex differentiation in mammalians. In  moderate intellectual disability, two individuals had severe intellectual  humans mutations in the SRY gene have been reported to account  disability and one individual had profound intellectual disability. Nine  for 10-15% of the XY sex reversal cases. of the twelve individuals attained some reading and writing skills and  We describe one novel indel mutation in the SRY gene at the patient  there was no loss of skills. This data contributes to the knowledge  with pure gonadal dysgenesis ( Swyer syndrome). Karyotype analysis  of the adult phenotype of Costello syndrome and informs the  was performed on amniotic cells obtained via amniocentesis due to  counselling of families. maternal age ( 37 years). It revealed a 46, XY complement without  mosaicism. Soon after birth we observed a discordance between  
P0063 . Mutations and polymorphisms in the TCOF1 gene in  female phenotype and male karyotype. We performed molecular  patients with Treacher Collins syndrome analysis of the SRY gene and we found indel mutation: 
C146 - B. A. Marszalek1, P. Wojcicki2, K. Kobus2, W. H. Trzeciak1;  153del8ins24 which causes G49fsX10. The protein is shorter and  1University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Hospital of Plastic Surgery,  has no HMG domain. MRI investigation of lesser pelvis showed no  Polanica Zdroj, Poland. differentiated gonads at the age of 3 months. Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is an autosomal dominant  Conclusion: In the best of our knowledge this is the Üst case of  craniofacial disorder characterised by malar hypoplasia,  assesing the patient with pure gonadal dysgenesis soonly after birth  micrognathia, macrostomia, auricular defects, conductive deafness  because of discordance of prenatal male karyotype and female  and cleft palate. The estimated incidence is 1/50000 live births, with  phenotype. 60% of the cases resulting from de novo mutations. The TCOF1  encodes a protein, 1411 amino acids in length, named treacle. At  least 106 mutations spread throughout the TCOF1 were detected,  mostly resulting in a truncated protein product of the gene.Clinical genetics 95 The structure of the TCOF1 was investigated in 50 patients with TCS  Considering the change in clinical manifestation together with  and their 36 relatives. The DNA fragments were ampliÜed by PCR  unchanged ratio of mosaic cell lines is it not unrealistic to assume  and were subsequently subjected to multitemperature single-stranded  that X inactivation might play some role in the phenotypic  conformation polymorphism (MSSCP) analysis, followed by real-time  deterioration. PCR, and direct sequencing. In one patient, sequence analysis of the ampliÜed exon 15 revealed  
P0066 . Phenotypic variability of 22q11 deletion within families a novel c.2373-2374delAG. This mutation generated a stop codon  V. Krut\x91lkova1, M. Havlovicov\x861, E. Koě\x86rek1, S. Vejvalkov\x861, T. Klein2, P.  at aa 794. In another patient, sequence analysis of exon 7 showed  Goetz1;  a c.786-787delAG. This mutation generated a stop codon at aa 270.  1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 2nd School of Medicine of Charles  AmpliÜcation of these fragments using LightCycler system revealed  University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of Pediatric Cardiology and  different melting temperature between normal and mutated alleles.  Cardiac Surgery of the 2nd School of Medicine of Charles University, Prague,  In exon 15, was identiÜed a novel c.2344C>T transition, resulting in  Czech Republic. Gln782Ter and in exon 23, a novel c.3880G>T transversion, resulting  22q11 deletion is the most common microdeletion. Estimated  in a Glu1294Ter. Two polymorphisms were demonstrated in the  occurrence is in 1 in 4, 000 live births. The majority of deletions are  TCOF1: c. 2429 T>C, resulting in Ala810Val in exon 16 and c.3938  de novo. 10-28% results from autosomal dominant transmission. In  C>T in exon 23 resulting in Ala1313Val. our group of 28 patients the inherited deletion occurred in 9 of them  Our results indicate the importance of molecular diagnostics in  (32%). Maternal transmission has been conÜrmed in all of 9 cases.  Treacher Collins syndrome for prenatal and postnatal screening and  In 2 cases there was a prenatal detection of conotruncal cardiac  for genetic counseling. disease; 22q11 deletion was conÜrmed by FISH analysis after the  birth. In one family four members with 22q11 deletion were detected;  
P0064 . A new phenotype with hypomelanosis Ito due to  in other case the patients were monozygotic twins. mutations in the p63 gene? Parents and their children show extensive phenotype variability  K. Lehmann1, S. Mundlos1, P. Meinecke2;  in concordance with other published data. Cardiac defect has  1Humboldt-Universit\x89t zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Abteilung f\x9er Medizinische  been conÜrmed in all of 9 probands but only in 3 of their mothers,  Genetik am Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, Germany. other 2 were observed for heart murmur in their childhood. Facial  Mutations in the human p63 gene are known to cause either isolated  stigmatization and other symptoms were also highly variable within  split hand/foot malformation or different syndromes such as EEC- the families. All of the mothers with 22q11 deletion were mentally  , AEC-, ADULT-, Rapp-Hodgkin- and Limb-mammary syndrome.  subnormal and showed similar pattern of behavior. Recently, we found a missense mutation in the DNA-binding  Our study conÜrms the need of examination of parents when the  domain of p63 in a boy presenting ectrodactyly, cleft lip/palate and  22q11 deletion is conÜrmed in their child. The same size of deletion  hypomelanosis of Ito. Hypopigmented skin patches and streaks  proved by molecular cytogenetic analysis has been documented  were located on the trunk, arms and legs. No additional skin  for the similar cases but cause of such variability of phenotype  abnormality or ectodermal dysplasia was observed. Even though  expression was not yet explained. As a possible explanation of  hypomelanosis of Ito is a non-speciÜc phenotype and often caused  phenotype variability other modifying genetic loci or environmental  by chromosome abnormalities, we hypothesize a correlation between  factors are suggested. hypopigmentation and the p63 mutation in this case. Our hypothesis  is supported by previous observations of individuals with both  
P0067 . A case ofschizencephaly with severe mental retardation,  ectrodactyly and hypomelanosis (Stewart et al. 1979; Riccardi et  cardiac and facial anomalies: a new syndrome? al. 1980). However, it remains unclear if there is a chromosome or  V. Klamroth, I. Kennerknecht, J. Horst;  mutational mosaicism in these patients. Interestingly, patients with  Westf\x89lische Wilhelms-Universit\x89t, M\x9enster, Germany. p63 mutation-induced ADULT syndrom also have extensive freckling  Schizencephaly is an uncommon brain malformation characterised  or characteristic hyperpigmentated skin patches. These observations  by a gray-matter lined cleft extending through the entire hemisphere.  of hypo- or hyperpigmental skin changes in p63-associated disorders  Most cases are sporadic but familial occurrence has been described.  raise the possibility of a speciÜc p63 function in the skin and  Schizencephaly is thought to represent a defect in neural migration.  melanocytes. Concomitant brain malformations (e.g. polymicrogyria, septum  pellucidum aplasia) are common, but the combination with other  
P0065 . Rare case in hemophilia A in a female patient with a  organ involvement is rare (e.g. septo-optic dysplasia). 46,X,idic(Xq) karyotype We report on a seven year old boy with syndromal disease including  K. Hadzsiev, å. Nagy, M. Czak\x96, R. Kellermayer, B. Melegh, G. Kosztol\x86nyi;  unilateral fused lip schizencephaly with epilepsy and hemiparesis,  University of P\x8dcs, P\x8dcs, Hungary. severe mental retardation, peculiar face, pulmonal atresia with right  Hemophilia A is an X linked, recessive, bleeding disorder caused by  ventricle hypoplasia, and severe feeding difÜculties. His three year  a deÜciency in the activity of coagulation factor VIII. The disorder is  old brother shows no schizencephaly or other organ involvement but  caused by mutations in the factor VIII gene which maps to Xq28. similar facial features and severe mental retardation. Chromosome  A 32 year old female patient with 30 kg (Ú3 c) weight and 120 cm  analyses and subtelomere deletion screening in both children were  (Ú3 pc) height was referred for diagnostic examination because of a  normal as was selective screening for inborn errors of metabolism  prolonged bleeding observed by casual injuries. Hemophilia A with 23  in the younger boy. To our knowledge this is the Ürst description  % VIII factor activity has been diagnosed. Her two male cousins are  of schizencephaly multiple malformation syndrome. The familial  severely affected by hemophilia A. recurrence in brothers is compatible with autosomal-recessive or  The patient was already examined by us before 19 years because  X-chromosomal inheritance, the different expression is suggestive of  of Turner phenotype. The cytogenetic analysis showed 45,X/ endogenic and/or exogenic modiÜers. 46,X,idic(Xq)/47,X,idic(Xq),idic(Xq) (10%/84%/6%). At that time no  mental retardation or bleeding disorder was present. 
P0068 . Early hematopoietic zinc Ünger gene (EHZF) is disrupted  The patient was mentally severely retarded; otherwise her phenotype  in a boy with multiple congenital anomalies, autism and mental  was the same as 19 years before. The ultrasound examination of the  retardation. pelvic region demonstrated no ovarian and uterus-like structures. At  L. Castiglia, D. Luciano, O. Galesi, M. Fichera, L. Grillo, D. Greco, C. Romano;  the cytogenetic analysis at 550 band resolution 45,X/46,X,idic(Xq)/ Oasi Institute for Research on Mental Retardation, Troina, Italy. 47,X,idic(Xq),idic(Xq) (8%/87%/5%) karyotype was proved. A 3-year-old boy with multiple congenital anomalies, mental  The correlation of genotypic and phenotypic Ündings at the  retardation and autistic behaviour was previously reported to carry  examinations performed at two different times is striking. Namely, at  a de novo reciprocal translocation: 46, XY, rcp (2;18)(p13;q11.2).  the age of 13 mental development was at average and no bleeding  He had intrauterine growth retardation, microcephaly at birth and  disorder was established, while at present severe mental retardation  low birthweight. An history of frequent upper respiratory infections  and mild hemophilia A were veriÜed.Clinical genetics 96 is associated with a reversed CD4/CD8 ratio. The phenotype is now  were normal. She was hypotonic and hypermobile, and her gait  made up of microcephaly, narrow forehead with frontal bossing,  was ataxic. Neither dystopia canthorum nor iris heterochromia were  hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, long ears, Ýat philtrum, cupid bow  noted, but there was moderate retinal depigmentation. Sweat, saliva  mouth, narrow palate, single palmar crease on the left hand and 5th- and tears were normally produced. Cardiovascular investigations  Ünger clinodactyly. were normal, as well as anorectal manometry. Brain MRI showed  Using BAC clones, we mapped the translocation breakpoints  hypersignals in the periventricular region. Mutation screening of  using Ýuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). Two overlapping  SOX10 revealed a de novo heterozygous mutation (
P175 A). genomic clones crossed the breakpoint on the der(18) chromosome,  Our case further expand the clinical variability associated with SOX10  locating the breakpoint region between R
P11 -958F21 and R
P11 - mutations, since it combines features of BADS with neurological  467
C13 . A combined approach with long range PCR and Southern  signs of W
S4  but without Hirschsprung disease. We therefore  blot analysis allowed us to determine that the early hematopoietic  conÜrm that BADS is allelic to W
S4 , and can also be ascribed to  zinc Ünger (EHZF) gene on chromosome 18 was disrupted by  heterozygous SOX10 mutations. the rearrangement. A single BAC clone, R
P11 -798J16, crossed  the breakpoint on the der (2). Extensive Database research did  
P0071 . Brachydactyly-short stature-hypertension syndrome:  not show any other gene that might be disrupted on chromosome  a new case associated with renal and cerebellar vascular  2. We suppose therefore that the disruption of the EHZF gene is  malformations probably the molecular cause of the phenotype observed in our  M. Derbent1, E. Baskòn2, M. AĔòldere3, P. I. AĔras2, \x85. Saat\x8ci2;  patient. Nevertheless, we are now evaluating the possibility that the  1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical  expression of another candidate gene in the vicinity of the breakpoint  Genetics Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, De- could be altered by the rearrangement through a positional effect. partment of Pediatrics, Nephrology Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University  Faculty of Medicine, Department of Radiology, Ankara, Turkey. 
P0069 . Periventricular nodular heterotopias and dilatation of the  Brachydactyly-short stature-hypertension syndrome is an autosomal  ascending aorta in two distinct families: a new condition ? dominant syndrome, was Ürstly described by Bilginturan et al.  O. Boute-B\x8dn\x8djean1, A. Dieux-Coeslier1, M. Holder-Espinasse1, S. Lejeune- in 1973. The responsible gene of this syndrome was mapped to  Dumoulin1, A. Moerman1, J. Weill1, P. Vermersch2, S. Manouvrier1;  12p12.2-p11.2 (Schuster et al., 1996). We report a new case, and  1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Roger Salengro, Lille, France. demonstrate his cerebellar and renal vascular malformations by  We report on Üve patients from two different families presenting with  magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). the association of periventricular nodular heterotopias (PNH) and  A 16-year-old male was referred to us because of arterial  dilatation of the ascending aorta. hypertension of unknown etiology. He had attacks of headaches, and  In the Ürst family, our patient was 31 when she was Ürst referred  epistaxis. Family history revealed that his father had chronic renal  to the genetic clinic. She presented with the association of  failure for 15 years. The father had history of hypertension attacks,  aortic incompetence and non-epileptic paroxystic neurological  but cause of chronic renal failure was unknown. Physical examination  manifestations secondary to PNH and arachnoid cyst of the posterior  of the patient showed short stature, brachydactyly of the hands,  fossa. Her father presented with supra-valvular aortic dilatation  and macrocrania with normal mental-motor development. His blood  repaired at the age of 41, and his brain MRI revealed asymptomatic  pressure was 150/90 mmHg. Routine blood, urine, renal function and  PNH. hematologic tests were in normal limits. Echocardiography, abdominal  In the second family, our patient went under surgery for dilatation  ultrasonoghraphy, and cranial MRI disclosed no pathological Ündings.  of the aorta at the age of 38. She presented with complex seizures  X-ray of the hands showed brachyphalangy, cone shaped epiphysis,  due to PNH associated with mega cisterna magna. Her mother was  and especially shortness of the 4th and 5th metacarpals. operated at the age of 54 from a dissection of the aorta, and her  Since, previous reports noted that anomalies of intracranial,  daughter presented at the age of 10 with aortic dilatation treated with  mesenteric and renal arteries (Chithayat et al., 1997 and Litwin et  beta-blocker and PNH. al., 2003), we examined the patient by contrast-enhanced MRA. This  There were neither clinical features of Marfan nor Ehlers-Danlos  study showed right aberrant posterior inferior cerebellar artery, and  syndromes (EDS) in these patients, although distal hypermobility  that left renal artery had early bifurcation, irregularity and stenosis of  was noted as well as generalised thin skin. Reviewing the literature,  its inferior dominant branch. we could not identify any similar condition, but the association of  Previous reports and our observations indicated that vascular  dilatation of the aorta and PNH had been previously reported in two  anomalies or possible diffuse vascular pathology are major  patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Cupo, 1981; Thomas, 1996).  component of this syndrome, and the responsible genes may be  Two other patients with EDS had also been described with bilateral  related to generalized connective tissue disorders. focal polymicrogyria (Echaniz-Laguna, 2000). We think that this association is probably a new autosomal dominant  
P0072 . Two cases of PHACES (Posterior fossa anomalies,  condition, and that there is probably a link between connective  Hemangiomas, Arterial anomalies, Cardiac/aortic malformations,  tissues anomalies and defect of neuronal migration. Eye anomalies, Sternal cleft/Supraumblical raph\x8d) syndrome  from Turkey 
P0070 . Black locks-Albinism-Deafness syndrome is allelic  S. Balcò1, M. Derbent2;  to Waardenburg syndrome type 4 and can be ascribed to  1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Departments of Clinical Genetics  heterozygous SOX10 mutation and Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine,  R. Touraine1, A. Comb\x8es1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2, M. Holder-Espinasse2;  Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey. 1CHU-Hopital Nord, St Etienne, France, 2Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France. Facial hemangiomas, sternal nonunion, supraumblical raph\x8d,  Waardenburg syndrome type 4 (W
S4 ) is a rare disorder characterised  vascular anomalies and Dandy-Walker malformation syndrome was  by sensorineural hearing loss, pigmentation anomalies and  described as a new entity by Gorlin in 1994. Frieden et al. (1996)  Hirschprung disease. SOX10 mutations have been reported in this  suggested use of acronym ÐPHACEÑ syndrome, because these cases  condition when inherited as autosomal dominant trait. Black locks- had Posterior fossa anomalies, Hemangiomas, Arterial anomalies,  Albinism-Deafness syndrome (BADS) is a rare autosomal recessive  Cardiac/aortic malformations, and Eye anomalies. When ventral  condition, in which EDNRB mutations have been described. developmental defects such as Sternal cleft or Supraumblical raph\x8d  We report on a patient presenting with overlapping features of these  are observed, the condition is expanded as ÐPHACESÑ syndrome.  two conditions. Grosso et al. (2004) suggested that the facial hemangiomas may be  She presented with severe hypotonia and constipation from  associated with disorders of the cortical development. birth, and at 3 months of age pigmented patches appeared over  We will present two new cases of PHACES syndrome from different  generalised skin and hair hypopigmentation, except for a brown lock.  families. First case was a 3-month-old female who had widespread  Sensorineural hearing loss was diagnosed at one year. When Ürst  facial, lower lip, tongue and soft palate hemangiomas. She was  referred to the genetic clinic at the age of 4 ď, growth parameters  second child of non-consanguineous parents. The patient was Clinical genetics 97 followed by us, and treated with corticosteroids. By the time she got 4  Ünding during the neonatal period.Relative rare complications are  years old, the facial hemangiomas had been regressed. The second  hemihypertrophy, moderate or severe developmental delay and  case was a 3-month-old male born to consanguineous parents.  congenital heart defects and polycythemia. The mode of inheritance  The patient had macrocephaly, mental-motor retardation, coarse  is complex, but recetly compiled data suggest that it is an autosomal  facial features, macroglossia, and sternal and frontal hemangiomas.  dominant trait of varying expression. Incomplete penetrance may lead  Umblical hernia and bilateral hydrocele were also noted. Cranial MRI  to familial BWS being underdiagnosed. Part of apparently sporadic  showed cortical atrophy. Echocardiography were normal in both of  cases had a relative with possible BWS. our cases. This syndrome may have a broad phenotypic spectrum.  Further molecular studies will help us to understand the phenotypic  
P0075 . Late and very late-onset Friedreich ataxia in Czech  variability. Reported cases indicate a highly signiÜcant association  republic between ipsilateral hemangiomas and cerebrovascular, and aortic  A. Zumrov\x861, T. MaĹ\x91kov\x861, A. B\x96day1, L. Apltov\x861, J. Kraus1, R. Mazanec1, E.  arch anomalies (Bronzetti et al., 2004). Z\x86rubov\x861, E. Havrdov\x862;  Finally, every case with superÜcial hemangiomas should be checked  1Neurogenetic Centre of 2nd Medical Faculty and Faculty Hospital Motol,  for the presence of cardiovascular, intracranial, and eye anomalies. Charles University, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2Neurologic department, 1st  Medical Faculty and University Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech  
P0073 . ModiÜed allelic replication in genomes of patients with  Republic. Beckwith Wiedemann Syndrome Friedreich ataxia (FA) is the most common autosomal recessive  O. Reish1, M. Mashevitz1, R. Gobazov1, M. Rozenblat1, L. Avivi2;  ataxia, accounting for approximately 50% of all cases of hereditary  1Assaf Harofe Medical Center, ZeriÜn, Israel, 2Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,  ataxia. Cardinal features include progressive limb and gait ataxia,  Israel. dysarthria, loss of joint position and vibration senses, absent tendon  A loss of synchrony in allelic replication timing has been detected in  reÝexes in the legs, and extensor plantar responses. lymphocytes derived from patients with various types of malignancies  Onset of FA is before age of 20 - 25 years. In approximately 15% of  or premalignancies. As Beckwith Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS) is an  patients with FA, the age of onset may be greater than 25 years. The  overgrowth condition associated with an increased risk to develop  age of onset in late onset Friedreich ataxia (LOFA) is between 26-39  malignancies, we used the Ýuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)  years and in very late onset FA (VLOFA) is >40 years. replication assay and evaluated the level of replication synchrony  We examined a series of 490 patients from unrelated families  of three cancer-implicated genes (RB1, AM
L1 , and CMYC) in  attending genetic testing because of idiopathic, progressive ataxia  lymphocytes derived from patients with BWS without malignancy. and inheritance compatible with autosomal recessive or sporadic  Ten controls and 6 patients with BWS including 2 sporadic individuals  disease. All patients were of Czech origin except 2 (Slovak origin). - one with paternal uniparental disomy (pat UPD), one with mosaic  28 patients from the examined group (5,7%) were homozygous for a  pat UPD and 4 individuals from the same family with enhancement  GAA triplet-repeat expansion in intron 1 of the FRDA gene. The age  of the paternal band at H19 locus, were evaluated. In cells derived  of onset has been observed between 4-20 years in 18 patients (64%),  from controls, each pair of alleles replicated synchronously; yet these  between 20-25 in 6 patients (21%), between 25-39 years in 3 patients  same alleles replicated in a signiÜcantly increased asynchrony in cells  (11,5%), and after 40 years in 1 patient (3,5%). derived from BWS patients. Each gene, which normally displayed  We demonstrate clinical picture and results of DNA test in 4 detected  synchrony in allelic replication, in the patientsÒ cells displayed loss  cases with late and very late onset Friedreich ataxia. of synchrony. The loss of replication synchrony, of each gene, in the  Supported by Grant IGA R NM/7405-3 and ScientiÜc Program 2nd  patientsÒ cells was achieved by an advanced replication of a single  Medical Faculty 111300003 4.2 allele, which replicated remarkably earlier than its normal scheduled  timing. In addition, the second allele showed a signiÜcantly earlier  
P0076 . A novel autosomal recessive progressive  replication timing than that normal for the gene. Thus, it is assumed  hyperpigmentation syndrome that the BWS condition is associated with activation of cancer- U. D. H\x9effmeier, A. Reis, A. Rauch;  implicated genes that may be the cause for over growth and an  University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. increased risk of patients to develop malignancies. We present a family of Iraqui origin with three siblings affected  by a novel type of progressive hyperpigmentation syndrome.  
P0074 . Beckwith - Wiedemann syndrom: Orofacial and other  The generalized hyperpigmentation started in early infancy and  Ündings - overview of 15 families increased during childhood. It also affected palms and soles, and  M. Kuklik1, J. Handzel2;  the face but spared cheeks. Additional features were dry, itchy and  1Charles University Prague 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Czech Republic, Prague 5  sunlight sensitive skin, dystrophy of toe nails, hair loss, myopia. The  - Motol, Czech Republic, 2Charles University Prague 1nd Faculty of Medicine,  remaining family history was unremarkable. Chromosomal analysis  Czech Republic, Praguetol, Czech Republic. at a 500 banding level in one girl showed a normal female karyotype.  Syndrome is characterized major features: exomphalos, macroglossia  A similar entity was described as ÐMelanosis diffusa congenitaÑ with  and overgrowth. The locus has been assigned to 11p15.5. Small  unknown origin by Braun-Falco et al. in 1980. Familial occurrence in  number of BWSs have abnormalities involving in WT 1 locus in  that entity suggested autosomal dominant inheritance with reduced  chromosome 11p13. Alterations of region 11p15 have been detected  penetrance. However, in our family the two affected girls and one  in neoplastic disease and in cancer predisposing syndromes, too.  affected boy were offspring of a Ürst cousin marriage suggesting  Most of our cases are sporadic. Somatic mosaicism is connected  autosomal recessive inheritance. with hemihypertrophy and with paternal isodisomy. We conducted  stomatological, genetic and paediatric study to clarify major and  
P0077 . FISH for detection of 22q11.2 deletion among patients  minor diagnostic characteristic and longterm expectation. We noted  referred for Di George/VeloCardioFacial Syndrome (DGS/VCFS) facultatively signs: wall defects and or macroglossia. Many of these  A. Kolialexi, H. Fryssira, S. Kitsiou, A. Galla, K. Salavoura, M. Kanariou, E.  infants are born prematurely. We detected no cytogenetic variations,  Kanavakis, A. Mavrou;  no tumours have been detected. Some candidate tumor supressor  Athens University, Athens, Greece. genes are relative to Beckwith - Wiedemann syndrome. Long term  DGS and /VCFS result in the majority of cases from deletion or  ultrasound monitoring was provided. Treatment of the craniofacial  rearrangement within chromosome band 22q11.2 and there is a wide  complications of BWS depend from variable degree of macroglossia.  variability of clinical spectrum. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis was  Partial glossectomy has resulted in decreased anterior open bite  performed in 139 patients (82 males /37 females) aged 10 days- and mandibular prognathism. The most frequent complications were  15 years, for the detection of a deletion in the critical DGS/VCFS  macroglossia, abdominal wall defect and prenatal and/or postnatal  region. Detailed clinical data were available in 56 cases referred by  overgrowth. Relative common features are horizontal earlobe  pediatricians (32/56), cardiologists (20/56) and neurologists (4/56) for  creaseas and pits, facial naevus Ýamneus, nefromegaly with renal  one or more of the following: congenital heart defects (47/56), facial  medullary dysplasia and hypoglykemia. Hypoglycaemia is a frequent Clinical genetics 98 dysmorphic features (37/56), mental retardation/behavioral problems  
P0080 . Lobar Holoprosencephaly - clinical and evolutional  (23/56), multiple congenital anomalies (15/56) skeletal abnormalities  aspects (15/56), Hypocalcaemia (10/56), immunological problems (10/56),  M. Boia1, V. Botiu1, E. Boia1, J. Puiu1, C. Budisan1, A. Manea2, E. Nedelea2, F.  growth retardation (8/56), hypotonia/seizures (7/56), velopharyngeal  Isfan2, C. Cojocaru2, S. Raicu2;  insufÜciency (5/56) and cleft palate (4/56).Cytogenetic analysis  1Clinic of Neonatology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,  revealed an abnormal karyotype in 2/139 cases (47,XXY and  Romania, 2Infants Emergency Hospital ÐLouis TurcanuÑ, Timisoara, Romania. 46,XX,2p+), which most likely did not contributed to the DGS/VCFS  Introduction: Holoprosencephaly appears between the 4-th to 8-th  phenotype. A 22q11.2 deletion was detected in 17/139 (12.2%)  week of pregnancy due to the lack of cleavage of the prosencephalus  patients tested (14males and 3 females) aged 10days-5 years  in the telencephalus and diencephalus,. The attendance is 1 at  (n=11), 5-10 years (n=2) and 10-15 years (n=4).In 3 the deletion was  10.000 live newborn,; 60 times higher at aborted human embryos.  inherited (2 maternal and 1 paternal). Patients with 22q11.2 deletion  Depending on the degree of differentiation and severity we can have  exhibited facial dysmorphic features (82%), congenital heart defects  3 subtypes of holoprosencephaly: alobar. semilobar and lobar. (65%), immunological problems (47%), multiple congenital anomalies  Material and Method: The authors present a study on 3 premature  including urogenital (41%), hypocalcaemia (35%), mental retardation  newborns, with lobar holoprosencephaly, an extremely rare affection  (35%), behavioral problems (35%), skeletal abnormalities (23.5%),  in the current medical practice. Two of the patients didnÓt show  velopharyngeal insufÜciency (23.5%) seizures/hypotonia (18%) , cleft  any symptoms until the age of two weeks when they presented  palate (18%) and growth retardation 12%). After reevaluation of the  generalized tonic-clonic seizure. One of the newborns showed other  remaining patients, 14 were classiÜed under other distinct genetic  associated malformations: unilateral anophthalmia and congenital  syndromes which emphasizes the need of stricter clinical criteria for  septal defect. Cerebral lesions were highlighted by cerebral imaging  patient referral. methods - head ultrasonography, CT in one of the cases and NMR in  2 of the cases. Those investigations showed speciÜc lesions at the  
P0078 . Partial trisomy 16q in a malformed child with mild  median line . The karyotype was normal in 2 of the cases; one of the  retardation cases presented trisomy 13. The evolution of the cases was severe,  K. Salavoura, A. Mavrou, A. Kolialexi, E. Kanavakis, S. Kitsiou;  causing death in one of the cases and slowly evoluting with recurrent  Athens University, Athens, Greece. seizures and motor- and psychic retardation in two of the cases. We report on a 2 year old girl with intrauterine growth retardation,  Conclusions: Lobar holoprosencephaly is a rare affection, without  slight dysmorphic features, mild mental retardation and karyotype  speciÜc clinical expression and its diagnosis can be easily missed  46,XX, der(8), t(8;16), (q24.2;q22) mat, conÜrmed by Ýuoresent in  in the neonatal period. Cerebral imaging was the primary method in  situ hybridization analysis. The chromosomal anomaly was the result  the setting of the diagnosis: head ultrasonography tracked down the  of an unbalanced segregation of a maternal balanced translocation  lesions and CT and NMR established their extension. t (8;16) (q24.2;q22). Partial trisomy 16q is a clinically recognized  Keywords: holoprosencenphaly, echography, newborn entity with a wide spectrum of anomalies which are compared with  our Ündings. In the literature there are about 40 reported cases, but  
P0081 . Phenotype/genotype associations in a 5p- male  there are only six previous ones where trisomy 16q is not associated  ascertained for azoospermia. with monosomy of another chromosomal segment, as in our patient.  M. Patricelli1, E. Rossi1, M. De Gregori1, L. Argentiero2, R. Busuito2, G. Foresti3,  The absence of monosomy as well as the small size of the trisomic  O. Zuffardi1;  segment (16q22ŗqter)may be the reason of the lack of serious  1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2U.S. di Citogenetica  congenital visceral defects in our patient. To our knowledge our  ASL Lodi, Lodi, Italy, 3Centro ÐSacro Cuore di Ges\x9cÑ - Fate Bene Fratelli, S.  report is the Ürst of a partial trisomy 16q resulting from a parental  Colombano al Lambro, Italy. translocation involving chromosomes 8 and 16.This case belongs to  The majority of deletions of 5p result in the classical phenotype of  a rare group of live born patients reported so far since partial trisomy  the Cri-du-chat syndrome. The associated features include severe  16q are usually reported during the 1st trimester. mental retardation, microcephaly, growth delay and a cry similar to  the mewing of a cat, often the Ürst diagnostic indication for the 5p  
P0079 . Craniosynostosis in a 22q11.2 microdeletion patient  deletion. Two distinct regions in 5p have been identiÜed by molecular  without FGFR3 mutation analysis, one responsible for the cat-like-cry in 5p15.3 and the  M. Czak\x961, W. Kress2, J. K\x86rteszi1, G. Kosztol\x86nyi1, E. Morava1;  other for dysmorphism, microcephaly, and mental retardation in  1University of P\x8dcs, P\x8dcs, Hungary, 2University Biocenter Am Hubland,  5p15.2. A third region for speech delay has been hypothesised in  Wurzburg, Germany. distal 5p15.3. We report on an azoospermic male with 5p deletion,  Craniosynostosis has been reported in 1 % of the patients carrying  with mild mental retardation, left renal hypoplasia, speech delay,  microdeletion at locus 22q11.2 which is signiÜcantly more common  a Ðbreathy, raspy voiceÑ, without the clinical features diagnostic for  than its incidence in the general population (0.05 %) (Ryan et al,  the cri-du-chat syndrome. A cat-like cry was present at birth. He  1997). In the ánonsyndromicÑ coronal craniosynostosis syndrome  was reported to have had a normal psychomotor development but  (Muencke et al, 1997, MIM 602849) mutation in the FGFR3 gene  the very poor performance at school. At the moment he works as  located at chromosome 4p16.3 is a cornerstone of the diagnosis.  warehouseman and is married. Cytogenetic analysis was requested  In other craniosynostosis syndromes mutations in FGFR1, FGFR2,  for azoospermia. The deletion breakpoint in the patient, determined  and TWIST genes were reported. Here we report on a patient with  by FISH analysis with BAC clones, maps in 5p15.31, 8 Mb far from  22q11.2 deletion in whom, among other features, craniosynostosis  the telomere. Microsatellite analysis revealed a maternal origin of  was also present. The patient, a Ürstborn of male twins, presenting  the deletion. Since most 5p- patients are characterized by severe  partial coronal and sagittal craniosynostosis, proptosis, small  mental retardation whereas our propositus has only a mild form,  mouth, intact palate, asymmetric chest interrupted aortic arch,  this case demonstrates the presence of different mental retardation  hyperextensible joints, and arachnodactyly, was found to have the  genes in 5p. The monosomy for that located in the distal 8 Mb is  common microdeletion of 22q11.2 by FISH (Vysis§). Sequence  responsible for the mild/moderate type of mental retardation present  analysis of the gene FGFR3, and that of genes FGFR1, FGFR2,  in our patient. Infertility is not unusual in males carrying chromosome  and TWINS (known as classical craniosynostosis genes) detected  rearrangements. no mutations in the hot spot mutation regions. Considering our  observation we suggest that the relatively high occurrence rate of  craniosynostosis in patients with 22q11.2 microdeletion can not be  explained by mutations of the known craniosynostosis genes. We  also suggest that the presence of FGFR3 mutation at the locus  4p16.3 in patients with 22q11.2 deletion found in some sporadic  observations (Dean et al, 1998, Ryan et al, 1998) might be a pure  coincidence of two relatively common mutations.Clinical genetics 99 
P0082 . Clinical and evolutional remarks on the congenital  
P0084 . Remarks on a case of Achondroplasia hydrocephaly A. Manea1, V. Botiu2, M. Boia2, D. Iacob2, F. Isfan3, C. Cojocaru3, S. Raicu3;  E. S. Boia1, M. Boia1, V. Botiu1, J. Puiu1, C. Budisan1, D. Iacob1, A. Manea2, F.  1Infants Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinic of Neonatology,  Isfan2, E. Nedelea2, C. Cojocaru2, S. Raicu2;  University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Infants Emergency  1Clinic of Neonatology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,  Hospital ÐLouis TurcanuÑ, Timisoara, Romania. Romania, 2Infants Emergency Hospital ÐLouis TurcanuÑ, Timisoara, Romania. Background: Achondroplasia is a common nonlethal form of  Objective: diagnostical framing of the echography Ünd out disease,  chondrodysplasia transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with  correlation between the imaging and clinical marks, setting of the  complete penetrance. Positive diagnosis is established relatively easy  evolutional stage and therapeutical based on speciÜc clinical signs: short stature, rhizomelic shortening  indication. of the arms and legs, disproportionately long trunk, trident hands,  Material and Method: The study contained 34 cases of  midfacial hypoplasia, frontal bossing, thoracolumbar gibbus, true  ventriculomegaly, selected by clinical and imaging criteria from the  megalencephaly and caudal narrowing of the interpedicular spaces. premature newborn hospitalized in the Clinic of Neonatology. Head  Material and methods: Premature newborn clinically, imagistic and  ultrasonography was used as method of diagnosis and prognosis  cytogenetically examined. evaluation. Results: A four days old newborn, L.M., has been hospitalised in  Results: Hydrocephaly was associated with: meningomyelocele  our department with plurimalformative syndrome. Personal history  in 8 cases, meningoencephalocele in 3 cases, Dandy-Walker  revealed healthy parents, gestational age of thirtyseven weeks, birth  malformation in 4 cases, agenesis of the corpus callosus in 5 cases,  weight : 2260 g, 35 cm stature, Apgar score 1 at 5Ó. The disease  malformation of the GalenÓs vein in 2 cases, arachnoid kyst in 4  was revealed in the 6th month of the pregnancy. Positive diagnosis  cases, lobar holoprosencephaly in 3 cases. In 4 of the cause couldnÓt  has been established based on clinical examination which shows  be found at they didnÓt present any associated malformations. 5 of the  a particular phenotype with: micrognathia, prominent forehead,  cases from those with cranio-vertebral dysraphism presented Arnold/ moderate exophtalmy, posterior cleft palate, micromelia ( upper  Chiari II malformations associated with meningomyelocele and 3 of  limbs=13cm), short overall stature, siting stature of 30 cm, congenital  those cases presented Arnold/Chiari III malformation associated with  deformed foot: varus equinus. Paraclinical investigations conÜrm the  meningoencephalocele . The clinical manifestations were those of  clinical data: bone radiography reveales the shortening of the limbs  the classic hydrocephaly associated with: recurring seizures, paresis,  long bones with changes of epiphysis osteochondritis. The genetical  paralysis of the inferior limbs in 4 cases, apnea crisis, acrocyanosis.  consult conÜrms the existing somatic changes without detecting  Cerebral imaging was used to appreciate the ventricular enlargement  any change of the karyotype. The evolution in the neonatal period  and the degree of compression of the cerebral tissue. The evolution  was difÜcult due to associated intercurrencies (especially repeated  of the cases showed a high rate of decease- 51,4 %. respiratory infection), to difÜcult feeding, with a slowly increasing  Conclusions: The fast evoluting hydrocephaly was the primary  weight curve. cause of death at the cases with associated malformations. The most  Conclusions: Achondroplasia is a rare disease in the current  frequently met malformation types were: cranio- cerebral dysraphism  medical practice. Diagnosis is easily established in prenatal and  and agenesis of the corpus callosum . postnatal period based on somatometric, cytogenetic and imagistic  Keywords: Hydrocephaly, congenital, child data. Keywords: 
P0083 . The necessity of early positive diagnosis of Dandy- Achondroplasia, diagnosis, child Walker Syndrom V. Botiu1, M. Boia1, F. Isfan2, A. Manea2, C. Cojocaru2, S. Raicu2;  
P0085 . The prevalence of the heart congenital malformations to  the premature newborn 1Clinic of Neonatology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,  Romania, 2Infants Emergency Hospital ÐLouis TurcanuÑ, Timisoara, Romania. D. Iacob1, V. Botiu1, M. Boia1, R. E. Iacob2, A. Manea2;  Introduction: The Dandy-Walker complex corresponds to the Dandy- 1Clinic of Neonatology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara,  Walker malformation and to the variants of its syndrom. Romania, 2Infants Emergency Hospital ÐLouis TurcanuÑ, Timisoara, Romania. Objectives: This work is proposing to frame into the diagnosis  Background: Heart congenital malformations represent an important  the cerebral lesions detected by the antenatal and/or neonatal  problem in pediatry because of the growth incidence and of the  echography. medical and social implications. Material and method: The study group contains 4 new-borns and  Purpose: This study wants to establish the incidency of heart  infants who were admited in our department between 1998-2004. The  congenital malformations compared to the other congenital  criteria for the comprise in the study were anamnestical, clinical and  malformations and their frequency according to some factors: risk,  imagistic. Head utrasonography was performed for diagnosis and for  social background, sex and prematurity. dynamic observation of the patients with ventriculomegaly. Physical  Method: The study is based on clinical, paraclinical examinations and  signs were conÜrmed by genetics, but without a chromozomial  imagistic explorations which were performed on premature new born  manifestation. hospitalized in the Neonatology and Health Care Clinic Timisoara  Results: Clinical signs were similar: all the patients presented an  between 2000 and 2002. increased head circumference, especially for the occipital region.  Results: Of the 72 studied with congenital malformations, 33 (45,8%)  Classical appearance of hydrocefalus was found in only one case.  had heart congenital malformations. Of these 3 (9%) were cyanotic  There were present: seizures, hypotonia, apnea and cyanosis and  lesions (transpositions of the great arteries) and 30 (91%) - acyanotic  other abnormalities: ASD-one case, congenital hydronephrosis- lesions. Regarding the social background 18 (54,5%) were from  one case, VSD-one case. The Ünal diagnosis was based on head  urban areas and 15 (45,5%) from the rural areas. The repartition of  ultrasonography: enlargement of the IV-th ventricle, maldevelopment  the cases according to sex showed that 16 (48,4%) were female and  of the cerebellum, enlargement of the whole ventriculary system. CT  17 (51,6%) -male. According to the prematurity: 12 (36,3%) were 1st  conÜrmed the diagnosis for all the patients. grade prematures, 12 (42,4%) - second grade prematures, 3 (9%)  The prognosis for the cases was reserved: one patient with evolutive  - 3rd grade prematures and 4 (12%) - 4th grade prematures. hydrocephalus had a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt at the age of 2  Conclusions: 1. the incidency of heart congenital malformations is  months, 2 patients died at 6 months, one at 7 months. high, representing 45,8% of the total congenital malformations. Conclusions: The diagnosis was set based on imaging studies and  2. the frequency of the acyanotic lesions is superior to the cyanotic  clinical evaluation; the associated abnormalities did not inÝuence the  lesions. prognosis; the hydrocephalus that occure consecutive to the Dandy- 3. there is a slight predominance of the cases which come from the  Walker malformation evolved fast and caused the death of 3 of the 4  urban areas comparatively to those from the rural areas, possibly  cases. because of higher pollution. Key words: malformation, diagnosis, child. 4. distribution according to sex is approximately equal.Clinical genetics 100 
P0086 . Phenotype of two siblings with pure partial trisomy 2p21- in the eastern Mediterranean with a population of 700,000. This  >2p23. population is served by a relatively new genetics clinic which was  T. E. Neumann1, B. Heye2, J. M\x9eller-Navia3, R. J. Exeler1, J. Horst1, I. Kenner- established in 1994. We discuss the clinical variability of this disorder  knecht1;  among the patient population in our clinic. We will also attempt to  correlate the effect of early intervention on the natural history of WS. 1Westf. Wilhelms-Universit\x89t, M\x9enster, Germany, 2Technische Universit\x89t, M\x9en- The incidence of WS in the Cyprus is approximately 1% of the  chen, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, Mainz, Germany. patients seen in the clinic. The diagnosis was established as early as  We present two female siblings at the age of 7 and 3 years, with  a few months and as late as 16 years. Many of the patients had the  similar and characteristic Ündings of short stature (<= 3rd perc.),  classic clinical picture; there were however a few who did not have  macrocephaly (> 97th perc.) and mild psycho-motor retardation; a  the expected spectrum of features (congenital heart disease, infantile  peculiar face with prominent forehead, deep set eyes, blue sclerae,  hypercalcemia or growth deÜciency). hypertelorism, epicanthus, short philtrum; high arched palate, small  We suggest that the patients in Cyprus have a greater heterogeneity  teeth, low-set posterior rotated ears with thickened helices, sparse  with a clinical picture at the two ends of the WS spectrum. Even  hair, pectus excavatum, clinodactyly of 4th and 5th Üngers and broad  though we had the opportunity to offer early intervention we found  Ürst toes. that it was not a single inÝuencing factor in the cognitive development  Routine cytogenetic analyses revealed a partial trisomy 2p21->p23,  of children with WS. due to a paternaly derived insertion of chromosome 2 material into  chromosome 6; karyotype: 46,XX,der(6)ins(6;2)(p12;p21p23)pat.  
P0089 . Should chromosome breakage studies be performed in  These results were conÜrmed by reverse in situ hybridisation. patients with VACTERL syndrome ? In contrast to terminal trisomy 2p that is repeatedly reported,  L. Faivre1, M. G\x8drard2, M. Le Merrer3, F. Huet1, M. Portno\x944, A. Verloes5, H.  interstitial partial trisomy 2p is rarely observed. The delineation of  Joenje6, C. J. Mathew7, C. Baumann5;  phenotypic Ündings to causative, non-terminal partial trisomy 2p is  puzzeling. Up to now, there is only one publication of the same partial  1Centre de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Dijon, France, 2G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddicale, CHIC, Cr\x8dteil,  trisomy 2p21->p23. Clinical features in common are: growth failure,  France, 3D\x8dpartement de G\x8dn\x8dtique, H\x98pital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris,  macrocephaly, development delay, prominent forehead, low-set  France, 4Cytog\x8dn\x8dtique, CHU Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 5G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddi- ears with helix anomaly, and clinodactyly. A comparison with other  cale, H\x98pital Robert Debr\x8d, Paris, France, 6Department of Human Genetics,  cases of partial trisomy 2p extending beyond 2p21->p23 conÜrms  VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Molecular Genetics,  these observations. Our studies now allow to delineate a common  GuyÓs Hospital, London, United Kingdom. phenotype of trisomy 2p21->p23 and lead to a more accurate  VACTERL is characterized by the association of vertebral anomalies,  genotype-phenotype assignment in partial trisomy 2p. anal atresia, cardiac malformations, tracheoesophageal Üstula,  renal anomalies, and limb anomalies and is postulated to be a very  
P0087 . Supernumerary interdigital Ýexion creases as marker  heterogeneous disorder. Those malformations are all part of the  of monosomy 21q22.3, an underdiagnosed cryptic deletion  Fanconi anemia spectrum. Although the association of VACTERL  syndrome with hydrocephaly have clearly been associated with Fanconi anemia  J. Hoyer, U. Trautmann, A. Rauch;  in several instances, the indication for chromosome breakage studies  is not clear in VACTERL without hydrocephaly. Here we report on 5  Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nu- unrelated patients with VACTERL and FA. Together with the data of  remberg, Erlangen, Germany. 13 VACTERL/FA cases extracted from a large previous European  There is a broad variation in the clinical features of distal q21  genotype-phenotype correlation study and those from the 3 reported  deletions. Patients with monosomy 21q22.3 are rarely described.  cases in the literature, we showed that: i) the frequency of VACTERL  Therefore we report a girl karyotyped with cryptic monosomy 21q22.3  association in FA patients can be raised at 13/243 (5%), ii) although  and without evidence of mosaicism. The diagnosis was conÜrmed  at least one other feature of FA was found in the vast majority  by subtelomer FISH analysis. Our patient was referred because of  of cases (caf\x8d au lait spots, growth retardation, microcephaly,  global developmental delay and minor morphological anomalies. Her  dysmorphism), none of those feature was found in 2 cases (10%),  weight, length and head circumference is normal. The girl has a mild  and iii) VACTERL phenotype in FA appear rare in the more prevalent  midfacial hypoplasia and abnormalities in sleeping EEG as distinctive  groups A, C and G and frequent in complementation groups D, E, F  features. A wide range of midline facial abnormalities with or without  (>30%). The diagnosis of Fanconi anemia being of importance for  pathological EEG can be associated with holoprosencephaly which  genetic counseling and early therapeutic intervention in patients, we  is inter alia related to deletion of chromosome 21q22.3. Comparison  conclude that chromosomal breakage studies should be performed,  with patients with large ring chromosome 21 revealed a similar  not only in cases of VACTERL-H, but also in VACTERL, especially  recognizable phenotype with multiple supernumerary interdigital  if the child also present skin pigmentation abnormalities, growth  Ýexion creases without digital abnormalities as a characteristic  retardation, microcephaly or dysmorphism. marker for this aberration. This particular phenotype was found to  be present bilaterally on the middle phalanges of the Üngers I-IV  
P0090 . Genotype-phenotype correlations in X-linked  in our patient. Multiple supernumerary interdigital Ýexion creases  Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia are rare in the general population, but occur frequently in a number  A. Ramazzotti1, E. Parrini1, D. Mei1, F. Moro1, J. Campistol2, A. Cuschieri3,  of syndromes such as Alagille syndrome, which is caused by  T. Dorn4, M. C. Jones5, E. Said3, L. Sander3, S. Sisodya3, Y. Takahashi6, G.  haploinsufÜciency of the JAG1 gene, located at 20p13. Therefore  Tortorella7, S. Palmieri8, P. Veggiotti9, M. Viri10, M. Wright11, W. B. Dobyns12, C.  another haploinsufÜcient gene leading to this rare morphological  A. Walsh13,14, R. Guerrini15;  anomaly in a syndromal context seems to be located at 21q22.3. 1IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, ScientiÜc Institute for Child and Adolescence  
P0088 . Williams Syndrome - an Epidemiologic Approach Neurology and Psichiatry, Pisa, Italy, 2Servicio de Neuropediatria, Hospital  V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1,2, A. Kotti1, E. Spanou Aristidou2;  Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 3St. LukeÓs Hospital, Gwardamangia,  Malta, 4Swiss Epilepsy Center, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Dysmorphology and  1Makarios Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus INstitute of Neurology  Genetics, Childrens Hospital and Health Center, San Diego, CA, United States,  and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. 6National Epilepsy Center, Shizuoka Medical Institute of Neurological disorders,  Williams syndrome (WS) is a microdeletion syndrome that is  Shizuoka, Japan, 7Universit\x87 degli Studi di Messina, Messina, Italy, 8Istituto di  characterized by distinctive facial features, cognitive impairment,  Scienze Neurologiche, Universit\x87 di Siena, Siena, Italy, 9Dipartimento di clinica  unique personality characteristics, cardiovascular anomalies, growth  neurologica e psichiatrica dellÓet\x87 evolutiva, Fondazione Istituto Neurologico  deÜciency and infantile hypercalcemia. The mainstay for diagnosis  Casimiro Mondino, Pavia, Italy, 10Regional Epilepsy Center, Fatebenefratelli  is the contiguous gene deletion in the WS critical region (located  Hospital, Milano, Italy, 11Institute of Human Genetics International Centre for  at 7q11) that encompasses the elastin gene. Clinical diagnosis is  Life, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 12Department of Human Genetics,  conÜrmed using Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH). Neurology and Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States,  We propose to analyse the frequency of WS in Cyprus, a small island  13Division of Neurogenetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department Clinical genetics 101 of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,  Foundation & Division of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Pisa,  Boston, MD, United States, 14Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences,  Pisa, Italy. Harvard Medical School, Boston, MD, United States, 15IRCCS Stella Maris  Periventricular nodular heterotopia (PNH) is a malformation of  Foundation & Division of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Pisa,  neuronal migration in which a subset of neurons fails to migrate into  Pisa, Italy. the developing cerebral cortex and remains as nodules of heterotopic  In PNH (Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia) subsets of neurons fail  gray matter along the lateral ventricles. to migrate to the developing cerebral cortex and remain bordering the  X-linked PNH is associated with mutations of Filamin A (FLN1) gene  lateral ventricular walls. (mapped to Xq28) and is characterised by 50% recurrence risk in  Classical PNH, an X-linked dominant disorder is far more frequent  daughters of affected women and prenatal or early postnatal lethality  in females, who have normal intelligence to borderline mental  in boys. Partial loss-of-function of FLN1 or somatic mosaicism were  retardation, epilepsy and extra-CNS signs. Prenatal or early postnatal  hypothesized to explain viability in two men with PNH recently  lethalithy in males was observed in most pedigrees. described. The disorder is associated with mutations in Filamin A gene (FLN1)  We have performed mutation analysis (DHPLC and direct  localised to Xq28 and coding for the 280 kDa protein Filamin A. In  sequencing) and Single Nucleotide Primer Extension (SNuPE)  order to deÜne genotype-phenotype correlations, we performed  associated with DHPLC on two families in which probands carried  clinical examination, cognitive testing, MRI and FLN1 molecular  FLN1 mutations in a mosaic fashion. analysis (by using DHPLC and direct sequencing) on 89 patients with  In the Ürst family, an affected man with classical PNH was mosaic  PNH. for an A>G substitution (intron 11 acceptor splice site) on both  22 probands (38 patients including familial cases) carried different  leukocyte DNA and hair roots. Single hair root analysis conÜrmed that  mutations (either missense, nonsense or missplicing) throughout  the mutation was not present in all ectodermal derivative cells. His  the FLN1 gene. These concerned 9/10 (90%) pedigrees consistent  daughter had inherited the X chromosome from her fatherÓs wild type  with X-linked inheritance and 13/80 (16%) of sporadic cases.  germinal cell population. Most patients had bilateral contigous heterotopic nodules while  In the second family, a woman with mild features of PNH was mosaic  a few carrying missense mutations had unilateral isolated or non  for a nucleotide insertion (c568_569ingG). The somatic mosaicism  contigous nodules. None of the patients with periventricular nodules  could explain the phenotype of this woman that was less severe than  harboured mutated FLN1. We also identiÜed male patients who  expected for a frameshift mutation. carried missense or mosaic truncating mutations, one transmitting the  Somatic mosaicism is one of the genetic mechanisms that may  disorder to his daughter. explain phenotypic variability in patients with FLN1 mutations. In conclusion, mutations of the FLN1 gene account for 90% familial  Mosaicism investigation using DHPLC should support genetic  cases with clear X-linked inheritance and concern both genders,  counselling in patients with PNH. although they are clearly predominant in females. Our results conÜrm  that FLN1, is the main gene associated with X-linked PNH although  
P0093 . Down syndrome associate with Hirschprung disease they support the implication of other genes. C. M. Popoiu, E. S. Boia, A. V. Popoiu, P. Fuicu, P. Tepeneu;  Emergency Children Hospital Louis Turcanu, University of Medicine and  
P0091 . Spontaneous recovery of a childhood-onset  Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. mitochondrial myopathy caused by a stop mutation in the  Introduction: Frederick Ruysch describes for the Ürst time in 1691 a  mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase III gene child with ÐEnormi intestine dilatation coliÑ. It has been more than 120  R. Horv\x86th1, H. Lochm\x9eller2, M. Hoeltzenbein3, J. M\x9eller-H\x99cker4, B. G. Scho- years since Harald Hirschprung characterized congenital megacolon  ser2, D. Pongratz2, P. Freisinger5, M. Jaksch1;  in Berlin but the etiology remain unknown. 1Academic Hospital Schwabing, Munich, Germany, 2Friedrich-Baur-Institute,  Purpose: The aim of the study is to evaluate the incidence and  Department of Neurology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany,  complications occurred in Hirschprung disease associated with Down  3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute of Pa- syndrome. thology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 5Childrens Hospital  Material and methods: We reviewed the medical records and  and Institute of Medical Genetics, Technical University, Munich, Germany. cariotype examinations for the 68 patients diagnosed and treated for  Recently, we reported on a patient suffering from mitochondrial  severe constipation in the last 20 years (1984-2003) in Department  myopathy with ragged red Übers (RRF), lactic acidosis, exercise  of Pediatric Surgery, Timisoara. All the patients diagnosticated with  intolerance and delayed growth with a heteroplasmic G9379A  Hirschprung disease were operated by Duhamel procedure. nonsense mutation (W58X) in the mtDNA encoded COIII subunit  Results: Fourteen patients presented: meconium ileus (7pts),  gene. An actual follow up examination of the patient showed  intestinal atresia (2pts), intussusception (1pts) and secondary  remarkable clinical and electrophysiological improvement. On a  megacolon (4 pts) and were excluded from the study. Fifty-four  second muscle biopsy signs of histological and immunohistological  patients present Hirschprung disease based on clinical Ündings,  improvement of the mitochondrial myopathy were found, which  X-ray barium enema, rectal biopsy and imunohistochimic studies.  was associated with a signiÜcant decrease (from 93% to 50%)  Three patients (5, 5%) present Down syndrome based on cariotype  of the mutational load of G9379A in skeletal muscle conÜrming a  examination on 15 mitoses. spontaneous regression of the disease. Myoblasts of the patient  Postoperatory results were very good in forty-Üve patients (83, 3%)  did not carry the mutation, therefore we suggest that the fusion of  good in seven patients (12, 9%) and satisfactory in two patients (3,  wild-type mtDNA containing myoblasts into existing muscle Übers  7%). Septic complications occurred in four patients (7, 4%) two of  might positively inÝuence the mutational rate in our patientªs muscle.  them with Down syndrome. Our results demonstrate the variable course of diseases caused by  Conclusions: The 5, 5% patients with Down syndrome represent  mtDNA mutations. We suggest that this possible positive outcome  the four folded incidence compared with normal population. It is not  should be considered in counseling some patients with mtDNA  clear until now if the genetic defect in megacolon result in ganglion  mediated disorders. migration defect or in environment problems. Association between Hirschprung disease and Down syndrome  
P0092 . Somatic mosaicism of the FLN1 gene in patients with  determine a higher rate of complications and implies a worsen  periventricular nodular heterotopia prognosis. E. Parrini1, D. Mei1, T. Dorn2, M. Wright3, W. B. Dobyns4, R. Guerrini5;  1IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, ScientiÜc Institute for Child and Adolescence,  Neurology and Psichiatry, Pisa, Italy, 2Swiss Epilepsy Center, Zurich,  Switzerland, 3Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Department of Human Genetics,  University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 5IRCCS Stella Maris Clinical genetics 102 
P0094 . First description of coumpound heterozygosity for the  
P0096 . First report on congenital prosopagnosia outside the  657del5 and R215W mutations in the NB
S1  gene in severely  caucasian population affected twin brothers I. Kennerknecht1, M. Gr\x9eter1, T. Gr\x9eter2, J. Thakur3, J. Horst1, R. Raman3;  E. Seemanova1, K. Gebertova1, M. Hadac2, P. Seeman3, H. Neizel4, R. Varon4,  1Westf\x89lische Wilhelms-Universit\x89t M\x9enster, M\x9enster, Germany, 2Nottulner  K. Sperling4;  Landweg 33, M\x9enster, Germany, 3Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India. 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Charles University Prague-Motol, Prague, Czech  Prosopagnosia or face blindness is deÜned as the inability to  Republic, 2Dept. of Neurology, University Hospital Krc, Prague, Czech Republic,  associate a face to a person, while faces as such and facial  3Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Charles University Prague-Motol, Prague, Czech  expressions can be recognized. The speciÜty of this deÜciency is best  Republic, 4Institute for Human Genetics, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. supported by double dissociation between probands with impairment  Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), an autosomal recessive  of e.g. object agnosia but not prosopagnosia and vice versa. Almost  chromosomal instability disorder, is clinically characterized  all reports (medline n < 400) are single casuistics or collections of  by congenital microcephaly and facial dysmorphology,  unrelated patients who acquired prosopagnosia after brain injuries,  immunodeÜciency, combined with hypersensitivity to ionizing  strokes or atrophy of at least the right occipito-temporal cortex.  radiation, an increased risk for lymphoreticular malignancy. Most  In contrast, the inborn form was described only in about a dozen  NBS patients are of Slavic origin and homozygous for the founder  probands of caucasian origin. mutation 657del5. The frequency of 657del5 heterozygotes in  We recently found that congenital prosopagnosia has a very high  the Czech population is 1:150. Recently, another NB
S1  mutation,  prevalence of 1 - 2 %, and that it is genetically determined - best  R215W, of unknown pathogenetic relevance, was found to have a  described by autosomal dominant inheritance in all 20 families  higher frequency among tumor patients of Slav origin than in the  ascertained (Kennerknecht et al. (2003) Eur J Hum Genet 10 (Suppl.  control population. This alteration results in the substitution of a basic  1): 249). The high frequency in the caucasian population prompted  (arginine) with a nonpolar amino-acid (tryptophan) and thus could  us to extend our search for other ethnic groups. We performed a  inactivate some nibrin functions. questionnaire based screening among 160 native indian students at  We report for the Ürst time on two monozygotic twin-brothers who  Banaras Hindu University in Varanasi. In a then selected subset we  are compound heterozygotes for the 657del5 and R215W mutation.  found after further detailed diagnostic interviews one Bengali female  Both children showed chromosomal instability. They were born  student with visual agnosia for face recognition only. hypotrophic at the 33rd week of pregnancy with premature closure  of fontanells suture. Poor gyriÜcation and enlarged lateral ventriculs  
P0097 . Congenital Nasal Pyriform Aperture Stenosis, Associated  were shown by ultrasound investigation of the brain. At the age of 5  Anomalies And Syndromes weeks, OFC, weight, and length were all under the 5th percentile. At  C. Baumann, S. Guilmin-Crepon, C. Garel, D. Bremond, R. Wallert, I. Bailleul- the age of 5 months they were treated for status epilepticus and their  Forestier, M. Castanet, P. Czernichow, T. van den Abbeele, J. Leger;  psychomotoric development was delayed. At the age of 10 months  Hopital Robert Debr\x8d, Paris, France. they developed microtrigonoturricephaly, muscle hypotonia, and  Congenital nasal pyriform aperture stenosis (CNPAS) is a rare cause  severe respiratory and feeding problems. We hypothesize, that the  of congenital nasal airway obstruction, requiring surgical intervention.  compound heterozygote status of these boys is the primary cause of  It has been reported in holoprosencephaly (HP) cases and can also  their severe clinical and cellular phenotype. As a consequence, we  occur as an isolated Ünding or in association with other systemic  postulate that homozygosity for the R215W mutation will lead to a  anomalies. Several chromosomal anomalies have been described  disease phenotype. with CNPAS. We aimed to describe the whole phenotypic spectrum  and prevalence of chromosomal and/or additional congenital  
P0095 . The features of clinical manifestation of different types of  anomalies associated with CNPAS. 31 unrelated patients aged  Prader-Willi syndrome. 3.5°3.2 years had dysmorphological evaluation, pituitary function  E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev, S. A. Nazarenko;  assessment, brain MRI, ophthalmologic, vertebral, heart, kidney  Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. and chromosomal investigations. A family history of midline defect  Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a paradigm for epigenetic imprinting.  was found in 5 (17%) and parental consanguinity in 8 (26%). Of  Functional nullisomy of the PWS genes (15q11-q13 region) results  the 31 patients, 25 (81%) had additional congenital anomalies  from normal. Selective inactivation of paternally inherited alleles is  including: solitary median maxillary central incisor (SMMCI)  caused by deletion, maternal uniparental disomy (UPD15mat), or  (55%), brain malformation (60%) (none had holoprosencephaly),  mutations in imprinting control region on paternal chromosome 15.  ophthalmologic anomalies (40%), cardiac malformation (22.5%),  The speciÜc of clinical manifestation of different forms of paternal  vertebral segmentation defects (18%), radial ray (13%) and  alleles inactivation are not understood entirely. We report about 3  renal anomalies (10%). 8 of them (26%) had pituitary hormone  groups of patients with clinical features of the PWS. First group (n =  deÜciencies and/or abnormal hypothalamo-pituitary MRI Ünding  31) was presented by probands with 15q11-q13 deletions detected  (39%). Among those patients we identiÜed 6 known associations: 4  by FISH-analysis. Second group (n = 13) of patients had UPD15mat.  VACTERL, 1 CHARGE, 1 RHYNS syndrome. Only one child had a  In third group of patients (n = 13) DNA methylation analysis did not  chromosomal anomaly (45,X). The genetic basis of CNPAS and its  revealed any abnormalities speciÜc to PWS. 64 clinical symptoms  relation with HPE are still unknown, but it is likely that a number of  classiÜed to 12 groups of development abnormalities were scored.  mechanisms can give rise to it. Additional malformations or endocrine  Correspondence analysis has revealed a signiÜcant difference  abnormalities are frequently associated and justify complete  between 3 groups (Ɂ2=156.27; P=0.014). Congenital hydrocephalus  evaluation in affected newborns for appropriate treatment and genetic  and round face were typical for probands with deletion form of PWS.  counselling. Diastem was characteristic for probands with UPD15mat. Individuals  with clinical features of PWS but normal DNA methylation status were  
P0098 . The study of Marfan syndrome in Republic of  distinguished by a high tall, increased frequency of microstomia,  Bashkortostan congenital epicanthus, aortic septal defect and decreased rate of  R. Valiev, R. Khusainova, I. Kutuev, E. Khusnutdinova;  hypothyroidism. We didnÓt show statistical differences between  Institute of biochemestry and genetic, Ufa, Russian Federation. groups of patients with deletion or UPD15mat (Ɂ2=41.10; P=0.38), but  Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disoder of connective  probands with deletion were characterized by increased frequency  tissue. Despite the fact that frequency of the disease in the world  of anomalies of spine (Ɂ2=6.69; P=0.009), extremities (Ɂ2=7.08;  is 1 to 5000, this ratio is in the Republic of Bashkortostan is 0,1 to  P=0.007) and nervous system (Ɂ2=13.69; P=0.002). Our results  5000. Such a low ratio is probably associated with lack of effective  indicate UPD15mat had a milder effect to phenotype than deletion of  medical and genetic consultation of the population living in remote  imprinted genes on chromosome 15. populated areas: 83% of the patients live in large cities. More than a  half of 90 patients who are under prophylactic medical examination  in connection with Marfan syndrome represent sporadic cases. Clinical genetics 103 The group under examination is characterized by mild forms of the  
P0101 . Sebaceous Nevus syndrome with spinal neuroÜbroma: A  disease while neonatal and atypical severe forms of the Marfan  new contiguous gene gyndrome? syndrome are absent.. The aim of our research is to investigate  K. Godbole, M. Weinstein, S. Viero, S. Blaser, P. J. McNamara, M. Shago, E.  genetic and epidemiologic base of Marfan syndrome and work out  Pope, M. M. Nezarati;  methods of DNA-diagnostics of the disorder. To date we analyze  Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. DNA samples of 52 probands. In order to detect mutations we use  Sebaceous nevus syndrome (SNS) is a distinct neurocutaneous  SSCP method, hetroduplex analysis with further direct sequencing.  disorder consisting of sebaceous nevus, typically localized to the  By present time we have carried out SSCP analysis of eight exons  scalp and face, and a broad spectrum of neurologic, ophthalmologic,  and direct sequencing of two exons of the FBN-1 gene in 36  cardiovascular, urogenital and skeletal Ündings. Affected individuals  probands. In one case we found polymorphism 2161-46a/g in intron  are at increased risk of developing both intracranial and extracranial  codon adjacent to the18th exon of the FBN-1 gene. In another case  tumours. NF-1 Microdeletion Syndrome is a newly recognised  we found polymorphism in 24 exon (984V/V). In the third case a  condition involving clinical features of NF-1, dysmorphic features, and  polymorphism 1057S\\S in 25 exon was found. The screening of  congenital heart disease. We present here a newborn girl with a facial  mutations in other exons of the FBN-1 gene is still carried on. sebaceous nevus, dysmorphic features, seizures and coarctation of  aorta. MRI of the brain and spine revealed a large mass extending  
P0099 . Progressive osseous heteroplasia associated with a de  from 
C1  to 
C6 , with a small enhancing lesion anterior to the pons.  novo mutation of GNA
S1  gene. Needle core biopsy of the spinal mass showed it to be consistent with  A. Dieux-Co\x90slier1, C. Morisot2, M. Holder-Espinasse1, S. Lejeune-Dumoulin1,  a neuroÜbroma, with radiologic features suggestive of a plexiform  M. Kottler3, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1;  neuroÜbroma. The patient had no other features of NF-1. The  1H\x98pital Jeanne de Flandre. CHRU, Lille, France, 2Centre Hospitalier, Lens,  family history was non-contributory. NeuroÜbromas are not a well- France, 3CHU H\x98pital Clemenceau, Caen, France. recognised feature of SNS. Courville et al. (2000) reported a patient  Heterotopic bone formation in skin and subcutaneous tissues  in whom a plexiform neuroÜbroma was mixed with a large epidermal  (osteoma cutis) is rare and can be primary or secondary to tumors,  nevus. Booth and Rollins (2002) reported two cases of SNS, with  traumatic and post-inÝammatory events. Primary osteoma cutis  spinal lipomas and abnormally enhancing, enlarged spinal nerve  can be associated with several genetic disorders among which  roots on MRI. These Ündings have been seen in some patients with  Übrodysplasia ossiÜcans progressiva (FOP), AlbrightÓs hereditary  NF-1. These cases suggest a possible link between NF-1 and SNS,  osteodystrophy and progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH). raising the question of whether the phenotype in the present case  POH is a rare autosomal dominant disorder, characterised by dermal  may represent a contiguous gene syndrome involving the NF-1 gene  ossiÜcation in infancy followed by progressive and widespread  and the unknown SNS gene(s). We are performing FISH analysis in  ossiÜcation of skin and deep connective tissues. Paternally inherited  this region and will present our Ündings. heterozygous inactivating mutations in the gene encoding the alpha  subunit of the stimulatory G protein of adenylyl cyclase (GNA
S1 )  
P0102 . Branchio-Oculo-Facial (BOF) syndrome in two infants:  have been identiÜed in POH patients. additional help required. We report on a two year-old girl presenting with neonatal and  Y. Sznajer1,2, M. Hall3, L. Perroni4, R. Cusano4, A. Mansbach5, A. van Wien6, V.  progressive osteoma cutis lesions with poor possibility of movements,  Segers7, E. Vamos8,9;  pre- and post-natal severe growth deÜciency, left hemihypotrophy,  1Paediatric Clinical Genetics Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola,  inÜltrating myocardial tumors and cystic dysplasia of the right kidney. ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 2Hopital Erasme, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 3Paediatric  Calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone and Gs alpha protein  Nephrology Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, ULB, Brussels,  activity levels were normal, as well as blood chromosomes. Belgium, 4Laboratorio di Genetica Umana, Ospedali Galliera di Genova,  Althought this atypical clinical presentation, we performed GNA
S1   Genova, Italy, 5Paediatric Otorhinolaryngology (ENT) Hopital Universitaire des  molecular analysis, which revealed a de novo 344-345insT frame- Enfants Reine Fabiola, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 6Neonatal Intensive Care Unit  shift mutation in exon 5, previously described in a POH patient (Shore  Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 7Dept  et al., 2002). of Pathology, Hopital Brugmann, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 8Paediatric Clinical  Genetics Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola and Hopital Erasme,  
P0100 . The Results of Cytogenetic Analysis in 150 Autistic  ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 9Hopital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium. Patients BOF syndrome consists of branchial defect, dysmorphic face  M. Havlovicov\x861, D. Novotn\x861, E. Koc\x86rek1, M. Hrdlicka2, Z. Sedl\x86cek1;  (dolichocephaly, sparse hair, high forehead, malar hypoplasia, small  1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University  chin), ocular anomaly (asymmetry, coloboma, microphtalmia), wide  Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Child Psychiatry, 2nd  nasal bridge, prominent nose, abnormal upper lip and philtrum,  Medical School, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. some type of cleft (lip, palate, pseudocleft) and renal anomaly. Pre- The autistic disorder was Ürst described by Leo Kanner sixty years  , postnatal growth retardation, developmental and mental delay  ago. This complex developmental disability is characterized by  are associated Ündings. Presence of thymic remnant in cervical  social and communicative impairments, repetitive and stereotyped  tissue could be characteristic. Autosomic dominant inheritance was  behaviours and interests. The prevalence of autism in the general  postulated but no causal gene was identiÜed so far. Mutations in  population is about 1 in 1000 with four males affected for one female.  Eya1 gene - implicated in branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome- were  In approximately 15% of the cases, autism is associated with known  not found in BOF syndrome. We present two unrelated infants with  genetic disorders. probable BOF syndrome born from non-consanguineous healthy  Nearly one third of the speciÜc genetic causes of autism are due to  parents. Both patients developed the above described dysmorphism,  chromosomal disorders. They account for less than 5% of all cases of  microphtalmia, feeding difÜculty and hypotonia but no hemangioma.  autism, although this estimate varies. Patient 1 presented with pseudocleft, right branchial mass and  We performed a detailed genetic analysis of 150 autistic patients  an unilateral pyelo-ureteral junction stenosis. The histology of the  focused on cytogenetic investigation. In our cohort, 7 subjects were  entire cervical lesion failed to identify thymic remnant (branchial  identiÜed as having chromosome anomalies (4.7%). One patient  cyst). Patient 2 presented facial asymmetry, left renal agenesis and  exhibited a de novo balanced translocation, 2 patients inherited a  hypoplastic 
C3 , 
C4  vertebral bodies without vertebral defect. Complex  balanced chromosomal translocation from their mother, 1 patient  inner ear anomaly and deafness were recorded in patient 1 but not in  had trisomy 8 mosaicism, 1 patient exhibited mosaicism with ring  patient 2. The standard karyotype was normal. No 22q11.2 deletion  chromosome 17, 1 had inv dup (15) chromosome and 1 patient  was found. Eya1 gene mutation was not found in patient 2. Because  exhibited del (17) (p11) and the Smith-Magenis syndrome. The quite  genetic heterogeneity exists in BOR syndrome and due to absence  high frequency of chromosomopathies supports the hypothesis that  of deÜnite marker in BOR and in BOF syndromes, question remains  PDDs may develop as a consequence of chromosomal abnormalities,  on a continuum disease rather than distinctive entities. Additional  and justify the cytogenetic examination in all patients with PDDs for  identiÜcation and comprehension on genes and mechanisms  establishment of their diagnosis. implicated in Ürst and second arch development are needed.Clinical genetics 104 
P0103 . Autosomal dominant Alport syndrome: natural history of  
P0105 . Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome).  a disease due to CO
L4 A3 or CO
L4 A4 gene. A threshold effect of urinary glycosaminoglycans and the walk  C. Pescucci1, F. Mari1, I. Longo1, P. Vogiatzi1, R. Caselli1, E. Scala1, C.  test as indicators of disease progression in a survey of subjects  Abaterusso2, R. Gusmano3, M. Seri4, N. Miglietti5, E. Bresin6, A. Renieri1;  with mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) S. Swiedler1, M. Beck2, M. Bajbouj2, R. Giugliani3, I. Schwartz3, P. Harmatz4,  1U.O. Genetica Medica, Siena, Italy, 2Unit\x87 di Nefrologia e Dialisi - Castelfranco  J. E. Wraith5, J. Roberts6, D. Ketteridge7, J. Hopwood7, N. Guffon8, C. S\x86  veneto, Treviso, Italy, 3Nefrologia - Ospedale G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy,  Miranda9, E. L. Teles10, C. Piscia-Nichols1;  4Genetica Medica - Universit\x87 di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Pediatria - Spedali  Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 6Centro di Ricerche Cliniche per le Malattie  1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, United States, 2Dept. of Pediatrics,  Rare, Ranica - Bergamo, Italy. Johannes Gutenberg Universit\x89t, Mainz, Germany, 3Hospl de Clinicas de Porto  Alport syndrome is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous  Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4ChildrenÓs Hosp & Research Center, Oakland, CA,  nephropathy. The majority of cases are transmitted as an X-linked  United States, 5Willink Biochemical Genetics Unit, Royal Manchester ChildrenÓs  semi-dominant condition due to CO
L4 A5 mutations. In this form  Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Willink Biochemical Genetics Unit,  males are more severely affected than females. Less than 10 % of  Royal Manchester ChildrenÓs Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7WomenÓs  cases are autosomal recessive due to mutation in either CO
L4 A3  and ChildrenÓs Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 8Hospital Edouard Herriot, Lyon,  or CO
L4 A4. In this rarer form, both males and females are severely  France, 9Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC), Porto University,  affected. Only two cases of autosomal dominant Alport syndrome  Porto, Portugal, 10Hosp de Sao Joao, Porto, Portugal. have been reported, one due to a CO
L4 A3 mutation and the other  A cross-sectional survey in individuals affected with the lysosomal  due to a CO
L4 A4 mutation. Because of the paucity of the reported  storage disease Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI) was conducted  families, the natural history of autosomal dominant Alport syndrome is  to establish demographics, urinary glycosaminoglycan (GAG) levels,  mostly unknown. We investigated four families with likely autosomal  and clinical progression of the disease. The survey evaluated 121  dominant Alport syndrome. The CO
L4 A3 and CO
L4 A4 genes were  bona Üde MPS VI-affected individuals over the age of 4 years from  analysed by Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography.  15 countries across the Americas, Europe and Australia representing  Automated sequencing was performed to identify the underlying  greater than 10% of the estimated world prevalence of the disease. A  mutation. Two families had a mutation in the CO
L4 A4 gene and  medical history, complete physical exam, urinary GAG determination,  two in the CO
L4 A3. Accurate clinical evaluation of family members  and assessment of several clinical measures related to endurance,  showed interesting results. Affected individuals (22 persons) had a  pulmonary function, joint range of motion and strength, and quality of  wide range of phenotypes from end-stage renal disease in the Üfth  life were completed for each participant. Although a wide variation in  decade to a non progressive isolated microhematuria. Finally, three  clinical presentation was observed depicting MPS VI as a clinically  heterozygous individuals (90, 22 and 11 years old, respectively) were  heterogeneous disorder, several general Ündings were obtained  completely asymptomatic. Our results demonstrated that patients  reÝecting progression of the disease. Impaired endurance, as  affected by autosomal dominant Alport syndrome have a high clinical  measured by the distance achieved in a 6-minute walk, could be  variability. Moreover, a reduced penetrance of about 90% (3/25) may  demonstrated across all age groups of MPS VI affected individuals.  be considered for the assessment of recurrence risk during genetic  High urinary GAG values (>200 Ⱥg/mg creatinine) were associated  counseling of these families. with a more accelerated clinical course based on age-adjusted short  stature and low body weight, impaired endurance, compromised  
P0104 . The evaluation of an infertile family with Y chromosome  pulmonary function, and reduced joint range of motion. An  microdeletion unexpected result was a dramatic cut-off of urinary GAG levels at  H. Samli1, M. Solak1, M. Samli2, A. Ozgoz1;  approximately 100 Ⱥg/mg creatinine for participants over the age  of 20 years. These results suggest that urinary GAG levels predict  1Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology  clinical morbidity, and longer-term survival is achieved in subjects  and Genetics, Afyon, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine,  whose GAG level is below the threshold of 100 Ⱥg/mg creatinine. Department of Department of Urology, Afyon, Turkey. Microdeletions of the so-called azoospermia factor (AZF) locus of the  
P0106 . Trisomy 20 mosaicism: the Ürst case not ascertained  Y chromosome long arm (Yq) have been recognized as an etiological  after prenatal detection of the mosaicism factor of severe oligozoospermia or azoospermia. In general, men  S. Giglio1, T. Pramparo2, G. Gregato2, B. Pirola1, V. Franco3, M. Brambillasca3,  with deletions are infertile and therefore deletions are not transmitted  G. Chiumello3, O. Zuffardi2;  to sons unless in-vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm  injection (ICSI) are performed. 1Diagnostica e Ricerca, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy, 2Biologia Generale e  We report a family characterized by multiple members with infertility  Genetica Medica, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Unit\x87 Operativa Pediatrica,  and Yq microdeletion. Complete reproductive history, semen analyses  Vita e Salute University, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy. and blood samples were elicited from relevant family members. DNA  Trisomy 20 is one of most common forms of mosaicism at prenatal  preparation and quantiÜcation were performed using commercial  diagnosis. 90% of the born children are grossly normal and exhibit  kits. A total of 15 pairs of sequence tagged sites based primer sets  normal development; 10% have serious defects. In these cases  speciÜc for the Y microdeletion region loci were used for screening.  trisomic cells are usually present in the Übroblasts but not in the  We report the case of an azoospermic patient (proband) who  blood. We report the Ürst case of trisomy 20 mosaicism in a girl with  inherited an extensive Yq microdeletion from his father through a  dysmorphism and congenital malformations. She was born from a 44- spontaneous pregnancy. The probandÒs father was a sevety-yr-old  years-old mother; birth weight and length were at 50th centile. Clinical  man who had 3 other children, 2 males and 1 female. The proband,  examination at one month of age revealed hypotonia and growth  his father and the other 2 brothers carried a Yq microdeletion of the  deÜciency, congenital scoliosis and vertebral anomalies, hypoplastic  AZFb subregion. The proband also carried Yq microdeletion on AZFa  iliac bones, 13 pairs of ribs, large forehead, epicanthic folds, deep  and AZFc region. The proband, his two brothers and father were all  philtrum, low posterior hairline, labia majora Üstula, large clitoris. At1  found to be deleted for RBM. At the time of analysis, the probandÒs  year of age she was operated for a hiatal hernia after melena and at  brothers were azoospermic. Unlike their father, the all three sons are  4 years she had punctate vasculitis skin lesions. infertile and have no offspring. Now, at 10 years, she presents normal mental development, no  Microdeletions of Yq involving the RBM gene are associated with  dysmorphism , severe scoliosis; pelvic and abdominal ultrasounds  a variable phenotypic expression that can include evidently normal  showed bicornuate uterus and small right kidney. Examination of the  fertility. skin showed streaky hyperpigmentation on the thorax, upper and  lower arms. Repeated lymphocyte chromosome analysis detects a normal  karyotype. At the last observation, the presence of the skin  pigmentation abnormalities prompted the geneticist (SG) to request  a chromosome analysis from Übroblasts detecting 27 out 30 cells  with trisomy 20. FISH analysis conÜrmed this Ünding. Microsatellite Clinical genetics 105 analysis revealed the maternal origin of the trisomy 20 excluding the  
P0109 . Prader-Willi syndrome - the newborn dysmorphic  uniparental disomy. This case stresses the importance to investigate  phenotype is a reliable guide for early diagnosis skin Übroblasts in skin pigmentation anomalies. E. Ëiglane-Shlik1, R. āordania2, A. Antson3, H. Varendi3, G. Tasa4, K. Kuuse5, T.  Ilus5, K. Ëunap5,1;  
P0107 . An additional case of the KBG syndrome 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2TallinnÓs Children  B. Demeer1, N. Bednarek2, Z. Belkadi3, M. Khoury3, C. Eschard4, D. Gaillard5,  Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 3ChildrenÓs Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu,  M. Doco-Fenzy1;  Estonia, 4Department of Human Biology and Genetics, University of Tartu,  1Genetic Department, CHRU, Reims, France, 2Pediatric Department B,  Tartu, Estonia, 5Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University  ChildrenÓs Hospital, Reims, France, 3Pediatric Department, CHG, Laon,  Clinics, Tartu, Estonia. France, 4Pediatric Department A , ChildrenÓs Hospital, Reims, France, 5genetic  Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder characterized  department, CHRU, Reims, France. by obesity, acromicria, mental retardation and hypogonadism.  We report the case of a child who was sent for genetic diagnosis  In neonatal age PWS is expressed differently, mainly by severe  on the association of growth retardation, facial dysmorphism and  muscular hypotonia and feeding difÜculties. Some authors have  mental retardation. Pregnancy had been complicated by oligoamnios,  described neonatal presentation of PWS, but most of them have not  unique ombilical artery and severe intrauterine growth retardation.  focused on distinctive craniofacial features and have not presented  His mother suffered from a unilateral hearing loss and her height was  photographs. We introduce here 4 newborns with PWS diagnosed  at -1,5 SD. The patient was born prematurely by caesarean section  during 1st month of age and present their photographs. at 29 GW (BW: 650g, BL: 31 cm, BHC: 24.8 cm ). At 4 years of  All four patients (3f/1m) were born at term. Two of them had low  age, the boy showed growth delay (-2SD) and a characteristic facial  birth weight (2316g and 2700g) and cephalhaematomas. Soon  appearance including broad forehead, hypertelorism, strabismus,  after birth all patients showed apathy or lethargy, central muscular  slight mongoloid slanting of the palpebral Üssures, marked  hypotonia, almost absent weak cry, no interest to food, aided feeding  anteversion of the nostrils, and retrognathia. Lips were thin and the  and termolability. Their faces were hypomimic with insufÜcient  upper lip was shaped like a hunterÓs bow. He had malpositionned  opening of the eyes. They had distinctive facial features, high  medial superior teeth and oligodontia. His hands were short. The  prominent forehead, narrow bifrontal diameter, down-turned corners  subcutaneous fatty tissue was not much developed and he had  of the mouth, micrognathia and dysplastic ears. The last case was  Ðcaf\x8d au laitÑ spots on his back, his hair was thick. He had severe  recognized immediately due to the similarity with the third one. In  developmental delay with speech defect and autistic features. He  one patient the PWS was caused by 15q11-13 microdeletion, in one  suffered from night myoclonies and partial seizures. by unbalanced 14;15 translocation causing 15q11-13 microdeletion  Investigations showed a pelvic left kidney on the intravenous  and in two by maternal UPD15.Four years ago we started systematic  urography, enlarged sub-arachnoidal spaces on brain MRI,  search for PWS patients in Estonia. Attention to the complex clinical  brachycephaly and fused 
C2 -
C3  vertebral bodies on the skeleton  features during the neonatal period resulted in the detection of 4  roentgenogram. Lymphoblastic and Übroblastic karyotypes were  PWS cases in newborn age. In our opinion the face of infants with  normal : 46,XY PWS is distinctive and the combination of neonatal hypotonia,  All those features are compatible with the KBG syndrome, an  feeding difÜculties and distinctive facial features is speciÜc for  autosomal dominantly inherited syndrome, Ürst described by Herman  recognizing PWS in neonatal age. and al in 1974. Only 27 cases have been reported so far. 
P0110 . Homozygous patients for a CCTG repeat expansion in a  
P0108 . Genotype-phenotype correlations in 177 patients with  family with Myotonic Dystrophy type 2 autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) W. Kress1, B. Halliger-Keller1, K. Ricker2, B. Schoser3;  K. Zerres1, J. Senderek1, E. Windelen1, F. K\x9epper1, I. Middeldorf1, F. Schnei- 1Institute of Human Genetics, W\x9erzburg, Germany, 2Dept. of Neurology, Uni- der1, C. Dornia1, T. Eggermann1, S. Rudnik-Schoneborn1, J. Kirfel2, R. B\x9ettner2,  versity of W\x9erzburg, W\x9erzburg, Germany, 3Friedrich-Baur-Institute, LMU, M\x9en- C. Bergmann1;  chen, Germany. 1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 2De- Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is caused by a dominantly  partment of Pathology, Bonn University, Bonn, Germany. transmitted CCTG repeat expansion in intron 1 of the zinc Ünger  Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is  protein 9 (ZNF9) gene on chromosome 3q. The clinical symptoms  associated with PKHD1 mutations on 6p12. ARPKD is characterized  resemble those of DM1, but the disease course is milder and no  by renal cysts of tubular and collecting ducts and congenital hepatic  mental deterioration is observed. A congenital form is lacking.  Übrosis (CHF). While the majority of cases manifests peri-/neonatally  DM2 patients with two mutant alleles are not reported so far. In  with a high mortality rate in the Ürst month, the prognosis of surviving  one large consanguineous family from Afghanistan we found three  patients is better. This is the Ürst study that reports the long-term  homozygotes for the CCTG repeat expansion. The oldest patient  outcome of ARPKD patients with deÜned PKHD1 mutations. We  was clinically most severely affected, compared to the two younger  examined the clinical course of 161 neonatal survivors (126 unrelated  homozygotes, but for the clinical course of symptoms all three  families) over a mean observation period of 6.0 years (0-35 y). The  homozygotes were within the range expected for heterozygotes.  1- and 5-year survival rate was about 95%. The median age of SCr  Further investigations, such as repeat length, muscle histology,  values of >2 SDs was 5.1 years. All but six patients (92%) had a  muscleblindlike 1 (MBN
L1 ) stainings or brain imaging studies, at  kidney length above or on the 97th centile for age. About 80% of  least at short-term observation showed no differences between  the study population developed systemic hyper-tension. Around  heterozygotes and homozygotes. Eleven children in the third  40% of patients presented with clinical signs of CHF (splenomegaly,  generation, aged 2 to 21 years, harbouring a repeat expansion, were  oesophageal varices, or ascites). Manifestation of CHF was positively  available for clinical exam and genetical analysis. None of these  related with increasing age. SigniÜcant correla-tions could be further  heterozygous children have signs or symptoms of disease till the age  demonstrated between renal- and hepato-biliary-related morbidities  of 18 years. At present, our analysis indicates, that homozygosity  sugge-sting uniform disease progression rather than organ-speciÜc  for the DM2 mutation does not severely alter the ability for a normal  patterns. PKHD1 mutation analysis revealed a total of 190 mutations,  pregnancy and birth, the age of onset of symptoms, the phenotype,  among them 70 novel ones. None of our patients carried two  the rate of disease progression or anticipation. truncating mutations corro-borating that one missense mutation  is indispensable for survival of newborns. We set up genotype- phenotype correlations and catego-rized missense mutations. The  obtained mutation detection rate of 75.4% with more than 95% of  patients with at least one mutation makes PKHD1 mutation screening  robust for clinical use.Clinical genetics 106 
P0111 . A case with Leigh syndrome and SURF1 gene mutations 
P0113 . Croatian girl with Angelman syndrome due to UPD - the  R. S. Tincheva1, E. Ostergaard2, F. Wibrand3, M. Schwartz4, I. Bradinova1, D.  evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation Avdjieva1;  L. Cvitanovic-Sojat1, R. Gjergja1, S. Seneca2, R. Lasan3, K. Crkvenac Gornik3;  1University Pediatric Hospital, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 2The John F.Kennedy Institute,  1Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital ÐSestre milosrdniceÑ, Zagreb,  Glostrup, Denmark, 3The John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark,  Croatia, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Free University of Brussels, Brussels,  4Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet University Hospital, University  Belgium, 3Laboratory of cytogenetics, Clinical Hospital Centre Rebro, Zagreb,  of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Croatia. Mitochondrial cytopathies are clinically and biochemically  Background: The Angelman syndrome (AS) is characterized  heterogeneous disorders affecting energy production. Leigh  by mental retardation, speech impairment, gait ataxia and an  syndrome is one of the most common disorders of mitochondrial  inappropriate laughing and excitability. Microcephaly and seizures are  energy generation presenting in childhood. The classic clinical  common. It is caused by the loss of maternally imprinted contribution  features include progressive neurological disease with motor and  in the 15q11.2-q13 region. The evident existence of genotype- intellectual developmental regression, symptoms of brainstem  phenotype correlation suggests four phenotypic groups: patients with  or basal ganglia disease, lactic acidosis, and characteristic  deletions, UPD (uniparental disomy) or ID (imprinting defect), UB
E3 A  neuropathological features on cerebral imaging. Leigh syndrome  mutations and unknown aetiology. Patients with large chromosomal  can be caused by a number of enzyme defects including cytochrome  deletions and those with unknown aetiology are more severely  c oxidase (COX) deÜciency. Mutations in the SURF1 gene were  affected than those with UPD or ID. Patients with UB
E3 A mutations Üt  recently shown to be a common cause of COX-deÜcient Leigh  in the middle of severity compared to the other groups. syndrome Case report: We describe a 10.5-years-old Croatian girl with  We present a 3 year-old girl born at term from second normal  AS. Karyotype and FISH with D15
S10  and SNRPN probes were  pregnancy and delivery. No consanguinity and family history were  normal, but parent speciÜc DNA methylation analysis and DNA  found. She had no problems until one year of age when growth  polymorphism testing for uniparenatal disomy showed UPD with both  retardation (SDS-3), generalized hypertrichosis and unstable walk  alleles FES/FPS of her father. She had normal weight and height,  were noticed. During an intercurrent illness we found severe lactic  head circumference around 75. percentile, mental retardation with  acidosis associated with hypotonia, movement disorders and  speech impairment and happy disposition with bursts of laughter.  cerebellar ataxia. She had speciÜc EEG pattern with.2-3 Hz large amplitude slow wave  Urine organic acid analysis excluded organic acidemias, plasma  paroxysms, but no seizures at all. amino acids were normal. Neuroradioimaging procedure showed  Conclusion: The normal growth parameters, lacks of seizures or  bilateral symmetrical hypertense signal abnormality in basal ganglia  gait ataxia do not exclude the possibility of AS in child with mental  on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Echocardiography  retardation and happy disposition. EEG should be done in every child  was normal. The child is with normal intellectual development.  with cryptogenic psychomotor retardation because the characteristic  Biochemical analysis of muscle biopsies detects deÜcient activity of  EEG pattern appear early and is speciÜc to the AS and one should  the IVth respiratory chain enzyme complex (COX). In skin biopsy was  expect the UPD or ID mechanism in the child with mild clinical  found that the child is compound heterozygous for two mutations in  spectrum of AS. the SURF1 gene: 312del10insAT in exon 4 and 845delCT in exon 9. 
P0114 . Croatian family with X-linked non-speciÜc mental  
P0112 . Adrenoleucodystrophy and epilepsy retardation due to interstitional deletion of Xq23 region A. S. Kotov;  F. Stipoljev1, R. Gjergja2;  Moscow Regional Research ScientiÜc Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russian  1Cytogenetic laboratory, General Hospital ÆSveti DuhÇ, Zagreb, Croatia,  Federation. 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital ÐSestre milosrdniceÑ, Zagreb,  An paroxysmal disorders of consciousness in adrenoleucodystrophy  Croatia. (ALD) in the majority of clinical observing present from orthostatic and  Background: More than 100 X-linked mental retardation (MR)  cardiogenic syncopes. In the base ÐMedlineÑ for 1981-2004 does not  syndromes have been described with half of the genes mapped to  be kept information on epileptic sezures at ALD patients. speciÜc regions of the X chromosome. MRX23 gene was mapped  Material: observation of adolescent with the combination ALD and  between DX
S1220  and DX
S424 , at Xq23-24 in one family with  cryptogenic epilepsy. affected male members presented with non-speciÜc MR and  Objective: practically healthy boy at 10 years stopped in psychomotor  verbal disability. We report three generations of single family with  development, then the cognitive disorders increased. In 13 years  cytogenetically visible deletion of Xq23 region.Case report: The  darkening of the skin has developed, hyperpigmentation of nipples  36-year-old pregnant woman was referred to genetic counselling  and genitalia. From 14 years the patient has monthly primary- because of MR and autism in her family. Her parents were second- generalized tonic-clonic epileptic seizures, which are appearing  degree cousins. Three brothers were severely mentally retarded; one  after arousing or falling asleep. At the checkup in 16 years the  showing autistic behaviour. The Fragile X syndrome was excluded.  local neurological signs are absent, the subcortical dementia is  The patient and her mother showed the same karyotype: 46,X,delX(q revealled, psychomotor disorders too. Cerebral T2-weighted MR  23),t(1;12)(p36.2;q24.31). The same interstitial deletion was found in  demonstrates conÝuent, symmetrical, hyperintense lesions of the  both brothers. An unbalanced translocation resulting in partial trisomy  white matter bilaterally. Adrenals on RCT reduce in size, cortex is  1p and monosomy 12q was found in autistic brother. The cytogenetic  thin. In blood analyses: ACTH 377,8 pmol/l (N - 2,2-13,4), cortisol  analysis of amniotic Ýuid cells revealed an affected male fetus with  144,0 nmol/l (N - 190-650). In t urine analyses: general cortisol 228  interstitional deletion Xq23 and balanced translocation 1p;12q. The  nmol/day (N - 300-750). EEG: diffuse disorders of electrical activity,  pregnancy was terminated.Conclusion: Our family represents the  epileptiform activity not revealled. Treatment: substitute glucocorticoid  further evidence that certain regions of the X chromosome were  therapy. Never got of systematic antiepileptic treatment. After  enriched for genes responsible for MR. We propose that Xq23  starting Depakine Chrono 1500 mgs a day therapy the sezures  region should be considered for precise cytogenetic and molecular  are stopped, but the phenomenas of adrenal insufÜciency and  diagnosis in such cases. The involvement of 1p and 12q region in the  dementia are increasing.Conclusion: Synthetic ACTH analogues are  peculiar phenotype of one brother, showing also elements of autism,  used as antiepileptic drugs in some forms of epilepsies. Possible,  indicate the need for further analysis. The molecular analysis will be  hyperproduction of ACTH is explained the rarity of epileptic sezures  performed in order to get precise information about breakpoint sites  at ALD. However, it is necessary to take a possibility of presence of  and chromosomal segments involved. epilepsy.Clinical genetics 107 
P0115 . Autopsy larynx Ündings of a patient with Down syndrome  the deceased cases had severe forms that associate heterotaxia  (DS, case report) with complex heart defects and other anomalies. The most  A. U. Petrounitchev, V. S. Zaitsev, M. O. Mkheidze;  frequent anomalies associated are: heart defects (69.6%, generally  complex), renal (26.1%) and spleen defects (21.7%). The different  Medical Academy for Postgraduate Education, St. Petersburg, Russian  types of heart anomalies will be analyzed separately. Syndromic  Federation. forms were diagnosed as Ivemark syndrome, X-linked laterality  Careful autopsy studies of larynx tissues are rarely done for DS. sequence, Kartagener syndrome, poly/asplenia- corpus callosum  We adduce some Ündings of post-mortem examination of a girl with  agenesis- caudal deÜciency, but also Marden Walker syndrome  DS. and Kabuki make up syndrome were identiÜed. In order to optimize  Proband was born after the fourth pregnancy by spontaneous vaginal  the management of syndromic forms, we have designed a protocol  delivery at term to a 44-yr-old female. Her parents had three healthy  for the diagnosis and follow up of these patients. A comprehensive  elder children. Proband had birth weight of 2600g (10centile)and  review of the literature referring to situs inversus, heterotaxia and the  length of 47cm (3centile). At 10th day of life diagnosis of DS was  genetic factors involved will be presented. conÜrmed (karyotype 47,XX+21). She had multiple congenital  In conclusion, the study presents our experience in the diagnosis of  malformations including open BottalloÓs duct, atrial septum defect of  patients with abnormal position of internal viscera showing statistical  the muscular part of ventricular septum, kidney dysplasia. The child  data, particular cases, a management protocol and a comprehensive  11 mn aged was dead following bilateral virus-bacterial abscess- literature review. forming pneumonia with Übrous-suppurative pleurisy. Autopsy Ündings  of larynx are the following: there were tissue dysplasia of Übrous  
P0118 . Microcephaly with chorioretinal dysplasia (Alzial-DuÜer  membrane with irregular thickness and adipose tissue inclusion,  syndrome): report of three patients and literature review redundancy and irregular distribution of blood and lymphatic vessels  A. Delahaye1, S. Hakiki2, D. Sanlaville1, D. H\x8dron3, B. Keren1, V. Cormier- of capillary type, wide zone of Ülamentous cartilage with solitary  Daire1, J. DuÜer2, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1, D. Genevi\x8eve1;  capillary vessels, solitary capillary vessels in hyaloid cartilage; there  were irregular distribution of larynx glandulae with lobular and exodic  1D\x8dpartement de G\x8dn\x8dtique, H\x98pital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France,  duct malformations, often the ducts were separately disposed. 2Service dÓOphtalmologie, H\x98pital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France,  3D\x8dpartement de G\x8dn\x8dtique, H\x98pital La Piti\x8d-Salp\x8dtri\x8ere, Paris, France. 
P0116 . Expression of the features of Treacher Collins syndrome  We report on microcephaly and chorioretinal dysplasia, in 3 unrelated  in members of two unrelated families patients (aged of 3, 5, and 18 years). Microcephaly was present at  E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Krstevska-Konstantinova, M. Kocova;  birth for the two oldest patients (-2 SD and -3.5 SD), and has now  reached respectively from youngest to oldest -3.5 SD, -5 SD and  Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. -4.5 SD. Developmental milestones were achieved appropriately,  Mandibulofacial dysostosis (TCSy) is an autosomal dominant disease  but the two oldest patients presented with mild mental retardation  which affects craniofacial structures. The most frequent symptoms  and speech delay (global IQ of 78 at 10 years old for the eldest).  in TCSy are bilateral symmetric anomalies of facial structures which  Clinical examination revealed bilateral clinodactyly of Üfth Üngers  originate from the Ürst and second branchial arches. This includes  (2/3), persistent nystagmus (1/3), atrial septal defect (1/3), and  antimongoloid slant of the eyelids, hypoplasia of the maxillar region,  supernumerary nipple (1/3). Ophthalmologic examination showed a  retromicrognathia, deformed ears and deafness. Although some  chorioretinal dysplasia with punched-out lesions (3/3). Cerebral MRI  authors claimed heterogenity of the syndrome, most of the cases  showed peri-ventricular cysts located on the temporal lobes (1/3). represent fresh mutation of the TCOF1 gene, over 100 mutations  Three distinct conditions with microcephaly and abnormal  have been described till now. The gene maps to 5q32-33, and it  ophthalmologic Ündings have been delineated in the literature namely  encodes nucleolar phosphoprotein treacle, which haploinsufÜciency  an autosomal dominant form (MIM 156590), an autosomal recessive  produces the signs of the syndrome. form (MIM 251270), and an autosomal dominant variant associated  Two unrelated families with 12 affected members of TCSy have been  with lymphoedema (MIM 152950). The mode of inheritance and the  evaluated. Anthropometric evaluation have been done in all affected  nosology of these syndromes are still questionable. Limwongse et al.  members in three generations, and in one family photographs of  described a family with features encompassing both the autosomal  some members of the forth generation have been evaluated. The  dominant variant of microcephaly with chorioretinal dysplasia and the  measurement of the facial features have been done according  autosomal form with lymphoedema. According to these data and to  to the published data (Kolar, Arvystas), as well as audiological  our reported cases, we therefore suggest that these 3 conditions may  examination. Since the main features of the TCSy were very variable  represent the same entity with a broad phenotypic variability. Finally,  within family members, they were classiÜed into three groups: mild,  we emphasize the importance of ophthalmologic examination in  moderate, severe. In both families, the most affected members were  patients presenting with pre- and/or post-natal microcephaly, as well  probands, and the carrier parent was the mother. The most constant  as for both parents, even if the head circumferences are normal. feature was antimongoloid slanting of the eyes and malformed ears.  Anthropometric analysis of the narrowness of the midface and ear  
P0119 . Familial X-linked cardiomyopathy length differs signiÜcantly from normal. A. V. Popoiu1, M. Puiu2, G. Doros1, C. M. Popoiu1, D. Stoicanescu2, D.  When molecular analysis is not available, minor physical  Mihailov1;  characteristics of the parents have to be carefully evaluated for  proper genetic counseling. 1Emergency Children Hospital Louis Turcanu, Timisoara, Romania, 2University  of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. 
P0117 . Laterality defects - clinical study of 23 patients Dilated cardiomyopathy is characterized by an increase in ventricular  C. Rusu1, M. Volosciuc1, L. Butnariu2, D. Mihaila2, A. Vlad2, G. Iliev3;  size and impairment of ventricular function. Familial dilated  cardiomyopathy is usually considered to be a rare and distinct  1University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania, 2ChildrenÓs Hospital, Iasi, Romania,  disorder. Between idiopathic forms, rare cases are with strong  3ÑCuza VodaÑ Maternity Hospital, Iasi, Romania. familial aggregation, early presentation in childhood and X-linked  Situs inversus and situs ambiguous (heterotaxia) are terms used  transmission. for complete or partial reversal of the normal position of lateralized  Methods. We investigated a family with 8 children, using  viscera. They could be isolated or syndromic. Many genetic factors  family history and physical examination, electrocardiography,  could be involved. echocardiography. We present a clinical study of 23 patients with abnormal position  Results: Among the family members 4 children were affected (3  of internal viscera in order to appreciate the frequency of different  males, 1 female) The mean age at presentation was 8 ° 3 months  associated features, to underline their importance for the diagnosis  with signs of severe heart failure. Two (2) children died after  and also to illustrate some particular cases. about 5 ° 2,5 month, at 23 month, through refractory heart failure,  Our study revealed higher frequency for males (60.9%) and total  respectively at 15 month through sudden death. The third male had  type of situs inversus (52.2%). Survival rate was high (78.3%). All  an embolic cerebral vascular accident, as a complication of dilated Clinical genetics 108 cardiomyopathy, and has a poor prognosis. girl. Family history revealed that parents are healthy, unrelated  The female showed a particular evolution, as she had severe heart  individuals. There were no other cases among their relatives. All of  failure as an infant, and is now completely recovered and symptom- these boys had synostosys of the distal phalanx (two bilateral and  free 7 years after. The rest of family members were examined, but  one unilateral), syndactylism of the third and fourth digits, bilateral  none showed any clinical or echocardiographic criteria of dilated  clino-camptodactilly. Syndactyly occurs as a unique anomaly or  cardiomyopathy. as a part of a plurimalformative syndrome. Genetic and clinical  Conclusions: We consider that the presented cases belong to the  heterogeneity, reduced penetrance and variable expresivity, as well  rare form of familial X-linked cardiomyopathy, where the affected  as different possible etiologies (genetic, multifactorial or epigenetic)  gene is the dystrophin encoding gene, that give us the explanation  must be taken into consideration for the genetic counseling.  why the female recovered, while the males had a poor prognosis. 
P0123 . Zygosity Testing: Why Twins Or Their Parents Want To  
P0120 . Association between minor congenital anomalies and  Know Zygosity learning disabilities F. J. Bamforth1, G. Machin2;  D. Stoicanescu, M. Puiu;  1University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2The Permanente Medical  University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania. Group, Oakland, CA, United States. Minor congenital anomalies do not have medical or cosmetic  At the University of Alberta Hospital between 1989 and 2003  importance, but detection of more than three such anomalies may  there were 397 requests for zygosity testing by DNA analysis from  reveal the prenatal origin of a disorder. The aim of the present study  parents of twins (361) or adult twins (36). Median age of testing  was to establish an association between the presence of minor  was 3 years, range 0 days to 73 years. Tissues examined for DNA  congenital anomalies and learning disabilities, attention deÜcit and  polymorphisms included placenta (65), blood samples (312), cord  hyperactivity. 219 patients aged between 7 and 18 years were  blood (5) and buccal swabs (15). Of all twins tested, 93% were  examined for the presence of minor congenital anomalies and  monozygotic (MZ). In the 0-17 year-old age group, there were equal  compared to a control group. The frequencies of these anomalies  numbers of males and females but there was a predominance of  were not signiÜcantly different in the two groups. The mean values  females (83%) among the adults tested. Chorionicity was available  of minor congenital anomalies per child were signiÜcantly different:  in 147 cases. 89% of dichorionic (DC) twins were MZ, while 7% of  2.5 in children with learning disabilities, 4 in those with learning  histological monochorionic (MC) twins were dizygotic (DZ). Reasons  disabilities and attention deÜcit and hyperactivity, 1.05 in the control  for requesting zygosity were given in 184 cases. In the 0-17 year age  group. As a positive correlation could be established, it can be  group, Òneed to knowÓ and ÒcuriosityÓ accounted for 50% of requests.  concluded that the presence of minor congenital anomalies especially  Health concerns accounted for 32% of requests from adult twins  more than three, may predict the future onset of these disorders. and 17% from children. These included discordance for anomalies  or disease, stillbirth or neonatal death of one twin, IVF twins, family  
P0121 . New clinical features of 3C syndrome planning, recurrence of twins and future transplantation. Among  E. Papadopoulou1, S. Sifakis1, M. Rogalidou1, C. Giannakopoulou1, M. B.  the adult twins, four were discordant for cancer and two for renal  Petersen2;  disease. Other reasons included misinformation about zygosity;  most commonly parents of DC twins were told their twins were DZ,  1University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 2Institute of Child Health, Athens,  and other twins in the family. Parents of twins or adult twins may be  Greece. uncertain of zygosity from appearance alone and knowing zygosity  Aim: to present a new case of 3C (or Ritscher-Schinzel) syndrome,  for certain may be reassuring. a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by craniofacial,  cerebellar, and cardiac anomalies. Various other malformations are  
P0124 . Myotonic Dystrophy In Yakutia associated with 3C syndrome. A. L. Sukhomyasova1,2, N. R. Maximova2,1, I. A. Nikolaeva2, S. K. Stepanova1,  Case Report: A male infant, 2nd child of phenotypically healthy  S. A. Fedorova2, A. N. Nogovitsina1,2;  parents, was born after a normal delivery. At birth, body weight, length  and head circumference was normal, but a general hypotonicity  1Republican Hospital ʨ1 -National Medical Center, Yakutsk, Russian  was recorded. Physical examination revealed a characteristic facial  Federation, 2Yakut ScientiÜc Center of Russian Academy of Medical Science,  appearance with prominent forehead and occiput, hypertelorism,  Yakutsk, Russian Federation. down-slanting palpebral Üssures, low-set ears, depressed  Myotonic dystrophy (MD) is one of the widespread hereditary  nasal bridge, and micrognathia. Skeletal anomalies included:  diseases in Yakutia (Korotov M.N., Kuzmina Z.M., 2000, Nogovitsina  camptodactyly of the thumb and the index Ünger of the right upper  A.N., 2001). In this investigation we consulted 31 Yakut families with  limb; bilaterally partial syndactyly of the 2nd and 3rd toes; hypoplasia  74 patients (43 female, 31 male) affected by MD in the medical- of the 3rd toe bilaterally. Hypospadias and bilateral nonpalpable testes  genetic consulting clinic of the Republican Hospital -National Center  (intra-abdominally testes by sonogram). X-rays of the skull: dilatation  of Medicine, Yakutsk. 37(50%) of the cases were marked as an adult  of the sagittal suture and numerous Wormian bones in the position  form, 27 (36%) of the cases referred to a classical youth form, 8  of the anterior fontanelle. Chest x-ray: a supernumerary right 13th  cases (11%) were marked as an early childÒs form and 2 (3%) have  rib. Eye examination: posterior embryotoxon (left). Echocardiogram  congenital form of MD. Since 2002 a DNA-diagnostics of MD has  revealed Fallot tetralogy. CT of the head: Dandy-Walker malformation  been introduced by applying PCR and electrophoresis (to determine  with posterior fossa cyst, enlargement of cisterna magna, and  the number of CTG-repeats) in the laboratory of the medical-genetic  cerebellar vemis hypoplasia. Chromosomes were normal.  consulting clinic in the Republican Hospital l -National Center of  Discussion: The presence of the testes in the abdomen, the  Medicine, Yakutsk. There were 217 diagnostic investigations on  posterior embryotoxon, and the Wormian bones of the skull are  symptomatic patients (74 abnormal), 143 there healthy relatives  associated with 3C syndrome, for Ürst time in the literature. These  (86 normal, 57 abnormal) and 5 prenatal diagnosis (2 normal, 3  new clinical features further expand the phenotypic variability of 3C  abnormal). In 86 cases MD was excluded for the clinically healthy  syndrome, and may be used in the differential diagnosis from several  relatives (heterozygosity was detected for 2 normal alleles), an  similar clinical entities. expansion size of CTG-repeats to be further determined in 74  patients and the rest 57 relatives. MD is a disease of importance at  
P0122 . Clinical heterogeneity in familial syndactyly the national level. D. Vasilie, M. Puiu, E. Nedelea, D. Stoicanescu;  
P0125 . Two new missense mutations in RUNX2 cause a mild  University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. phenotype of Cleidocranial Dysplasia (CCD) Syndactyly is a congenital anomaly in human beings characterized by  B. S. Fiebig1, D. Horn1,2, J. Kunze2, P. Robinson1, S. Mundlos1;  two or more fused Üngers or toes. This study presents three brothers with anomalies of the digits, in the  1Institut f\x9er Medizinische Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Humangenetik,  context of a family with four children, the Ürst one being an unaffected  Berlin, Germany.Clinical genetics 109 Cleidocranial Dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominantly inherited  1University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Research  skeletal disorder, characterised by clavicular hypoplasia, large  Institute Growth & Development (GROW), Maastricht University, Maastricht,  fontanelles with delayed closure, dental anomalies and short stature.  Netherlands, 3University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. CCD is caused by mutations of RUNX2 located on chromosome  Since Rett syndrome (RTT, MIM *312750) is known to be caused  6p21 which encodes a protein that is part of the bone morphogenetic  by mutations in the MEC
P2  (methyl-CpG-binding protein 2) gene,  protein signalling cascade. mutations have been reported also in male patients. Among them  In this report we present two unrelated CCD families with novel  is a group of males with non-mosaic and often familial MEC
P2   missense mutations in RUNX2 and relatively mild clinical phenotypes. mutations unknown to occur in females. They show a broad spectrum  The Ürst family presented because of bilateral hip dysplasia in their  of neurodevelopmental disorders, most often mental retardation (MR)  6-month-old daughter. Examination of the father revealed shortening  and divers neurological signs. of the clavicles and a funnel chest. Supernumerary teeth had been  We tested a group of 70 males with an unexplained combination  extracted at an earlier age. The body height of the father was not  of MR and unselected neurological symptoms for mutations in  decreased (1,81 m), but his head circumference was enlarged. MEC
P2  by sequencing the coding region. All patients had undergone  Molecular analysis of RUNX2 revealed a proline- to leucine  a careful clinical evaluation, cytogenetic analysis and most of  substitution in exon 2 (
P127 L). them additional investigations. Patients with dysmorphism or with  In the adult patient of the second family the persistence of deciduous  indications for an environmental cause of their MR were not included. teeth and impaction of permanent teeth was the only clinically  7 sequence changes were identiÜed: a de novo missense mutation  relevant symptom. Aplasia of the frontal sinus was demonstrated  
P225 L (674C>T) in a male with RTT variant (for details see Eur J  radiologically. Radiographs of the thorax and hand excluded  Paed Neurol 2003;07:5-12), an unclassiÜed variant (1214C>T) and 5  hypoplasia of the clavicles and other skeletal symptoms in the  non-pathogenic variants. index patient. His body height was normal, the head circumference  The validation of hitherto unreported nucleotide changes has to be  enlarged. done carefully and is hampered by e.g. inaccessibility of male family  In this patient a glutamine- to histidine substitution (Q209H) in exon 4  members and the rare occurrence of some variants. Also several  was identiÜed. males previously published to have MEC
P2  related disorders were  Both of the above mutations are located in the highly conserved,  shown to have a non-pathogenic variant by further studies. In this  DNA-binding RUNX-domain of the protein. Although both missense  clinically highly selected group, a low prevalence of pathogenic  mutations led clinically to different phenotypes, the mild expression of  MEC
P2  mutations has been found so far. Nevertheless, the clinician  CCD with absence of short stature was common to both patients. should be aware of RTT variants in males and consider MEC
P2   analysis in males with MR associated with a progressive neurological  
P0126 . Inherited thrombophilias and cytogenetics Ündings in  disorder. patients with repeated fetal loss Z. Ěech1, R. Gaillyov\x862, S. Pr\x86Āilov\x862, Z. Kalina2, J. Soukalov\x862, M. ViĀĳov\x862,  
P0128 . Genomics of Male Infertility M. Penka1, H. ViĀĳov\x863, P. Ventruba3;  K. Kucheria, R. Dada;  1University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Clinical Hematology, Brno, Czech Republic,  AIIMS, New Delhi, India. 2University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Medical genetics, Brno, Czech Republic,  In the last few years considerable progress has been made towards  3University Hospital Brno, Clinic of Gynaecology/Obstetrics, Brno, Czech  understanding sperm physiology and the biology of gamete  Republic. interaction to understand the pathophysiology of male infertility. Also  Reproductive genetics is a part of reproductive medicine. As a part  with advent of Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) knowledge  of the preventive genetic examination in patients with repeated fetal  about the various factors leading to spermatogenic impairment is one  loss we karyotype both partners and check for the Factor V Leiden  of the most important aspects of scientiÜc research. mutation G1691A , the Factor II prothrombin mutation G20210A and  Y chromosome deletions lead to infertility. Three regions on Yq  the thermolabile variant ot the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase  (AZFa, AZFb and AZFc)are critical for spermatogenesis. So far four  gene in the woman. groups from India have published their data on male infertility using  Inherited thrombophilias are the leading cause of maternal  molecular methods. thromboembolism and are associated with increased risk of certain  Idiopathic oligozoospermic and azoospermic cases were included  adverse pregnancy outcomes. These effects imply an association  in this study. Cytogenetic and semen analysis was done in each  between the factor V-Leiden mutation and late Ürst-, second-, and  case. In cytogenetically normal cases microdeletion analysis was  third-trimester fetal loss. done according to guidelines as prescribed by European academy  There are conÝicting data on the link between hyperhomocysteinemia  of andrology. Microdeletions spanning the AZF loci were found in  (caused by hetero- or homozygosity for the 
C667 T MTHFR  a 9.63% cases and genotype, phenotype correlations exists. . In a  thermolabile mutant) and recurrent spontaneus abortions. large number of cases with AZFc microdeletion there is a population  The frequency of Factor V-Leiden in the Czech population is about  of germ cells with XO cell line and these cases are counseled prior  6%, of G20210A Prothrombin about 2.3%, of heterozygotes for  to going in for ART about the risk of male offspring being born with  
C677 T MTHFR about 38.2% and about 10% for homozygosity for  sexual ambiguity, turner phenotype in addition to being infertile.  
C677 T MTHFR. Deletion on Y chromosome make the Y chromsome more prone  In our group we followed 150 couples with repeated spontaneus  to secondary larger deletions resulting in worsening of testicular  abortions. We found an increased number of carriers of congenital  phenotype. Thus in a large number of idiopathic cases of male  chromosomal aberations in men and women in this group. The  infertility there is a genetic basis and in the other normal cases need  number of heterozygotes for 
C677 T MTHFR was 47 % and  to further evaluated. homozygotes 6,7%. In women with three or more fetal losses we  found 13.3 % carriers of factor V-Leiden. 
P0129 . Mild Phenotypes in a Series of Opitz GBBB Syndrome  We recommend to test for inherited thrombophilias in women with  Patients with MID1 Mutations two and more repeated spontaneous abortions, a hematological  J. So1,2, V. Suckow1, Z. Kijas1, V. Kalscheuer1, B. Moser1, M. Baars3, H. Firth4,  examination and pregnancy monitoring in women -who are carriers of  P. Lunt5, B. Hamel6, P. Meinecke7, C. Moraine8, S. Odent9, A. Schinzel10, J. van  inherited thrombophilias.We test inherited thrombophilias in partners  der Smagt11, K. Devriendt12, B. Albrecht13, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach13, I. van der  to detect the risk of homozygosity in the offspring. Burgt6, F. Petrij14, L. Faivre15, J. McGaughran16, F. McKenzie17, J. M. Opitz18, T.  C. Cox19, S. Schweiger1;  
P0127 . MEC
P2  related disorders in male patients with mental  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2The Hospital  retardation and neurological symptoms for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Academisch  U. Moog1,2, E. E. J. Smeets1,3, K. van Roozendaal1, D. Tserpelis1, K. Devriendt3,  Ziekenhuis, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4AddenbrookeÓs  G. Van Buggenhout3, E. Schollen3, C. Schrander-Stumpel1,2, J. Frijns1,3;  Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Bristol Royal Hospital for Sick  Children, Bristol, United Kingdom, 6University Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Clinical genetics 110 Netherlands, 7Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, Germany, 8Centre  
P0131 . Clinical genealogical and electrophysiological analysis  Hospitalier Universitaire de Tours, Hopital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 9Hopital  of the hereditary motor -sensory neuropaties in Moldova and  Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 10University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland,  polymorphic short tandem repeats for diagnosis of the Charcot- 11Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 12Universitaire  Marie-Tooth 1 A duplication. Ziekenhuizen Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 13Universitaetsklinikum Essen, Essen,  V. C. Sacara;  Germany, 14Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,  National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau,  15Hopital dÓEnfants, Dijon, Cedex, France, 16Royal ChildrenÓs Hospital and  Republic of Moldova. Health District, Herston, Queensland, Australia, 17Hunter Genetics and  The inherited neuropathies of the peripheral nervous system  University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia, 18University  are clinically and genetically a heterogenous group of disorders.  of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 19Adelaide  Molecular genetic studies have made major breakthroughs in  University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. unraveling the underlying gene defects, and DNA diagnosis can  Opitz syndrome (OS) is a congenital midline malformation syndrome  now be offered to a large number of families with distinct forms  characterized by hypertelorism, hypospadias, cleft lip/palate,  of hereditary peripheral neuropathies.We presents the results of  laryngotracheoesophageal (LTE) abnormalities, imperforate anus,  clinical-genealogical and electrophysiological examination of patients  developmental delay and cardiac defects. The X-linked form  with hereditary motor-sensory neuropathies, which were included in  (XLOS) is caused by mutations in the MID1 gene, which encodes a  long-term registry of Moldova. Some genetics features of the disease  microtubule-associated RING Ünger protein. In this study, phenotypic  have been revealed (intrafamilial polymorphism of different degree,  manifestations of patients with and without MID1 mutations were  effect of the ancestor in the dominant forms). Electrophysiological  compared to determine genotype-phenotype correlations. MID1  peculiarities of the separate clinical-genealogical variations of the  mutation analysis of 70 patients with clinically suspected OS revealed  pathology were found. According to publication date most CMT1A  14 different mutations in 25 of the subjects. These included 19  cases (>98%) are caused by a duplication of a 1.5 Mb region on the  patients from 8 different pedigrees with familial XLOS, 4 sporadic  shot arm of chromosome 17 containing the PM
P22  gene. We test  cases, and 2 patients with XLOS of unclear inheritance. Ten novel  2 STRs located within the duplication (tetra- and pentanucleotide  mutations are reported here for the Ürst time. The XLOS patients with  repeats) 54 DNA samples of unrelated CMT1 patients . The CMT1A  MID1 mutations appeared to be less severely affected than previously  duplication was determine in 24.07% cases (gene dosage for  reported, particularly in functionally signiÜcant domains such as  heterozygous samples- different Ýuorescent intensity and /or three  LTE, anal, cardiac and neurologic abnormalities. Less functionally  alleles). The presence of two alleles (59.3%) was used to indicate  relevant minor anomalies were more prevalent in patients with MID1  that no duplication was present in samples. Homozygous samples  mutations. Female XLOS carriers had much milder phenotypes  16.6% required a competitive gene dosage test. The PMP 22  compared to male MID1 mutation carriers, with the most ubiquitously  duplication is not the most frequent abnormality in MoldavianÓs CMT1 penetrant trait being hypertelorism. Most of the anomalies found  in patients of this study do not seem to correlate with the type of  
P0132 . Molecular study of the SMA patients in Iranian Spinal  molecular MID1 gene defect, with the possible exception of LTE  Muscular Atrophy families malformations. This study highlights the wide spectrum of severity  I. Salahshourifar, Y. Shafaghati, Z. Golkar, H. Najmabadi;  and manifestations of OS, reÝecting the genetic heterogeneity of  the disease and complexity of the underlying mechanisms. It also  Welfar & Rehabilitation Science University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). shows that genetically conÜrmed XLOS patients may have a better  Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder  prognosis and quality of life than previously thought. characterized by degeneration of anterior horn cells in the spinal  cord leading to progressive muscular weakness and atrophy. The  
P0130 . Multiple caf\x8d-au-lait spots and three different  SMA-determining genes including SMN (survival motor neuron),  malignancies in two siblings of a consanguineous marriage  the responsible gene in SMA phenotype expression, NAIP gene  between Ürst cousins (neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein) and BTF2
P44  are located on  K. Wimmer1, A. Peyrl2, H. Beiglb\x99ck1, T. Calens3, H. Pirc-Danoewinata4, I.  chromosome 5q13 in two highly homologous copies (telomeric and  Slavc2, C. Fonatsch1, L. Messiaen3;  centeromeric) within the SMA region. In this study, the NAIP gene deletion was analyzed in 34 SMA  1Department of Medical Biology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria,  families, with the consanguinity rate of 65% (22/34), in which exon 7  2Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria,  of the SMNt gene deletion was already conÜrmed and was deleted  3Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,  in 79% of affected individuals. We found 63% (12/19) NAIP gene  AL, United States, 4ChildrenÓs Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna ChildrenÓs  deletion in SMAs (83% SMA-I, 28% SMA-II and III), 6.6 %( 2/30)  Hospital, Vienna, Austria. of carrier parents for SMNt. The NAIP gene deletion in SMA-I was  Multiple caf\x8d-au-lait spots (CLS) are usually the Ürst clinical sign of  higher than other SMA-types. neuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1) in affected children. We report here on  two siblings of unaffected consanguineous parents, who developed  
P0133 . Mental retardation and blepharophimosis in seven  multiple CLS and early-onset malignancies. The girl of the family  cases: overlapping features between Young-Simpson and Ohdo  was diagnosed with medulloblastoma at the age of 7 years and with  syndrome myelodysplatic syndrome (MDS) two years later. She died from an  M. Holder-Espinasse1, A. Male2, S. Mansour3, M. McGowan3, K. Nischal4,  acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) into which the MDS has evolved. Her  V. Cormier-Daire5, A. Munnich5, S. Smithson6, E. Thompson7, L. Wilson4, R.  brother, who also presented with CLS, was diagnosed with a high grade  Winter4;  glioblastoma at the age of 9 years and is currently in stable condition.  NF1 mutation analysis revealed no evidence for a constitutional truncating  1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2GuyÓs Hospital, London, United Kingdom,  NF1 mutation nor a NF1 microdeletion in the boy. Neither did FISH and  3St GeorgeÓs Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street  LOH analyses reveal evidence for loss of one NF1 allele in the leukaemic  Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Necker-Enfant malades Hospital, Paris,  cells of the girl. Early-onset tumours and signs of NF1 have been reported  France, 6St MichaelÓs Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 7Women and ChildrenÓs  in so far nine children with inherited homozygous deÜciency of one of  Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia. the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. All children presented with CLS and  The combination of blepharophimosis and mental retardation can be  developed either haematological malignancies or brain tumours or both.  part of many genetic conditions. There are two distinct syndromes  Six children were found in three HNPCC families, however, in two families  in which the latter are associated with multiple congenital anomalies  there was no family history of colorectal cancers. Therefore, we suggest  and characteristic facial features. However, although there are  overlapping features between these two conditions, hypothyroidism  homozygous mismatch repair deÜciency may be the genetic alteration  and post-axial polydactyly seem to be speciÜc Ündings of Young- causing cancer predisposition and NF1 symptoms also in the here  Simpson syndrome, whereas congenital heart defect, hearing  presented siblings. We are currently performing mutation analysis in the  impairment and dental anomalies have only been described in Ohdo  mismatch repair genes, MLH1, MSH2, PM
S2  and MSH6 and autozygosity  syndrome. Here we report 6 patients with overlapping features of  mapping of loci associated with these genes. theses two conditions.Clinical genetics 111 Our seven cases shared common Ündings such as facial features  
P0136 . Skewed X-inactivation is associated with recurrent  including blepharophimosis, a wide nasal bridge, dysplastic ears  spontaneous abortion and a micrognathia; mental retardation; bilateral talipes and/or  S. G. Bagislar1, F. S\x99ylemez2, B. Cengiz2, I. \x85st\x9ener2, S. Ceylaner3, G.  camptodactyly. Four patients presented with raised TSH and optic  Ceylaner3, T. \x84z\x8celik1, A. Acar4;  atrophy in addition to the initial Ündings. Five cases presented with  1Bilkent University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Ankara,  long thumbs, and one case presented with unilateral post-axial  Turkey, 2Ankara University Medical Faculty, Department of Obstetrics and  polydactyly. Two patients presented with hypoplastic teeth and three  with overlapping toes. Two cases presented with hearing impairment. Gynacology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Zekai Tahir Burak Hospital, Genetics Section,  Our seven patients have got overlapping features of both syndromes  Ankara, Turkey, 4Sel\x8cuk University Meram Medical Faculty, Department of  and it is difÜcult to establish a deÜnite diagnosis. Diagnosis is  Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey. important for genetic counselling, as autosomal recessive inheritance  Recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) is deÜned as three or more  has been proposed in Young-Simpson syndrome. The main clinical  consecutive losses at 20 weeks or less of gestation. A signiÜcant  characteristics of Young-Simpson/Ohdo syndromes will be discussed,  proportion of the unexplained cases of RSA may be caused by a  and the cases will be compared with those previously reported. genetic mutation or chromosomal abnormality. The role of nonrandom  X chromosome inactivation (XCI) has been questioned in the  
P0134 . Oto-Facio-Cervical syndrome: IdentiÜcation of a large  pathogenesis of RSA in recent studies but conÝicting results obtained  constitutional deletion of the 8q13 BOR syndrome region (Sangha et. al., Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65, 913-917, 1999, Sullivan  C. Bommer1, V. Kalscheuer2, S. Tinschert3,1;  et al. Obstet Gynecol. 101, 1236, 2003). We therefore investigated  the XCI patterns in peripheral blood DNA obtained from 64 RSA  1Institut f\x9er Medizinische Genetik, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Instiut  patients and 160 age matched controls. Pregnancy history, age,  f\x9er Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, TU  karyotype information and disease information was collected from  Dresden, Dresden, Germany. all subjects. The methylation status of a highly polymorphic CAG  Oto-facio-cervical (OFC) syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant  repeat in the androgen-receptor (HUMARA) gene was determined  condition that has been described in four unrelated patients. It  by use of methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme HpaII and PCR.  overlaps clinically with the Branchio-Oto-Renal syndrome (BOR)  The PCR products, both before and after digestion, were separated  syndrome. In addition to the manifestations found in BOR syndrome  on 8% sequencing gel, were dried, and were autoradiographed on  patients it is characterized by facial abnormalities, hypoplasia of the  MedicalÜlm CP-BU (Agfa). Densitometric analysis of the alleles was  cervical muscles (pronounced sloping shoulders), mental retardation,  performed using the Multi-Analyst software version 1.1 (Bio-Rad  and short stature. In 2001, Rickard et al. presented evidence that the  Laboratories). Skewed X-inactivation (>80 percent skewing) was  OFC syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving the  observed in 13 of the 53 informative patients (24.5 percent), and 10  EYA1 gene that is mutated in BOR syndrome. of the 124 informative controls (8 percent) (P=0.005; Ɂ2 test). More  We describe a male patient with hypoplastic kidneys who underwent  importantly, extremely skewed XCI, deÜned as >90% inactivation  transplantation at age 11. He presented with conductive hearing  of one allele, was present in nine (16.9 percent) patients, and in  loss, small dysmorphic ears, a preauricular pit, lateral cervical  only three controls (P=0.001; Ɂ2 test). These results support the  Üstulas, facial anomalies, a long neck with slopping shoulders and a  interpretation that disturbances in X-inactivation mosaicism may be  pseudopterygium formed by the trapezius muscle. In addition, he had  involved in the pathogenesis of RSA. hexadactyly of the right hand and the right foot. By FISH-analyses  we detected a deletion in the BOR syndrome region that was smaller  
P0137 . Genotype-phenotype correlation in Portuguese families  than the deletion seen by Rickard et al. (2001). Our results will help  with hereditary deafness associated to GJB2 mutations to narrow down the critical region of the OFC syndrome. Literature: Rickard et al., Hum Genet (2001) 108 :398-403 T. Matos1, H. Teixeira1, I. Galhardo2, A. R. Santos2, A. OÓNeill3, S. Almeida4, H.  Rosa5, J. C. Ferreira6, O. Dias2, M. Andrea2, H. Caria1,7, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1;  
P0135 . Evaluation of clinical Ündings in four patients with  1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of Lisbon, Lisbon,  Williams syndrome Portugal, 2Center of ORL Research, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal,  E. Mihci1, S. Tacoy1, Z. Cetin2, S. Yakut2, F. Kardelen3, S. Berker Karauzum2,  3ORL Service, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Genetics Service,  G. Luleci2;  Hospital D. Estef\x88nia, Lisbon, Portugal, 5ORL Service, Hospital Garcia de  Orta, Almada, Portugal, 6Obstetrics Service, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada,  1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Akdeniz University,  Portugal, 7Higher School of Health, Polytechnic Institut of Set\x9bbal, Set\x9bbal,  Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz  Portugal. University, Antalya, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric  Most cases of moderate-to-profound congenital inherited deafness  Cardiology, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey. are caused by mutations in the GJB2 gene. Over one hundred Cx26  Williams syndrome is characterized with dysmorphic face, mental  mutations have been identiÜed so far. Consequently, molecular  retardation, characteristic behavior proÜle, idiopathic hypercalcemia,  screening for GJB2 mutations has become an important tool in the  as well as supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS). This syndrome  diagnosis of hereditary prelingual deafness. results from a microdeletion in chromosome 7 (7q11.23) including  GJB2 is considered to have allelic heterogeneity since different  the elastin gene named ELN, which synthesize the elastin protein, an  mutations cause different phenotypes and a given mutation can  important protein in connective tissue. cause different levels of hearing loss, even within the same family.  Clinical and laboratory Ündings of four patients referred for facial  No clear genotype-phenotype correlation has been established to  dysmorphism with congenital heart disease, diagnosed as Williams  date, which would have important implications for genetic counseling  syndrome and conÜrmed by FISH analysis, were evaluated. FISH  and prognostic clinical information. In a recent collaborative  technique was applied after the features of the patients were  study involving a large number of pacients segregating two GJB2  evaluated using the scoring system recommended by American  mutations, a Ürst evidence of correlation was obtained. Pediatrics Academy in 2001. In the present study we have analysed portuguese families with  Two of the patients were male, and two were female, and all had  biallelic mutations in GJB2, in order to assess a possible genotype- congenital heart disease. One patient had VSD and PDA, one had  phenotype correlation. This analysis enabled us to conclude that  mild pulmonary stenosis, one subaortic VSD and pulmonary stenosis,  the Cx26 mutations identiÜed in portuguese pacients cause hearing  and one had pulmonary stenosis and secundum ASD. Besides, there  impairment of any degree of severity, with inter- and intra-familial  were major dysmorphic clinical Ündings. variability, as previously reported for other populations. Most  It was emphasized that Williams syndrome, which is considered  Individuals homozygotic for the 35delG mutation presented severe  to be a rare genetic disease, is actually more frequently seen  to profound hearing impairment, but in a few cases this genotype  genetic disease of childhood, when clinical Ündings are carefully  was also associated to moderate impairment. A slight deÜcit at high  analyzed and diagnostic laboratory tests are used. The Ündings were  frequencies was observed in several 35delG carriers. discussed in the light of the literature. These data represent a contribution for the establishment of more  precise genotype-phenotype correlations regarding GJB2 mutations.Clinical genetics 112 
P0138 . Desmin storage restrictive cardiomyopathy with atrio- 
P0140 . MYBP
C3 -linked hypertrophic cardiomyopahty is not a  ventricular block is associated with desmin gene defects. ÐbenignÑ disease. A. Pilotto1, M. Pasotti2, A. Repetto3, M. F. ScafÜno4, M. Diegoli5, M. Concardi4,  R. Serpi1, E. Porcu1, N. Banchieri1, M. Pasotti2, M. Grasso1, A. Brega3,4, E.  A. Brega6,7, E. Arbustini4;  Arbustini1;  1Institute of Pathology, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Cardiology  1Cardiovascular Pathology and Molecular Diagnostic Lab-Transplant Research  Division-IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Cardiology Division - IRCCS  Area, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Cardiology Division, IRCCS  Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Cardiovascular Pathology and Molecular  Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Biology and Genetics for  Diagnostic Lab-IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 5Department of  Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Genetics and  Pathology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Department of Biology and  Microbiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 7Department of  Background. Preliminary data on genotype-phenotype correlations  Genetics and Microbiology University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. in patients diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) due  Background. Desmin storage restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is  to myosin-binding protein C (MYBP
C3 ) gene mutations, indicate  causally linked to defects of desmin and alpha-B crystallin (CRYAB)  that MYBP
C3  gene defects are associated with late onset and good  genes. 13 mutations have been identiÜed to date in the desmin gene  prognosis-phenotype. The aim of the present study was to record  (chr. 2q35), 12 in patients with desmin storage myopathy, and one in  events (death and cardiac transplantation) and follow-up data  a familial dilated cardiomyopahty in which the myocardium has not  [congestive heart failure (CHF), implantable-cardioverter deÜbrillator  been investigated. (ICD), worsening of the New York Heart Association (NYHA)  Methods and Results. We report four desmin gene mutations,  functional class] of 35 patients with HCM due to MYBP
C3  gene  three novel and one known, in four unrelated probands diagnosed  defects. with RCM plus atrioventricular block treated with pacemaker  Methods and Results. 116 consecutive patients (71 males, mean age  implantation. Of the four probands none had clinically overt skeletal  41°16 years), diagnosed with HCM, underwent clinical evaluation  muscle involvement at the time of diagnosis. Their heart disease  and molecular genetic analysis. This latter identiÜed 35 (30%)  was diagnosed at the mean age of 30°11 years. Molecular genetic  mutations of MYBP
C3  gene, in 35 unrelated patients: 26 novel  analysis identiÜed 4 mutations of the desmin gene: R16C, R406W,  mutations were novel (73%), 7 known (27%). After 63°14 months of  T453I, delGTATACCTTG splice site junction (exon 3). Screening of  follow-up we recorded 3 deaths (2 sudden cardiac deaths and one  the Alpha-B Crystallin gene gave negative results. The disease was  due to congestive heart failure). Eight patients developed cardiac  familial autosomal dominant in two cases, autosomal recessive in one  dilatation and dysfunction: 2 of them underwent heart transplantation  and associated with a de novo mutation in one. Overall, 17 members  (HTx), 2 ICD implantation for ventricular arrhythmias, 4 worsened the  of the four families underwent clinical and instrumental screening  NYHA functional class from I to II; one patient developed restrictive  as well as molecular genetic analysis. Of the 17 members of the 4  pattern and was implanted with ICD for ventricular arrhythmias. The  families, 8 all affected carried the desmin gene defect. remaining 23 patients (65%) are in stable clinical conditions, 10 in  Conclusion. Desmin storage disease involving the heart causes a  NYHA class I and 13 in NYHA class II. typical RCM plus atrioventricular block. Although two genes have  Conclusions. Of 35 unrelated probands with HCM causally linked  been reported as associated with the disease, the desmin gene  to MYBP
C3  gene defects, 12 (34.3%) developed major events  is the most likely candidate. The typical phenotype constitutes the  or worsened after 63°14 months from diagnosis. The disease is  easy cardiological marker for addressing these patients to EMB and  therefore not a benign phenotype as preliminarily suggested. molecular genetic analysis of the desmin gene. 
P0141 . Genetic mapping in families with hereditary syndactylies 
P0139 . Revisiting metatropic dysplasia: report on 19 new  S. Mailk1,2, M. Arshad2, M. Amin-ud-Din3, S. Haque2, F. Oeffner1, D. Bornholdt1,  patients and review of the literature D. Lerche1, T. Richardt1, M. C. Koch1, W. Ahmad2, K. H. Grzeschik1;  D. Genevieve, M. Le Merrer, A. Munnich, P. Maroteaux, V. Cormier-Daire;  1Institute of Human Genetics, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany,  Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. 2Department of Biological Sciences, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad,  Metatropic dysplasia (MD) is a rare chondrodysplasia characterised  Pakistan, 3Department of Biology, Government College, DG Khan, Pakistan. by short limbs with limitation and enlargement of joints and usually  The combination of molecular and genetic studies with experimental  severe kyphoscoliosis. Radiological features include severe  manipulation of developing limb buds has signiÜcantly advanced our  platyspondyly, severe metaphyseal enlargement and shortening of  understanding of the signal centers, signalling molecules and their  long bones. The term ÐmetatroposÑ means changing patterns in greek  complex molecular interactions, co-ordinating limb bud outgrowth and  and emphasizes the evolutive changes in the body proportions of  patterning. One of the approaches to understand limb development  patients with MD. The classiÜcation proposed by Beck et al, based  is the study of human subjects showing various limb deformities. We  on the radiological features, divide three different types: a lethal  intend to identify gene(s) causing syndactylies. These genes might  autosomal recessive form, an autosomal recessive non lethal form  inÝuence anterior-posterior patterning or the separation of individual  and a non lethal autosomal dominant form with less severe X-rays  Ünger rays. manifestations and a better clinical outcome. Four families with hereditary non-sydnromic syndactylies were  Here, we report on clinical, radiological and histological Ündings  ascertained from various parts of Pakistan. The phenotypic study of  of 19 new MD patients (5 lethal or terminated cases, and 14 living  the affected subjects revealed that one of these families segregated  patients) and compared them with 67 patients previously reported in  type I syndactyly, two families syndactyly type II, all of them showing  the literature. autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. The fourth family, depicting  Beside usual diagnostic criteria, additional radiological features have  an autosomal recessive inheritance was proved to be a unique type,  been observed ie hypoplasia of the anterior body of Ürst cervical  hitherto unreported. vertebrae, irregular and squared calcaneum bone and precocious  Since there were three chromosomal locations known for type I,  calciÜcation of hyoid and cricoid bones. Moreover, the long term  II and III syndactyly (2q34-q36, 2q31, 6q22-q23, respectively), we  follow up of one patient from birth to 30 years shows radiological  performed linkage analysis using highly polymorphic microsatellite  features overlapping two different types (ie the non lethal autosomal  markers from these regions in three of the families to look for  recessive and the dominant form). cosegregation of the phenotype with any of these loci. Our Ündings  Finally, among the 76 patients, the observation of 2 families only with  indicated that the phenotype in these families was not linked to any  recurrence and two cases with vertical transmission is suggestive of a  of these loci and there was genetic heterogeneity for syndactyly type  ÐuniqueÑ autosomal dominant mode of inheritance which is conÜrmed  I and II, beyond the known loci. Also it conÜrmed that our family with  by the use of the statistical proband method (Chi2 = 8.31). recessive syndactyly was a unique variant with an unknown novel  locus. Ultimately we intend to identify and characterize the candidate  gene(s) involved in the disease phenotype in our families.Clinical genetics 113 
P0142 . Williams-Beuren-Syndrome: Determination of deletion- 
P0144 . Italian experience of DM1 molecular testing on 710 two- breakpoint on chromosome 7q11.23 using quantitative Real- generations families. Time-PCR E. Bonifazi, L. Vallo, R. Iraci, A. Botta, G. Novelli;  C. Schubert, F. Laccone;  Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. Institute of Human Genetics, 37073 Goettingen, Germany. Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1; OMIM #160900) is an autosomal- The Williams-Beuren-Syndrome (WBS) a rare (1/20000-50000)  dominant genetic disorder with multisystemic clinical features  genetic disorder is associated with a 1.5-2Mb hemizygous deletion  associated with a CTG expansion in 3Ó untranslated region of the  on chromosome 7q11.23. WBS-patients display vascular stenosis,  dystrophia myotonica protein kinase gene (DMPK) on chromosome  weakness of connective-tissue, dysmorphic face, short stature and  19q13.3. DM1 genotypes can be divided into 
E1  (50-200 CTG), 
E2   mental retardation. (200-1000 CTG) and 
E3  (>1000 CTG) classes. We report on a 6  At least twenty-four genes have been identiÜed in the deletion-region  years experience in providing symptomatic and prenatal molecular  in WBS-patients Ýanking by large low-copy-repeat sequences (>  diagnostic services for DM1 over the Italian territory on 710 two- 320Kb). generations families. Analysis of the intergenerational differences in  HaploinsufÜency of the Elastin-gene (ELN) and most probably of  repeat length has revealed an allelic dimension increase in 64.1%  the LIMK1-gene has been shown to be causally involved in the  of analysed families, in each case concordant with the DM1 clinical  pathogenesis of WBS. Isolated hemizygosity of ELN leads to a  anticipation characteristics. Contraction events were observed in  supravalvular aortic stenosis, the hemizygosity of the LIMk1 gene  6.4% of cases, while the repeat is stable in the remaining 29.5% of  is responsible for the impaired visual-spatial-constructive cognition  germ line transmissions. We have then subdivided our data on the  in WBS-patients. The Ýanking genes of ELN are assumed to cause  basis of DM1 mutation parental origin. We found that the CTG repeat  other feature of WBS such as mental retardation, hypercalcemia and  length increase in 180 of male and in 275 of female transmission  connective tissue abnormalities. respectively. We observed more frequently an 
E1 -
E2  passage (male  The precise identiÜcation of deletion-breakpoints and determination  =115 and female =105) and an 
E2 -
E3  passage (male =25 and female  of the correct size of the deletions is not feasible by using the FISH-  =130), more rarely 
E1 -
E3  change (male =40 and female =40). In  and/or microsatellites analysis. conclusion : 1) the DM1 mutation is more stable through generations  For determination of the deletion-sizes we developed a quantitative  than expected; 2) the CTG repeat tends preferentially expand  PCR-approach (qPCR) using SybrGreen§ dye and reactions were  maintaining a well deÜned genotype-phenotype correlation; 3) there  analysed on an ABI-7900HT (TaqMan). Our assay screens 2.2Mb of  are no signiÜcant differences in DM1 mutation stability between  the WBS-region in 50Kb intervals. paternal and maternal transmission. This methodology has been tested in DNA samples of ten patients  Supported by grant form the Italian Ministry of Health and Ministry of  with a known deletion of the WBS-region and was able to detect the  Education, University and Research (2003). deletion and the approximate size in all cases. We will investigate further DNA samples including patients with a  
P0145 . Holt-Oram syndrome: a french national collaborative  strong clinical suspect of WBS but without apparent study in a series of 31 families deletion. We will report on the detection efÜciency and sensitivity  S. Manouvrier-Hanu1, M. Holder-Espinasse1, G. Br\x8dvi\x8ere2, G. Vaksman2, S.  of this new system and we will perform a genotype/phenotype- Blesson3, O. Boute-B\x8dn\x8djean1, M. Vibert4, C. Testolin5, J. Lespinasse6, N. Por- correlation. chet7, F. Escande7;  1Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Hopital Cardiologique, Lille, France, 3Hopital  
P0143 . Cutis laxa arising from an autosomal dominant splice  Bretonneau, Tours, France, 4Hopital Sainte Croix, Metz, France, 5Prasidio Os- mutation in exon 24 of the elastin gene (ELN) in a three months  pedaliero Macedonio Melloni, Milano, Italy, 6Service de g\x8dn\x8dtique, Centre Hos- old boy and his father with highly variable phenotype pitalier, Chamb\x8dry, France, 7Biologie Mol\x8dculaire, Eurasant\x8d, Lille, France. C. Kraus1, I. Hausser2, M. Essayi3, J. Kunze4, A. Reis1, L. M. Neumann4;  Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is the most frequent Ðheart-handÑ  1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Electron Microscopic Labo- syndrome. Autosomal dominant inheritance is the rule in this  ratory, Dermatology, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Neonatology Charit\x8d  condition which expression can be highly variable. Clinically, HOS is  Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics Charit\x8d Campus  characterised by the association of cardiac malformations and pre- Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany. axial anomalies of the upper limbs. Congenital cutis laxa is a rare, genetically heterogeneous connective  HOS has been ascribed to TBX5 mutations since 1997 in 30% of the  tissue disorder. The systemic involvement of elastic tissue is  cases, highlighting the genetic heterogeneity of this entity. characterized by high clinical variability. The typical aspect is  A national French collaboration led to the clinical analysis of 31  marked skin laxity lacking elastic recoil which is accompanied nearly  families since 2002. We have established precise clinical diagnostic  always by rareÜcation, loss, fragmentation or severe disorganisation  criteria allowing to classify the families in 3 distinct categories:  of dermal elastic Übres. In three cases of autosomal dominant  typical HOS (19), atypical HOS (9), and highly improbable HOS (3).  cutis laxa, causal frameshift mutations within the gene coding the  Molecular biology was performed in 25 families, and is still pending  structural protein Elastin, a main component of elastic Übres, could be  in 6. identiÜed. Here we report a three month old boy with cutis laxa and  Amongst the ÐatypicalÑ (8) and the Ðhighly improbableÑ (3) cases,  his clinically unaffected father. Mutation analysis in the Elastin gene  no TBX5 mutations were identiÜed. In the 14 ÐtypicalÑ families, 11  was carried out by direct sequencing all coding exons in genomic  mutations have been identiÜed, including 6 which were not previously  DNA. A cytosine to thymine substitution was identiÜed at the last  reported (3 nonsense, 2 missense and 1 frameshift). position of exon 24. To further characterize the implication of the  Although we can not yet establish genotype-phenotype correlation  mutation, total RNA was extracted from cultured Übroblasts. RT-PCR  in our cohort, we conÜrm the genetic heterogeneity of HOS and the  and subsequent sequencing of a fragment encompassing the critical  interest of precise clinical delineation before molecular analysis. region revealed an in frame deletion of exon 24, resulting in a stable  We will search for TBX5 deletion for the ÐtypicalÑ cases with negative  protein lacking amino acids 526-540. This is consistent with former  mutation screening, and we will look for other candidate genes in the  observations that suggest that the phenotype of cutis laxa is the  ÐatypicalÑ cases. result of a dominant negative effect compared to SVAS caused by  loss of function mutations in the ELN gene. Interestingly, the mutation  
P0146 . X-Linked Mental Retardation in the Iranian Population was also present in the father who had no signs of cutis laxa,  M. Hasanzad1,2, S. Ainechi2, S. Hosseini Amini2, T. Parsa2, M. Garshasbi2,  suggesting that the mutation is associated with a high phenotypic  M. Motezaker2, S. Esmaili2, S. Abedini2, R. Karimi-Nejad3, H. Ropers4, H.  variability. Nevertheless, herewith we report the fourth family with  Najmabadi2,3;  autosomal dominant cutis laxa, caused by a mutation in the Elastin  1Azad Medical University,Tehran Unit, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of),  gene. 2Genetics Research Center (GRC), The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation  University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Kariminejad &Najmabadi Clinical genetics 114 Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 4Max-Plank- MFS (MIM#154700) is an autosomal dominant disorder (1:5000) of  Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. the connective tissue primarily involving the cardiovascular, ocular  With an incidence of 1.5 to 2.5 percent, mental retardation (MR) is  and skeletal systems (Ghent nosology). Its diagnosis relies on Ghent  one of the biggest unsolved problems in Medical Genetics. Severe  criteria among which positive family history and FBN1 mutations are  forms affect approximately 0.5 percent of the general population,  major ones. FBN1 is a very large gene (15q21: 230 Kb, 65 exons,  and most of these have genetic causes. An excess of affected males  2871 amino acids). To date, 559 mutations have been identiÜed. The  is a consistent Ünding in all published studies. Based on these  study aimed at assessing whether FBN1 mutations found in MFS  observations, it has been estimated that 25 percent of the severe  patients match Ghent criteria and clinical phenotypes. genetic forms of mental retardation may be due to gene defects on  Clinical series: 40 unrelated probands (11<18 and 29>18 years) and  the human X chromosome. Recent molecular studies in families with  relatives. FBN1 screening: DHPLC analysis of the 65 exons and  syndromic and non-syndromic X-linked MR have already revealed  sequencing of heteroduplex amplicons. 
C677 T MTHFR was analysed  mutations in close to 50 different genes. However, it has become  with RFLP. Controls: one hundred chromosomes (50 unrelated  apparent that in general, mutations in these genes are very rare. In  healthy individuals). Western populations ,the Fragile X syndrome, does not account for  Of the 40 FBN1 mutations, 24 were novel: Y20C; 
C224 R; Q348X;  more than 2% to 2.5 % of all cases. R439G; Q454P; R516X; ex15-del15bp (nt2018-2031) and del8bp  In Iran with its high proportion of consanguineous marriages, mental  (2050-2057); ex19-delT (nt2467); G1058D; ex26-Ins10bp (nt3361);  retardation is a particularly important problem. As a prelude to large- ex29:Y1219C, delC(nt3763); ex 30-Ins5b (nt3900-3904); ex41-IV
S40 - scale, systematic research into X-chromosomal and autosomal  1A-G; R1790X; 
C1876 Y; 
C1900 Y; ex49-del2bp (nt6185-6186); ex54- forms of MR, we have implemented molecular Fragile X diagnosis  ins5bp (nt6785); A2383Y; 
C2535 W; Y2629C; ex63-delT (nt8032). and tested 387 probands from 249 families with possible X-linked  Of the above 40 patients, 19(47.5%) fulÜlled the Ghent criteria: 3/19  inheritance patterns. 134 patients had a full mutation , 32 probands  aged <18 years. 18(45%) met two criteria plus FBN1 mutation: 7/18  carried a premutation , and 221 did not have recognizable mutations  aged <18 years. 3(7,5%) met one Ghent criterion and carried the  in the FMR1 gene. These results may indicate that in Iran, Fra(X) is  FBN1 mutation: 1/3 aged <18 years. Three pairs of unrelated families  more common than elsewhere. In the non-Fra(X) families that are  shared identical mutations but phenotypes within families showed  large enough, linkage studies and mutation screening are being  different severity. 
C677 T As expected, Ghent nosology met the age  performed to rule out defects of other known genes for XLMR. of the patients, and FBN1 genotype constituted a major diagnostic  contributor to diagnosis in patients <18 years.No correlation was  
P0147 . Williams Breuren syndrome associated with caudal  found between FBN1 genotype, 
C677 T variation and severity of the  regression syndrome and coagulopathy phenotype. M. Ledinegg1, C. Windpassinger1, E. Petek1, C. Suppan2, J. Schalamon3, M. E.  H\x99llwarth4, L. Ofner5, K. Wagner5, T. Schwarzbraun5, H. Zierler5, S. Sodia5, P.  
P0149 . Otoferline : The trap of the neonatal hearing loss  M. Kroisel5;  screening with the evoked otoacoustic emissions S. Marlin1, A. Marcolla1, F. Denoyelle1, R. Couderc1, E. Garab\x8ddian1, C. Petit2,  1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Medical  D. Feldmann1;  University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Department of pediadic surgery,Medical  University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Department of pediadic surgery, Medical  1H\x98pital Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 5Institute of Medical Biology & Human  Hearing loss is the most frequent of the sensory deÜcits. One child  Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. in 1000 at birth presents with a severe or a profound deafness,  Here we report on the clinical and molecular genetic Ündings in  while another one in 1000 becomes deaf before adulthood. Recent  a patient with the quite unusual association of Williams Beuren  discoveries in human genetics have indicated that 60-80% of cases  syndrome (WBS) with caudal regression syndrome (CRS) and a rare  of congenital deafness are of genetic origin in developed countries  variant of a coagulopathy (combined deÜciency of factor XI and factor  . The vast majority, about 85%, of non syndromic sensorineural  XII). Molecular cytogenetic analysis conÜrmed a de novo deletion of  hearing loss (NSSNHL) show autosomal recessive transmission.  the WBS-critical region including the elastin gene and the LIM-Kinase  Since 1994, more than 70 loci for NSSNHL have been identiÜed and  1 gene in 7q11.23. The precise extent of the deletion, which in this  35 different genes cloned. One of them, GJB2, encoding connexin  case can not be recognized in banded chromosome preparations  26, is involved in the most frequent form of NSSNHL: DFNB1. has still to be determined. At least one form of CRS has also been  The OTOF gene encodes a protein, Otoferlin, wich is localised in the  mapped to the long arm of chromosome 7 but the locus for the  inner hair cells . This molecule could be involved in the fusion of the  autosomal dominantly inherited Currarino syndrome at 7q36 is much  synaptic vesicules in the cochlear neuro-ephitelium. The mutations  more distally located. An independent deletion of the HLXB9 gene  in OTOF are responsible for a congenital profound non syndromic  which could be responsible for the formation of CRS was ruled out by  deafness : DFNB9. The characteristic of DBNB9 is the persistance of  FISH analysis, as was the presence of a paracentric inversion at the  transient evoked otoacoustic emissions, leading to the false negative  WBS critical region in her mother. Unfortunately her father was not  result in case of hearing loss screening with this technique or leading  available for analysis yet. There are various types of coagulopathies,  to a diagnosis of auditory neuropathy. however the combination of a deÜciency of factor XI and XII is not  We will present the phenotype and the genotype study of two  well documented nor is there an established linkage to 7q. It remains  independent patients presenting OTOF biall\x8dlique mutations. The  to be investigated by sequencing of the HLXB9 gene and detailed  molecular diagnostic has permited to localise the defect in the  mapping of chromosomal breakpoints Ýanking the WBS deletion  cochlear and to propose cochlear implant to the two families. to rule out a coincidence or to show that there is indeed a causal  relationship between an unusually large albeit still submicroscopic  
P0150 . Further delineation of the clinical phenotype associated  deletion with that phenotype. with mutations in OPHN1 gene: a clinically recognizable  syndrome 
P0148 . Fibrillin 1 (FBN1) genotype versus Ghent criteria in 65  N. Philip1, B. Chabrol1, C. Raybaud1, C. Moraine2, M. Croquette3, V. Layet4, A.  unrelated probands with suspected Marfan Syndrome. Moncla1, L. Villard5;  M. Grasso1, S. Ansaldi1, A. Pisani2, C. Lucchelli1, L. Lanzarini3, C. Malattia4, M.  1Hopital dÓEnfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Hopital de Tours, Tours,  Diegoli2, A. Brega5,6, A. Pilotto7, E. Arbustini1;  France, 3Cytog\x8dn\x8dtique, Lille, France, 4Hopital Charles-Nicolle, Rouen, France,  1Cardiovascular Pathology and Molecular Diagnostic Lab-Transplant Research  5INSERM U491, Marseille, France. Area, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Pathology,  A mutation in the OPHN1 gene, encoding Oligophrenin, has been  University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Cardiology Diviison, IRCCS Policlinico  reported for the Ürst time in a family of non-speciÜc XLMR. Since then  S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Pediatry, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy,  , it has been demonstrated that mutations in OHPN1 were associated  5Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan,  with syndromic mental retardation with cerebellar hypoplasia in two  Milano, Italy, 6Department of Genetics and Microbiology University of Pavia,  families and a sporadic case (Philip et al, 2003; Bergmann et al,  Pavia, Italy, 7Institute of Pathology, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy. 2003). These Ündings were conÜrmed by the reappraisal of the Ürst Clinical genetics 115 family, demonstrating similar MRI Ündings. We report here a new  
P0153 . Two new patients with Cross (oculocerebral syndrome  family with the same phenotype. We made a review of the literature  with hypopigmentation) syndrome. in order to propose a better deÜnition of the clinical phenotype.  B. Keren1, D. Genevieve1, A. Delahaye1, D. Chauveau2, S. Hadj Rabia3, S.  Neuroradiological Ündings were identical in all male patients: cerbellar  Lyonnet1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1;  hypoplasia predominating on the lower vermis, cortical atrophy and  1Departement de Genetique, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France,  variable ventricular dilatation requiring ventriculo-peritoneal shunting  2Service de Nephrologie Adulte, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, Fran- in two cases. Mental retardation was constant, usually moderate (IQ  ce, 3Service de Dermatologie, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. around 50), predominating on language. In all cases tested, verbal  Syndromes with hypopigmentation of skin and hair include: i)  IQ was signiÜcantly lower than performance IQ, and all had rather  isolated oculocutaneous albinism syndromes, ii) Chediak-Higashi,  conserved visuo-spatial abilities. There was no associated ataxia,  Griscelli, Vici and Hermansky-Pudlak syndromes, all characterized  except in one family. Strabismus was present in three families,  by hypopigmentation and immunodeÜciency or haematological  epilepsy in two. In addition, we demonstrated that all male patients  features, and iii) other heterogeneous disorders namely Tietz  exhibit a characteristic facial appearance. Heterozygous females  syndrome, ermine phenotype (or BADS syndrome), osteoporosis and  exhibit mild mental retardation and slight facial dysmorphism. All Üve  oculocutaneous hypopigmentation syndrome, Preus syndrome and  mutations are non-sens mutations or small out-of-frame deletions. No  Cross syndrome (CS). reccurent mutation or hot-spot was observed, demonstrating that a  Here, we report on two brothers born from Portuguese Ürst cousin  complete mutation screening of the gene is mandatory in suspected  parents. They both share the same phenotypic presentation namely  cases. hypomelanosis involving the skin, hair and eye, mild premature aging,  mild mental retardation, sensorineural deafness, severe myopia,  
P0151 . A Case of Robinow Syndrome hypogonadism with testis ectopia, enamel anomaly and moderate  \x84. N. Demircioglu;  postnatal short stature. Additional features are observed namely  Ege University, Faculty of Medicine,, ĕzmir, Turkey. cerebellar atrophy (1/2), complete 2-3 cutaneous syndactyly of the  Robinow Syndrome which was Ürst described in 1965 is  toes (1/2) and glomerulopathy (1/2). Bone x-rays, high resolution  characterised by fetal facies, hemivertebrae and genital hypoplasia.  blood chromosomes and immunological studies are normal.  It can be inherited in both autosomal dominant and autosomal  Ophthalmologic exam reveals fundal appearance of albinism. recessive fashion. Phenotypic features are more severe in the  The generalised hypopigmentation of skin and hair and the likely  recessively inherited form. Up to date about 100 cases have been  autosomal recessive mode of inheritance are suggestive of CS but  reported the observation of mild mental retardation, myopia (despite the fundal  A 16-month old boy was hospitalised because of his short starture  appearance of albinism) and the absence of ataxia may also suggest  and genital anomaly. There is no consanguinity between parents and  the diagnosis of Preus syndrome. These diagnoses will be discussed  there is no similar case in the family. On physical examination his  in the light of the review of the literature. weight was 9 kg (3-10th centile), height 71.5 cm (below 3rd centile),  head circumference 46.5 cm (10th centile). He had all of the cardinal  
P0154 . 25 years of experience in the treatment of the cleft lip and  features of the syndrome including fetal face, hypertelorism, wide  palate palpebral Üssures, anteverted nostrils, triangular mouth, clinodactyly,  A. Radulescu1, M. C. Popoiu1,2, E. S. Boia1,3, P. Tepeneu1,2, C. Calugaru1;  brachymelia, umbilical hernia, hypospadias, and mesomelic dwarÜsm 1Childrens Hospital ÒLouis TurcanuÓ Department of Pediatric Surgery, Timisoara,  Laboratory tests revealed low IGF-1 , IGF-1 BP-3 , and low growth  Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy ÒVictor BabesÓ, Timisoara,  hormone levels. On X-ray examination multiple fusion defects in  Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy áVictor Babes á, Timisoara,  lumbar vertebrae and butterÝy vertebrae, and mesomelic shortening  Romania. of the extremities were observed. Cranial MR showed that the sella  Background Cleft lip and palate or orofacial cleft is one of the most  was normal. common congenital malformations. This case is presented because of its rarity and the presence of low  The average incidence is around 1 in every 1000 live births with  GH, IGF-1, IGF-1 BP 3 levels without empty sella. variable birth prevalence based on geographic origins, the highest  rates commonly beeing found in Asian populations. 
P0152 . Hidden 45, X/47, XXX/47, XX, del(Y)(p?)/46, XX mosaicism  Method The present study analizes a number of 290 medical  associated with True Hermaphroditism (TH) records of pacients affected by the disease ,treated at the Childrens  S. Kofman-Alfaro1, K. Nieto1, R. Alvarez1, R. Y. Pe\x95a2, I. Palma1, E. Luis2, L.  Hospital àLouis TurcanuÒ ,Department of Pediatric Surgery in  M. Dorantes2, R. Garcia-Cavazos3, G. Queipo1;  Timisoara,Romania during 1.01.1979-31.12.2003. 1Genetics Dept. Hospital General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina UNAM,  Results During this period of time we observed a more frequent  Mexico City, Mexico, 2Intersex Clinic. Hospital Infantil de Mexico-Federico  incidence of cases in our male patients and also a higher number  Gomez, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Biomedical Research Department Instituto  of complex (both lip and palate ) cases mainly affecting the area  Nacional de Perinatologia, Mexico City, Mexico. around the cities of Petrosani and Anina in Romania.Ten percent  True hermaphroditism (TH) is an unusual form of sex reversal,  of all the studied cases had a familiar history of the disease . The  characterized by unequivocal testicular and ovarian elements in the  Millard gingivoperiosteoplasty technique was by far the most used  same individual. Approximately 60% TH have a 46, XX karyotype,  followed by the Steffensen, Mesurier procedures . The Veau and  33% are mosaics with a second cell line containing a Y chromosome,  Tennison techniques were used in 4 cases. Following these surgical  while the remaining 7% are 46, XY. The Sex determining gene  procedures the results were very good in 80 % of cases ,good in 9  SRY, is present in only 10% of true hermaphrodites with a 46,XX  % of cases ,fair in 7 % and poor results were noted in 4 % of cases.  karyotype, therefore in the remaining 90%, mutations at unknown  Redone surgery after the correction procedure was necessary in 1 %  X-linked or autosomal sex determining loci have been proposed as  of patients. Speech disorders affected mainly the patients with cleft  factors responsible for testicular. TH presents considerable genetic  palate in 12% of cases . heterogeneity with several molecular anomalies leading to the dual  Conclusions Although the disease is known for a long time no  gonadal development in a single subject. In 1998 gonadal SRY  genetic therapy made itÓs presence noted in solving the problem of  mosaicism was proposed in 3 sporadic 46,XX TH SRY- negative  cleft palate and lip. in blood leukocytes but positive in gonadal tissue and in 2002  the presence of hidden mosaicism for Y-derived sequences was  
P0155 . Bartsocas- Papas syndrome: prenatal diagnosis and  conÜrmed as al mechanism to explain TH etiology in some cases.  autopsy Ündings Here we report a new TH case in which a hidden mosaicism for the  D. L. Skidmore1, S. Keating2, J. Johnson2, D. Chitayat1,2;  Y and X chromosome was detected by PCR and FISH in peripheral  1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Mount Sinai Hospital,  blood and gonadal tissue, supporting the fact that hidden mosaicism  Toronto, ON, Canada. is associated with TH and that molecular analyses of gonadal tissue  The Lethal Multiple Pterygium syndromes (LMPS) are a group of  should be done in all 46,XX cases.Clinical genetics 116 genetically heterogenous conditions characterized by ptergyium,  DNA samples of 156 chronic liver disease children with ages between  hypertelorism, hydrops fetalis and cystic hygroma. The Bartsocas- 1 month and 15 years were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction  Papas syndrome (BPS) consists of pterygium, ankyloblepharon,  followed by digestion with TaqI and XmnI enzymes. a hypoplastic, malformed nose, a small jaw, oral synechia and  Twelve children were homozygous and another 12 were  limb abnormalities. We report a case of a fetus with many Ündings  heterozygous for the Pi*Z allele (7.7%). There were 3 children Pi*SZ  consistent with BPS, however, with some characteristic features  and 2 were Pi*SS. Fourteen patients were heterozygous for the Pi*S  missing; and some present usually reported in other LMPS. allele. The frequency found for the Pi*Z allele was 12.5% and the  The parents were non-consanguineous and the pregnancy was  Pi*S was 6.7%. The frequency of Pi*Z alleles in a previous study in a  terminated at 28 weeks gestation for multiple abnormalities detected  sample of our population was 0.5% and the Pi*S allele was 7.0%. on fetal ultrasound. These include severe symmetrical IUGR,  The high frequency of Pi*Z in this population demonstrates the  moderate oedema, omphalocele and rocker bottom feet. The  usefulness of A1ATD molecular testing in children with chronic liver  autopsy showed pterygia of the popliteal, antecubital fossa and the  disease. axillae. There was partial syndactyly on both upper and lower limbs.  Ankyloblepharon were absent. There were clefts of the palate and  
P0158 . ArtiÜcial neuronal networks as an aid to diagnose  mandible. Synechia from the tongue to the mandibular alveolar  multiple congenital malformation syndromes ridges, and mucosal overgrowths involving the upper and lower pre-  U. Tautenhahn, G. Graetschel, J. Pelz;  molar areas. The genitalia were hypoplastic and the karyotype was  Charit\x8d Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany. 46, XY. Computer programs which can be used as an aid to diagnose  The case highlights the continued difÜculty of differentiating between  multiple congenital malformation syndromes have been used for  the various syndromes associated with multiple pterygium. The  many years. These programs are based either on algorithms, which  shear number of pterygium, and the involvement of the axilla are  deÜne a diagnosis by a set of phenotypic components all having  more typical of LMPS. However, the oral synechia and genital  the same weight or on algorithms based on a concept of Bayesian  hypoplasia Üt well with BPS. Other concistent features of BPS, such  statistics. A new approach for this Üeld are artiÜcial neuronal networks  as ankyloblepharon and a markedly malformed nose were absent.  (ANNs). A commercially available shell, suitable for building up  This case questions again the classiÜcation of the multiple pterygium  feedforeward ANNs trained by using backpropagation of errors. The  syndromes. More deÜnitive conclusions will be obtained with the  data of 234 patients representing individual examples of 21 different  Ünding of the different causative genes. malformation syndromes were used. The number of symptoms or  symptom combinations for the description of cases were limited to 28,  
P0156 . Several Silver-Russell-syndrome-like phenotype features  55 and 78 in different series of tests. After the export of the patients  in a female patient with a subtelomeric deletion 10q data to the shell the data of about 2/3 of the patients were used for  P. M. Kroisel1, E. Petek1, C. Windpassinger1, K. Wagner1, B. Plecko2, H. Zier- the training of the ANN. The remaining 1/3 of patients data-sets were  ler1;  used to test the diagnostic capacities of the different ANNs. The most 1Institute of Medical Biology & Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of  efÜcient yielded a diagnosis in more than 95 % of all tests. Correct  Pediatrics, Graz, Austria. diagnoses without any concurrent differential diagnoses were  Here we present a 23 year old female patient, who is just 116  generated in 26 %; adding all tests producing the correct diagnosis  cm tall, with 23 kg. She shows a lateral asymmetry and several  among other diagnoses amounted to 74 %. The application of ANNs  anomalies and dysmorphic features. She was born at term as the  in the diagnostic process of malformation syndromes is efÜcient - one  second child of a non consanguineous Austrian couple. Length  shortcoming is, that different sets of training data produce models  was 41 cm and weight 1191 g. She did not drive well and was early  with different generalization accuracies. The signiÜcance of an ANN  diagnosed of having a Guerin-Stern syndrome because of some  is to a great extent inÝuenced by chance and the experience of the  minor arthrogrypotic limb contractures mainly of her shorter right leg  developer. and her hands. Physical examination reveals that her right leg is 4.5  cm shorter and also her right arm is reduced in length. Her femora  
P0159 . A case of fetal hydantoin syndome having hemangioma  are disproportional short, she has missing ribs and a severe scoliosis.  associated with hemiatrophy at the left side of the body Chromosome analysis with 4 weeks showed a normal karyotype.  C. Ozkinay, A. Ekmekci, H. Onay, T. Cankaya, O. Cogulu, F. Ozkinay;  In the Ürst year a ventricular septal defect was corrected. Increased  Ege University Medical school Hospital, Izmir, Turkey. CPK and fructose-aldolase was repeatedly found but EMG was  Fetal Hydantoin Syndrome occurs due to in utero exposure to  normal. Her psychomotor development is grossly retarded. She was  hydantoin and only 10% of the infants born with adverse affects.  not able to walk before 5 years and started to speak with 4 years.  The teratologic affects of hydantoin depend on the genotype of  Additional anomalies were recognized like a double kidney left and  fetuses and include four major categories of problems: craniofacial  just 2 month ago a vaginal atresia was diagnosed requiring surgical  dysmorphology, prenatal onset of growth deÜciency, central nervous  treatment with removal of her uterus. On this occasion a human  system dysfunction with IQ less than 75, increased risk for major  genetic examination was performed and detailed chromosomal  malformations such as congenital heart disease, cleft lip/palate,  analysis including subtelomeric FISH revealed a cryptic 10q deletion.  microcephaly, and major genitourinary, eye, and limb defects. Although several of the reported symptoms are in good accordance  A two years old girl was referred to us for a wine-colored  with previously reported patients this particular case shows some  pigmentation at the left side of her body and the shortness of her  additional features that will be presented together with a precise  left extremities. She was born to an epileptic mother who was given  molecular characterization of the deletion. phenytoin throughout thepregnancy. She was born spontaneously at  term and she weighed 2900 g at birth. 
P0157 . Frequency of Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Pi*Z and Pi*S alleles in  Physical examination of the case showed broad depressed nasal  children with chronic liver disease in Brazil bridge, short nose with bowed upper lip, broad alveolar ridge, high  U. Matte, C. T. Ferreira, S. M. G. Vieira, C. Kieling, K. Nonemacher, L. Lima, T.  palate, short neck, low-set hairline, widely spaced nipples, umbilical  R. Silveira, R. Giugliani;  hernia, hypoplasia of distal phalanges, hypoplastic Üngertips, digit  Hospital de Cl\x91nicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre - RS, Brazil. anomalies with small nails at her feet, large skin hemangioma  Alpha-1-Antitrypsin DeÜciency (A1ATD), an autosomal recessive  and hemiatrophy at the left side of her body. The case has been  disorder characterized by reduced serum A1AT, is the most common  diagnosed as Fetal Hydantoin Syndrome with an additional Ündings  genetic cause of liver disease in infants and children. More than 90  of hemangioma and hemiatrophy. variants of the A1AT protein have now been identiÜed. The most  The association of fetal hydantoin syndrome and hemangioma with  common alleles are Pi*S and Pi*Z which are characterized by serum  hemiatrophy has been described for the Ürst time in this case A1AT concentration between 50 - 60% and 10 - 15% of normal,  respectively. The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of  the alleles Pi*S and Pi*Z in children with chronic liver disease.Clinical genetics 117 
P0160 . Genetic Characterization of Spondylothoracic Dysplasia a series of semi-structured schedules and validated psychological  A. S. Cornier1, J. R. Acevedo2, N. Ramirez1, N. Arciniegas1, S. Carlo1;  measures. At this preliminary stage of analysis the results show that  40.8% of the patients had their diagnoses conÜrmed, 45 % had their  1Ponce School of Medicine, Ponce, PR, United States, 2Univ. of Puerto Rico at  previous diagnoses disputed and 14.2 % of the patients were given  Arecibo, Arecibo, PR, United States. an unclassiÜed diagnosis. After the second interview stage those  Spondylothoracic dysplasia is an autosomal recessive disorder  patients who have received a genetic test were much more clear in  with high prevelence in Puerto Rican population. Typical Ündings  their minds about their diagnosis and what it meant (38%), than those  include segmentation and formation defects of the spine. Short and  individuals who have not received a genetic test (15%). The Ündings  rigid neck, protuberant abdomen and inguinal hernias are frequent  suggest that the psycho-social and practical beneÜts of a molecular  Ündings as well. We have followed 32 patient for over 8 years  diagnosis for patients and their families is important. allowing us to determine the natural history, phenotype and genotype  charcaterization of the disease. Sequential pulmonary function tests,  
P0163 . Glucocerebrosidase gene: identiÜcation and  establishments of antropomorphic measurements and comparison  characterization of four novel point mutations, a recombinant  of height and thoracic circumferences, have allow us to determine  allele and a non-pseudogene-derived complex allele causing  the minimal measurements required for survival. Genetic mapping to  Gaucher disease type I chromosome 2q31 has been establish and further characterization  S. Mioěię1, S. Dominissini1, A. L. E. Montalvo1, M. Deganuto1, M. Filocamo2, R.  and reduction of the critical region to 2cM has been achieved. These  Cariati1, M. Stroppiano2, B. Bembi1, M. G. Pittis1;  has allowed us to establish the genetic and phenotypic differences  among syndromes with similar phenotypes. 1Unit\x87 Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio  Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. 
P0161 . The clinical phenotype in 34 patients with supernumerary  Gaucher disease (GD) is the most frequent lysosomal glycolipid  marker chromosomes containing the Prader-Willi-Angelman  storage disorder due to an autosomal recessive deÜciency of  critical region acid Ȳ-glucosidase (GBA) characterised by the accumulation of  N. R. Dennis1, R. J. Thompson2, E. E. Craig2, M. W. M. Veltman2, P. F. Bolton3;  glucocerebroside. Three GD clinical variants have been identiÜed  based in the absence (Type 1) or presence of primary CNS  1Division of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, Southampton, United  involvement (Type 2, acute neuropathic and Type 3, subacute  Kingdom, 2Developmental Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,  neuropathic). The GBA gene (~7 kb) is located on chromosome 1 and  United Kingdom, 3Institute of Psychiatry, University of London, London, United  contains 11 exons. A highly homologous 5 kb-pseudogene is located  Kingdom. 16 kb downstream from the active gene. We studied 20 females and 14 males aged 2-57 years with  In this work we characterised six novel genetic alterations in GBA  supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMC) containing one or  gene causing GD type 1: four missense changes (D24N, I119S,  more copies of the Prader-Willi-Angelman critical region (PWACR).  
P182 L, V191E), a recombinant allele and a non-pseudogene- Two were normally functioning individuals who were mosaic for the  derived complex allele (G421D+H451R). All six mutant alleles were  SMC; the rest were ascertained via learning and/or behavioural  present as compound heterozygotes in association with N370S,  difÜculties. Of the latter, 3 who were mosaic were among the more  the most common mutation in GD1. The mutant alleles, except  mildly affected. All the SMC were maternal in origin and all except  the recombinant one, were expressed in vitro in COS-1 cells and  two were de novo. One familial case was unusual in containing only a  analysed by enzyme activity, protein processing and intracellular  single copy of the PWACR, associated with a correspondingly milder  localization. phenotype, the other had a clinically normal mosaic mother. The novel allele due to the recombination between the gene and the  Affected individuals typically showed severe learning disability, plus  pseudogene was identiÜed by the ampliÜcation of a fragment from  problems of social communication and behaviour which satisÜed  intron 4 to intron 7 in which an anomalous product of 1743bp was  formal criteria for an autism spectrum disorder. About 80% suffered  obtained, cloned and sequenced. The1743bp fragment contained  from seizures of various types, 60% had a history of hypotonia  the gene sequence up to intron 5: the Ürst nucleotide change A>G  and early motor delay, 40% gave a history of strabismus, and 40%  corresponding to those of the pseudogne was detected at nucleotide  showed incoordination, usually mild. In contrast, the prevalence of  position 4179 of GBA gene. Recombination extended up to exon  major and minor congenital anomalies was low. 7 where the mistmatch C>T at genomic nucleotide position 5152  Although the breakpoints involved in the formation of the SMC varied  corresponding to the pseudogene was not present. considerably (see Roberts et al, Am J Hum Genet 2003, 73:1061- 1072), no correlation was detected between speciÜc clinical features  
P0164 . The importance of alternative communication for Cri-du- and the inclusion of speciÜc loci, only between overall severity and  Chat syndrome: a case study the number of additional copies of the PWACR as a whole. Where  P. Ramos1,2, M. Ramos1;  a normal cell line was detected, the clinical picture was less severe,  and there was a possible association between a more severe  1Associa\x8c\x8ao Brasileira de Cri du Chat, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Federal  outcome and the intensity of seizures. University if Rio de Janeiro, Rio de JAneiro, Brazil. This work intends to show that early stimulation and utilization of  
P0162 . The Psychosocial Aspects of Skeletal Dysplasia and the  alternative comunication can change signiÜcantly the prognosis  Impact of Molecular Genetic diagnosis of Cri-du-Chat syndrome. This syndrome presents as major  A. Saima;  characteristics problems with cognitive and motor development.  Speech acquisition is also a major problem for children with this  1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, and Regional Genetic Service,  syndrome. To achieve the objective, it will be made a case study,  Manchester, United Kingdom. based on a brazilian child - Clarice SantÓAnna - who is now 4 years  The aim of this study was to assess the psycho-social problems  and six months. Since she was born, she has been stimulated  associated with undiagnosed skeletal dysplasias and the impact  with physical therapy and speech therapy. Since her one year and  of a precise molecular diagnosis. Patient recruitment was through  eight months, Clarice attains regular scholling. When she was  the 11 of the UK regional genetic services. The genetic testing was  two years, she has begun sign language as alternative means to  provided by the regional molecular genetics laboratory (RMGL) in  communication. With that, she has acquired ability to communicate  Manchester. Mutation screening was undertaken for patients with  with her parents. In addition, it has provided a signiÜcant reduction in  differing skeletal dysplasias. 129 diagnostic patient DNA samples  attentionÓs deÜcit, has ended steriotyped moviments, increased her  had been received for mutation screening analysis (experimental  internal language and, Ünally, has developed her desire to speak.  group), with a separate 57 patients composing of the control group  Another type of alternative communication has been begun to turn  (no mutation analysis). Psychosocial assessment was undertaken at  possible Clarice to speak with her classmates and school teachers:  two interval points; 3 months prior to the disclosure of the test result  it has been used for that the Picture Symbols Communication - PCS  and 3 months post test result. A similar course was employed for the  - photographs and products labels. As a result of these therapies,  control subjects. The psychological evaluation was performed using  Clarice is now able to speak a few words very clearly and has much Clinical genetics 118 more capacity to keep concentrated in school activities. It is also  set eyes, aracnodactyly, joint contractures and the hepatic veins  worth mentioning that she can walk since she was three years. connecting to the right atrium, previously unreported in nMFS. A  right congenital diaphragmatic hernia was diagnosed prenatally at  
P0165 . Prader Willi Syndrome to mat UPD 15, associated with  28 weeks gestation. The baby developed collapse of much of the left  large deletion of long arm of one Chromosome 15, including the  lung and lower segment of lower right lobe. A missense mutation c.  entire FBN1 gene 3202T>G on exon 25 of FBN-1 gene was detected. This mutation  M. Giovannucci Uzielli, L. Giunti, E. Andreucci, I. Sani, C. Bacci, B. Toschi, E.  occurs in calcium biding epidermal growth factor like domain 11.  Lapi, U. Ricci;  Fibroblasts studies are in process. Case 2: male infant born at  term with dolicomacrocephaly, deep set eyes, loose redundant skin  University of Florence, Florence, Italy. over head and neck, pectus carinatum, marked arachnodactyly,  In a newborn with clinical and anamnestic aspects evocative of PWS,  joint contractures, mitral valve regurgitation and dilatation of aortic  we applied the due protocol of laboratory studies. and pulmonary roots. The brain MRI revealed interdigitation of the  The constitutional karyotype was normal 46,XY, and the FISH  interhemispheric Üssure suggesting a partial absence of the falx and  analysis didnÓt reveal submicroscopic deletion of the PWS/AS critical  a cerebellum displaced upwards through a dehiscent incisura, also  region. The methylation test conÜrmed the clinical diagnosis of PWS.  seen at Ürst time in a nMFS patient. Neurological examination was  By using a battery of DNA polymorphic markers, we were able to  normal. At 3 months, the patient died secondary to severe mitral  identify a maternal heterodisomy for the entire chromosome 15:  valve insufÜciency. A novel G>A transition mutation was identiÜed and  during this research, quite unexpected was the identiÜcation of a  it is predicted to affect the invariant +1 position of the splice donor  large Ðde novoÑ deletion of the long arm of one of the two maternal  site in intron 30 leading to skipping of exon 30 of the FBN-1 gene.  chromosomes 15. By the Übroblasts studies of case 2, we can speculate that skipping  This large deletion includes the entire FBN1 gene, as well  of exon 30 does not affect the initial process of Übrillogenesis and  demonstrated by using intra and extra gene markers. elastogenesis, but rather contributes to a decreased durability of  Some reports of the literature describe very rare large deletions of  elastic Übers, possibly linked to increased expression of elastolytic  FBN1 gene; no deletion of the entire Fibrillin gene was until now  proteinase(s). described. The child, now 2-years old doesnÓt show clinical patterns of Marfan  
P0168 . Genetic basis of assessment of carrier status and risk  syndrome. The ultrastructural study of skin and connective tissues,  estimation in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) didnÓt reveal important pathological aspects . Studies on the collagen  T. Grimm1, S. Rudnik-Sch\x99neborn2, K. Zerres2;  and Fibrillin protein are now in progress. 1Department of Medical Genetics, W\x9erzburg University, W\x9erzburg, Germany,  
P0166 . Genetic analysis of familial stuttering 2Institute of Human Genetics, Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. U. Ratnamala1, D. Dasgupta2, J. V. Solanki3, U. Radhakrishna1;  Spinal muscular atrophy is one of the most common neuromuscular  disorders of early childhood with an incidence of about 1:10,000.  1Greencross Blood Bank & Genetic Research Centre, Ahmedabad, India,  Due to the high incidence and fatal outcome in a high percentage of  2Dept. of Biochemistry, Institute of Science, Mumbai, India, 3Dept. of Animal  affected children, genetic testing is of utmost importance not only for  Genetics & Breeding, Veterinary college, Anand, India. conÜrmation of the diagnosis in affected children but also for deÜning  Stuttering is a speech disorder, which begins in childhood between  the carrier status in relatives of SMA patients and their spouses.  the ages of 3-6 and is characterized by involuntary syllable  Approximately 95% of clinically typical SMA patients lack both copies  repetitions, sound prolongations or interruptions (audible and  of the SMN1 gene. The interpretation of results of heterozygosity  silent). It is a painful symptom and is considered as societyÓs hidden  tests in SMA is, however, complicated by different factors: 1.) About  disability. Stuttering greatly interferes with a childÓs emotional and  1.7% of SMA disease alleles show other small intragenic SMN1  psychological development and also affects their daily social or  mutations. 2.) About 1.8% of patients show a spontaneous mutation.  occupational functioning. The incidence of stuttering among the  3.) About 3.3% of SMA chromosomes in the total population have two  general population is about 0.7-1.0% with a higher 4-5:1 ratio of  SMN1 copies. Despite the growing knowledge about the molecular  male to females affected. Family, twin, and adoption studies strongly  basis of SMA and the increasing use of heterozygosity testing risk  suggest a genetic predisposition/susceptibility to stuttering, but no  calculation is often wrong. The main reasons are: 1.) Calculation of  genes have yet been identiÜed. Associations between childhood  risks without Bayesian theorem. 2) Not taking HaldaneÓs mutation- and/or adult stuttering and brain disorders, such as Down syndrome,  selection equilibrium (1935) into account and 1.) The uncritical use  ParkinsonÓs disease, Tourette syndrome and depressive illness,  of incidence data. Results of precise risk calculation often differs to  have been reported. The gene responsible for stuttering has been  a great extent from Ügures given in clinical practice or the majority of  suggested on 18p and proximal 18q (Am J Med Genet. 124A: 133-5,  publications about this subject. On the basis of the mentioned criteria  2004). We have studied a large six generation Indian pedigree with  risk assessment of common situations will be given, underlining the  an autosomal dominant stuttering (OMIM 184450). The pedigree  necessity of knowledge of formal genetics in the molecular era of  consists of 260 individuals including 95 affecteds (58 males/ 37  genetics. females). The onset is ranged from 3-7 years. The age distribution of  affecteds is 8-70 years. Severity of the phenotype was quite variable  
P0169 . A new phenotype associating sensory and motor  among the affecteds and skipping of a generation was also observed.  neuropathy with a predominant proprioceptive ataxia Karyotype analysis of thirty-Üve sporadic affecteds with stuttering  H. Azzedine1, O. Anne2, D. Vincent3, C. Barhoumi1, G. Stevanin1, A. Brice1, A.  showed chromosomal anomaly in one individual. Linkage studies with  Lagueny4, E. Le Guern1;  markers closely linked to chromosome 18 will both conÜrm allelism  to this locus and may reduce the genetic interval encompassing the  1INSERM U289-NEB, Paris, France, 2CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 3CHU  stuttering gene or provide evidence for genetic heterogeneity. Larochelle, Larochelle, France, 4CHU Bordeaux, H\x98pital du Haut Leveque,  Pessac, France. 
P0167 . Neonatal Marfan Syndrome: two cases with some  Sensory ataxia is a symptom almost associated with either a  unusual clinical Ündings cerebellar syndrome in the context of spinocerebellar atrophy (SCA),  G. B. Maegawa1, B. Lo1, P. Satodia1, H. Whyte1, M. Sermer1, J. Hutchinson1, G.  or a superÜcial sensory deÜcit in the framework of Charcot-Marie- Wilson1, G. Gross1, G. Matyas2, A. Hinek1, D. Chitayat1,3, S. Unger1;  Tooth disease (CMT) and hereditary sensory neuropathy type I (HSN  I). 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Division of Metabolism  Sensory ataxia is rarely a major symptom of hereditary neuropathies  and Molecular Pediatrics, University ChildrenÓs Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland,  with AD transmission. 3Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital,  We describe a French family in which segregated an AD sensory  Toronto, ON, Canada. and motor neuropathy, characterized by late onset of symptoms  We report two cases with unusual clinical Ündings. Case1: female  and sensory ataxia. This family comprises 96 members including 26  born at 37 weeks gestation with loose redundant facial skin, deep- affected individuals.Cytogenetics 119 Genotyping of 40 microsatellites markers covering 8 candidate loci  1Dept Enviromental Medicine and Public Health University of Padua, Padua,  was performed on an ABI 3730 sequencer: CMT 1A, 1B, 2A & 2B,  Italy, 2Dept of Medicine and Public Health University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,  HSN 1A & 1B, sensory motor neuropathy with ataxia (SMNA/SCA18)  3Dept of Pediatrics University of Padua, Padua, Italy. and spinocerebellar ataxia 25 (SCA25). Molecular biological studies on Turner Syndrome (TS) during last  14 examined patients had normal muscle strength except 9 cases  years have contributed to clarify that the 70-80% of 45,X patients  where mild weakness in distal lower limbs was observed. In all cases,  retain the maternal X chromosome. MtDNA is inherited maternally  vibratory and pinprick sensations were decreased or abolished in  and the haplotype is used to study maternal lineage. Some evidences  distal limbs and deep tendon reÝexes were absent or depressed.  indicate that interaction of the sex chromosome and mtDNA might  Electrophysiological examination showed mildly reduced motor  exist, therefore we have analyzed HVI and HVII segments of the non  and sensory nerve conduction velocities with severely decreased  coding mtDNA control region in 25 mother-affected child pairs 45,X  compound muscle action potential (CMAP) and sensory nerve action  maternally inherited and 3 mother/patient pairs with Y chromosome  potential amplitudes. Peroneal nerve biopsy showed a severe loss  mosaicism. Cytogenetic data were conÜrmed by X microsatellites and  of myelinated Übbers with clusters of regeneration and few onion  amelogenin analysis. bulb formations. These Ündings are consistent with a primary axonal  The HVI and HVII sequences were compared with normal Italian  degeneration with some demyelinating features. At the genetic  population data without identifying an unique haplotype for the TS  level, the 8 candidate loci were excluded by haplotyping and linkage  patients but low frequency mutations were found . Mother-child  analysis. haplotype patterns comparison showed differences in mtDNA  This neuropathy corresponds to a new phenotype variant of CMT2. A  sequence. At present the signiÜcance of this difference remains to be  genome-wide search is in progress to localise the responsible gene. clariÜed. 
P0172 . IdentiÜcation of the origin of a marker chromosome 7 in a  child with dysmorphic signs and congenital heart defect 
P0170 . Pregnancy Loss and Prospective Medico-Genetic  G. von Beust1, S. Sauter1, A. Wessel1, B. Zoll1, T. Liehr2;  Consulting 1University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany, 2University of Jena, Jena,  E. Ginzburg, B. Ginzburg;  Germany. Regional Hospital of Kaluga, Kaluga, Russian Federation. We report on a case of additional marker chromosome mosaicism.  In the system of Medico - Genetic consulting of the families with  Cytogenetic analysis was performed postnatally and revealed mos  Pregnancy Loss, cytogenetic examination is obligatory. 47, XX + mar [26] / 46, XX [14]. The karyotypes of the parents were  The aim of this work is to study the frequency of chromosome  normal. The marker chromosome was identiÜed by Ýuorescence in  aberrations among families with Pregnancy loss according to data of  situ hybridization (FISH) and derived from chromosome 7. A marker  Medico - Genetics consulting room of Kaluga Regional Hospital. chromosome derived from chromosome 7 has not been reported  As a result of cytogenetic research in the selection of 252 patients  until now. A uniparental disomy 7 was excluded. The child revealed  (126 couples) chromosome aberrations were revealed in 16 patients. congenital heart defect and dysmorphic signs. The psychomotoric  Table 1 Cytogenetic aberrations revealed in families with Pregnancy  development of the little girl was retarded and followed up for two  Loss years. Number of fami- Aberration women men lies 
P0173 . Chromosome heteromorphisms in couples with  1 46,XX,t(13;7) + - reproductive failure 1 46,XX,t(17;13) + - M. M. Noditi1, E. Vladescu2, M. Craina2;  1 45,XX,t(14;21) + - 4 46,XX,inv (9) + - 1Institute of Public Health, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinic of Gynecology ÐBegaÑ,  1 46,X inv(X) + - Timisoara, Romania. 1 46,XX/45,X + - In order to estimate the role played by chromosome heteromorphisms  1 46,XX/47,XXX + - in reproductive failure an analysis was carried out on 128 couples  1 46,XY,t(6;11) - with sterility, recurrent abortions or stillborn infants. The couples  1 46,XY, inv (Y) - were selected in the Clinic of Gynecology ÐBegaÑ Timisoara - In  1 46,XY,del (Y) - Vitro Fertilization Department (2001-2003). Using the protocol with  1 46,XY,inv (9) - ethidium bromide (10Ⱥg/ml) and GTG and C banding techniques  1 47XYY - we were able to identify 31 couples (24.2%) with chromosome  1 47,XY + mar - heteromorphisms. Among them one couple presented a different  Dash - normal cariotype variant in both partners and in two couples one partner had  According to data obtained total chromosome aberration in families  two different variants (1qh+ and 9qh+). In 21 couples (67.6%)  examined made up 12,7%. Cariotype pathology among men - 4,76%  chromosome 9 showed an increased secondary constriction (15  correspondingly. Data obtained among women fully correspond the  couples) or a pericentric inversion (6 couples). 10 couples (32.3%)  results of other research. Cariotyping among men showed higher  revealed an augmentation of the size of the h region of chromosome  Ügures of chromosome aberrations in comparison with the data  1 (9 couples) and 16 (1 couple). The size of the hererochomatin  of other authors. In our opinion it is connected with the expansion  variant was appreciated using 16p as a reference standard (small  of existing indices of cytogenetic examination of the families with  - 42.4%, intermediate - 27.3%, large - 12.1%). The highest variation  Pregnancy Loss, it is the presence of phenotype healthy children  in size has been recorded for the h region of chromosome 9. The  in families and miscarriages in anamnesis that didnÒt exclude the  pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 showed different pattern in  possibility of revealing balanced aberrations both among men  size and location of the breakpoints. women. The chromosome heteromorphism could be regarded as a risk factor  So, the indices used by us, are applicable both for retrospective  in couples with reproductive failure. examination of families with burdened obstetrical anamnesis and  for prospective medico-genetic consulting of couples who are going  
P0174 . Hirschsprung disease and retinitis pigmentosa in a boy  to marry having relations with reproductive aberrations in their  with interstitial deletion of chromosome 13q22q31 genealogy. B. T\x9eys\x9ez1, M. Arapoglu2, A. Dahl\x8dn3, B. BaĔlama1, M. G\x9elcan4;  1Dep.of Pediatrics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, ĕstanbul University, ĕstanbul,  
P0171 . HVI and HVII mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in Turner  Turkey, 2Dep. of Pediatrics, Sisli Etfal State Hospital, ĕstanbul, Turkey,  syndrome: analysis of 28 mother-child pairs 3Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 4Dep. of  L. Caenazzo1, C. Bini2, G. Ferri2, S. Ceccardi2, S. Bruscagnin1, E. Ponzano1, N.  Pediatrics, Bakòrkoy Social Security Hospital, ĕstanbul, Turkey. A. Greggio3, S. Pelotti2;  We described a 45 days-old boy with dysmorphic facies consisting Cytogenetics 120 of round Ýat face with short and broad nose, prominent glabella,  revealed a 47,XY,+21 karyotype, the classic phenotype of DS was  hypertelorism and blue, discolored eyes. His second toe, especially  absent. The parentÓs karyotypes were both normal. FISH analysis  the distal phalanx was broad and biÜd Üngernail overlapping the  using a speciÜc probe for the Down Syndrome Critical Region  Ürst toe was noticed in the right foot. Chromosome 13 deletion was  (DSCR) (locus D21
S55 , in 21q22.2) demonstrated the absence of  found at (13)(q22.1q31.3) region by cytogenetic analysis and FISH  this region in one of the three chromosomes 21, thus explaining  investigation. The patient was followed-up until he was 2.5 years old.  the lack of the typical dysmorphic features. Final karyotype:  Psychomotor development was delayed. Since the patientÓs deletion  47,XY,+21.ish del(21)(q22.2q22.2)(wcp21+,D21
S55 -). region was the Hircshsprung disease gene region, a rectal biopsy  Patient 2 was referred because of simian crease, low-set ears  was performed at 10 months of age because of increasing complaints  and developmental delay. The karyotype was interpreted as a  of constipation. Biopsy demonstrated aganglionic megacolon. He also  reciprocal translocation of maternal origin involving chromosomes  had retinitis pigmentosa which not been described in 13q deletion  5 and 21, with an extra 21: 47,XY,t(5;21)(q12.3;q21.2)+21mat.  syndromes. Since the phenotype was not typical of trisomy 21, complementary  FISH studies showed that chromosome 3 was also involved in the  
P0175 . Some cytogenetic aspects of primary amenorrhea familial translocation - the mother had the DSCR translocated onto  A. Stana1, M. Bari1, A. Rodewald2, A. Arghir3, L. Neagu3, A. Lungeanu3;  chromosome 3 (which was not inherited by the child). Therefore  besides the 2 normal copies of chromosome 21 (with 2 signals for the  1ÑFilantropiaÑ Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute for Human Biology,  DSCR), the child had partial 3p and 21q trisomies . Final karyotype:  Hamburg, Germany, 3ÑVictor BabesÑ National Institute, Bucharest, Romania. 47,XY,der(5),der(21),t(3;5;21)(p24.3;q13.1;q22.1)mat,+21.ish  Eight cases with cytogenetic abnormalities were found among 53  21q22.2(D21
S55 x2) patients with primary amenorrhea. Given the rarity of discrepant clinical and cytogenetic assessments  The karyotypes of these cases were: of DS the authors emphasise the importance of good communication  ȶ 46,XY in four cases with histologic conÜrmation of testicular  between clinicians and laboratories to allow precision and accuracy  feminisation syndrome for three of them of diagnoses. ȶ mosaicism with X monosomy: -46,XX/45,X/47,XXX (82%/13%/5%) with Turner stigmata, 1 case 
P0178 . Two cases of de novo partial duplication of 1p: molecular  -45,X/46,XX (63%/37%) without Turner stigmata, 1 case cytogenetic characterization by high resolution multicolor- -45,XX,t(20;21)/45,X, 1 case involving autosomes banding (MCB) FISH and clinical aspects ȶ mosaicism without X monosomy: A. D. Polityko1, H. Starke2, N. Rumyantseva1, I. Naumchik1, O. Khurs1, I.  -45,XX,-14,+18p/46,XX,+18pter (20%/80%), 1 case Pisarik1, E. Goncharova1, L. Shamgina1, N. Drozdovskaja1, L. Podleschuk1, E.  Our cases are clear examples of the different mechanisms involved in Abramchik1, E. Jaroshevich1, U. Claussen2, T. Liehr2;  primary amenorrhea. If the role of X mosaicism is well established in primary amenorrhea, 1Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute for Human Genetics  only few knowledge concerning autosomal involvement in the  and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. pathogenesis of sexual development were accumulated. Isolated partial duplications of short arm of the chromosome 1 are  rare Ündings. We report on two unrelated patients with duplications  
P0176 . Gonadal mosaicism of partial trisomy 12p within 1p, their karyotype abnormalities both initially were described  H. Eckel, M. Volleth, S. Jakubiczka, P. Muschke, P. Wieacker;  by GTG-banding analysis as 46,XX,add(1p). Multicolor banding (MCB) assay using the chromosome 1 probe set  Institute of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Magde- was applied to investigate the abnormal chromosomes. Thus, the  burg, Germany. origin of additional material of 1p was discovered and the precise  We report on the unusual case of a partial trisomy 12p mosaicism  breakpoints were characterized. in a proband without any phenotypic abnormality. The index  Proband 1 is a 6-years-old girl with mental and speech delay,  patient was a 16-year-old boy affected by mental retardation and  congenital heart disease, multiple malformations. Isolated partial  craniofacial dysmorphy including macrocephaly, a short nose with  duplication was showed in her karyotype: 46,XX,add(1).ish  anteverted nostrils and a broad protruding lower lip. G-banding and  dup(1)(pterŗp36.3::p36.2ŗqter) de novo. whole chromosome painting-FISH analysis in cultured lymphocytes  Proband 2 is a 10-years-old female with mental and speech delay,  revealed a derivative chromosome 12 with a partial duplication of  behavior difÜculties and multiple anomalies. Inverted duplication was  the short arm: 46,XY,dup(12)(p12.1p13.3).ish dup(12)(wcp12+).  described as: Chromosome analyses in parental lymphocytes showed a normal  46,XX,add(1).ish dup(1)(pterŗp36.2::p31.3ŗp36.2::p31.3ŗqter) de  male karyotype in the father. In contrast, chromosomal mosaicism  novo. was detected in the phenotypically normal mother with 12% cells  We demonstrated the high effectiveness of MCB approach for  exhibiting the same derivative chromosome 12 as detected in her  diagnostics of unclear intersticial rearrangements. MCB elucidates  son. In the mother, chimerism was excluded by the analysis of  the orientation of duplicated segments and clariÜes the mechanism  microsatellites. 10 years before, lymphocyte analysis in the mother  of chromosomal aberration. Duplications described in two probands  had also revealed a trisomy 12p mosaicism with 11.5% abnormal  covered essential part of 1p and had a common breakpoint at 1p36.2  cells. This demonstrates the high stability of the aberrant cell line. As  while the sizes and localization of duplicated segments were different.  a consequence of the chromosomal aberration in the son, it can be  The clinical spectrum of pure partial trisomies 1p is discussed with  concluded that a gonadal mosaicism is present in the mother. regards to literature data cases and to size and origin of duplicated  1p segments. 
P0177 . Genotype/phenotype discrepancies in 2 cases of Down  Supported by DAAD 325/2003 and DFG WER 17/01/04. Syndrome: a áde novoÐ trisomy 21 and a complex translocation  of maternal origin 
P0179 . Acrofacial dysostosis-Nager typeand alobar  N. Oliva Teles1, M. F. Silva1, M. M. Freitas1, G. Lima1, E. Lopes1, M. Martins1, J.  holoprosencephaly in a case with a previously undeÜned  Siznando2, E. Martins2, I. Cordeiro3, M. Pinto1;  chromosomal abnormality 1Instituto de Gen\x8dtica M\x8ddica Jacinto Magalh\x8aes, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital  Y. Alanay, D. Aktas, B. Talim, M. Caglar, E. Tuncbilek;  Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal, 3Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey. Trisomy 21 or Down Syndrome (DS) is easily identiÜed clinically.  The present case was terminated after multiple anomalies noted  Since the discovery of the chromosomal region responsible for  on ultrasound at 17 weeks gestation. The phenotypic features were  its main phenotypic characteristics (21q22.2) it is now possible to  proptosis, anasia, facial cleft with complete cleft palate, atresia of the  explain the rare cases of discrepancy genotype/phenotype of some  left external ear, short neck, absent thumb on the left hand, simian  patients. line on the left hand, clubfoot and postaxial polydactyly of the left foot. Patient 1 was referred because of developmental delay, recurrent  The autopsy Ündings were alobar holoprosencephaly, truncus  vomiting and weight loss. Although the cytogenetic investigation  arteriosus, lobe anomaly in the lung (single lobe on the right, two Cytogenetics 121 lobes on the left), right renal agenesis, absence of uterus, fallopian  into account before invoking biological explanations of sex ratio bias,  tubes and both ovaries. such as the effect of X-linked lethal genes or abnormal X-inactivation,  The chromosome analysis of skin Übroblasts showed 45,XX,der(5)  and may be useful to include in diagnostic reporting. t(5;22)(p14.3;q11),-22. Acrofacial dysostoses (AFD) are a heterogenous group of disorders  
P0182 . Breakpoint characterization by FISH in a child with mild  involving mandibulofacial dysostosis and various acral anomalies.  features of dup(3q) syndrome due to an interstitial inverted  This fetus had a lethal type of AFD. Among the various types of AFDs  duplication 3q (q26.31q24) de novo. this case represents Nager-type AFD base on the facial dysostosis  J. Karimzad Hagh, F. Gerresheim, M. Meins, G. Dekomien, W. Klein, J. T.  and preaxial limb defect. Genitourinary abnormalities have also  Epplen;  been reported. However congenital heart defect is very uncommon  Human Genetics, Ruhr-Universit\x89t Bochum, Germany. and holoprosencephaly (HPE) has not deÜned previously. Both AFD  Dup(3q) syndrome is deÜned as a characteristic phenotype  and HPE have been separately described with deletions in different  associated with duplications of 3q21-qter. Clinical evaluations  chromosomes. This is yet the Ürst case clinically combining both  suggest, that duplications involving a critical region in distal 3q26.3  entities with a previously undiagnosed cytogenetic abnormality. is sufÜcient to produce dup(3q) syndrome. In this report we describe  a 15-months-old boy with mild dysmorphic features, abnormal head  
P0180 . A new subtelomeric 4p deletion shape and microcephaly. Craniofacial features of dup(3q) syndrome  L. Rodr\x91guez;  included low-set ears, upslanting palpebral Üssures, a broad nasal  CIAC, Madrid, Spain. root with anteverted nostrils, long philtrum, downturned corners of the  The Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS), is a wellknown syndrome  mouth, micro-retrognathia and short neck. Further Ündings included a  whose critical region seems to be located at D4F26 locus at 4p16.3.  sinus pilonidalis, tapering Üngers, small feet with syndaktylia 2/3 and  The microdeletion of this critical region generates the clinical  bilateral sandal gap. manifestation of the syndrome. Nevertheless, with the new molecular  Classical cytogenetics by use of high resolution Q, G and R banding  techniques, several cases with features resembling the WHS, had a  methods revealed a de novo structural aberration comprising an  4p microdeletion which not involve the critical region of this syndrome  additional segment in 3q, the pattern of which appeared symmetrical  but a proximal zone. This could suggests that D4F26 locus is not the  to the adjacent one. By Ýuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)  only critical deletion site for clinical WHS. using a whole chromosome painting probe (wcp 3) and arm speciÜc  We present a case with a subtelomeric deletion of the region  probes (pcp 3p, pcp 3q) the additional material was shown to have  D4
S3360  in 4p, (localized at 73 kb from the telomere, Cytocell), and  originated from 3q. In order to deÜne the breakpoints of this interstitial  with no deletion of the critical region of the WHS (4p16.3), which is  duplication, FISH with 33 BACs was performed. By this means  more distal from the telomere. breakpoints were narrowed down to 3q24 proximal and 3q26.31  The infant was referred to us when she was 4 years old, with a  distal. Proximally the breakpoint was assigned to a region smaller  developmental delay and a bone age showing a delay of two years. than 50 kb. The high resolution G-band karyotype (850 bands) was normal. The  The mapping data of this duplication are compared with other cases  application of the Multiprobe-T kit showed a subtelomeric 4p deletion.  deÜned by pure duplication in similar segments of chromosome 3q.  The application of Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (FISH) with the  We submit that relevant genes of dup(3q) syndrome lie in the region  WHS syndrome probe, showed no chromosome deletion. Thus her  3q26.2-q26.31. karyotype was deÜned as: 46,XX,del(4p).ish(tel4p-/tel4q+).ish(p16.3)( The karyotype of the patient was delineated as 46, XY,  WHSCRx2). Her parents showed no chromosome alteration including  dup(3)(3q26.31q24). subtelomeric regions. Although our case apparently has a very distal 4p deletion, not  
P0183 . Somatic instability of a constitutional large ring  including the WHS critical region, presents clinical manifestations  chromosome 7 by nuclear extrusion and micronucleus  similar to that observed in the WHS. We consider that those cases  formation with clinical appearance of WHS, with no deletion of the WHS critical  Y. Mehraein1, S. Ehlhardt1, K. D. Zang1, D. Dill-M\x9eller2;  region should also be analyzed for subtelomeric deletion. 1Saarland University, Department of Human Genetics, Homburg/Saar, Germa- ny, 2Saarland University, Department of Dermatology, Homburg/Saar, Germany. 
P0181 . A model for evaluation of maternal cell contamination  Ring chromosome formation by fusion of the terminal chromosome  in spontaneous abortions cultured cells: signiÜcance for  arms is a well known structural aberration being documented for most  cytogenetic analysis of prenatal selection factors human chromosomes. Beside sporadic somatic events a variety of  S. A. Nazarenko, T. V. Nikitina, I. N. Lebedev;  cases displaying a constitutional ring chromosome either additional  Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. or replacing the respective normal chromosome are described in  Chromosomal abnormalities play a leading role in early human  the literature. Surprisingly, although different chromosomes are  lethality, however, estimation of fetus karyotype by long-term cell  affected, the reported individuals with numerically normal karyotype  culture may not be accurate because of possible contamination of  show phenotypic similarities as growth retardation, mental delay  such cultures by maternal cells. In the present study, we examined  and microcephaly, leading to the suggestion of a ,,ring syndromeÐ.  the results of retrospective cytogenetic analysis of 478 Ürst trimester  The speciÜc ring syndrome phenotype in varying ring chromosome  spontaneous abortions. Maternal cell contamination (MCC) was  conditions has been attributed to functional impairment and increased  evaluated by PCR analysis of amelogenin gene for the presence  apoptosis of cells caused by mitotic instability of the chromosomal  of Y chromosome DNA in non-cultured cells of Ð46,XXÑ embryos.  rings. A mathematical model for the estimation of MCC level with  We here report a rare case of a large ring chromosome 7 in a 14 year  expected rates of different karyotypes in abortions is proposed. The  old growth retarded boy with severe mental delay, where we could  experimental validation of the model was performed by analysis  demonstrate chromosomal instability in blood cells showing as well  of segregation of polymorphic microsatellite DNA markers for 6  duplication but mainly loss of the structurally abnormal chromosome  autosomes in 60 Ð46,XXÑ embryos and their parents. In 16% of the  7 by active nuclear extrusion and micronucleus formation. An  embryos with a 46,XX karyotype a molecular assay has revealed  increased micronucleus formation is frequently observed in  Y chromosome DNA. Taking MCC into account, the frequency  exogenously induced chromosomal instability, however, has not been  of chromosomal abnormalities in spontaneous abortions rose  shown in a constitutional ring chromomosome condition. from 54.6% to 60.3% and the sex ratio in abortions with normal  karyotype increased from 0.66 to 1.02. The model allows to evaluate  the diagnostic accuracy of conventional cytogenetic analysis of  reproductive wastages, which amounts to 92.3%. MCC clearly affects  the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities and the sex ratio in  spontaneous abortions. Thus, correction for MCC should be taken Cytogenetics 122 
P0184 . An unusual reciprocal translocation detected by  isochromosomes of the short and the long arm, respectively. Both  subtelomeric FISH: Interstitial and not terminal. parents revealed normal karyotypes. M. Riegel, A. Baumer, A. Schinzel;  To characterise both Y markers in detail we FISH-mapped a panel  of Y chromosomal probes originally developed to present a standard  University of Z\x9erich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. FISH-signal pattern for the human prometaphase Y chromosome  An 11 month-old boy with a pattern of dysmorphic signs, an ASD,  (Roettger et al. 2002). This panel included probes for SHOX (PAR1),  right inguinal hernia, bilateral undescended testes, bilateral urinary  TSPY, DYZ3 (Y centromere), UTY, KALY, RBMY, XKRY, EIF1AY,  reÝux and right renal dysplasia, and developmental delay revealed  DAZ, CDY, DYZ1 (Yq12 heterochromatin), SYB
L1  (PAR2) and the  an abnormal chromosome 11 with enlarged terminal long arm in  human-all-telomere sequence (TTAGGG). his karyotype. The paternal karyotype was normal 46,XY, while the  n The smaller Y marker turned out to be a ring chromosome containing  mother showed the same 11q+ and in addition a 2q- chromosome.  the entire short arm, the original Y centromere and parts of the  Chromosome paiting with chromosome 2 and 11 libraries conÜrmed  proximal long arm, including AZFa. Size variations of this ring Y  a reciprocal translocation with a tiny 11 signal on 2q and a larger  chromosome in different metaphases may be due to double or even  2 signal on 11q. Thus, a reciprocal terminal exchange was  multiple ring formation during mitosis. The bigger Y marker, indeed,  assumed.The karyotype of the mother would thus be 46,XX,t(2;11)(q was an isochromosome of the Y long arm. Surprisingly, hybridisation  35;q24.3). FISH with 2q and 11q subtelomeric probes was performed  of DYZ3 detected no Y-speciÜc alphoid sequences on it, despite of  in order to conÜrm the reciprocity of the translocation. However, to  a clearly visible primary constriction within one of its DAPI-positive  our great surprise we did not Ünd the expected pattern, namely an  heterochromatic regions. Because of its stable mitotic distribution  11q signal on the rearranged 2 and a 2q signal on the rearranged  a de novo formation of a neocentromere has to be accepted.  11. It turned out that the translocation was not an terminal reciprocal  Furthermore, we detected an interstitial deletion in Yp11.22 and  exchange, but was interstitial on both chromosomes which is highly  Yq11.23 that must have occurred during the formation of this complex  unusual. Thus, the results ámovedÐ the aneuploid segments to a more  rearrangement. Thus, the karyotype of this boy may be described as  proximal position, especially the deleted 11q segments since it does  47,X,r(Y)(pterq11.21),i(Y)(qterÏ>q11.23::q11.22::q11.22::q11.23Ï not contain the subtelomeric FISH region. The molecular cytogenetic  >qter). results in this family show that reciprocal translocations should be  investigated not only with whole chromosome paiting, probes but  
P0187 . Supernumerary marker chromosome: cryptic  also with further probes for the subtelomeric region since, for genetic  chromosomal rearrangement resulting in partial trisomies 21  counseling, karyotype-phenotype correlation and gene mapping it is  and 12 of increasing importance to determine the breakpoints and aneuploid  U. Koehler1, M. Bodensohn2, G. Strobl-Wildemann1, E. Holinski-Feder1;  segments as precise as possible. 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum MGZ, M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Sozialp\x89diatri- 
P0185 . Mosaicism for ectopic NOR at 8pter and complex  sches Zentrum am Krankenhaus Traunstein, Traunstein, Germany. rearrangement of chromosome 8 in a patient with severe  We report on a cytogenetic investigation of a 2 year old boy without  psychomotor retardation preliminary information of the childs phenotype. U. Felbor1, N. Kn\x99tgen1, G. Schams2, A. Buwe1, C. Steinlein1, M. Schmid1;  Cytogenetic investigation (GTG-banding) revealed an aneuploid  karyotype with an additional G-group chromosome indistinguishable  1Department of Human Genetics, University of W\x9erzburg, Germany, 2Centre for  from chromosome 21 (resolution 450 bands). However clinical  children with developmental disorders and handicaps, W\x9erzburg, Germany. information obtained from the referring pediatricians excluded any  We report on a 3-year-old girl with severe delays in mental and  major features of Down syndrome. motor skills, absent communication, generalized seizures, and subtle  The boy was born after an uneventful pregnancy at term beeing the  dysmorphisms. The third child of a healthy non-consanguineous  Ürst child of unrelated parents. At the age of 12 months epilepsy  Caucasian couple was born at term with Apgar scores of 10/10 after  with myoclonic astatic seizures occured. Beside delayed motor  1 and 5 minutes. Birth weight (3000 g), length (51 cm), and head  and speech development at the age of two years, he shows slight  circumference (35 cm) were normal for gestational age. At the age  dysmorphic features such as macrocephaly, rectangular face with  of six months, developmental delay was Ürst noticed. Metabolic  prominent cheeks, hypertelorism, high forehead, short neck, small  screening showed no pathological changes. Cranial magnetic  chin and zygodactyly 2/3. resonance imaging demonstrated a reduction of myelin mass but  Due to the lack of phenotypical features of Down syndrome, a  no malformations. Conventional cytogenetics revealed a mosaic  FISH analysis with the Down syndrome region speciÜc probe  karyotype. A de novo ectopic NOR at the telomeric region of the short  (LSI 21, Vysis) has been performed and revealed two signals on  arm of one chromosome 8 (8ps) was found in 90% of lymphocyte  the two normal chromosomes 21, but no signal on the derivative  and in 98% of Übroblast metaphases. A derivative chromosome  chromosome 21. 8 without short arm satellites and a small NOR-bearing marker  The following Multiplex-FISH identiÜed the supernumerary  chromosome were present in the remaining cells. Der(8) included  derivative chromosome 21 as the result of a cryptic rearrangement:  an inverted duplication of 8p and a rearranged duplication of 8q  translocation of the distal end of the short arm of chromosome 12  but lacked a second centromere. SKY analyses demonstrated that  to the long arm of chromosome 21. The unbalanced rearrangement  der(8) consisted entirely of chromosome 8 material and chromosome  was further conÜrmed by chromosome painting probes (WC
P12 ,  painting probes speciÜc for 8p and 8q conÜrmed the rearrangement.  WC
P21 , Vysis) and probes speciÜc for the subtelomeric regions of  FISH with a probe speciÜc for centromeres 14 and 22 labeled both  chromosomes 12p and 21q. the telomeric region of 8ps and the small marker centromere. A  Karyotype: 47,XY,+der(21)(21pterŗ21q22.12::12p13.3ŗ12pter).ish  subtelomeric probe for 8p revealed a cryptic deletion in 8ps and  der(21)(wcp12+,wcp21+,D21
S259 x2,D21
S34 x2, D21
S342 x2,VIJyRM der(8). Since severe mental retardation and seizures rarely occur in  2029x2,VIJyRM2196x3) de novo. mosaic trisomy 8 syndrome, the submicroscopic partial monosomy  This case demonstrates anew that preliminary detailed clinical data is  8pter most likely contributes to the phenotype. indispensable for a correct diagnostic approach. 
P0186 . De novo formation of a Y neocentromere during complex  
P0188 . Reciprocal translocations: how many are complex  rearrangements leading to a 47,X,r(Y),i(Y) karyotype rearrangements? C. M\x9ench1, R. Wimmer1, J. Pasantes1, P. K\x9epferling2, W. Schempp1;  E. Rossi1, R. Ciccone1, R. Giorda2, T. Pramparo1, S. Giglio3, R. Tenconi4, M.  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Freiburg, Germany, 2Praxis f\x9er  Priolo5, R. Di Noi5, O. Zuffardi1;  Humangenetik, Cottbus, Germany. 1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCSS E. Medea, Bosisio  An aberrant karyotype with 47 chromosomes including two different  Parini, Lecco, Italy, 3Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 4Genetica Clinica  sized marker chromosomes was identiÜed during prenatal diagnosis.  ed Epidemiologia, UniversitaÓ di Padova, Padova, Italy, 5Azienda Ospedaliera  Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with a Y painting probe  Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli, Reggio Calabria, Italy. tagged both marker chromosomes, that were supposed to be  We report 4 cases of reciprocal translocations, where FISH analysis Cytogenetics 123 showed an unexpected complexity of the rearrangement. on the X chromosome. The rec(X) had a duplication of the segment  The Ürst patient is a 8-year-old girl with cranio-facial dysmorphisms,  Xq27.3 ŗXqter and deletion of the Xp22.31ŗXpter. We concluded  psycomotor and growth retardation, monolateral neuroblastoma.  that the patientÓs karyotype was: 46,Y,rec(X)(qterŗq27.3::p22.31ŗ FISH analysis with subtelomeric speciÜc probes (kit Vysis) showed a  qter),inv(9)(p11q13). semicryptic translocation, of maternal origin, between the long arm of  The probandÒs phenotype corresponds to descriptions of contiguous  chromosome 6 and the long arm of chromosome 15: 46,XX,t(6;15)(q gene syndromes due to deletion of STS, SHOX, ARSE and KAL  22;q21)mat. genes. Despite the loss of the ARSE gene there is no evidence  Further FISH experiments with Bacs speciÜc for 6q and 15q  of chondrodysplasia punctata. Additional conditions associated  highlighted an insertion of the region 6q22.31-6q22.33 on the long  with disomy of the Xq28 segment, such as severe growth and  arm of a chromosome 10 to the band 10q25.2. developmental delay and a peculiar shape of the head and mouth,  The second case concerns a Prader-Willi patient with karyotype 46, were observed. XY,t(15;18)(q11;q22)de novo. FISH analysis showed the involvement  of a third chromosome, one chromosome 21. Further analysis  
P0191 . Subtelomeric translocations in couples with recurrent  demonstrated that the der(21) was fragmentated in several portions  miscarriages translocated on the other two derivative chromosomes. S. Monfort, C. Orellana, F. Martinez, L. Badia, J. Mill\x86n, P. Lopez, F. Prieto;  The third patient is a child with cerebral malformations and  Unidad de Gen\x8dtica. Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. a karyotype: 46,XX,t(2;4)(p12;q31)de novo. FISH analysis  Introduction Unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements involving  demonstrated that 2p12-pter was translocated on two non adjacent  telomeres are emerging as an important cause of mental retardation  regions of chromosome 4q: 4q25 and 4q28 and that the region  and congenital malformations in humans. As suggested by several  containing the breakpoint of the der(2) was inverted. Furthermore, the  authors, they could also be responsible for recurrent miscarriages.  der(4) showed an interstitial deletion of about 20Mb on the short arm. This chromosomal rearrangements escape diagnosis by conventional  The last patient is a young boy with facial dysmorphisms,  cytogenetic methods. So, it is necessary speciÜc techniques for  psychomotor retardation, micropenis and a karyotype: 46,XY,t(7;10)( detecting subtelomeric translocation. p12;q24)pat. Objectives The aim of this study was to investigate the presence of  FISH analysis demonstrated a duplication of 10q24-q25 in the  subtelomeric translocation in couples with recurrent miscarriages. propositus but not in the father. Materials and Methods This study was performed in eighteen  These data stress the need to investigate reciprocal translocations  clinically normal couples who have had four or more spontaneous  with molecular analysis to allow a correct understanding of the  abortions and whose karyotypes were found to be normal using  rearrangement. conventional cytogenetic techniques. Fluorescence in situ Hybridisation (FISH) with speciÜc probes of  
P0189 . An interstitial deletion on chromosome 13 in a boy with  chromosomal telomeric regions (ToTelvision TM Multi-Color, VYSYS)  mental retardation and bilateral retinoblastomas. to metaphase spreads was used. L. N. Krogh1, L. B. Ousager1, A. Gerdes1, K. Rasmussen1, N. Illum1, J. Alsner2;  Results Among the 36 individuals studied, only one subtelomeric  1Odense University Hospital, Odense C., Denmark, 2Aarhus University Hospital,  translocation was detected between 2p and 3p chromosomes. The  Aarhus C., Denmark. female carrier of this translocation had had seven miscarriages and  The patient was born at term, no. 2 of 2 by non-consanguineous  no viable offspring. parents. He was mild hypotonic at birth with a large occipital cranium.  The rest of the couples showed normal results. The boy continued to be hypotonic and at 5 months he could not hold  Conclusion Subtelomeric translocations are not a usual Ünding  his head. Further investigations were done and an examination of the  among couples with recurrent miscarriages. The high economical and  eyes shows bilateral tumours in the retinas. This was conÜrmed with  labour costs of these studies make its clinical application impractical. MRI showing retinal tumour, increased space in the subarachoidal  room bifrontally and mildly increased sulci. The retinoblastomas were  
P0192 . Partial trisomy 16q due to a maternal balanced  treated with radiation. translocation t(16;21)(q22;q22.3) in a boy with multiple  Standard chromosome analysis displayed a short 13q. malformations: further delineation of the trisomy 16q phenotype Due to the retinoblastoma FISH with locus speciÜc probe for RB1  H. C. Duba1, R. Sommer1, R. Seiman1, K. Holl2, W. Pumberger1, G. Wiesinger- was carried out (13q14.2). There was only one signal from the  Eidenberger1;  locus supporting the suspicion of a deletion including the RB1 gene.  1Landes- Frauen- und Kinderklinik, Linz, Austria, 2Landesnervenklinik, Linz,  Multicolour Banding FISH conÜrmed the breakpoints at 13q14.1 and  Austria. 13q22. Partial trisomy (16)(q22-qter) represents a rare condition. Only a few  Cytogenetic and molecular genetic results will be presented. patients with familial rearrangements are described (A. Schinzel:  Catalogue of unbalanced chromosome aberrations in man, 2nd  
P0190 . Subterminal deletion/duplication event in an affected  edition, 2001: 685). We report a dysmorphic boy with a partial trisomy  male due to maternal X chromosome pericentric inversion 16q due to a maternal balanced translocation t(16;21)(q22;q22.3).  N. Kokalj Vokac, N. Marcun Varda, A. Zagorac, A. Erjavec Skerget, B.  The chromosomal aberration [karyotype: 46,XY,der(21)t(16;21)(q Zagradisnik, M. Todorovic, A. Gregoric;  22;q22.3)] was detected at postnatal diagnosis and conÜrmed and  Maribor Teaching Hospital, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia. deÜned by GTG/QFQ banding in the parents and Ýuorescence  We report a 13-month-old male infant with severe growth and  in situ hybridisation (FISH) with whole chromosome paints and  developmental delay, ichthyosis, hypogonadism, limb shortness,  subtelomere probes for chromosome 16 and 21. The boy, who  hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and a round, Ýat face and thin  showed intrauterine growth retardation was born by Caesarean  upper lip as a consequence of a recombinant X chromosome (rec(X))  section in the 36th gestational week (weight 2500g, length 43cm,  derived from crossing-over within the inversion identiÜed in a family. head circumference 33 cm, Apgar 9-10-10). The following dysmorphic  On routine karyotyping the patientÓs chromosomes were considered  features were observed on physical and clinical examination after  to be normal, with pericentric inversion of the heterochromatic  birth: trigonocephaly, hypertelorism, strabism, conspicuous hearing  region of chromosome 9. Because of the phenotypic abnormalities,  test, long philtrum, thin lips, high palate, small mandible, unilateral  FISH was performed using subtelomeric probes. On one X  choanal stenosis, wide spaced nipples, patent ductus arteriosus,  chromosome two signals for Xqtel were detected on each tip of the  single palmar creases, proximal placement of thumb, hypoplastic  chromosome, while there was no signal for Xptel . The patientÓs  scrotum and cryptorchid testes. The boy suffers from dysphagia  fatherÒs chromosomes were normal, but his mother had pericentric  and failure to thrive and shows a general developmental delay.  inversion of chromosome 9 and one abnormal X chromosome.  Comparison of our patient with other cases presenting partial trisomy  Pericentric inversion of the X chromosome was conÜrmed by FISH  16q allows a further delineation of the dup(16)(q22-qter) phenotype  analysis. Further FISH analysis of the patient and his motherÒs  and a precision of the phenotypic map of chromosome 16q. chromosomes using BAC and YAC probes revealed the breakpoints Cytogenetics 124 
P0193 . Contribution of FISH to the detection of subtelomeric  medicine. It was evaluated for genotoxicity in cultured peripheral  rearrangements in syndromic mental retardation blood lymphocytes of newborns administered chloral hydrate  C. Orellana, S. Monfort, F. Mart\x91nez, L. Bad\x91a, J. Mill\x86n, A. Orts, F. Prieto;  for sedatization. Sister chromatid exchanges and micronucleus  frequencies were measured before and after chloral hydrate  Unidad de Gen\x8dtica. Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. administration. Sister chromatid exchanges and micronucleus were  Introduction Subtelomeric rearrangements are a cause of  signiÜcantly found to increase after administration. The results of the  syndromic mental retardation. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH)  study suggest that chloral hydrate might have a moderate genotoxic  techniques with telomeric probes can detect alterations in these  potential in newborns. regions. However, not all the rearrangements detected will have  phenotypic manifestations. 
P0196 . FISH analysis in children with developmental delay,  Objectives Search for subtelomeric rearrangements among  dysmorphism and malformations patients with syndromic mental retardation and to asses whether the  I. Petkovic, I. Barisic;  alterations detected are pathological by complementary molecular  and familiar studies. University ChildrenÓs Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. Materials and Methods Sixteen patients with moderate-severe  Chromosome aberrations are frequent cause of developmental  mental retardation and congenital abnormalities were selected.  delay, dysmorphism and congenital malformations. Cytogenetics  FISH technique with telomeric probes was performed on metaphase  has low resolution power and chromosome anomalies smaller  spreads. Those cases with alterations were analysed with  than 5Mb cannot be detected. FISH is useful method for detecting  polymorphic markers in order to delimit the affected regions. Familiar  submicroscopic rearrangements. In this report we present the  studies were also carried out in these cases. results of FISH study in 140 children with developmental delay,  Results Two cases with a subtelomeric imbalance were detected.  dysmorphism and congenital malformations (DDM). The FISH  One case showed a derivative chromosome 6 with loss of the most  method with microdeletion probes and ToTelVysion multi-color FISH  terminal 6p and gain of 3qter. The other case showed a derivative  panel for subtelomeric screening was performed according to the  chromosome 5 with loss of pter and gain of 9pter. Both derivatives  manufacturerÓs suggestions (Vysis). Microdeletions were detected  were inherited and familiar studies pointed out the pathological status  in 14(11.0%) out of 127 children with phenotype suggestive of  of these imbalances. microdeletion syndromes. FISH analysis revealed hemizygosity for  Conclusions The study of cryptic chromosomal imbalances offers  22q11.2 in 7(6.7%) and re-evaluation revealed deletion of ELN locus  a lot of advantages. In addition to offer genetic counselling to the  in 2(1.95) additional patients out of 104 suspected for DiGeorge/ affected families, it will allow us to know more about the genetic  VCFS. Williams syndrome was diagnosed in 3(37.4%) out of 8  causes of mental retardation. Moreover the alterations detected could  patients, Angelman in 1, and deletion of SNRPN locus in 3(50%)  be the starting point for the characterisation of new genes. out of 6 children referred for Prader-Willi syndrome. Subteromeric  FISH revealed no rearrangement in 9 patients with DDM and  
P0194 . Micronucleus Frequency in Rat Embryonic Blood Cell  normal karyotype and contributed to the precise characterization of  Treated with Anticoagulant Agents 4 investigated structural chromosomal aberrations with suspected  M. Aksoy1, I. Uysal2, A. Karabulut2, K. Ozdemir3, H. Acar4, B. Altunkeser3;  involvement of telomere. This report conÜrms that FISH is powerful  method for diagnosis of microdeletion syndrome. Although no  1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Selcuk University, Meram Medi- rarrangement was detected by subtelomeric screening in this small  cal Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Anatomy, Selcuk University, Meram  group of patients, this study points that multisubtelomere FISH  Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Cardiology, Selcuk University,  is useful in understanding the mechanism of origin of structural  Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Sel- rearrangements, and emphasize the need of selection criteria and  cuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey. precise phenotype evaluation of the patients prior to subtelomeric  Thromboembolic complications during pregnancy are the most  testing. Supported by the Ministry of Science of the Republic of  common causes of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality.  Croatia (TP-01/072-01). Heparin and low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH) are used to  reduce the incidence of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy and  
P0197 . ECARUCA: an internet-based European database for  improve outcomes. LMWH products are dalteparin, enoxaparin and  collection of rare chromosomal abnormalities nadroparin. I. Feenstra1, D. A. Koolen1, R. Winter2, A. Schinzel3, A. Siezen1, C. Evans4, B.  In the literature, cytogenetic studies in animals have been evaluated  B. A. de Vries1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij1;  the genotoxic potential of these products. There were not any  mutagenetic effect in in vivo rat bone marrow chromosomal  1University Medical Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute of  aberration and micronucleus (MN) frequency. However, there is no  Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 3University of Zurich, Institute of Me- published data about the effects of LMWH on the cells of developing  dical Genetics, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Middlesex University, London, United  rat embryos. In this study, we aimed to analyse genotoxic and/or  Kingdom. cytotoxic effects of anticoagulant agents on the MN formation in rat  During recent years a considerable improvement in diagnostic  embryonic blood cells. Rat embryos were exposed to the different  techniques has enabled cytogeneticists to Ünd more and smaller  clinically relevant concentrations of anticoagulant agents (heparin  chromosomal aberrations. However, accurate clinical knowledge  5-40 iu/ml; dalteparin 2.5-15 iu/ml; enoxaparin 25-100 Ⱥg/ml;  about rare chromosome disorders is frequently lacking, mostly due  nadroparin 1-4 iu/ml) for 48 hours in culture between 9.5 and 11.5  to a signiÜcant decline in published cases. On the other hand, there  days of embryological development in which early organogenesis  is an increasing demand from parents and physicians for reliable  takes place. After culturing the embryos, their blood samples were  information about the disorder of their child or patient. collected by removing the visceral yolk sac and the embryo in RPMI- Therefore, we established the European Cytogeneticists Association  1640 medium. The samples were prepared according to classic MN  Register of Unbalanced Chromosome Aberrations (ECARUCA). This  assay. It was observed that the increased concentrations of the used  internet-based database, funded by the European Union, collects  agents caused a dose-dependent increase in the MN frequency in rat  cytogenetic and clinical data of (non-) published cases with a rare  embryonic blood cells when compared to MN frequency in controls.  chromosome abnormality. This result indicates that the possible genotoxic and/or cytotoxic  Currently, (cyto) genetic centres can submit data to the register  effects of anticoagulant agents on the developing rat embryo.  by using the downloadable forms from the ECARUCA website,  www.ecaruca.net . It will be possible to submit data by a web-based  
P0195 . The assessment of genotoxicity of chloral hydrate in  process soon. newborn lymphocyte culture The availability of collected data is subdivided in a two-level system:  A. Tastekin, M. Ikbal, H. Dogan, I. Pirim, R. Ors;  each internet user can view general information about a speciÜc  chromosome aberration and the accompanying clinical features.  Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Erzurum, Turkey. Whereas, account holders can receive speciÜc data per case,  Chloral hydrate is a sedative commonly used in pediatric  including additional research and clinical pictures.Cytogenetics 125 The collection and exchange of clinical and technical knowledge will  chromosome 3 were identiÜed by cytogenetic studies. allow for accurate information on clinical aspects of rare chromosome  In the Ürst case, a rare chromosomal abnormality consisting of an  disorders that can be used by the professionals involved. Moreover,  interstitial deletion of long arm of chromosome 3, was found in a  correlation study of chromosome aberrations and their phenotypes  5-year old girl with mild mental retardation. Phenotype features  will be invaluable for localizing genes involved with mental retardation  included cranial and mandibular anomalies and congenital cerebral  and congenital anomalies.During the presentation, the website and  malformation. Cytogenetic analysis, performed on GTG-banded  its possibilities will be demonstrated as well as our plans to optimise  chromosomes, identiÜed an interstitial deletion del(3)(q22) ProbandÓs  the communication of cytogenetic know-how within Europe. parents and sister have normal phenotypes and there was no  abnormality revealed by cytogenetic studies. Thus, the interstitial  
P0198 . An extremely rare case of reciprocal translocation  deletion of the chromosome 3 was considered Ðde novoÑ. homozygosity The second case, a 4-year old girl was referred for cytogenetic  G. Frey-Mahn1, B. Grossmann1, M. Bock1, A. Keilmann2, U. Napiontek2, U.  analysis with severe mental retardation. She had facial dysmorphic  Zechner1, V. Beyer1, N. Kohlschmidt1, T. Haaf1;  features and hyperkinesia. The chromosomes studies revealed  a duplication dup(3)(p22p24). Beside duplication 3p22-3p24 an  1Institute of Human Genetics, University School of Medicine Mainz, Germa- unbalanced translocation between the long arms of chromosomes 5  ny, 2Department of Communication Disorders, University School of Medicine  and 9 was identiÜed in a single metaphase. ProbandÓs parents are  Mainz, Germany. phenotypically normal. A homozygous reciprocal translocation, 46,XY,t(10;11),t(10;11),  Two rearrangements involving the chromosome 3 were identiÜed  was detected in a 4 year old boy with congenital non-syndromic  in two children with non-syndromic mental retardation. In order  neurosensory hearing impairment. Both of his parents, who  to elucidate the mechanisms responsible both for the interstitial  are consanguineous, carry the translocation in a heterozygous  deletion of the long arm and for the duplication of the short arm of  state and hear normally. The single translocation was also found  chromosome 3 molecular techniques are required. in the couple`s daughter and their two other sons, who are all  Acknowledgements. National Program VIASAN, Project 127/2001-  phenotypically unremarkable. The pedigree is consistent with an  2003. autosomal recessive form of deafness caused by disruption or  otherwise inactivation of a gene in the breakpoint region(s). By  
P0201 . Distal monosomy 11q and partial trisomy 20q in a girl  chromosome banding, the breakpoints were located in 10q24.3-q25.1  with MCA/MR. and 11q23.3. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation of fully integrated  W. Courtens, L. Rooms, J. Wauters, E. Reyniers, M. Wojciechowski, A.  BAC maps to patient chromosomes was used to localize the  Deprettere, J. van den Ende, K. Storm, F. Kooy, M. M. N\x99then;  breakpoint on chromosome 10 to a 2 Mb interval and the breakpoint  on chromosome 11 to a 1.5 Mb interval, respectively. The breakpoint  University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. region on chromosome 11 is associated with an autosomal recessive  Terminal deletion of 11q is a distinct clinical entity, also known as  locus (DFNB24) for hearing impairment and is therefore particularly  Jacobsen syndrome. Frequent features include mild to moderate  interesting. Positional cloning of the breakpoint regions is underway  psychomotor retardation, cardiac defects, thrombocytopenia  to uncover a novel gene(s) involved in congenital hearing loss. and facial dysmorphism including trigonocephaly, telecanthus /  hypertelorism, broad depressed nasal bridge, micrognathia and  
P0199 . De novo 9-break-event in one chromosome 21 combined  low-set dysplastic ears. The deletion classically described is  with a microdeletion in 21q22.11 in a mentally retarded boy with  del(11)(q23ŗqter), but breakpoints may varying. Terminal 20q  short stature trisomy is a rare chromosomal anomaly; all reported cases to date  H. Starke1, O. Rittinger2, A. Weise1, U. Claussen1, T. Liehr1;  were associated with another chromosomal anomaly. We present a 2-year-old girl with pre- and postnatal growth  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2St. Johanns- deÜciency, a cardiopathy (aortic stenosis with hypoplasia of the  Spital, Klinische Genetik, Salzburg, Austria. aortic arch), left-sided hydronephrosis due to pyelourethral junction  We report on a moderately mentally retarded 12-year-old boy of short  stenosis, frequent respiratory infections, psychomotor retardation  stature showing the most complex chromosomal rearrangement  and facial dysmorphism. Standard and high resolution chromosome  (CCR) within a single chromosome ever described. A de novo  analysis were normal. The diagnosis could be established by MLPA  derivative chromosome 21 was recognized in GTG-banding shortly  (Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe AmpliÜcation) analyses showing  after birth. However, the nature of the rearrangement remained  a diminished (1/2) intensity at telomere 11qter (Salsa probe 1143- obscure up to the application of the chromosome 21 speciÜc  
L0700 , KIAA1030 gene) and an increased intensity corresponding  centromere-near multicolor-FISH (subcenM-FISH; Starke et al., 2003;  with telomere 20qter (Salsa probe 1091-
L0642 , URK
L1 /FLJ20517  Hum Gene. 114:51-67) probe set and of six selected locus-speciÜc  gene). These results were conÜrmed by FISH analysis showing  probes along chromosome 21. An unbalanced 9-break-event was  only one 11qter signal and three 20qter signals (one on both  uncovered with breakpoints in 21p13, 21p12-13, 21q11.2, 21q21.1,  chromosomes 20 and one signal at chromosome 11q). More detailed  21q22.11, 21q22.11, 21q22.12, 21q22.22 and 21q22.3. A deletion of  DNA analyses revealed that the deletion occurred at the paternal  21q22.11 was detected by application of the BAC probe bk249H10.  derived chromosome and that the breakpoint is situated between  The karyotype can be described as 46,XY,der(21)(:p13->p12~13: markers D11
S4151  and D11
S934 . Further studies to delineate the  :q22.3->q22.22::q11.2->p12~13::q11.2->q21.1::q22.11->q21.1:: breakpoint are ongoing. Phenotype-genotype correlation will be  q22.12->q22.22::p13->p13). The clinical signs can either be due to  discussed. gene inactivation in connection with structural changes at the break  and fusion regions, to the building of new fusion genes within the  
P0202 . Subtelomeric chromosome aberrations as a cause for  CCR and/or to the deletion of genes in 21q22.11. Supported in parts  miscarriages? FISH screening of 30 samples from pathological  by the Dr. Robert PÝeger-Stiftung and the DFG (PO284/6-1). pregnancies H. Engels1, G. Kn\x99pÝe2, A. Ehrbrecht1, S. Zahn1, G. Schwanitz1, A. Hoischen1;  
P0200 . Structural rearrangements of chromosome 3 in two  children with mental retardation 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Pathology, Bonn,  L. Neagu1, M. Budisteanu2, A. Rodewald3, A. Arghir1, L. Serghei4, M. Bari5, A.  Germany. Lungeanu1;  Subtelomeric chromosome aberrations have been implied as  a possible cause for recurrent miscarriages. Several studies of  1ÑVictor BabesÑ National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2ÑProf.Dr.A. ObregiaÑ  couples with more than three abortions pointed to a low overall  Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute for Human  prevalence of familial subtelomere aberrations (3 out of 348 patients,  Biology, Hamburg, Germany, 4ÑCarol DavilaÑ University of Medicine, Bucharest,  summarised in Cockwell et al., Hum Genet 112 (2003): 298-302).  Romania, 5ÑFilantropiaÑ Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. To our knowledge, a systematic study of pathological pregnancies  In this paper we present two cases with mental retardation and  themselves has not been performed so that no data are available  dysmorphic features in whom structural rearrangements of  about the incidence of de novo subtelomere aberrations.Cytogenetics 126 We report on a study of 30 samples from pathological pregnancies  
P0205 . Complex chromosomal rearrangements - cytogenetical  from gestational weeks 9 to 36. In order to exclude an ascertainment  and clinical data in Belarus Registry of Chromosomal  bias towards familial aberrations, samples were collected  Abnormalities. consecutively including all karyotypically normal samples with  N. Rumyantseva, A. Polityko, I. Naumchik, O. Khurs, T. Asadchuk;  sufÜcient metaphase numbers. Screening was performed using a  Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. novel combinatorial Subtelomere-Six Colour-FISH with BAC and PAC  Complex chromosome rearrangements (CChR) may cause  probes mainly from the second generation probe panel published by  decreased fertility, reproductive failure, abnormal offspring. We  Knight et al (Am J Hum Genet 67 (2000): 320-332). studied a spectrum and clinical data of CChR detected by GTG- 29 out of 30 subtelomere screenings gave normal results suggesting  banding, FISH methods among patients with malformations, mental  a low incidence of subtelomere aberrations in miscarriages.  retardation, hypogenitalism, amenorrhea, miscarriages. 45 patients  In the remaining case an enlargement of 22p diagnosed  with balanced or unbalanced CChR, inherited and sporadic, were  after amniocentesis had been misinterpreted as a maternal  found. heterochromatic polymorphism. A large euchromatic intrachrosomal  I group - balanced CChR (15 patients) presented: combinations  22q duplication of at least 7 Mb was identiÜed by Subtelomere-Six  of reciprocal or Robertsonian translocation with inversion; two  Colour-FISH (46,XY,der(22)(qterŗq13.2~q13.1::p12~p11.2ŗqter).  inversions 46,XX,inv(8)(p11.2q11.2),inv(9)(p11q12)14pss,15p+ and  The breakpoint characterisation using a panel of BAC and PAC FISH  46,XY,inv(7)(p11.1q21),inv(9)(p11q13), two translocations 45,XX,t( probes is ongoing. 2;20)(q21;q13),der(14;21)(q10;q10). Phenotype abnormalities were  noted in 3 patients with CChR(dn): 46,XX,inv(8)(p11.2q11.2),inv(9) 
P0203 . Multicolor chromosome banding (MCB) in the interphase  (p11q12)14pss,15p+ and 46,XX,inv(2)(p23q37),t(5;12)(q11.1;q22)  nucleus - mental retardation, multiply malformations. 45,XX,der(15;15)(q10;q1 U. Steinhaeuser, H. Starke, U. Claussen, T. Liehr;  0),inv(9)(p11q12) - mental delay, severe obesity. In 2 cases of CChR  Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany. patient inherited each aberration from each parent: 46,XX,t(6;16)(p All up to present published FISH studies on the interphase  23;q22)mat; inv(2)(p11q13)pat; and 46,XX,t(3;5)(p14.2;p15.3)mat;  architecture are performed on interphase nuclei which are prepared  inv(9)(p11q12)pat. using the airdrying procedure of chromosome preparation. This  II group - unbalanced CChR (30 cases): standard method and similar approaches (Solovei et al., 2002; in:  1. Inbalance of autosomes (16 cases): FISH Î a practical approach; Oxford-Univ-Press: 119-157) lead to a  Down syndrome (DS; 11 patients with typical phenotype) is due to  Ýattening of the nuclei or produces, in the best case, a half-spherical  combinations of full trisomy 21 with inherited balanced translocation  shape. When interphase architecture shall be studied this may lead  - t(11;21)(q21;q22)mat, t(12;22)(p11.2;q13)pat, or inversion -  to questionable results. Recently we described a technique, where  inv(7)(p12q21.1)mat; inv(9)(p11q13). the whole FISH-procedure can be performed on cell suspension  Mosaic karyotypes: 47,XY,+21/48,XY,+21,+21, and 48,XY,+21,+mar/ and the cells are brought on a concave polished slide as the Ünal  46,XY. step of the procedure, just before the evaluation. We called this  Rare forms: 46,XY,t(3;12)(q13.2;q24.2),del(10)(p12)dn;  procedure suspension-FISH = S-FISH (Steinhaeuser et al., 2002;  48,XY,+mar,+mar; 47,XX,t(11;22)q25;q13)pat,+del(22)(q13);  J Histochem Cytochem 50: 1697-1698) and demonstrated that the  47,XX,+8,inv(9)(p11q12)/46,XX,inv(9)(p11q12)pat; 46,XX,der(2),t(2;1 nuclei maintain their spherical nature here. In this study we used  1)(q36;q22)mat, inv(9)(p11q13). the S-FISH approach to do MCB based 3-D-analyses on spherical  2. Inbalance of gonosomes (9 cases):  interphase nuclei derived from peripheral blood of normal controls  Turner syndrome is due to combination of monosomy X or  and bone marrow cell suspension. A multicolor banding (MCB) probe  structural abnormality X with translocation or inversion. Klinefelter  set for chromosome 5 was applied in 3 clinical cases with MDS  syndrome - 47,XXY with inherited balanced t(3;14)(p21;q24)  or AML with known deletions in chromosome 5q of different sizes  and der(13;14)(q10;q10) or inv(9)(p11q13). Rare variants-  (Ò5q- syndromeÓ). We were able to detect the known chromosomal  47,XYY,t(6;15)(p213;q24)/45,X,t(6;15)(p213;q24)mat;  rearrangements in the interphase nuclei. The breakpoints could  46,X,del(Y)(q11), inv(9)(p11q12)dn. be conÜrmed as well. Thus, we demonstrated the possibility to  3. Inbalance of autosomes and gonosomes (5 cases): combination  detect and describe chromosomal alterations on interphase nuclei.  of DS and Klinefelter syndrome Î 48,XXY,+21 and 47,XXY,der(14;2 Supported in parts by the ÐF\x99rderverein des Klinikums der FSU Jena  1)(q10;q10),+21mat. Rare forms (dn) Î 47,XX,+18[90]/45,X[10] and  e.V.Ñ and the EU (QLRT-1999-31590/QLRT-2000-01590). 48,XXX,+ider(9)(p10)/47,XXX. Cytogenetical and clinical data of CChR will be presented. Problems  
P0204 . A complex rearrangement of chromosome 1q associated  of genetic counseling for families with CChR will be discussed. with a distinctive phenotype and cerebellar malformation E. Boland1, J. Clayton-Smith2, D. Donnai1,2, G. C. M. Black2,1;  
P0206 . Skin manifestations in mosaic trisomy 16 syndrome 1University Department of Medical Genetics, St MaryÓs Hospital, Manchester,  L. B. Ousager1, A. Erlendsson2, K. Rasmussen1, F. Brandrup3;  United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, St MaryÓs Hospital,  1Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 2Department  Manchester, United Kingdom. of Audiology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 3Department of  Cerebellar hypoplasia may occur as an isolated abnormality or as  Dermatology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. part of a multiple anomaly syndrome. It is often associated with a  Trisomy 16 is the most frequent chromosome abnormality at  posterior fossa cyst, the two abnormalities being referred to as the  conception and the most common autosomal trisomy in spontaneous  Dandy Walker malformation. Cerebellar hypoplasia may arise due to  miscarriages. Nonmosaic trisomy 16 has been described in very few  a single gene disorder or chromosome aberration. We report the case  cases that survived to third trimester and seems to be incompatible  of a 5 year old girl with delayed development, dysmorphic features,  with postnatal survival. Trisomy 16 mosaicism, however, has been  atrial septal defect, atrophy of the corpus callosum and cerebellar  described in CVS as a common abnormality. The clone with trisomy  hypoplasia in association with a small corpus callosum and a pineal  16 might be conÜned to placenta or identiÜed at birth in Übroblasts  cyst. Banded chromosome analysis showed an apparently balanced  and/or lymphocytes. Variable clinical expressions of this mosaicism  inversion of 1q32.3-42.1. Further analysis using BAC-FISH revealed  have been described. Intrauterine growth retardation seems to be the  the rearrangement to be more complex including two separate  rule and characteristic abnormalities include asymmetry of the skull  inversions and two deletions of 3-4Mb. Cerebellar malformations  or limbs, congenital heart defects and eye abnormalities. To the best  have not previously been reported in association with aberrations of  of our knowledge there are no reports of follow up beyond the Ürst  1q. The deleted regions may hold a gene, or genes with an important  few years of life and only in one patient skin abnormalities have been  role in cerebellar development. described. A case of distinctive, unilateral dermatological manifestations  characterized by hypertrichosis, telangiectasia, hyperkeratosis  and slight hyperpigmentation in a 48-years-old man is presented. Cytogenetics 127 Additional Ündings were left-sided skeletal abnormalities and  syndrome) in 5 cases. hearing loss. Analysis of Übroblasts from two different samples of  Chromosomal aberrations in recurrent abortions occurred in only one  affected skin showed trisomy 16 mosaicism. A normal chromosome  couple of 10: a reciprocal translocation t(1;4). copy-number was found in blood lymphocytes and Übroblasts from  High number of infertile subjects is affected by chromosomal  unaffected skin. aberrations. Routine cytogenetic analysis should be performed to  The majority of mosaic trisomy 16 pregnancies originate from  explain infertility but also to counsel couples before ART. Screening  maternal nondisjunction in the Ürst meiotic division followed  of Y chromosome microdeletions is also recommended in men with  by Òtrisomic zygote rescueÓ whereby a chromosome 16 is lost.  severe male factor infertility. The rescue may result in uniparental disomy. The importance  of uniparental disomy will be discussed. Based on the clinical  
P0209 . Subtelomeric 9p;12q Rearrangement in a Family Passed  characteristics a possible relation to Becker naevus syndrome is  Through Three Generations With Two Affected Individuals  suggested. Presenting Unbalanced Karyotype C. Schell-Apacik1, U. Wiedemann2, J. M\x9eller-Navia3, H. von Voss1;  
P0207 . Frequency and spectrum chromosomal aberrations in  1Institut f\x9er Soziale P\x89diatrie und Jugendmedizin der Ludwig-Maximilians-Uni- somatic cells at the population living in a zone of inÝuence of  versit\x89t, Kinderzentrum M\x9enchen, Munich, Germany, 2Labor f\x9er Medizinische  Semipalatinsk test site Genetik Dr. Klein, Martinsried, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik Mainz,  G. Abildinova;  Mainz, Germany. Republican research center of mother and child health protection, Almaty,  We report on an unbalanced rearrangement of the telomeric regions  Kazakhstan. of the short arm of one chromosome 9 and the long arm of one  Purpose: To study cytogenetical effects in somatic cells in a  chromosome 12, karyotype 46,XY,der(9)t(9;12)(p24.3;q24.33) in a  population irradiated as result of ground and atmospheric nuclear  child of the age of 5 3/  years, who presented with mental retardation  12 tests in 1949-1962. We analysed the frequency and types of  and some dysmorphic features. Since conventional chromosome  chromosomal aberration in 66,068 G-banded metaphases in 174  analysis alone did not reveal the rearrangement, the translocation  cultures of peripheral blood lymphocytes. was detected only by straightforward analyses combining cytogenetic  The greatest frequency of cells with aberrations (3.2°0.4%) is  and molecular cytogenetic methods including microdissection  found in a zone of extreme radiation risk (ERR). This is double the  and telomere FISH analysis. Further studies revealed not only  frequency seen in the zone of minimal radiation risk (MRR) -(1.8° 0.2  that the childÓs mother and grandmother were carriers of the 9;12  %) and three times that in a control area -(1.04° 0.16 %). translocation but that the sister of the childÓs mother, who was  Acentric fragments are the most prevalent aberration, with  reported to have mental retardation as well, carried the same  frequencies 1.3°0.2 per 100 cells in the ERR, 0.94°0.13 in the HRR,  unbalanced translocation as the child. signiÜcantly higher than the MRR (0.43°0.06) and control zone  A partial trisomy 12q and a partial monosomy 9p due to a  (0.2°0.06).Dicentrics were seen at a frequency of 0.18°0.03 and  translocation 9p24.3 and 12q24.3, resulting from a maternal balanced  rings at 0.27°0.06 per 100 cells in persons from the ERR and HRR,  translocation has been reported once in the literature in a newborn  compared to 0.02°0.01 in persons from the MRR and control group. who passed away at the age of 2 ď months. However, even if the  The frequencies of radiation-inÝuenced stable markers (deletions,  breakpoints given appear to be similar to our case according to  translocations) were 0.74°0.16 (ERR), 0.84°0.12 (HRR), 0.63°0.13  nomenclature, the rearrangement was detected by cytogenetic  (MRR) and 0.37°0.08 per 100 metaphases, respectively. analysis already suggesting that the imbalance of the chromosomal  Thus, analysis of the frequency and types of chromosomal  regions may be more serious. aberrations has shown that in somatic cells of the inhabitants of the  We present the clinical, chromosomal and molecular cytogenetic  surveyed areas the tendency to accumulation of unstable and stable  Ündings of the two affected individuals and other family members  radiation markers is observed, which testiÜes to possible continuation  investigated so far, comparing our results with the available literature  of the inÝuence of radiation on chromosomal integrity. data. 
P0208 . Results of cytogenetic studies in 112 patients of the  
P0210 . The evaluation of genotoxic potential of a nitroimidazole,  south of Tunisia investigated for infertility and reproductive  ornidazole, in lymphocyte culture of patients with amebiasis failures M. Ikbal, H. Dogan, I. Pirim, M. Ertek;  N. B. Abdelmoula1, A. Amouri2, A. Saad3, A. Bahloul4, T. Rebai1;  Ataturk University, Erzurum, Turkey. 1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Institute of Pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia,  The genotoxicity study of ornidazole was carried out on human  3University Hospital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4University Hospital Hbib  lymphocyte chromosomes using sister chromatid exchange and  Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia. micronucleus. 22 patients with Entemoeba histolitica infections who  The aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution of  received 1000mg/d for 10 days participated in this study. Sister  chromosomal abnormalities in infertility and reproductive failure. chromatid exchanges and micronucleus were measured before  We investigated cytogenetically 73 infertile men, 14 women with  therapy and after therapy. A statistically signiÜcant increase was  amenorrhoea and 10 couples who had 2 or more spontaneous  observed in the SCE (Z= -5.778, p<0.001) and MN frequencies (Z=  abortions or recurring Art failure. Wives of 5 infertile men with OAT  -5.712, p: 0.004) after ornidazole therapy could be described. It was  were investigated before ICSI. 34 infertile men were also analyzed for  concluded that ONZ has a potential genotoxic and cytotoxic effect in  Y microdeletions. human peripheral lymphocyte cultures. Further and detailed studies  The overall frequency of chromosomal abnormalities was 19,6%  are needed to elucidate ONZ mechanism of genotoxicity and its  (22/112) and the prevalence of DAZ microdeletions in infertile men  carcinogenic potential, since the drug is widely used. was 8,8 % (3/34). Numerical sex chromosome abnormalities were more frequent than  
P0211 . FISH detection and characterisation of subtelomere  structural chromosomal rearrangements. aberrations in 76 mentally retarded patients - High diagnostic  Frequency of cytogenetic abnormalities detected among infertile men  yield among mildly affected patiens was 19% attributable mainly to the inclusion of klinefelterÓs syndrome:  A. Ehrbrecht1, S. Zahn1, K. Bosse1,2, G. Schwanitz1, P. Propping1, H. Engels1;  10 cases of 47,XXY karyotype. Excluding this category, only 6,3%  1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Gynaecology  infertile men were found to have chromosomal abnormalities: 1 case  and Obstetrics, University of Cologne, Germany. of de la chapelle syndrome [46,XX], 1 case of structural chromosomal  The aetiology of mental retardation (MR) which affects 2-3% of  rearrangements [45,XY,t(13;14)] and 2 cases of cytogenetic deletion  the population is unknown in about half of the cases. Subtelomeric  of the Y chromosome. Chromosomal abnormalities in infertile  chromosome aberrations have on average been determined in  women affected by primary or secondary amenorrhoea were found  4,6% of patients with idiopathic MR (Xu and Chen, Am J Med Genet  in 50% of cases. Chromosomal abnormalities concern exclusively X  117(2003):15-24). chromosome: structural in 2 cases and numerical (mosaic TurnerÒs Cytogenetics 128 We performed FISH screening for subtelomeric chromosome  In this study, patients were being followed up at Istanbul Medical  aberrations in 76 clinically well documented MR patients with normal  School , BMT unit between 1999-2003. Ten patients with acute  banded karyotypes. Subtelomere FISH was carried out using two  leukemia were evaluated for chimerism between 21th day and 18th  different probe sets and three techniques. The Ürst probe set was  month after allo BMT . We used FISH method and PCR ampliÜcation  a commercially available one (ToTelVysion©, Vysis). The second  and reverse dot blot. We performed FISH assay with CEP X/Y  set consisted of BAC and PAC probes mainly from the Ðsecond  probe (Vysis) to 10 patients.The Amplitype PM Kit includes PCR  generation probe panel. The latter one was applied in two different  ampliÜcation reagents for following six genetic loci Low Density  multi-colour FISH techniques: Subtelomere-COBRA-FISH and  Lipoprotein Receptor, Glycophorin A , Hemoglobin G Gammaglobulin  Subtelomere-Six Colour-FISH. , D7
S8  and Group SpesiÜc Component . Subtelomere aberrations were detected in 5 patients (6,6%).  Patients had an average age of 31.5°8.7 and the ratio of male to  Both unbalanced translocations [der(2)t(2;5)(q37.3;p15.1), der(2 female was 4:6. Eight patients were shown to be in state of complete  2)t(7;22)(q36.3;q13.33)] and all three deletions [del(14)(q32.31),  chimerism with both methods. Two of all patients were shown to be  del(2)(q37.3), del(16)(p13.3)] had occurred de novo. The breakpoints  in a state of mixed chimerism with PCR analysis. One of the mixed  of the aberrations were characterised by FISH using panels of BAC  chimeric patients was found to be complete chimeric by further FISH  and PAC probes in order to contribute to karyotype-phenotype  of analysis . correlations. With special regard to the clinical preselection ÐchecklistÑ  X/Y probes were useful with all patients who had received a  proposed by de Vries et al. (J Med Genet 38(2001):145-150),  transplant from a sex-mismatched donor. PCR-based method is also  we compared the phenotypes of our patients with and without  very rapid and efÜcients at discriminating siblings. subtelomere aberrations. Most of our patients with subtelomere  aberrations had relatively mild phenotypes and displayed only few of  
P0214 . Pericentric inversion of chromosome 2,  the selection criteria of the ÐchecklistÑ and an implementation of the  46,XX,inv(2)(p13;q37), associated with recurrent abortions - A  proposed cut-off would have excluded three out of Üve aberration  new case? carriers, demonstrating the need for further discussion of selection  M. Naveed1, M. T. A. Ali1, A. Malhotra1, D. S. Krishna Murthy2;  criteria. 1Human Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United  Arab Emirates, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Medical Genetics Center, Maternity  
P0212 . Chromosomal Abnormalities in Recurrent Miscarriage. A  Hospital, Sabah Area, Kuwait. preliminary study of 250 Romanien couples Familial pericentric inversions of chromosomes, 9 and Y are  V. Belengeanu;  relatively common and are considered to be normal polymorphic  University of Medicine and Farmacy, Timisoara, Romania. variant in the general population occurring with varying frequencies.  A proportion of cases with repeated abortion are caused by  However, de novo pericentric inversions of some chromosomes  chromosomal abnormality in one of the parents are causally associated with infertility, reproductive failure, multiple  This study includes 250 couples with recurrent miscarriage and/or  congenital anomalies, dysmorphic features, due to recombinant  stillborn infant who were referred for cytogenetic studies between July  aneusomy. We report here a new case of pericentric inversion of  2000 and December 2003 at two of the Genetics Center of Timisoara. chromosome 2, in a female spouse of an Indian couple investigated  Cytogenetic features of peripheral blood lymphocytes cultivated  for history of 3 repeated Ürst trimester abortions. Chromosome  according to standard techniques on PB MAX medium for 72 h were  analysis using standard Giemsa trypsin banding technique showed,  evaluated. The GTG analysis revealed the karyotypes. 46,XX, inv(2)(p13;q37). Karyotype of the husband was normal  The number of previous abortions varied from 2 to 14 abortions  46,XY. A review of literature suggests that pericentric inversions of  (mean 3 abortions/couples). In 42 (8,4%) of these cases  chromosome 2 increases the risk for spontaneous abortions but  chromosome abnormalities were identiÜed. do not increase the risk for unbalanced recombinant aneusomy for  These abnormalities includes: 5 cases with robertsonian  chromosome 2. The pathogensis of pericentric inversion 2 will be  translocations [t(13;21), (21;22), (14;14)], 2 cases with balanced  brieÝy reviewed. reciprocal translocations [t(2;6), t(6;7)]; 8 cases with pericentric  inversions [inv(9), inv(16)]; 4 cases with duplications [1(dup) and  
P0215 . Cytogenetic studies in the referred population of Dubai,  16(dup)]; 2 cases with [22p+, 15p+] ,1 case with insertion ins(3);  United Arab Emirates -1986-2002: A report of 14,546 cases 1 case with r(13), 2 cases with deletions del(Yq); mosaic forms  M. T. A. Ali, A. K. Malhotra, M. E. Al-Sharie, S. Mani, F. Frias, E. E. Al- of gonosomal aneuploidies in 7 cases, structural anomalies of X  Rawaished, S. Naveed, M. Naveed;  chromosome [inv(X), iso(X), del(Xp), del(Xq)] in 4 cases, 15 satelite  Genetics Deaprtment, Al Wasl Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. cases. We report here cytogenetic Ündings seen over the last 16 years  Polymorphisms: 1qh+(3cases), 9qh+(26cases), 13ph+(1case),  (1987-2002). A total of 14,546 cases were investigated for suspected  16qh+(2case), Yqh+ (1case) were seen in 13,2 %. chromosomal abnormalities, at the Genetics Department of Al Wasl  Genetic counseling is suggested for each pregnancy loss. After the  Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai (UAE), providing diagnostic genetic services  second pregnancy loss the chromosome analysis of the conception  to seven emirates states in the UAE. Aneuploidy of the autosomes  product and of both parents must be taken into account. If some  and the sex chromosomes are relatively common as in other similar  abnormal chromosomes are detected in one or both of the parents,  studies. Chromosome analyses of GTG banded metaphases among  the amniocentesis must be performed in order to determine the fetal  14, 546 cases showed, trisomy 21in 579 cases, followed by trisomy  karyotipe in each future pregnancy. 18 in 55 cases, trisomy 13 in 21 cases. Among sex chromosome  Kay words: recurrent miscarriage , abnormal chromosomes. aneuploidy, 45,X (Turner syndrome) was the most common seen  in 39 cases, followed by 13 cases of 47,XXY, 5 cases of 47,XXX. 1  
P0213 . Chimerism analysis with FISH and PCR methods case of 48,XXXX and 1 case of 49,XXXXY. Structural abnormalities  F. Aydin1, F. Oguz1, S. Kalayoglu2, Y. D. Ogret1, D. Sargòn2, M. N. Carin1;  were also observed, including 124 case of translocations, 16 cases  1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical School, Department of Medical Biology,  deletion and 3 duplication. Ring chromosome was detected in one  Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical School, Department of  case(ring 2). This study gives an idea of spectrum of chromosomal  Haematology, Istanbul, Turkey. abnormality in the heterogeneous population of Dubai (UAE). The  The term chimerism refers to the presence of lympho- data is compared with similar studies in the Arab population. hematopoietic cells of non host origin. Full or complete chimerism  (CC) generally refers to complete replacement of host by donor  
P0216 . ISCNAnalyzer easily detects karyotype errors in  lymphohematopoiesis mixed chimerism (MC) indicates the presence  cytogenetic databases of both donor and recipients cells within a given cellular compartment. B. Hiller, J. Bradtke, H. Balz, H. Rieder;  The two tests most widely used today are in situ hybridization and  Institute of Clinical Genetics, Marburg, Germany. PCR-based methods. Both methods have a high sensitivity and  CyDAS (Cytogenetic Data Analysis System) is planned to become a  spesiÜcity.Cytogenetics 129 comprehensive integrated tool for the analysis of cytogenetic data. As  from balanced familial aberrations. Consequently, partial trisomy  a Ürst step, we developed a class library for the evaluation of ISCN  2q often occurs along with a monosomy or trisomy of another  karyotypes. This ISCNAnalyzer was tested with karyotypes from the  chromosome segment. We present a 17-year-old girl with an isolated  Mitelman Database of Chromosome Aberrations in Cancer (by kind  duplication of a small distal segment of chromosome 2q. After normal  permission of F.Mitelman). motor development, there was an arrest in the mental development.  Of 22445 entries dating from 1995 or later, 20140 (90%) were parsed  Growth and weight followed the 97th centile, head circumference  without problems. Errors were recorded in 2305 datasets. About half  was normal. She had brachycephaly, a square face with protruding  of the errors were due to incomplete descriptions of aberrations, e.g.  eyes, a beaked nose, clinodactyly on both hands, and 2nd rays  missing breakpoints (977, 42%) or missing aberration descriptions  of the feet were shortened. Chromosome analysis revealed an  for derivative chromosomes (270, 12%). Such information could  altered chromosome 2q with additional material. Parents were not  often be obtained from other karyotypes of the respective publication.  available for analysis. By FISH with chromosome 2 speciÜc library, a  Incomplete descriptions also often reÝected problems to achieve a  subtelomere probe for 2q, and a probe generated by microdissection  more detailed characterization of complexly aberrant karyotypes.  of the additional segment (Micro-FISH), the diagnosis of partial  Most interestingly, 420 (18%) entries showed breakpoints in not- trisomy 2q35-q37.3 was established. About 20 cases have been  existing chromosome bands. Moreover, non-acceptable breakpoint  reported with isolated duplications of various regions of 2q. To our  designations of translocations or dicentric chromosomes were used  knowledge, only two of them had a comparable, but not identical,  in 200 cases (9%), and other errors in derivative chromosomes were  partial trisomy of 2q. The delineation of a distinct phenotype of distal  found in 266 (12%) records. trisomy 2q remains difÜcult because malformations are rare and  In the Mitelman Database, karyotypes of published data are recorded  growth patterns are variable. With increasing age, more characteristic  as written in the publications irrespective of typewriting mistakes  facial signs (plagiocephaly, square face, beaked nose, buphthalmus)  or other errors. Therefore, our Ündings indicate that karyotype  develop and might allow to deÜne a common phenotype. Constant  data need to be checked more closely before publication and that  Ündings are mental retardation, clino-, camptodactyly, and genital  the ISCNAnalyzer may be a useful tool for Ünding faulty data in  abnormalities in males. Besides adding to the clinical characterisation  cytogenetic databases. of distal trisomy 2q, our case further illustrates the usefulness of  Supported by DFG grant Ri1123/2-1 Micro-FISH in the elucidation of chromosomal rearrangements. 
P0217 . Case report: boy with severe hypotonia, hypogenitalism,  
P0219 . Partial Deletion of the Long Arm of Chromosome 13 in  chronic interstitial pneumonia, and partial X disomy, karyotype  a Fetus with Dandy-Walker Malformation Supporting Previous  46,X,der(Y)t(X;Y)(q28;q11.2) Observations of a Candidate Gene Loci R. Teek1,2, K. Ëunap1,3, R. Zordania4, T. Z\x9arjanova4, P. Tammur1, O. Bartsch5;  D. Aktas, Y. Alanay, B. Saygan-Karamursel, B. Talim, O. Deren, M. Caglar, E.  1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute  Tuncbilek;  of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia,  Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey. 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Children`s  Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM) is a genetically heterogenous  Hospital of Tallinn, Tallinn, Estonia, 5Institute of Clinical Genetics, Dresden  entity that can present as an isolated malformation or in association  University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. with genetic syndromes, single gene disorders, chromosomal  Aberrant Xq-Yq interchange in the fatherÓs germline can lead to  abnormalities or other multifactorial conditions. Xq DNA present on a truncated Y chromosome. The patients  The present case was terminated after DWM, and limb defects were  have partial X disomy and abnormal gene expression resulting  noted on ultrasound at 21 weeks gestation. The autopsy Ündings at  from the absence of X inactivation. The phenotype (severe mental  22 weeks gestation revealed right renal agenesis, lobe anomaly in  retardation, generalized hypotonia, microcephaly) was named X- the lung (two lobes on the right, an incomplete Üssure on the left),  Y(Xq) syndrome (Lahn et al., Nat Genet 1994;8:243-250). Few  and only four digits on all four extremities in addition to absence of  patients have been described to date. We report a term-born boy,  cerebellar vermis, a posterior fossa cyst continuous with the fourth  birthweight 3100g, length 50 cm, and Apgar 8/9. He failed to thrive,  ventricle, and hydrocephalus which conÜrmed DWM. had feeding difÜculties and frequent episodes of pneumonia. Cystic  The chromosome analysis of cord blood showed 46,XY, del(13) (q14- Übrosis was strongly suspected but excluded by molecular studies.  q34). Findings at 13 months included moderate mental retardation, short  Malformations of the central nervous system and other anomalies  stature (-3 SD), microcephaly (-3.5 SD), Ýat occiput, round face,  have been described with deletions of the long arm of chromosome  hairy forehead, broad eyebrows, almond-shaped eyes, blue sclerae,  13. One of the critical regions for holoprosencephaly (HPE) is now  strabism, full cheeks, micrognathia, low-set dysplastic ears, short  known to be located on this region. McCormack et al. have reported  neck, broad thorax, wide-spaced nipples, single palmar crease, and  two cases with HPE and DWM with deletion of the long arm of  hypogenitalism (micropenis, cryptoid testes, hypoplastic scrotum).  chromosome 13 suggesting that a haploinsufÜciency at a locus within  The chorionic gonadotrophin test showed no increase of testosterone  13q22-33 may cause this anomaly. One of the patients described  (0.69 nmol/l, normal range 8-38). Cytogenetic and FISH studies  also had 4 digits on each extremity similar to our case. revealed a translocation of Xq28, karyotype 46,X,Yq-.ish der(Y)t(X;Y Our Ündings support the possibility that the candidate gene loci for  )(q28;q11.2)(DYZ3+,DXY
S14 +,DY
S221 -,MTM+,
L1 CAM+,SYB
L1 +).  isolated DWM may be found in this particular region. We also suggest  Thus, the boy had disomy Xq28-qter and nullisomy Yq11.2-qter. He  careful cytogenetic examination in patients with DWM. died 18 months old with chronic interstitial pneumonia. Nullisomy and disomy Xq28 in boys share many clinical  
P0220 . Small reciprocal insertion detected by spectral  manifestations, including the retardation, microcephaly, seizures,  karyotyping (SKY) and hypotonia, possibly due to inappropriate expression of FLN1  W. Werner1, K. Oexle1, U. G\x9entzschel2, S. Tinschert1, A. Herr1, A. Matth\x89i1, O.  (MIM 300049). In our patient, we hypothesize that the hypogenitalism  Bartsch1, K. G. Hinkel1, E. Schr\x99ck1;  and the chronic interstitial pneumonia, respectively, could possibly  1Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, Technische Universit\x89t, Dresden, Germany, 2Ins- be caused by overexpression of F18 (a candidate gene for genital  titut f\x9er Molekulare Biotechnologie, Jena, Germany. development) and BA
P31 /DX
S1375 E (an inhibitor of CFTR  Insertions are rare, reciprocal insertions most unusual. Reciprocity  expression). of insertions has been reported only in three patients. We observed  the exchange of small fragments between chromo-somes 4 and 16.  
P0218 . A rare chromosomal aberration: partial trisomy of 2q35- A now six year-old boy presented with insufÜcient opposition of the  q37.3 hypoplastic thumbs, thenar hypoplasia, brachydactyly, single palmar  I. Heil1, S. Rudnik-Schoeneborn1, S. Busse2, H. M. Schueler1;  creases, cryptorchidism, epicanthal folds, an enlargement of the  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Technology, Aachen, Germany,  cavum septum pellucidum, a spinal dermal sinus (i.e., spina biÜda  2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Aachen, Germany. occulta), muscular hypotonia, and borderline mental retardation.  Duplications of chromosome 2q are uncommon and mostly originate  Hearing test and ophthalmologic examination were normal. The Cytogenetics 130 karyotype was unbalanced, 46,XY,der(16)ins(4;16)(q27q28.2;q rearrangement in humans. Carriers of Robertsonian translocations  12.1 or q13) pat. In the father a reciprocal insertion, 46,XY,rep  are usually attributed with male infertility (oligiastenoteratospermia)  ins(4;16)(q27q28.2;q12.1 or q13), was found. The father also had  and have an increased risk of spontaneous abortions and newborns  brachydactyly but his thenars and thumbs were normal. He had  with genetic abnormalities. bilateral hearing loss of about 50% which, however, was attributed to  To assess frequency and type of chromosome aberration of  frequent otitis media during childhood. vital spermatozoa from patient 45,XY, der (13;14) with severe  The chromosomal origin of the insertion in chromosome 16 of the  oligoastenoteratospermia heterologous ICSI fertilisation of mouse  propositus and its balanced reciprocity in the father were identiÜed by  oocytes with human spermatozoa was used. The spermatozoa from  spectral karyotyping (SKY). Cryptic and half-cryptic interchromosomal  fresh or cryopreserved-thawed sample were applied. insertions in the size range of 1 - 5 Mb can be detected by  In total 57 suitable metaphase plates of human sperm chromosomes  routine cytogenetics if hybrid-ization techniques such as SKY are  were analysed. Frequency of normal spermatozoa (26,31%) is not  implemented. In the individuals presented here, FISH analysis  different from frequency of balanced spermatozoa (40,36%) (Ɂ2 test,  with BAC clones is being applied now to characterize the deletion/ P>0.05). Ratio of X- to Y-bearing spermatozoa is not signiÜcantly  insertion borders. If the rearrangement comprises the chromosomal  different from the expected 1:1 in normal and chromosomal balanced  region 16q12.1, Townes-Brocks syndrome is to be diagnosed in the  spermatozoa (Ɂ2 test, P>0.05). Frequency of hyperploid spermatozoa  son resulting from haploinsufÜciency of SAL
L1  which is located in this  was 10,52%, frequency of spermatozoa with and without der(13;14)  region. was equal - 5,26%. Frequency of spermatozoa with additional  chromosome 13 and 14 was 3,50 % and 0%, respectively. Frequency  
P0221 . Y; autosomal translocation or cryptic tissue mosaicism in  of spermatozoa with nullisomy for chromosome 13 and 14 was 5,26%  a boy with 45, X0? and 3,50 % respectively. Frequency of spermatozoa with structural  R. Kellermayer, M. Czako, K. Hadzsiev, P. Gyuris, A. Kozari, G. Kosztolanyi;  abnormalities was 14,03% (8,77% spermatozoa with der(13;14)  and 5,26% without it). Thus there was no any interchromosomal  University of P\x8dcs, Pecs, Hungary. effect and preferential disjunction of translocation with gonosomes,  Sexual differentiation of males is determined by the presence of  additional or rearranged chromosomes (Ɂ2 test, P>0.05). the Y chromosome. More precisely, in order for phenotypically male  Despite of the modest sample size our data suggest that  genitalia to develop, the presence of the Sex-determining Region  chromosome analysis of spermatozoa from carrier of chromosome  gene on the Y chromosome (SRY) is neccessary. The presence of  rearrangements can give more information about proportion of normal  the SRY gene has been always detected in males, irrespectively of  and abnormal spermatozoa. This information will be useful for genetic  their karyotype apart from exceptionally rare cases. Recently, we  counselling. have examined a 15 year old boy with hypogonadism but normal  male genitalia (testicles approximately 2ml bilaterally), gynecomastia  
P0224 . Single cell analysis by sequential application of two  and mental retardation (IQ=54). LH, FSH and testosteron studies  different approaches: multicolor interphase FISH followed by  showed prepubertal levels in the patient. Repeated karyotypic  single cell CGH analysis of peripheral lymphocytes revealed a 45, X0 chromosomal  S. Langer1,2, J. B. Geigl1,2, S. Thalhammer3, R. Gangnus4, M. R. Speicher1,2;  arrangement in all of the 150 cells examined. The same karyotype  was found in the Übroblasts of the patient. No sign of mosaicism  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, TU M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Humangenetik,  was detected by interphase FISH of the centromeric region of the  GSF- Forschungszentrum, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Geowissenschaf- Y chromosome (Yp11.1-q11.1) in the blood or buccal mucosa.  ten, LMU M\x9enchen, Germany, 4P.A.L.M. Microlaser Technologies AG, Bernried,  Additionally, no signal suggesting the presence of Y material on any  Germany. chromosome could be detected in the peripheral lymphocytes by  Genome analyses of single cells become increasingly important in  FISH with Y painting probe. Considering the phenotypic appearance,  different applications. the results of gonadal histology, conventional and FISH cytogenetic  In clinical diagnostics single cell- approaches are essentiell e.g. in  analyses, we suggest that apart from translocation of the SRY  cases of mosaicisms. Furthermore, sophisticated single cell analysis  containing region of the Y, cryptic tissue mosaicism in some cell lines  may enable the examination of fetal cells in maternal blood to realize  could also be the causative factor of the pathology in this patient. a non- invasive prenatal diagnosis. In cancer, single cell analyses are  needed especially for monitoring minimal residual disease and for  
P0222 . The Clinical Spectrum of Pericentric Inversion of  the assessment of genetic changes within disseminated tumor cells  Chromosome 8 in a Saudi Family (micrometastasis). Here we demonstrate the sequential analysis of  J. M. Al-Jubeh, N. A. AlL-SannaÓa;  individual cells by two different single cell techniques. After interphase  FISH cells are selected based on the number of FISH signals,  Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. isolated by laser microdissection, ampliÜed by linker adapter PCR  Recombinant 8 syndrome is a well established clinical entity  and analysed by CGH. Examples will be presented for normal controll  characterized by mental retardation, and severe cardiac anomalies.  cells and for tumor cells with multiple copy number changes. The majority of the reported cases so far have been of Hispanic  The combination of these two different techniques allows an efÜcient  origin. Here, we report a 14 years-old Saudi boy with a paternally  control of the single cell CGH results through interphase FISH. inherited pericentric iinversion of chromosome 8, inv(8)(p23.1q24.22).  He presented with microcephlay, short stature and abnormal  
P0225 . Generation of chromosome painting probes from single  genitalia, but otherwise a normal cognitive function. Both of his  chromosomes by laser microdissection and linker-adaptor PCR identical twin brother as well as his father are phenotypically normal.  J. B. Geigl1,2, S. Langer1,2, S. Thalhammer3, W. M. Heckl3, M. R. Speicher1,2;  His 8 month old brother was diagnosed prenatally on amniocentesis  with rec(8)dup(8q)inv(8)(p23.2q24.22). He was small for gestational  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, TU M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Humangenetik,  age, mildly hypotonic, had aterial septal defect and ambiguous  GSF- Forschungszentrum, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Geowissenschaf- genitalia. ten, LMU M\x9enchen, Germany. . Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) plays an essential role in  research and clinical diagnostics. The versatility and resolution of  
P0223 . Cytogenetic analysis of spermatozoa \x93f 45,XY, der (13;14)  FISH depends critically on the used probe set. Here, we describe a  patient after their injection into mouse oocytes. novel approach for the generation of speciÜc DNA probes from single  I. D. Fedorova1,2, K. V. Tatyana1, B. S. Vladislav1, V. Josean3, D. Mark3;  copies of chromosomes. Single chromosomes or single chromosomal  regions were microdissected by laser pressure catapulting and  1OttÓs Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian  ampliÜed using linker-adaptor PCR. The probes were labeled and  Federation, 2St-Petersburg State University Department of Genetic and  tested in various scenarios including multicolor-FISH experiments  Selection, St-Peterburg, Russian Federation, 3Infertility Centre, Department of  employing up to seven different Ýuorochromes. FISH conÜrmed the  Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. speciÜc and evenly staining of the respective chromosomal regions.  Robertsonian translocation is one of the most common chromosome  Furthermore, the capability of these probes to detect even small Cytogenetics 131 translocations (<3 Mb) suggests that the dissected regions are  and high forehead, hypertelorism, small, low set posterior rotated  completely represented in the generated painting probes. dysplastic ears and micrognathia were noted. Other symptoms were  small tongue, glossoptosis, cleft palate, syndactyly of Üngers and  
P0226 . Subtelomeric screening - a method to solve family  hypospadia. Sonography of the brain showed dilatation of posterior  mysteries horn of lateral ventricles and large cavity of septum pellucidum.  B. Welling;  Pulmonary artery stenosis was suspected. The karyotype showed  extra material on the short arm of chromosome 2. Parental  Institute of Human Genetics, M\x9enster, Germany. karyotypes were normal. Painting probes suggested that the extra  20 years ago a couple (T) asked for counselling because of several  material was derived from chromosome 2. An interstitial duplication  mental retarded siblings to the woman. Cytogenetic analyses for the  2p13->p22 was suspected and conÜrmed by CGH. couple (T) and two still alive affected brothers of the woman have  We reexamined the boy at the age of Üve months. Severe growth  been performed with normal results. retardation with particularly short limbs and macrocephaly was  Couple T got three children, a son and two daughters. One daughter  noted. MRT showed hydrocephaly, partial agenesis of callosum,  (AT) showed mental retardation and presented at age of 12 years  hypoplastic limbic gyrus and hypoplastic hypophysis. The boy had  at our institute. Again cytogenetic analysis was normal. The  a tracheostoma and a gastrostoma. Other clinical Ündings were  other daughter (HF) is healthy and has two healthy children. The  nephropathy, anal stenosis and recurrent hyperinsulinemia. Profound  unaffected son (ST) married and got two daughters of whom the  developmental delay with hypotonia was present. Ürst-born (DT) showed mental retardation. The second girl is healthy.  To our knowledge an interstitial duplication 2p13->22 have not been  During third pregnancy of his wife the family presented again at our  described before. We will compare the symptoms of our patient with  institute in 2003. other cases with interstitial duplication 2p. Our case helps to further  We performed subtelomeric screening for AT and DT and  delineate the phenotype of this chromosomal aberration. identiÜed in both the same subtelomeric unbalanced translocation  t(6;22)(q27;q13.3)(tel6q-,22q13.3+). Consecutively we examined  
P0229 . Duplication of chromosome 8p23.1p11.2 in two unrelated  blood samples of two still alive mental retarded brothers of Mrs. T  families. and found also the same above mentioned translocation. Several  M. Tan;  mental healthy family members were identiÜed as carriers for the  balanced form of the above mentioned translocation, e.g. ST as well  Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. as HF and her children. At last prenatal diagnostic via amniocentesis  Tandem duplications are direct or inverted duplications of genetic  in the third pregnancy of STªs wife revealed the speciÜc subtelomeric  material, ordered one after the other. Inverted duplications  unbalanced translocation in this family. As the fetus would be most  of chromosome 8p (inv dup 8p), are relatively common  likely affected by mental retardation pregnancy was interrupted. structural rearrangements. The majority of intrachromosomal or  This family history shows that cases of unexplained mental  interchromosomal duplications are presumably de novo and the  retardation should be reexaminated especially via subtelomeric  recurrence risk is <0.5%. The duplication comprises chromatin  screening to solve family mysteries. of the same chromosome and results in trisomy of the segment  concerned. We report here two cases of similar duplications referred  
P0227 . A Cytogenetical Study of Pediatric Necropsies at an  for chromosome studies. G-banded metaphases analysed from the  Universitary Hospital With a Selective Clinical Methodology probands from phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated peripheral  J. M. Pina-Neto, D. Ortolan, V. S. Bitar, L. C. Perez;  blood lymphocytes using standard cytogenetic techniques revealed  an inverted duplication of the short arm of chromosome 8 resulting in  School of Medicine of Ribeir\x8ao Preto, Ribeir\x8ao Preto, Brazil. partial trisomy for the segment p11.2 ŗ p23.1. This study has used a selective methodology for detection of  Case 1: A 5-month-old baby boy presented with hypotonia, poor  chromosomal anomalies in pediatric necropsies (died between  head control, agenesis of the corpus callosum and congenital heart  20 weeks of gestation and 15 years old). We had 1.558 pediatric  defects. necropsies including 464 with congenital anomalies . The  Case 2: A 6-month-old baby girl with failure to thrive and some  cytogenetical study was obtained in 94 children with isolated  dysmorphic features. She was the third child conceived through in- congenital malformations ( from 211 = 44.5% ) and no chromosomal  vitro fertilization and has two normal, healthy siblings. Both parents  anomaly was detected in this group and, in 179 with multiple  are phenotypically normal and non-consanguineous. congenital anomalies ( from 253 = 70.8% ) and where were detected  In both cases, parental blood for chromosome studies were  72 chromosomal anomalies in this other group= 28.5%. recommended. Case 1, the parents were not done and the origin  The total frequency of chromosomal anomalies was 4.62% and if  of the abnormality was unknown. In Case 2, an apparently normal  we consider only the perinatal death, this frequency was 3.1% ( 26  karyotype was observed in both parents suggesting a de novo  chromosomal anomalies in 835 necropsies ). These frequencies  interstitial duplication in the child. are similar to non-selective samples ( 3.5 to 4.4% - Machin and  More documentations of patients are needed to clarify the exact  Crolla, 1974; Bauld et al, 1974; Kuleshov, 1976; Angeli et al, 1984;  clinical signiÜcance of duplication of distal end of 8p. Sutherland and Carter, 1983 ). If we consider only perinatal death, we had 17 cases of autosomal  
P0230 . Expanding the basic genetic defect in Wolf-Hirschhorn  trisomies ( 18, 13 and 9 ) = 65.4%; 6 cases of structural anomalies  syndrome = 23 %; 2 cases of sexual reversion = 7.7% ; and 1 case of triploidy  R. Lecce, M. Murdolo, I. Mancuso, G. Marangi, G. Neri, M. Zollino;  = 3.8%. Kuleshov, 1976 reported that in non-selective studies of  chromosomal perinatal mortality 55% were by autosomal trisomies,  Catholic University, Rome, Italy. 20% by sexual chromosome anomalies and 20% by structural  Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a MR/MCA condition caused  chromosome anomalies. The main difference between our selective  by partial 4p deletion. Although genotype-phenotype correlations  sample work and the non-selective was that there was no detection  mostly depend on the extent of the deletion, unexplained phenotypic  of sexual chromosomal anomalies. The detection of autosomal  variability is a typical hallmark of WHS. The genomic defects  anomalies were very similar. represent a de novo event in most cases. De novo rearrangements  are largely assumed to be isolated deletions. We analysed a total of  
P0228 . Partial trisomy 2p13->22: A case report 37 WHS families. Molecular cytogenetics was carried out with 4p- M. Hempel1, A. Garhammer2, B. Fritz3, C. Daumer-Haas1;  speciÜc cosmid or BAC clones (total 70) and with all subtelomeric  probes. We found that 32 (86.5%) out 37 rearrangements were de  1Pr\x89natal-Medizin M\x9enchen, Munich, Germany, 2Kinderklinik vom III.Orden,  novo, 5 (13.5%) segregated from a balanced parental translocation.  Munich, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, Philipps-Universit\x89t Marburg,  Among de novo rearrangements, 21 (66%) were isolated 4p  Marburg, Germany. deletions, 11 (34%) were double chromosome anomalies, in particular  We report a male term newborn with growth retardation (<p3) and  unbalanced de novo translocations (N=7), involving chromosomes  low birth weight (p3) but normal head circumference (p25). A broad  8p (5 cases), 11q and 7p, inverted 4p duplications associated with Cytogenetics 132 terminal deletion (N=3), intrachromosomal recombinant (N=1). All four breakpoints were Ýanked by large segmental duplications.  The parental origin of the deleted chromosome 4 was paternal  Hybridization patterns of breakpoint Ýanking BACs and the nature  in 83% of cases (25/30), maternal in 17% (5/30). Paternally  and distribution of duplicated segments suggest that they have been  derived rearrangements were usually isolated deletions (21/25),  present before the origin of both inversions. We propose a scenario  double anomalies being unfrequent (4/24). Maternally derived  of the origin of both inversions by which segmental duplications may  rearrangements all were unbalanced de novo t(4p;8p) translocations  have been the cause rather than the result of these chromosome  (5/5). rearrangements. Double chromosome anomalies were Ürst mistaken as cryptic  deletions (less than 3.5 Mb), causing apparent genotype-phenotype  
P0233 . ReÜnement Of The X-chromosome Breakpoint In A  inconsistencies. On the contrary, the actual deletion size was 12 Mb  Female Patient Carrying A 4;x Translocation. (N=5), 5 Mb (N= 4) and 20 Mb (N=1). M. Garc\x91a-Hoyos1, R. Sanz2, I. Lorda-S\x86nchez1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, M.  The different categories of the basic genomic defect in WHS identify  Rodr\x91guez de Alba1, R. Riveiro1, A. Queipo1, C. Ramos1, C. Ayuso1;  speciÜc clinical phenotypes. 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Nuestra Se\x95ora de  These observations can be considered a model for haploinsufÜciency  Aranzazu, San Sebastian, Spain. syndromes affecting different chromosomes. We present molecular genetic studies of a female patient affected  with Choroideremia, primary amenorrhea and mild sensorineural  
P0231 . Molecular cytogenetic breakpoint analysis in three  deafness who has been already reported (Lorda-Sanchez et al.;  familial cases of Xp;Yq translocation 2000) showing a balanced translocation between chromosomes 4  A. T. D. Doan, R. Wimmer, C. Bernardi, W. Schempp;  and X. Previous cytogenetic analysis revealed that the breakpoint in  Human genetics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany. the X chromosome was in the Xq21 region. The gene associated with  Xp;Yq translocations are very rare, and molecular characterization  Choroideremia (CHM) lies within the X- chromosome breakpoint. The  suggests their etiology through aberrant exchange between  CHM gene is localised on Xq 21.2 and the 15 exons identiÜed span  homologous sequences on Xp and Yq. Males with Xp;Yq  a genomic sequence of about 150kb that encodes an ubiquitously  translocations are usually nullisomic for a portion of Xpter and their  expressed protein of 653aa called Rab Escort Protein-1 (REP-1).  phenotype depends on the extent of the Xp deletion. They may  Different mutations including large genome rearrangements involving  present chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX), short stature or L\x8dri- the REP-1 gene are responsible for Choroideremia disease but all of  Weill syndrome (SHOX), mental retardation (MRX), ichthyosis (STS)  these cause truncated or absent protein. and Kallmann syndrome (KAL). The phenotype of females carrying  We carried out two different techniques in order to reÜne the X- Xp;Yq translocations with the corresponding deletions of Xp material  chromosome breakpoint. is usually normal, except for short stature. 1- FISH was performed with speciÜc CHM gene probes: 103D  We have performed molecular cytogenetic breakpoint analysis  (hybridises to 5 ªUTR and ex\x96n 1) and 293 (hybridises to exons 14  in three familial cases of Xp;Yq translocation. In two families the  and 15 and 3ªUTR). Y chromosomal breakpoint was situated adjacent to the AZFa  2- Expression levels analyses of different CHM gene exons were  distal boundary within KALY (Yq11.21), while the X chromosomal  carried out at cDNA level with speciÜc pairs of primers previously  breakpoints are within STS (Xp22.31) in one and within KAL  described (van den Hurk et al.; 1997). (Xp22.31) in the other family. In this latter family the sole male carrier  FISH analysis showed that the CHM gene was disrupted in the X- suffers from developmental delay and mental retardation with the  chromosome involved in the translocation and the expression levels  molecular exclusion of fra(X) syndrome. In the third translocation  analyses allow us to know that the breakpoint was localized between  family the breakpoints differ: the breakpoint on the Y chromosome is  13 exon and 14 exon of the CHM gene. Our results explain the CHM  located adjacent to the AZFa proximal boundary (Yq11.21), and the  clinical picture showed by this female patient. breakpoint on the X chromosome is located distal to ARSE very close  to the pseudoautosomal boundary in Xp22.33. X-inactivation studies  
P0234 . Deletion 4p of a der(4)t(4p;22q) in a newborn with a father  using the BrdU-replication technique revealed preferential inactivation  carrying a balanced 4;22 translocation. of the Xp;Yq translocation chromosome in blood lymphocytes of  K. Hansson, H. Dauwerse, A. van Haeringen, R. Belfroid, M. Hoogenboom, C.  female carriers in all three families studied. The manifestations in  KnepÝ\x8d, D. Linders, B. Bakker;  male and female with speciÜc loss of Xpter and gain of Yq material  Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. are discussed. A newborn girl was referred for chromosome analysis because  of multiple congenital abnormalities. She was born at term with a  
P0232 . The evolutionary history of human chromosome 7 birthweight and head circumference below the 2nd centile. She had  S. M\x9eller1, P. Finelli2,3, M. Neusser1, J. Wienberg4;  downslant of the eyes, blepharophimosis, a high prominent nasal  1Institute for Anthropology and Human Genetics, Department of Biology II, M\x9en- bridge, micrognathia, atrial septal defect and abnormal pulmonary  chen, Germany, 2Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Biology  venous return. Moreover, one kidney was missing. The girl died  and Genetics, University of Milan, Italy, 4Institute for Human Genetics, GSF-Na- after six days. The parents had had one spontaneous abortion and  tional Research Center for Environment and Health, M\x9enchen, Germany. the grandparents two miscarriages and a stillbirth at 6 months of  We report on a comparative study on evolutionary changes of  pregnancy. human chromosome 7 homologs using a combined molecular  Chromosome analysis (GTG-banding) of peripheral blood showed a  cytogenetic and in silico approach to reconstruct the succession of  terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4 (46,XX,del(4)(p1 rearrangements in all major primate lineages. The ancestral primate  6.1)).The father was found to carry a balanced translocation involving  homologs to chromosome 7 comprised of two chromosomes (7a  chromosome 4 and chromosome 22 (46,XY,t(4;22)(p16.1;q13.1)),  and 7b/16p). From these the segment 7a was further derived by  which was also present in the grandfather. The chromosomes of the  a paracentric inversion as shared by lemur and higher Old World  mother were normal. To characterize the breakpoint on 4p in the girl  primates. The ancestral higher primate chromosome form was  and her father, FISH with BAC clones was performed. BAC clone  further derived by a Üssion of 7b/16p and a centric fusion of 7a/7b as  R
P11 -29H20 hybridized with both 4p and 22q in the father; mapping  observed in the orangutan. Two further inversions with four distinct  the translocation breakpoint within this clone. In the girl a signal  breakpoints were described in detail: a pericentric inversion in the  with BAC R
P11 -29H20 was observed on the del(4). However, this  African ape ancestor and the subsequent paracentric inversion  signal had a lower intensity compared to the signal on the normal  in the common ancestor of human and chimpanzees. FISH  chromosome 4. No signal was observed on 22q. Molecular studies  analysis employing BAC probes conÜned the 7p22.1 breakpoint  demonstrated that the ádeletedÐ chromosome 4 in the girl originated  of the pericentric inversion to 6,8Mbp on the human reference  from the translocation chromosome 4 in the father. Probably, an  sequence map and the 7q22.1 breakpoint to 97,1Mbp. For the  adjacent-1 segregation during spermatogenesis resulted in a derivative  paracentric inversion the breakpoints were found in 7q11.23 between  (4)t(4;22) and one normal chromosomes 22 in the daughter and an  76,1Mbp and 76,3Mbp and in 7q22.1 at 101,9Mbp, respectively.  additional event caused the partial deletion of the der(4) chromosome.Cytogenetics 133 
P0235 . FISH studies of autosomal supernumerary marker  46,XY,del7(q32q33). To detect the origin of the deletion we  chromosomes (SMCs) recommended the karyotype for parents. A. Mavrou, A. Kolialexi, H. Fryssira, A. Galla, A. Tsezou, P. PapazaÜri, E.  The 14 years old patient had a mild mental retardation. The  Kanavakis, S. Kitsiou;  patientÓs karyotype was 46,XX,del7q(34). The mother and two sister  karyotypes were normal, so we can consider a de novo deletion on  Athens University, Athens, Greece. the patient. FISH studies of autosomal supernumerary marker chromosomes  We consider useful to present comparative the clinical features for  (SMCs) the two patients. The cytogenetic and phenotypic abnormalities of 26 patients (9  females and 17 males) aged 8 days -15 years, with autosomal SMCs  
P0238 . Abnormal X chromosome in two patients with Turner  are presented. With the use of FISH we were able to identify the  syndrome origin of the SMC in 21/26 (80.7%) cases. In 9 patients the SMC  M. Volosciuc, E. Braha, C. Rusu, V. Gorduza, M. Gramescu, L. Butnariu, M.  originated from chromosome 15 (42.8%), in 5 from chromosome 15  Covic;  (23.8%), in 2 from 13 (9.5%) and in 3 from chromosomes 1,8,22. In 2  unrelated cases the SMC contained material from both chromosomes  University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. 11 and 22, resulting from 3:1 miotic non-disjunction,since in each  Turner syndrome (TS) is a chromosomal disorder due to a complete  family one of the parents was a carrier of t(11;22). In 2 other cases  or partial absence of an X chromosome. TS females classically  the SMC was familial, as it was also present in a phenotypically  manifest short stature, webbed neck, cubitus valgus and gonadal  normal parent, in 19 it was de novo and 3 families were unavailable  failure. Most TS features are the result of reduced dosage of X linked  for investigation. The majority of cases showed the SMC in all  genes. metaphases studied (19/26), while in 7 it was found in a mosaic  We report two patients, total different from clinically point of view, with  form, ranging from 3% to 50%, The identiÜcation of the SMC allowed  structural anomalies of X chromosome. correlation with the clinical phenotype and genetic counseling of the  One of them, 40 years old, with secundar amenorrhoea, short stature  families. and poorly developed secondary sexual characteristics showed a  mosaicism 45,X/46,X,delX(q22-qter). She has no cardiac or renal  
P0236 . Unexpected malformations in a female fetus with a  anomalies but has an autoimmune thyroiditis. deletion Xp: demonstration of a cryptic translocation by MLPA The 2 years old patient, with short stature, dysmorphic features,  C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, N. de Leeuw1, J. Creemers1, B. de Vries1, D.  cardiac anomaly (VSD, pulmonar stenosis), moderate hydrocephaly  Oldeweghuis2, E. Sistermans1;  and mild mental retardation, left ureterocel has an omogen karyotype  46,X,delX (p11.2-p11.4). The other 2 probandÓs sisters are clinically  1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Medisch Spectrum Twente, Ensche- normal. de, Netherlands. As the patients are clinically different due two distinct and rare  A woman was referred at 31 weeks gestational age because of fetal  interstitial deletions we consider the cases open for discussions. growth retardation. On fetal ultrasound a heart defect and double  bubble, indicating duodenal atresia, were seen. Amniocentesis was  
P0239 . Late-onset diseases among carriers of balanced  performed and an unbalanced female karyotype with a deletion of the  chromosome rearrangements - results of a multicentre survey short arm of the X-chromosome was found: 46,X,del(X)(p22.2). FISH  A. Tzschach1, M. Hoeltzenbein1, I. Bache2, S. Tinschert3, C.  with a paint Xp showed Ýuorescent signals on the entire aberrant Xp.  Bommer4, H. K\x99rner4, G. Thiel5, J. M\x9esebeck6, T. Grimm7, W. Henn8,  Both parents had normal karyotypes. E. Brude9, M. Kr\x9eger9, B. Leube10, B. Schulze11, G. Schwanitz12, R.  At 39 weeks a girl was born weighing 1496 grams. Duodenal atresia  Raff12, A. Dufke13, G. Wolff14, A. Latos-Bielenska15, S. Ebner16, M.  and heart malformation were conÜrmed and in addition she appeared  Kossakiewicz17, S. Fuchs18, G. Barbi19, A. K\x99hler20, D. Wand21, I.  to have a cleft palate with micrognathia, ectrodactyly of the right  Schreyer (Jena), P. Muschke (Magdeburg), B. Fritz (Marburg), H.J.  hand, corpus callosum agenesis and hypoplastic kidneys. During the  Pander (Stuttgart), P. Kozlowski (D\x9esseldorf), B. Wellek (Mainz),  neonatal period a central diabetes insipidus became apparent. V. Kalscheuer (Berlin), N. Tommerup (Copenhagen), H. H. Ropers  Directly after birth EDTA-blood was obtained from the umbilical cord  (Berlin); for Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe AmpliÜcation (MLPA), which  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2WJC for  identiÜed a duplication of 19p. FISH analysis with a subtelomeric  Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Institute of Clinical  probe for 19p conÜrmed this result. Thus the girl had a cryptic  Genetics, Dresden, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Germany,  unbalanced translocation: 46,X,der(X)t(X;19)(p22.2;p13.3). 5Praxis ÐGenetische Beratung und DiagnostikÑ, Berlin, Germany, 6Centre of  Duplications of 19p are extremely rare. This is most probably due  Human Genetics, Bremen, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, W\x9erzburg,  to the gene richness of chromosome 19 and due to the difÜculty  Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Homburg/Saar, Germany, 9Institute  to demonstrate small duplications of this negatively staining  of Human Genetics, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics,  chromosome. The two cases described before had some features  D\x9esseldorf, Germany, 11Praxis f\x9er Humangenetik, Hanover, Germany,  in common with our patient: growth retardation, micrognathia, heart  12Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 13Institute of Human Genetics,  defect and hypoplastic kidneys. The severe phenotype in our patient  T\x9ebingen, Germany, 14Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany,  is remarkable since a skewed X-inactivation in favour of the normal  15Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 16Praxis f\x9er medizinische  X-chromosome would be expected. We are currently performing X- Genetik, Regensburg, Germany, 17Praxis ÐGyn\x89kologen-Medizinische GenetikÑ,  inactivation studies in our patient. Nuremberg, Germany, 18Institute of Human Genetics, Hamburg, Germany,  19Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 20Institute of Human Genetics,  
P0237 . Two unrelated children with partial deletion of  Gie¦en, Germany, 21Institute of Human Genetics, Halle/Saale, Germany. chromosome 7q Large-scale breakpoint analyses in patients with disease-associated  E. Braha, M. Volosciuc, C. Rusu, M. Gramescu, M. Panzari, M. Covic;  balanced chromosome rearrangements (BCRs) have enabled us  University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. to identify numerous gene defects underlying monogenic diseases.  Among aproximative 30 examples of interstitial deletion involving 7q  Late-onset and complex disorders are an even more promising  no recognisable clinical syndrome was decribed (Gorlin, 2001). target for this approach, given the multitude of genetic risk factors  We report two unrelated children, 1 month respectively 14 years old;  thought to predispose for such disorders. To ascertain patients with  the parents are healthy and nonconsanguineous. The patients were  BCRs and complex diseases, we have performed a multicentre  born following an uncomplicated pregnancy. survey among adult carriers of BCRs using questionnaires inquiring  Clinically, the patients have in common growth retardation,  about all aspects concerning health and disease. 141 carriers (aged  microcephaly, broad nasal bridge with bulbous tip, down slanting  22-77 years, mean age 42 years) from 6 institutes returned the  palpebral Üssures, dysplastic ears, and micrognathia. questionnaires. A causative role of the BCR was assumed if the  The one-month-old patient has congenital heart defect (Fallot  rearrangement co-segregated with the disease in families, or if one  tetralogy). The karyotype showed an omogen 7q partial deletion  breakpoint was located in a chromosomal region known to harbour Cytogenetics 134 a gene for this disorder. Several patients met these criteria, as listed  downslanting palpebral Üssures are also found in 22q11.2  below: microduplication syndrome. The altered shape of the eyebrows in  our patient is similar to the observation in 22q11.2 microduplication  Disease Karyotype Position of mapped locus,  or co-segregation syndrome. Dyslexia 46,XY,t(5;16)(p15;q11) Co-segregation in family 
P0242 . Structural chromatin features in cytogenetic preparations  Hyper-IgE- 46,XY,t(4;22)(q21.1;q12.2) 4q21 and co-segregation in  Syndrome family imply genomic separation and epigenetic activities Goitre 46,XX,t(7;14)(q32;q32) 7q31 and co-segregation in  J. P. Chaudhuri1,2, M. Battaglia2, S. Karamanov2, C. Berger2, C. Stephenson2,  family J. Walther1;  Psoriasis 46,XY,t(2;4)(p25;q31.1) 4q31.1 1Tumorcytogenetik Unit, Kinderklinik, LMU, Munich, Germany, 2IMPATH Inc,  Schizophrenia 46,XX,inv(1)(p32q42) 1q42  Department Cytogenetics, Phoenix, AZ, United States. (DIS
C1  and DIS
C2 ) Transcriptionally active chromatin is known to adopt a more  Epilepsy 46,XX,t(1;5)(p31;q22) 1p31 open structure, for example, through histone acetylation, while  Cataract 46,XY,inv(9)(q22.33q34.1) 9q22 deacetylation promotes repression of gene expression by compaction  Stomatocytosis 46,XX,inv(9)(q22.1q34.1) 9q34.1  of chromatin [1,2]. Exploration of various gene locii and other  (STOMATIN gene) markers of human chromosomes following FISH staining revealed a  Anaemia 46,XX,t(2;9)(p16;q13) 2p16 and 9q13 biphasic organisation of nuclear chromatin which may be associated  Endometriosis 46,XX,t(6;17)(q27;q25) 6q27 and 17q25 with epigenetic activities. Different sequence and chromosome  In view of the estimated 80,000 BCR carriers in Germany and  speciÜc DNA probes, applied singly or combined, indicated that in  the notorious disadvantages of association studies and related  some cells one of the two haploid sets adopts the open chromatin  strategies, these initial results underline the potential of this approach  structure and appears to take the lead to operate, while the other  for identifying genes for complex disorders. remains quiescent. We have observed this feature during cytogenetic  investigations of cells from amniotic Ýuids, postnatal, juvenile and  
P0240 . A Down patient with chromosome 21 duplication adult specimens. This feature of apparent functional hemizygosity,  M. Gramescu, C. Rusu, E. Braha, V. Gorduza, M. Volosciuc, M. Covic;  besides lending support to the phenomenon of separation of the  parental genomes in nuclei all through the cell cycle [3-5], may  University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. indeed have implications to epigenetic activities. We are presenting  Down syndrome is the most common chromosomal disorder, and is  these observations for a general scrutiny because they may be  due to trisomy for all or a large part of chromosome 21. involved in development, and possibly also in cellular differentiation  We report a patient, 5 months old, with the characteristic phenotype  and in neoplastic transformation through loss of heterozygosity [6]. of Down syndrome, cardiac anomaly (ASD, VSD), and a defect of  References the lacrimal system. She is the third child of an nonconsanguineous  1 Berger SL: Curr Opin Genet Dev 12:142-148, 2002. and clinically normal couple. The couple has another girl nine years  2 Turner BM: Cell 111:285-291, 2002. old, clinically normal, a boy who died six hours after birth and a  3 Nagele RG, Freeman T, McMorrow L et al.: J Cell Sci 112: 525-35,  spontaneous misscariage at 3 months gestation. The patient was  1999. born after an uncomplicated pregnancy. The delivery was at 8 months  4 Parada L, Misteli T: Trends Cell Biol 12: 425-32, 2002. gestation, APGAR 8, birth weight 2400g, birth length 45 cm. The  5 Chaudhuri JP and Walther J-U: Int J Oncology 23:1257-62, 2003. karyotype showed an non-mosaic mirror image duplication 21q:  6 Hoban PR, Heighway J, White GRM et al.: Human Genet 95:651- 46,XX,dup21q. We recommended karyotyping of both parents and  656, 1995. the older sister, which are now underway. Down syndrome is only seldom caused by partial trisomy 21 resulting  
P0243 . Case report: boy with severe congenital heart defect and  from a duplication of 21q, making our case an unusual one. tetrasomy 9p tissue-speciÜc mosaicism M. Linn\x8d1, O. Bartsch1, G. P\x99rksen2, E. Schr\x99ck1, W. Werner1;  
P0241 . Tandem duplication of proximal chromosome 22q:  clinical and molecular cytogenetic characterization 1Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, Technische Universit\x89t Dresden, Dresden, Ger- B. Pabst1, K. Miller1, A. Dermitzel2, R. Glaubitz2, J. Schmidtke1, M. Arslan-Kirch- many, 2Klinik f\x9er Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universit\x89t Dresden,  ner1;  Dresden, Germany. Prenatal ultrasound showed a univentricular heart with transposition  1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Wagner, Stibbe, Kast, Bispink  of the great vessels. Amniocentesis was performed and a normal  and Partner, Hannover, Germany. standard karyotype was obtained. The mother reported no exposure  We report on a 5-months-old girl with a de novo tandem duplication of  to teratogens and normal fetal movements during the pregnancy. At  the proximal part of chromosome 22. After intracytoplasmatic sperm  birth, the mother and father were 22 and 26 years old, respectively.  injection dizygotic twins were born in the 36th week of gestation by  After birth, chromosome analysis was repeated because the infant  caesarean section. The parents are healthy and consanguineous  showed a number of congenital anomalies (bulbous beaked nose,  (Ürst cousins). At the age of 2 months the girl was admitted because  down slanting corners of the mouth, mild micrognathia, and bilateral  of severe feeding problems. Medical examination revealed no  longitudinal plantar creases) in addition to his heart defect. The  malformation of inner organs and a heart murmur turned out to  analysis of 109 metaphases from blood lymphocytes showed in 15 %  be accidental. Length and weight are within normal range and  of the cells an E-group sized metacentric extrachromosome, which by  developmental delay is not obvious until now. Dysmorphic features  FISH using CEPH YAC 853b3 was shown to be an isochromosome  are Ýat occiput, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral Üssures, thick  9p, in 12.8 % of the cells. A coincidental common 22q11 deletion was  eyebrows with medial Ýare, short nose with depressed nasal root,  excluded. The karyotype was 47,XY,+i(9p)[14].ish i(9p)(D9
S1681 ++)  thin upper lip, preauricular pits, large, dysmorphic ears with prominent  22q11(HIRA/D22
S553 /D22
S609 x2,HCFx2) / 46,XY[95]. In  antehelix and indentation of earlobes. Frontal hair line is low. Routine  an additional chromosome analysis of skin Übroblasts, the  cytogenetic analysis revealed a female karyotype with a structural  isochromosome was not found in 23 metaphases. This is the lowest  aberrant dicentric chromosome 22. FISH analysis with a chromosome  level (15% in lymphocytes, 0% in skin) of tetrasomy 9p that has been  22 speciÜc painting probe identiÜed the additional material as  reported. Congenital cardiac anomalies have been reported in only  chromosome 22 speciÜc. The duplicated segment includes the  1 of 12 (8.3%) patients with trip(9p) mosaicism (Human cytogenetics  DiGeorge critical region as demonstrated by FISH. The karyotype is  database, Schinzel 1994), and the type of heart defect observed  described as dup(22)(pter->q12::q10->qter). Chromosome analysis of  in our patient has not been reported previously with tetrasomy 9p.  lymphocytes from the parents revealed normal karyotypes. The report demonstrates the limitations in the prenatal diagnosis of  Although the girl carries a relatively large duplicated segment the  tissue-speciÜc chromosomal mosaicism. Moreover, it illustrates the  clinical Ündings are relatively mild. Preauricular pits as observed  clinical variability of the tetrasomy 9p syndrome, which may include  in the girl are typical for cat eye syndrome. Hypertelorism and  univentricular heart.Cytogenetics 135 
P0244 . Novel exonic point mutations in cystathionine Ȳ-synthase  calculations that take into account the frequency of cFS expression  gene of Down syndrome and the size of the respective chromosomal band we identiÜed non- K. Thilakavathy, R. Rosli;  random 30 cFSs (out of app. 240 cFS) in each mouse strain. Of  those, 22 cFSs were found to be expressed in both Balb/c and 
C57 / Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia. B
L6  mice, whereas each mouse strain also expressed eight strain- Recently, folate metabolism has been linked with human aneuploidy  speciÜc cFSs. such as Down syndrome. Cystathionine Ȳ-synthase (CBS) is involved  Furthermore, levels of cFS expression were compared between  in folate metabolism and the gene is located on chromosome 21. The  mouse and human for all evolutionary conserved segments  aim of this study was to detect the presence of CBS gene mutation(s)  consisting of two or more chromosomal bands. We found a  in Down syndrome children and their mothers using saliva samples.  high correlation between the frequencies of cFS expression in  Exon-speciÜc primers were designed from the intron sequences  homologous bands. This Ünding suggests that the level of cFS  for ampliÜcation of the 17 CBS exons. The mutation was detected  expression is a characteristic feature of chromosomal segments that  using the ABI Prism 377 sequencer. Mutations were detected only in  was conserved during evolution. exon 10 and 17. A transition of C to T was found at position 20628  In addition, utilizing molecular cytogenetic techniques we have  of exon 10 while exon 17 has two mutations at position T27796C  identiÜed Üve cFSs that span the exact homologous sequences in  and 
C27817 T. The Down syndrome children were found to have the  the mouse and human genome (Fra2D-FRA2G, Fra4
C2 -FRA9E,  same genotype as their mothers. The percentage of the children and  Fra6A3.1-FRA7G, Fra6B1-FRA7H and Fra12
C1 -FRA7K). The fact  mothers having normal, heterozygous, and homozygous transition(s)  that the genomes of men and mouse differ in particular in their  genotypes were 20%, 40%, 40%, respectively, for exon 10 and 20%,  repetitive DNA sequences suggests that cFS expression may not be  46.7% and 33.3%, respectively, for exon 17. The number of mothers  explained by the occurrence of repetitive sequences. and children having the transitions in the CBS gene was twice the  number of mothers and children with normal genotype, suggesting  
P0247 . Mechanisms leading to the female predominance of  that the mothers who have these substitutions are at higher risk of  somatic and germ mosaicism carriers having a child with Down syndrome. N. V. Kovaleva1, P. P. D. Cotter2;  
P0245 . Small reciprocal insertion detected by spectral  1St. Petersburg Centre for Medical Genetics, St. Petersburg, Russian  karyotyping (SKY) Federation, 2Division of Medical Genetics, ChildrenÓs Hospital, Oakland, CA,  W. Werner1, K. Oexle1, U. G\x9entzschel2, S. Tinschert1, A. Herr1, A. Matth\x89i1, O.  United States. Bartsch1, K. Hinkel1, E. Schr\x99ck1;  Objectives: Comparative analysis of the cytogenetic proÜle  and sex ratio in prenatally and postnatally detected cases of  1Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er  structural chromosome aberrations of postzygotic origin. Analysis  Molekulare Biotechnologie, Jena, Germany. of pregnancy outcome in prenatally detected mosaics for normal  Insertions are rare, reciprocal insertions most unusual. Reciprocity  line/rearrangement (N/rea) cases. Methods: Review of structural  of insertions has been reported only in three patients. We observed  autosomal rearrangements of probable post-fertilisation origin  the exchange of small fragments between chromo-somes 4 and 16.  of known sex identiÜed from the literature. Transmitting parents  A now 6 year-old boy presented with insufÜcient opposition of the  and patients with infertility/miscarriages were excluded. Results:  hypoplastic thumbs, thenar hypoplasia, brachydactyly, single palmar  (1) A difference was noted in the composition of mosaic N/rea  creases, cryptorchidism, epicanthal folds, an enlarge-ment of the  cases between prenatal (N=85) and postnatal ill-deÜned [N=82,  cavum septum pellucidum, a spinal dermal sinus (i.e., spina biÜda  excluding N/r(20)] cases, with the highest proportion of N/del and  occulta), muscular hypotonia, and borderline mental retardation.  N/nonRob translocations in the prenatal group, and the highest  Hearing test and ophthalmologic examination were normal. The  proportion of N/dup and N/ring in the postnatal group, presumably  karyotype was unbalanced, 46,XY,der(16)ins(4;16)(q27q28.2;q due to different maternal age composition. (2) There was a female  12.1 or q13) pat. In the father a reciprocal insertion, 46,XY,rep  predominance in the cases of N/Rob translocation, Rob translocation  ins(4;16) (q27q28.2;q12.1 or q13), was found. The father also had  Üssion, mosaicism for more that one Rob translocation, mosaic  brachydactyly but his thenars and thumbs were normal. He had  and nonmosaic homologous balanced and unbalanced acrocentric  bilateral hearing loss of about 50% which, however, was attributed to  rearrangements, in both prenatal (21males/31females) and postnatal  frequent otitis media during childhood. (76M/101F) cases. (3) There was a male predominance in prenatally  Discussion: The chromosomal origin of the insertion in chromosome  detected N/rea (46M/39F) cases and female predominance in  16 of the propositus and its balanced reciprocity in the father were  postnatally detected ill-deÜned N/rea (37M/45F) cases. (4) In the  identiÜed by spectral karyotyping (SKY). Cryptic and half-cryptic  prenatal N/rea group, males were more frequently normal (28M/ interchromosomal insertions in the size range of 1 - 5 Mb can be  15F), while abnormalities were more common in females (8M/ detected by routine cytogenetics if hybrid-ization techniques such  14F), probably due to sex differences in cell proliferation activity.  as SKY are implemented. In the individuals presented here, FISH  Conclusions: We hypothesise several mechanisms operating at  analysis with BAC clones is being applied now to characterize  early stages of human development causing female predominance  the deletion/insertion borders. If the rearrangement comprises the  in somatic/gonadal mosaicism carriers: trisomy rescue, instability of  chromosomal region 16q12.1, Townes-Brocks syndrome is to be  pericentromeric regions in female embryos (Kovaleva and Shaffer,  diagnosed in the son resulting from haploinsufÜciency of SAL
L1   2003; present data), and stronger selection against abnormal cell  which is located in this region. lines in male embryos. 
P0246 . IdentiÜcation of Üve new common Fragile Sites that are  
P0248 . Microdeletion Of The Y Chromosome In Klinefelter  conserved between human and mouse Syndrome: Case Report A. Helmrich1, K. Stout1, K. Hermann2, T. Heiden1, E. Schr\x99ck3;  H. Samli1, M. Solak1, M. M. Samli2;  1Department of Medical Genetics, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 2metaGen Phar- 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Biology,  maceuticals GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical Genetics, Technical  Afyon, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of  University, Dresden, Germany. Urology, Afyon, Turkey. Common Fragile Sites (cFS) have been shown to be relatively  We report a patient with KlinefelterÓs Syndrome and with deletion of  unstable genomic sites that may serve as hot spots for tumor related  Yq interval. Our patient was 24 years old with primery infertility. His  DNA-breakage. 3 semen analysis showed azoospermia. Plasme LH and FSH levels  Here, we compared cFS-expression in Balb/c and 
C57 /B
L6  mice  were abnormally high and testosterone levels were (below lower limit)  (Üve each) to the expression of human cFSs (ten probands). Balb/c  reduced. Each of his testis has a volume of 5 cc. Peripheral blood  mice showed signiÜcantly more cFSs than 
C57 /B
L6  animals after  karyotype analysis showed Klinefelter Syndrome (47,XXY) pattern.  treatment with different concentrations of aphidicolin (APC), but  Polimerase chain reaction ampliÜcation of DNA was performed  a similar spontaneous level of cFS expression. Using statistical  using the fallowing primers; AZFa (sY81, sY82, sY84), AZFb (sY127, Cytogenetics 136 sY142, sY164, RBM1), AZFc (sY145, sY152, sY153, CDY, BPY,  
P0251 . New syndrome - chromosome 19q distal deletion  DAZ1, DAZ2, DAZ3). Analysis revealed a single deletion of AZFa  syndrome region (sY84). Deletion of the AZFa region may be an additional  R. Mikelsaar1, E. Roomets1, E. Pihlau2;  factor for absolute azoospermia in men with KlinefelterÓs Syndrome. 1Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of General and  To the best of our knowledge this is the Ürst report of a patient with  Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Psychiatry Clinic of  Klinefelter Syndrome and with microdeletion in the AZFa region. Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. There are very few publications about the distal deletion of 19q in  
P0249 . A new campomelic dysplasia translocation breakpoint  patients with MCA/MR. At present, six cases of de novo proximal  maps 400 kb from SOX9 deletion of 19q with both MCA/MR and Diamond-Blackfan anaemia  M. Erdel1, A. H. Lane2, F. Fresser1, P. Probst1, G. Utermann1, G. Scherer3;  or MCA/MR have been reported. The Ürst case with a mosaic deletion  1Institut f\x9er Med. Biologie und Humangenetik der Med. Universit\x89t, Innsbruck,  of the distal third of 19q was published by us (Mikelsaar Ruth et al  Austria, 2Pediatric Endocrinology, State University of New York, Stony Brook,  2001, JMedGenet). NY, United States, 3Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Anthropologie der Universit\x89t,  Now, we have diagnosed the second case of mosaic distal  Freiburg, Germany. del(19)(q13.3:) from 301 mentally retarded patients studied, giving  Campomelic dysplasia (CD) and autosomal XY sex reversal  the incidence about 1 per 150. The proband is a 12-year-old boy  are caused by mutations within the SOX9 gene on 17q or by  with mild mental retardation and hypotonia, agressiveness, speech  translocations outside the SOX9 coding region. All CD translocation  impairment, slightly upslanted palpebral Üssures, high palate, maxillar  breakpoints published so far map 50-300 kb upstream of SOX9  hypoplasia, anteverted nostrils, skeletal deformities. Cytogenetic  except for one with a distance of 890-950 kb, deÜning an extended  studies on cultured lymphocytes using GTG banding and FISH  control region. Here, we present clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular  with TelVysion 19q DNA probes (Vysis Inc) showed the deletion of  cytogenetic data for a three years old CD patient with karyotype  19q in 13% of metaphases. His karyotype is interpreted as mos  46,XY,t(1;17)(q42.1;q24.3). His clinical and radiological features  46,XY,del(19)(q13.33:)/46,XY. include right cryptorchidism, severe perinealscrotal hypospadias,  The comparison of phenotypes of all these published cases of distal  tracheobronchial dysplasia, Ýat nasal bridge, high arched palate,  and proximal deletions 19q showed some common features, such  hypoplastic scapulae, thoracic scoliosis, and mild tibial bowing.  as psychomotor/mental retardation and skeletal anomalies. Our  Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has shown that the 17q  two patients have also clinical features that might be more speciÜc  breakpoint in this case maps 400 kb proximal to SOX9. Plasmid,  to the distal deleted 19q13.33-qter region, such as malocclusion of  cosmid, and BAC clones from the SOX9 region were selected  teeth, high palate, minor anomalies of nose and absence of major  to establish a 550 kb-spanning colour bar code on DNA Über  congenital anomalies of the internal organs. preparations for high resolution FISH mapping experiments.  In conclusion, the incidence of the del(19)(q13.3:) among mentally  We are using this FISH assay for (1) the Üne mapping of the  retarded patients is higher than observed, showing that many cases  17q24.3 breakpoint of this patient on DNA Über preparations from  might remain undiagnosed. Phenotypic features of patients indicate  lymphoblastoid cells and for (2) submicroscopic aberration screening  to the existence of a new syndrome - chromosome 19q distal deletion  in other CD patients without mutations in the SOX9 coding region. syndrome. 
P0250 . Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization characterization of  
P0252 . Partial trisomy (12)(q24.2qter) due to a paternal  apparently balanced translocation reveals cryptic complex  t(4;12)(q35;q24.2) chromosomal rearrangements with unexpected level of  B. R\x99thlisberger1, M. Fischer1, R. Huber2, A. Capone2, M. Hergersberg1, A.  complexity. Huber1;  P. C. Patsalis, P. Evangelidou, S. Charalambous, C. Sismani;  1Kantonsspital Aarau, Zentrum f\x9er Labormedizin, Aarau, Switzerland, 2Kantons- Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. spital Aarau, Kinderklinik, Aarau, Switzerland. The great majority of apparently balanced translocations are  We report a case of a 29 months old boy with growth retardation,  associated with multiple miscarriages and normal phenotype. Several  microcephaly, minor facial anomalies, mental retardation, cerebral  mechanisms have been proposed to explain how a small percentage  atrophy, cerebral ventricular dilatation, hypotonia and pes  of apparently balanced translocations are associated with abnormal  equinovarus. Conventional cytogenetics showed the presence of  phenotypes. One of the proposed mechanisms, that have not been  additional material on the long arm of chromosome 4. Since at  well investigated, is that apparently balanced translocations may  the time of diagnosis blood of the parents could not be obtained,  host ÐcrypticÑ complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs). To  24-colour-FISH (Ýuorescence in situ hybridization) was performed  test this hypothesis, this study investigated 20 non-pre-selected  and it could be demonstrated, that the additional chromosomal  cases with apparently balanced translocations in order to determine  material originates from chromosome 12. After revealing this result  the presence of cryptic CCRs. Multiprobe subtelomeric and whole  to the parents their blood could be collected, and, by conventional  chromosome paint FISH analyses revealed and further characterised  cytogenetics a balanced chromosome translocation between the  three cryptic CCRs. Two out of three CCRs showed an unexpected  long arm of chromosome 4 and the long arm of chromosome 12 was  level of complexity. The results of this study provided evidence  found in the father. Therefore the karyotype in the patient can be  that the link between an apparently balanced rearrangement and  described as following: 46,XY,der(4)t(4;12)(q35;q24.2)pat. the appearance of abnormal phenotype, may be partly explained  We compare the phenotype of our patient with previous reports of  by the presence of cryptic CCRs. The results also suggested that  patients with partial duplication of the long arm of chromosome 12  what is reported as apparently balanced translocation by classical  and with subtelomeric deletions of the long arm of chromosome 4.  cytogenetics, may host cryptic CCRs, which could be more common  Our investigation provides further information for a better clinical  than initially thought. The use of both of the above-mentioned FISH  delineation of these two chromosomal aberrations. methodologies was absolutely necessary to detect the CCRs,  because they involve not only terminal but also interstitial, as well  
P0253 . Pure proximal monosomy 6q resulting in a distinct  as very small or large chromosomal segments. These Ündings  phenotype emphasize the need to investigate all prenatal and postnatal cases  U. Siebers-Renelt, R. J. Exeler, J. Horst, I. Kennerknecht;  classiÜed as apparently balanced translocations by G-banding,  Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany. particularly if family member(s) have abnormal phenotype(s).  We report on the clinical and cytogenetic Ündings in a girl seen  The clinical signiÜcance of prenatal and postnatal identiÜcation of  at the age of 13 months and 3 5/12 years. She is the only child  CCRs is extremely important, as they are associated with multiple  of non-consanguineous parents. Pregnancy was complicated by  miscarriages, mental retardation and malformations. EPH gestosis and caesarean section was performed in the 38th  week because of IUGR and CTG-abnormalities. Psychomotoric  development was severly retarded. With 13 months the girl was Cytogenetics 137 able to turn. At 3 5/12 years she can sit on her own but is still  
P0255 . Molecular cytogenetic mapping of the breakpoints of the  unable to walk or to stand without help. During the Ürst 2 years of  constitutional pericentric inversion inv(10)(p11.2q21.2) life recurrent episodes of respiratory distress occurred. Moreover,  S. Metzke-Heidemann1, S. Gesk1, J. I. Martin-Subero1, L. Harder1, A. Caliebe1,  feeding problems required a permanent enteral nutrition via PEG. By  M. Kautza1, C. Duba2, M. Erdel3, J. Jenderny4, L. French5, M. E. Earthrowl5, W.  now, the girl is still unable to drink. Dysmorphic features include Ýat  Grote1, P. Deloukas5, R. Siebert1;  midface, hyperteleorism, downslanting palpebral Üssures, depressed  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,  nasal bridge and a Pierre-Robin-sequence with micro-/ retrognathia  Germany, 2WomenÓs Hospital Linz, Linz, Austria, 3Institute of Medical Biology  requiering surgery. Additionally, she has got an ASD II. Karyotyping  and Human Genetics, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Laboratory  revealed a shortening of the long arm of one chromosome 6 (GTG- Prof. Dr. Arndt & Partner, Hamburg, Germany, 5The Wellcome Trust Sanger  banding). Whole chromosome painting showed that the derivative  Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. chromosome 6 consisted of chromosome 6 material only. By  The pericentric inversion of chromosome 10, inv(10)(p11.2q21.2), is  microdissection with subsequent reverse in situ hybridisation, we  one of the most common chromosomal heteromorphisms in humans.  could identify an interstitial deletion of band q15-q16.1 (46, XX,  The majority of the cases is familial and lacks recombinations in  del(6).rev ish del (6)(q15;q16.1) de novo). Most cases of partial  offspring. Most carriers show neither malformations or dysmorphic  monosomy 6q described before are either located more distally or  signs nor any other recurrent clinical phenotype. combined with a partial trisomy of other chromosomes, all resulting in  We mapped the breakpoints of this chromosomal polymorphism by  a different phenotype. means of Ýuorescence-in-situ-hybridization (FISH). Based on the  map positions of spanning and Ýanking BAC clones the breakpoints  
P0254 . FISH analysis of Y chromosome abnormalities:  in 10p11.2 and 10q21.2 were narrowed down to approximately 50kb.  possibilities and limitations FISH suggested the breakpoints of the inv(10)(p11.2q21.2) to be  E. Kocarek1, D. Novotna2, Z. Musova2, M. Malikova2, S. Vejvalkova2, M.  conserved on the molecular cytogenetic level in Üve unrelated North  Simandlova2, E. Seemanova2, Z. Vlckova2, J. Hrabakova1, M. Panek1, K.  German and one Russian carrier. Novotna1, F. Losan3, V. Krutilkova2, M. Havlovicova2, P. Goetz1;  In addition to the common inv(10)(p11.2q21.2), we investigated  1Charles University 2nd Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Motol  two carriers of other pericentric inversions of chromosome 10:  University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Private Genetic Counselling  A 3-year old boy with retardation of motoric and mental skills,  Centre, Plzen, Czech Republic. speech delay and dysmorphic features who carried a de novo  Our report presents cytogenetic (GTG banding) and FISH Ündings  inv(10)(p15q22.1) and a 51-year old patient with myeloÜbrosis and  from 11 patients with various numerical or structural abnormalities  inv(10)(p13q22.1). In agreement with the cytogenetic assignment,  of the chromosome Y. According to the concrete result of the  FISH proved the breakpoints in both cases to differ from those of the  cytogenetic examination DYZ1, DYZ3, SRY and Y-speciÜc whole  inv(10)(p11.2q21.2) polymorphism. chromosome painting probes were used for the FISH analysis.  The application of FISH is recommended for prenatal diagnosis of  Samples from 3 patients were subsequently examined by means  de novo inversions of chromosome 10 and in case parents are not  of the PCR method focused on Y-speciÜc sequences (SRY, DYZ1,  disposable for cytogenetic investigation to discriminate between the  DYZ3, KALY, PABX/PABY). stable frequent variant with breakpoints in 10p11.2 and 10q21.2 and  Table 1: Clinical Ündings in patients with chromosome Y abnormali- other less frequent variants that could be associated with clinical  ties symptoms. Moreover, future molecular studies have to clarify the  molecular mechanisms associated with the formation of constitutional  Phenotype Number/Percentage of patients inversions 10. Gonadal dysgenesis 6 / 55% Supported by the National Genome Research Network (NGFN I) Turner syndrome features 4 / 36% Normal male 1 / 9% 
P0256 . Subtelomeric FISH Screening in Mental Retardation: A  The aim of our study is to describe chromosomal aberrations  Survey Report involving the chromosome Y and compare results of the FISH  V. Aiello1, N. AstolÜ1, A. Sensi1, M. Neri1, R. Faggioli2, L. Mazzoni1, B. Buldrini1,  analysis with the clinical, cytogenetic and molecular Ündings. R. Gruppioni1, A. Bonfatti1, O. Calabrese1, F. Stanzial3, E. Frate4, L. Rocchetti5,  E. Malaspina6, S. Bigoni1, E. Calzolari1;  Table 2: Overview of cytogenetic and FISH results Chromosomal abnormality Number of cases 1Sezione Genetica Medica Universit\x87 di Ferrara Arcispedale SantÓAnna,  Ferrara, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica Universit\x87 di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy,  derivative Y (mostly dicentric) 7 3Ambulatorio Interaziendale Consulenza Genetica Azienda Sanitaria Bolzano,  normal Y (in gonadal dysgenesis) 2 Bolzano, Italy, 4Ambulatorio Genetica Medica ULSS Treviso, Treviso, Italy,  translocation t(X;Y)(p22;p11) 1 5Ambulatorio Genetica Clinica AUSL Rimini-, Rimini, Italy, 6Dipartimento di  Dicentric chromosome Y was the most frequent Ünding. Besides this  Pediatria Universit\x87 di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. we describe one case of monocentric derivative Y (involving inverted  FISH screening for subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements  duplication of Yp) and one case of cryptic XY translocation. In all but  in patients with moderate or severe developmental delay has  two cases we determined the dysmorphic Y in mosaic (mostly with  demonstrated a relatively high yield, detecting chromosomal  45,X cells). abnormalities in 6.8% of 840 patients, with variability of frequency in  FISH is effective method for determination of derivative  the different surveys. chromosomes Y and submicroscopic rearrangements involving the  We report on the results of the diagnostic activity of our laboratory  SRY region. Phenotypes of all these patients clearly correspond with  concerning N. 84 patients, all refrred for mental retardation or global  FISH Ündings. developmental delay of mild to severe grade, and judged as mildly  In one patient (karyotype 46,XX) with gonadal dysgenesis (not  to severely dysmorphic by a Clinical Geneticist. All the male patients  involved in the table 2) molecular analysis revealed presence  phenotipically compatible with fragile X syndrome were screened  of the Y-centromeric sequence (DYZ3) while FISH results were  for FRAXA mutation/ premutation and all had a standard normal  negative. This controversial Ünding indicates certain limitations of the  karyotype performed. All the positive cases for which a normal parent  cytogenetic and FISH analysis. Possible explanations are discussed  showed the same rearrangement were considered polymorphisms  on the poster. and hence negative at the screening (n6 2q- and n1 10q). Our study was supported by grants of the Internal Grant Agency  Three de novo cryptic deletions (1p, 9p, 9q), one apparently balanced  (Ministry of Health, Czech Republic) IGA NE 5685-3 and IGA NE  cryptic reciprocal translocation rcp(4;18) (parents not yet available)  6912-4 and research project of the Charles University No.111300003. and one deletion (20p) at present not yet tested in the family, were  identiÜed (5,95%). Of the cryptic rearrangements identiÜed, only the  9q deletion was detectable at high resolution banding. The phenotypes of the 5 cases can contribute to the knowledge of  the telomeric rearrangements associated syndromes.Cytogenetics 138 
P0257 . Partial trisomy 19q combined with a translocation of the  
P0259 . A patient with an interstitial deletion  additional material to chromosome 6q detected by quantitative  46,XY,del(18)(q22.2q23) with normal intelligence and height real-time PCR and FISH in a girl with mild facial dysmorphisms,  C. Schiffer1,2, C. Jacobi3, I. Harting4, A. Jauch1, H. Hager1, J. Zschocke1, T.  hypotonia and developmental delay Voigtl\x89nder1;  S. M. Sauter1, D. B\x99hm1, I. Bartels1, J. Neesen1, B. Wilken2, B. Zoll1;  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Germany, 2Central  1Georg-August-Universit\x89t, Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, G\x99ttingen, Germany,  Institute of Mental Health, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and  2Klinikum Kassel, Neurop\x89diatrie, Kassel, Germany. Psychotherapy, Mannheim, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, University of  We report on a 2 7/12-year-old girl who was referred to us because of  Heidelberg, Germany, 4Department of Neuroradiology, University of Heidelberg,  psychomotor developmental delay. H is the second child of healthy,  Germany. non-consanguineous parents. Pregnancy and birth were uneventful.  The 18q- syndrome is a deletion syndrome with an estimated  Milestones of motor development were achieved delayed: grasping  frequency of 1/40.000 live births. It is characterized by mental  at 6 months, sitting without support at 16 months, crawling at 16  retardation, dysmorphic features and growth failure. Most deletions  months and free walking at 2 4/12 years of age. Speech development  are terminal, and only few interstitial deletions have been published.  seemed also to be retarded. H spoke about Üve words and followed  We report on a male patient with an interstitial 18 q-deletion without  simple instructions. mental or growth retardation. Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed a numerically and  The 19-year old male was admitted for the evaluation of complex- structurally normal female karyotype of 46,XX. By quantitative real- partial epileptic seizures. He had congenital bilateral ear canal  time PCR analysis of all 46 subtelomeric regions a partial trisomy  atresia. Development had been normal apart from mild speech delay.  of the subtelomeric region of 19q could be detected. This result  He attended a school for the deaf. Family history was unremarkable. was conÜrmed by FISH-analysis with a subtelomeric probe for  Clinical examination showed a marfanoid stature, also seen in  19q. The additional material of chromosome 19q was localised on  his father. Head circumference was normal. There were minor  chromosome 6q. However, a deletion of the subtelomeric region  facial abnormalites including asymmetric face, high palate,  of 6q could not be detected with the subtelomeric probe for 6q.  micrognathia and poorly modelled external ears. Except for a  Conventional cytogenetic analysis as well as FISH with subtelomeric  motoric polyneuropathia, internal and neurological examination  probes for 19q and 6q was also carried out in the parents. However,  was normal. Ophthalmological examination, echocardiography and  the parents showed normal results. abdominal sonography revealed normal results. Neuropsychological  The detected chromosomal aberration in H probably occurred de  tests showed visuomotor skills below average but were otherwise  novo. It could be assumed that there is also a very small deletion on  unremarkable. His IQ was in the normal range. MRI scan  6q which cannot be detected by the subtelomeric 6q probe used by  showed white matter abnormalities and a unilateral temporal  FISH nor by the subtelomeric primer sets used by real-time PCR. HÓs  lesion. High-resolution chromosome analysis and FISH analysis  clinical features are very likely to be caused by the partial trisomy 19q  yielded a pathological male karyotype with an interstitial deletion  and maybe also by an additional partial monosomy 6q. (18)(q22.2q23). We conclude that this previously not described interstitial deletion of  
P0258 . Common Fragile Sites, viral integration sites,  18q has breakpoints distal to the genes responsible for microcephaly,  evolutionary breakpoints and enzymatic DNA-cleavage - what we  mental and growth retardation. Dysmyelination in our patient maybe  know about the mechanisms of chromosomal translocations related to haploinsufÜciency of the myelin-basic-protein (MBP)  T. Hardt1, T. Heiden1, A. Helmrich1, A. Matth\x89i2, F. Trotier1, K. M. Stout1, A.  gene located in 18q23 .Other genes in the deleted region must be  Rump2, E. Schr\x99ck2;  responsible for atretic ear canals and facial dysmorphies. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical  
P0260 . Molecular Cytogenetic analysis in Williams Syndrome Genetics, Technical University, Dresden, Germany. Chromosomal aberrations have been identiÜed in virtually all tumors  S. A. Midyan, L. S. Nazaryan, G. R. Shakhsuvaryan, T. F. Sarkisian;  and reÝect genomic changes that contribute to the transformation of  Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. normal cells into tumor cells. Using screening techniques, such as  Willams syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder with  chromosome banding analysis, comparative genomic hybridization  multisystemic manifestations caused by heterozigosity for partial  (CGH) and spectral karyotyping (SKY), chromosomal aberrations  deletion of chromosome band 7q11.23 with an estimated incidence of  speciÜc to many different tumors and their respective developmental  1 in 20 000 live birth which is accompaned with supervascular aortic  stages have been detected. Recurrent chromosomal translocations  and hypercalcemia. We were referred 6 cases on the suspicion of this  are the primary aberrations found in leukemias, lymphomas and  syndrome. sarcomas. The principal biological mechanisms causing these  Cytogenetic analysis was perfomed on GTG-banded chromosome reciprocal translocations have not yet been identiÜed. s.Prometaphases were analysed using Image analysis system, no  Common Fragile Sites (cFS) have been found to be hot spots of  karyotype abnormality was found. Fluorescent in situ hybridization  frequent DNA-breakage. They are characterized as chromosomal  (FISH) analysis was performed, using LSI Williams syndrome region  regions (1 - 9 Mbp in size) showing allelic differences in DNA- probes. replication-timing and increased DNA-Ýexibility. In order to better  Case 1 was a 1,5-year boy with hypertelorism, palpebral Üssures,  understand what may cause the expression of cFSs, we have: srabismus, wide unscrewed nostrils, stenosis of pulmonary artery  * studied the expression pattern of cFS in 10 normal probands and in  and ventricular septal defect. In this case Wiliams syndrome wasnÓt  two different mouse strains conÜrmed. * identiÜed several new cFSs in human and mouse, their synteny and  Case 2 was a 4-year old girl. She was born in term, weight-3000g .  their colocalization with evolutionary breakpoints At the delivery polyhydroamnion and large placenta were noted. At  * started to map viral integration sites in close vicinity of cFSs in HPV- the time of phisical examination several dismorphic facial features  transformed keratinocytes were noted: Ýat back of the head, low hear-line on the forehead,  * investigated genomic instability of a tumor-speciÜc translocation  hypertelorism, Ýat nasal bridge, short turn-up nose with the wide  breakpoint using high-resolution array-CGH unscrewed nostrils, long Ülter. Hypercalcemia was observed. She had  * analyzed centromeric breakage in two different tissue types  mild language and cognitive delay, coned Üngers and clinodactyly.  (adenocarcinoma vs. squamous cell carcinoma) Visceral anomalies included congenital heat defect as a stenosis  * established an in vivo model of the MLL-gene translocation by  of pulmonary artery. Williams syndrome was conÜrmed, with  treating lymphoblastoid cells with etoposide observation only one signal in each cell. This diagnostics was very  * and started to investigate the 3D-chromatin-organization of cFS  useful for further prognosis to family. within the nucleus. Molecular cytogenetic analysis is of great importance for conÜrmation  of microdeletion syndromes where conventional cytogenetic study  cannot reveal subchromosomal aberrations and it will be perform also  for the other referred cases.Cytogenetics 139 
P0261 . An unbalanced complex rearrangement involving  syndrome fully consistent with a WHS diagnosis. Karyotype was  chromosomes 3 and 14 with intra-chromosomal telomeric  normal and molecular cytogenetic analysis was not performed. sequences. The youngest brother is now 17 years old. He suffers from  R. Genesio1, F. Fabbrini2, P. Tedeschi2, L. Cuomo3, A. Pedicini3, M. A. Police3, A.  severe growth retardation, cleft palate, hypospadias, typical facial  Conti2, L. Nitsch2;  appearance, severe mental retardation and seizures. Standard  chromosomes were apparently normal. FISH analysis, performed  1BioGeM - Biotechnology and Molecular Genetics, Napoli, Italy, 2University  when he was 11 years old, conÜrmed the diagnosis of WHS (46,  Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 3Ospedale San Giuseppe Moscati, Avellino, Italy. XY.ish del (4p)(F26-; I
S28 -; D4
S96 -; D4
S43 -; D4
S182 -; D4
S180  X 2).  We report here on clinical, cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic  The deletion spanned about 3 Mb, including both WHS critical region  Ündings in a girl with a complex chromosomal rearrangement. Clinical  (WHSCR) and WHS critical region 2 (WHSCR-2). features included mental retardation, atrial septal defect, limb defects  The recurrence of phenotype between the two brothers led us to  and dismorphic traits such as high forehead, hypertelorism, low set  further investigations. ears and short neck. Cytogenetic analysis revealed that additional  A preliminary FISH analysis with the 33c6 probe (D4
S43 ), deleted  material was present on the q arm of chromosome 14, in mosaic  in the proband, excluded the presence of a cryptic translocation in  form, in about 85% of the analyzed cells. It could not be resolved  both parents. Since the mother presented with some phenotypic  by standard or high resolution karyotyping. FISH analysis, using  abnormalities (facial dysmorphisms, mild mental impairment,  whole chromosome painting probe for chromosome 14, showed that  febrile convulsions), a skin biopsy was performed in order to rule  a large extra-chromosomal region was present within the q arm of  out mosaicism for the microdeletion. In this occasion a non mosaic  the derivative chromosome 14. This was identiÜed as a portion of  smaller deletion was detected, spanning about 1.5 Mb from D4
S96   chromosome 3 using the Octoprobe Multiprobe system. The use  to the telomere. Her karyotype was 46, XX.ish del(4p)(F26-; I
S28 -;  of subtelomeric probes for chromosomes 3 and 14 unraveled that  D4
S96 -; FGFR3 X 2; D4
S43  X 2). Both WHSCR and WHSCR-2 were  additional material, derived from both the q arm of chromosome 3  fully preserved. and the q arm of chromosome 14, was fused to the telomeric end  We describe the clinical phenotype of the mother in relationship to  of chromosome 14. The derivative chromosome showed in fact  the small deletion and discuss this unusual potential mechanism of  two signals for the subtelomeric probe of chromosome 14 with a  recurrence of microdeletion syndromes. signal from the subtelomeric probe of the q arm of chromosome 3 in  between. Intra-chromosomal telomeric sequences were observed  
P0264 . Partial sacral agenesis and short medullary cord in a  at the fusion point between the original chromosome 14 and the  patient with 18p- syndrome: a rarely reported malformation  additional material. Parental karyotype was normal further suggesting  complex that the rearrangement originated from a post-zygotic event. Trisomy  N. Brun1, S. Dahoun1, P. Bugmann2, S. Hanquinet2, V. Schwitzgebel2, A. Bot- for both the q end of chromosome 3 and the q end of chromosome  tani1;  14 possibly explains the phenotype. Molecular mechanisms for this  rearrangement will be discussed. 1Service of Medical Genetics, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzer- land, 2Department of Pediatrics, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Swit- 
P0262 . Cytogenetic effects of the PU-239 in the workers of  zerland. Nuclear-Chemical Plant The 18p- syndrome is one of the most frequent and well- N. Popova, S. Nazarenko, Y. Yakovleva, E. Vasilyeva, S. Vovk;  characterized deletion syndrome involving a segment close to a  telomere. Its phenotype is not evidently pathognomonic and the  Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. most important associated malformation is the holoprosencephaly  The frequency and spectrum of chromosome aberrations in  spectrum. Partial sacral agenesis has been reported only once  peripheral blood lymphocytes were evaluated in 3 groups of workers  (Anderson-Shotwell et al. J Med Genet 1989; 26:70-71). of the Nuclear Chemical Plant (NCP) who have various internal  We describe a 9-month-old female patient referred for failure to  Pu-239 contents (I Ċ 1.2-11 nCi; II Ċ 13-20 nCi; III Ċ> 25 nCi) and  thrive starting after weaning at the age of 5 months. She was born  in inhabitants, living in the radiation safe region (control group).  by C-section at term with normal birth parameters. Examination  In average 300 cells per individual were analyzed. Frequency  showed an alert child with weight <
P3 , length at 
P3 , and OFC at  of aberrant cells in 3 groups of NCP workers and in control was  
P10 . The phenotype was mainly characterized by marked brachy- 1.61°0.36, 2.42°0.52, 2.66°0.30, 1.34°0.17 percent respectively.  /plagiocephaly, prominent forehead, bitemporal hollowing and  Differences between groups II, III and control group were statistically  pufÜness over the dorsum of hands and feet. signiÜcant (P<0.05). The analysis of types of chromosome  Blood karyotype was 45,XX,-13,-18,+der(t)(13;18)(q10;q10) de novo,  aberrations in workers of all groups of plutonium plant has shown,  resulting in partial monosomy of 18p. that damages of chromosomes arise, basically, due to aberrations  Xray and MRI surveys revealed partial sacral agenesis with  of chromosomal type (dicentric, ring chromosomes and atypical  normal 
S1 , small 
S2 , posteriorly displaced and abnormally shaped  chromosomes, pair fragments). Differences on frequency of breaks of  
S3  vertebrae, and the medullary cone ending at D12. Further  chromosomal type between the control and group III were statistically  investigations did not show evidence so far for neurogenic bladder or  signiÜcant (P<0.01). In groups II and III increased level of Ñrogue  intestine. cellsÑ and cells with Double minutes chromosomes (DMs) was  In addition, it was found that the girl had at the age of 1 year  observed. Differences between groups II and III of NCP workers and  complete growth hormone and severe IgA deÜciencies, as already  control individuals on these parameters were statistically signiÜcant  frequently reported in 18p- patients. (P<0.01). Observed cytogenetic pictures it is possible to explain by  We conclude that it would be useful to screen persons with 18p-  action of incorporated plutonium-239 which is a source ŋ-particles.  syndrome in order to determine the real prevalence of sacral and/or  ŋ-particles cause double breaks DNA and initiate formation of  cord anomalies in this chromosome imbalance. aberrations of chromosome type. 
P0265 . Clinical and chromosome breakage Investigation in some  
P0263 . Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS): a new mechanism of  Iranian patients referred for aplastic anemia including Fanconi  familial recurrence and further insights into genotype-phenotype  anemia correlation S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, F. Behjati1, Y. Shafeghati1, E. Keyhani1, R.  F. Faravelli1, R. Lecce2, M. Murdolo2, G. Neri2, F. Dagna Bricarelli1, M. Di  Kariminejad2, Z. Oloomi3, F. Moosavi4, F. Amini1, H. Najmabadi1;  Rocco3, M. Zollino2;  1Genetic Reaserch Center, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences  1Genetica Umana, Genova, Italy, 2Istituto di Genetica Medica, Facolta di  University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Kariminejad/Najmabadi  Medicina A. Gemelli, Universit\x87 Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 3Pediatria  Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Imam  II, Istituto Gaslini, Genova, Italy. Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  We report on a family with two brother affected by WHS. Republic of), 4Shohada Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran,  The Ürst patient died at 18 years of age. He had a MCA/MR  Iran (Islamic Republic of).Cytogenetics 140 Aplastic anemia (AA) is referred to situations in which bone marrow  retardation than other patients with Turner syndrome referred to our  fails to generate blood elements. This entity is composed of  laboratory. GTG banding of her mother did not reveal any mosaic  several different diseases and syndromes such as fanconi anemia  karyotype. (FA). Since the deÜnite diagnosis of FA among AA cases is very  Important for patientsÓ management, a total of 25 referred cases for  
P0268 . Turner girls with spontaneous puberty should regularly  AA were investigated clinically and cytogenetically. In this study the  be checked for XX cell line lymphocytes of the patients and their normal sex-matched controls  M. Kocova1, G. Ubovic1, M. Krstevska-Konstantinova1, E. Sukarova- has been treated with mitomycin C alkylating agent. The Ündings are  Angelovska1, R. Jankova2, D. Toncheva2;  presented and compared with other similar studies 1Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of  Macedonia, 2Department for Medical Genetics, Medical University, SoÜa,  
P0266 . Application of chromosome microsurgery in producing  Bulgaria. FISH probes Spontaneous puberty occurs in 5-20% of Turner girls. Data from  R. Hill1, F. Mahjoubi2;  the literature point that a presence of 46,XX cell line is important for  1CSIRO, Sydney, Australia, 2NRCGEB, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). development of spontaneous puberty. One of the advanced technologies in molecular cytogenetics  We analyzed 76 girls with Turner syndrome followed until 16 years  is chromosome microsurgery. With the help of this technology,  of age; 28 (36.8%) had X monosomy, 21(27.6%) had in addition cell  molecular genetics and cytogenetics come together in order to get  line/s with no structural abnormalities of chromosome X, 13 (17.2%)  more information about chromosome or part of a chromosome.  had structural changes of X in the second cell line, and 14 (18.4%)  In chromosome microsurgery the chromosome of interest or  had only structural changes of X chromosome. Eleven girls (14.5%)  chromosomal region of interest is dissected using a Üne glass  developed spontaneous puberty at an age of 12.8 + 1.5 years. The  microneedle under an inverted microscope. The chromosomal DNA  karyotype from peripheral blood lymphocytes in this group was :  isolated by chromosome microsurgery is then ampliÜed employing  45, X0 in 3 (27.2%), 45, X0/46,XX/47,XXX, in 4(36,4%), 45,X0/46,  one of the molecular methods such as PCR. The PCR ampliÜed  XiXq in 4 (36,4%), and 45,X0/46,X,Xr in 1(9%). Menstrual cycling  chromosomal DNA can be used in different applications for example  appeared in four girls. Comparison of the karyotype with those  Ýuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). without puberty shows higher percentage of karyotype with additional  In FISH, Ýuorescently labelled nucleic acid molecules are deposited  X chromosome and isochromosome X as a second cell line. in chromatin at the site of speciÜc DNA sequences. By this method  One girl developed endometrial carcinoma. FISH performed on the  unique sequence, chromosomal subregions, or entire genomes can  ovarian tissue conÜrmed 67% and 90% of 46,XX cells respectively,  be speciÜcally highlighted in metaphase or interphase cells. The  although 45,X0/47,XXX was her karyotype form the blood. technique is simple in principle. SpeciÜc DNA or RNA sequences are  Presence of 46,XX cell in the ovaries might be crucial for the  Ürst labelled with nonradioactive molecules, for example biotin. The  development of spontaneous puberty. Presence of 46,XX cell line in  probe and the target chromosomes or nucleic acids are denatured.  some other tissues (buccal smear, hair root or Übroblasts) might point  Complementary sequences in the probe and target are then allowed  to mosaicims in the ovaries. Searching for XX cell line with FISH  to anneal. After washing and incubation in Ýuorescently labelled  in different accessible tissues in Turner girls should be mandatory  afÜnity reagents, a discrete Ýuorescent signal is visible at the site of  in order to develop appropriate approach towards the induction or  probe hybridisation FISH has several applications both in research  maintenance of menstrual cycling. and diagnosis areas. In this presentation, brieÝy, the way to make FISH probes by  
P0269 . WAGR syndrome in a patient with 11p13 deletion due to a  employing chromosome microsurgery will be explained and some of  de novo unbalanced translocation 5p;11p. the applications of FISH probes will be mentioned. O. Calabrese1,2, A. Capucci1, P. Battaglia1, A. Baroncini1;  1AUSL di Imola, Imola, Italy, 2Istituto di Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy. 
P0267 . An Unusual Mosaic Form [45,XO / 46,XX / 46,X,i(Xq) /  WAGR syndrome, characterized by predisposition to WilmsÓ tumour,  47,X,i(Xq),i(Xq) / 48,XX,i(Xq),i(Xq)] Of Turner Syndrome aniridia, genitourinary abnormalities and mental retardation, is one of  S. Gorucu1, A. Arslan1, E. Cakmak1, B. G\x99gebakan1, A. G\x99\x8cmen2, S. Oguzkan1,  the most extensively studied Ðcontiguous gene syndromesÑ. Patients  M. Canturk1;  invariably have a germline chromosomal deletion at 11p13 of variable  1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology,  size and nature but always affecting WT1 and PAX6 genes, both  Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department  located on band 11p13. of Gynecology, Gaziantep, Turkey. Here we present a 37-years-old woman with WAGR syndrome  Turner syndrome is typical for a 45,X karyotype. It is relatively  .The patient was born at term after an uncomplicated pregnancy, to  rare among live births, but common in spontaneous abortion.  healthy unrelated parents. At birth low birth weight and buphtalmo  Chromosomal mosaicism placental mosaicisim is the reason  were noted. At 4 months of age ophtalmological examination revealed  of survival at term and displays the characteristics of Turner  bilateral subtotal aniridia and ectopia lentis. Subsequently she  syndrome (TS). A female patient with Turner syndrome , 19 yers  suffered from numerous respiratory infections, one of them requiring  of age was referred to us. Chromosome analysis was carried out  hospitalisation for cardiovascular arrest. At 18 months of age she  on the chromosome spreads of lymphocyte cultures. One hundred  underwent surgery and chemotherapy for WilmsÓ tumor. Intestinal  metaphases examined by conventional GTG banding technique.  malrotation was also observed. The patient exhibited a mosaic kayotype. She had a classical  At our evaluation the patient shows disproportionate short stature  45,XO karyotype, normal 46,XX female karyotype, isochromosome  (<3\xa0p), obesity, OFD at 50\xa0p, dysmorphisms, moderate mental  46,X,i(Xq) / 47,X,i(Xq),i(Xq) and 48,XX,i(Xq),i(Xq) mosaicisim.  retardation with compulsive behaviour. The main phenotype of patient was short stature, web-neck, low  The standard cytogenetic analysis showed an apparent chromosome  posterior hair line, gonadal dysgenesis, mental retardation, primary  5p deletion. High resolution karyotyping, indicated by WAGR clinical  and secondary amenorrhea. The formation of isochromosome of Xq  diagnosis, demonstrated an 11(p12-14.2) deletion due to a de novo  may be a sporadic event, equally likely to occur on the maternally  unbalanced translocation t(5p;11p). The cytogenetic Ünding was  or paternally derived X-chromosome and that the mechanism of  conÜrmed by FISH with subtelomeric probes and chromosomes 5p  formation may be independent of parental origin. Unusual one X,  and 11p paintings. two X isochromosomes giving rise to 45,XO / 46,XX / 46,X, i(Xq) /  The presented case is another example of reciprocal translocation  47,X,i(Xq),i(Xq) / 48,XX,i(Xq),i(Xq) genotype brings an attention that  involving the 11p13 region, infrequently reported in the literature, and  can not be explained simply by a sporadic occurance. Also, Turner  producing loss of genetic material at the breakpoints responsible of  syndrome who receive the X chromosome from their father have  the clinical picture and probably also of the intestinal malrotation not  higlier verbal IQ scores and better social cognition than those who  yet observed in WAGR syndromeÓs cases. receive from their mother suggesting male-female differences in  social cognition and verbal intelligence. She had more severe mental Cytogenetics 141 
P0270 . Are all cases of Kabuki syndrome due to a 8p22-8p23.1  or mosaicism was recorded, thus conÜrming the clinical diagnosis.  duplication? These genetically conÜrmed Down syndrome were born to mother in  D. Sanlaville1, C. Bernardin1, D. Genevieve1, J. Amiel1, C. Baumann2, M. de  different age group, however, maternal age in most of the cases was  Blois1, V. Cormier1, S. Lyonnet1, M. Le Merrer1, P. Parent3, F. Prieur4, M. Prieur1,  below 30 year and the child was either Ist or 2nd issue. To all these  O. Raoul1, A. Toutain5, A. Verloes2, A. Munnich1, M. Vekemans1, S. Romana1,  parents pre-natal diagnosis was advised. All the 43% genetically  C. Turleau1;  conÜrmed Down Syndromes have been referred to the Rehabilitation  center for further management. 1Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2H\x98pital Robert Debr\x8d, Paris, France,  Following Trisomy 21,Trisomy 13 has been found the next common  3CHU de Brest, Brest, France, 4H\x98pital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France, 5H\x98pital  autosomal abnormality (1%). No other autosomal abnormality was  Bretonneau, Tours, France. recorded in the referred patients. Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare multiple congenital anomaly/mental  In the remaining 35% patients, Sex- Chromosomal abnormalities  retardation syndrome with an estimated frequency of 1/32,000 in  affecting only the X-Chromosome was recorded. 17% female had  Japan. It is characterized by postnatal growth retardation, distinctive  XO/XX mosaicism, and 3% had XO condition. 13% males had XXY  facial features, dermatoglyphic anomalies, skeletal dysplasia and  constitution and the remaining 2% had XY/XXY constitution. Only  mental retardation. A broad spectrum of additional features are  one male child was found possessing 49,XXXYY Sex Chromosome  observed in KS patients such as cardiac and kidney malformations,  constitution. autoimmune thrombopenia and anemia, growth hormone deÜciency  Present study has helped the clinicians of Jammu and Kashmir in  and premature thelarche. Molecular basis of KS is unknown.  getting the proper diagnosis of their patients. The diagnosis has  Recently, Milunsky and Huang reported six unrelated patients with  been found useful in the Rehabilitation Programme of those who had  KS and a 8p22-8p23.1 duplication found using comparative genomic  Chromosomal abnormality. hybridization and conÜrmed by BAC-FISH. We collected a series of  patients with clinically diagnosed KS. No duplication was detected  
P0273 . Cytogenetic Analysis of Mental Retardation in and  using high resolution chromosome banding. We are currently  around Coimbatiore, Tamilnadu, India studying these patients by FISH using the clones described by  K. Sasikala, R. Ashok Kumar, A. L. Calistus Jude, S. Sudha, M. Vimala Devi;  Milunsky and Huang. To date 15 patients have been studied, and no  duplication 8p22-8p23.1 was detected. Our preliminary results do not  Division of Human Genetics, Department of Zoology, Bharathiar University,  conÜrm the previously described association between KS and 8p22- Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, India. 8p23.1 duplication. Mental Retardation is not a diagnosis in itself but only a symptom  of some underlying disorder. Diagnosis evaluation of etiology of  
P0271 . Detection of De Novo Partial Trisomy 22qter mental retardation is essential in the management of parents as  R. Lasan, L. Letica, I. Tonkovic, K. Crkvenac, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic;  well as for genetic counseling of the parents. Mental retardation can  occur in many families from a variety of causes, many of them still  Genetics and Metabolism Division, Pediatrics Department, University Hospital  unidentiÜed not well understood. Some forms occur more frequently  Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. under speciÜc social and environmental conditions. A few of them  Characterization of a small chromosomal segment by means of  have genetic origin of biochemical disorders, where the dominant  conventional cytogenetics, even when high resolution banding is  characters seem to occur in particular family groups. Other types  applied, can be inconclusive. are the results of birth accidents or diseases. Mental disability may  The identiÜcation of the origin of duplicated chromosomal material on  vary from the borderline of sufÜciency to a preformed degree of  22p, otherwise very difÜcult to characterize, is offered as an example.  impairment. The concept of mental retardation engulfs many factors  It was done using the FISH. such as social, behavioral, development, etiological, morphological  The analysis of peripheral lymphocytes from the propositus by  and prognostic implication. Role of genetics as an etiological factor  means of conventional cytogenetics with standard resolution, was  in mental retardation has been gaining more ground of late. Clinical  normal. The FISH with cosmid N85A3, which normally hybridizes  Cytogenetics has provided the importance for the detection of an  to the terminal region of the chromosome 22 long arm, revealed 3  increasing number of recognizable syndromes associated with  signals, two of which corresponded to the normal position, and one  chromosomal anomalies. Of the 565 subjects analyzed chromosomal  was found on the short arm of the derivate chromosome 22. The  aberrations were observed in 362 subjects. Among the male subjects  causes of the distal chromosome segment duplication often lead to  minor chromosomal aberrations were observed in 134 of 255  the familial pericentric inversion, parents with the same probe having  subjects and major chromosomal aberrations were observed in 99  normal signals on the terminal position of the chromosome 22 long  of 255 subjects. Among the107 female subjects minor chromosomal  arm. Segmental aneusomy was not detected at original cytogenetic  aberrations were observed in 64 subjects and major chromosomal  diagnosis because the extra material on the chromosome 22 short  aberrations were observed in 65 subjects. arm was compatible with polymorphism of the satellite region of 22p. Clinical features of this 3-year-old boy with a rare de novo  
P0274 . Cytogenetic Findings in Cancerous and Non-Cancerous  chromosomal aberration was growth retardation at birth, mental and  Lesions of the Digestive System developmental retardation, including a smaller mandible, genital  A. L. Calistus Jude, K. Sasikala, M. Vimala Devi, S. Sudha;  hypospadia, testicular retention, ventricular and pulmonary stenosis.  The authors suggest a possible association of the patientÓs clinical  Division of Human Genetics, Department of Zoology, Bharathiar University,  features with the duplicated material at the distal part of chromosome  Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, India. 22 long arm. Chromosome instability provides a predisposing background to  malignancy, contributing to the crucial genetic changes in multistep  
P0272 . Human congenital anomalies: Cytogenetic analysis in  carcinogenesis. It is generally accepted that cancer is a genetic  Jammu and Kashmir, India: Four year study disease resulting from multiple genome rearrangements. The  S. M. A. N. Gupta;  Gastrointestinal Tract (GIT) is a frequent site for the development of  cancers. A variety of chromosomal aberrations have been identiÜed in  Human Genetic Research & Counselling Centre, Department of Zoology,  various cancerous and non-cancerous lesions of the gastrointestinal  University of Jammu, Jammu, India. tract. Cytogenetic analysis revealed various chromosomal aberrations  A total of 250 children in different age group, suspected to have  and rearrangements in 19 of the 60 subjects with non-cancerous  chromosomal abnormalities were enrolled for chromosome study  lesions and 26 of the 80 subjects with cancerous lesions of the  from 1998-2002. Majority of these children were clinically diagnosed  digestive system. The percentage of aberrations accounted to a  as Down Syndrome while the remaining were suspected to have  higher score in the group with cancerous lesions than the group with  either an autosomal or sex- chromosomal abnormality other than  non-cancerous lesions. Certain aberrations observed in cancerous  Down syndrome. Chromosomal abnormalities were detected in  lesions were also observed in non-cancerous lesions suggesting a  79% cases and in the remaining 21% no chromosomal abnormality  predisposing or precancerous condition. was seen. In these 79% cases, Trisomy 21 (43%), either typical Cytogenetics 142 
P0275 . ReÜning breakpoints using FISH probes in a set of Turner  gene content, designation of cryptic chromosomal rearrangements  patients with mosaic karyotypes 45,X/46,X,idic(Xq). in subtelomeric regions is of great importance etiologically in cases  L. A. Gole1, J. A. Crolla2, D. O. Robinson2, K. Y. Loke1;  with dysmorphic features with idiopathic MR. Subtelomeric FISH  technique is routinely applied lately in cases with dysmorphic  1National University Of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Wessex Regional  features with idiopathic MR. In our study, FISH with speciÜc probes  Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. for subtelomeric regions for all chromosomes was applied to 10  Clinical presentations in patients with mosaicism for a structurally  cases with idiopathic MR who suit the determined criterias of scoring,  abnormal Y chromosome, can range from a classical Turner  and whose karyotypes were detected to be normal by conventional  phenotype, through mixed gonadal dysgenesis to phenotypically  cytogenetic methods. Deletions of cryptic subtelomeric regions in  normal males. Isodicentric Y chromosomes are usually observed  4 cases were detected as: 46,XX,del(1)(pter), 46,XX,del(4)(pter),  to be present along with a 45,X cell line as dicentric chromosomes  46,XX,del(5)(pter), 46,XX,del(9)(pter). It is emphasized that  are inherently unstable and may be lost during mitosis resulting  criterias in choosing the cases were essential, that submicroscopic  in mosaicism. The variability in sexual phenotype is thought to be  subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements has a high frequency  related to the tissue distribution and relative proportions of Y material  of occurrence, and are important in diagnosis and in the counseling  in the developing gonads of the respective cell lines, particularly  to be provided to the family. The clinical features of the cases were  those with functional copies of SRY. However, a further factor which  discussed and compared with literature. might also have an effect on the phenotype is when the breakpoint in  the Yq long arm, results in the duplication or absence of the regions  
P0278 . DownÒs syndrome cluster registered in Republic of  bearing genes for azoospermia AZFa, b and c. As formation of most  Belarus as a possible consequence of the Chernobyl accident. isodicentric Y chromosomes involves a break and duplication of  I. Zatsepin1,2;  either the short or long arms, we have used a panel of FISH probes  to determine whether there are any common sequences in Yq which  1Belarus Institute for Hereditary diseases, Minsk, Belarus, 2International  are predisposed to breakage in a series of seven patients with  Sakharov Environmental University, Minsk, Belarus. idic(Y)(q11.23) chromosomes. The prevalence at birth of DownÓs syndrome (DS) was analyzed  in Belarus for the period of 1981 to 2001. No clear-cut long-term  
P0276 . Cytogenetic analysis in infertility and birth defects: an  effects of radiation exposure of the population due to Chernobyl  Indian Perspective accident were revealed. The analysis of monthly prevalence  B. B. Ganguly, N. N. Kadam;  showed a DS cluster in January of 1987. We observed 31 DS cases  instead of 14 expected. All known modifying factors (contribution  Mahatma Gandhi MissionÓs New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India. of prenatal diagnosis, changes in maternal age distribution and  Cytogenetic diagnosis was carried out in 6474 patients, presented  registration completeness) were shown to play negligible role. The  with birth defects, pubertal delay and infertility in children,  time of appearance and the spatial distribution of DownÓs syndrome  adolescents and adults respectively. Conventional G-banding was  children, born in January of 1987, assume an association with the  performed in peripheral blood following standard technique. On an  exposure due to the passage of radioactive clouds. Theoretical  average 50 metaphases were examined for each patient; thus a total  backgrounds of the revealed cluster were found in the published  of ~323700 metaphases and 51792 karyograms were evaluated  results of experimental studies. Nevertheless, insufÜcient dosimetric  using IKAROS imaging software. Chromosomal abnormality  information, relatively low occurrence of the disorder, lacking  was recorded as 50%, 25%, and 5% in children, adolescents  information on probandÓs families (such as migration and data on  and adults respectively, whereby 14% of the total patients were  trisomy origin) as well as contradictory results of epidemiological  detected with some structural or numerical aberrations. Both  studies in Europe prevent from unambiguous conclusions and  structural and numerical aberrations were recorded in autosomes  necessitate the performance of further investigations. and sex chromosomes, with a higher frequency in former group of  chomosomes. Clinical correlation of cytogenetic Ündings revealed  
P0279 . Disruption of the glutamate transporter gene EAAT2 in  consistent or contradictory pattern of chromosomal conÜguration.  a boy with mental retardation, epilepsy and t(1;11)(p33;p13)  Incident of normal karyotypes in many cases, however, pose urge for  translocation employment of FISH, CGH or other molecular genetic techniques.  M. Mayer1,2, M. Wisniewska2, J. Kolowska3, M. Hoeltzenbein1, A. Latos-Bielens- In couples having recurrent pregnancy loss, a pericentric inversion  ka2,3, H. H. Ropers1, V. M. Kalscheuer1;  in chromosome 9 was the most consistent anomaly observed in  1.8% cases. Since these samples were collected from different  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin-Dahlem, Germany, 2Chair  states of India, a cross sectional study revealed prevalence of  and Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,  chromosomal disorders in few states, probably due to poor socio- Poland, 3Medical Genetics Centre, Poznan, Poland. economic condition, awareness of environmental factors, and/or  The systematic study of patients with disease-associated balanced  consanguineous marriage. The whole spectrum of aberrations,  chromosome rearrangements is a powerful strategy for the isolation  chromosomal involvement, clinical correlation and state-wise  of disease genes and for linking phenotype and genotype. In this  distribution will be presented and discussed. This study indicates  context we have investigated the chromosomal breakpoints in a boy  signiÜcance of chromosomal diagnosis in undiagnosed illness,  with severe mental retardation, epilepsy, cerebral cortex atrophy,  prevalence of chromosomal aberration in Indian population and  psychomotor retardation and a de novo balanced translocation  impact of gene-environment interaction on human health. The study  t(1;11)(p33;p13). Fluorescence in situ hybridizations FISH using  also establishes conventional G-banding as the cornerstone of  BACs and PACs selected from the candidate regions identiÜed  clinical cytogenetics. clones from both chromosome 1 and chromosome 11 that span the  breakpoints. In silico analysis of the breakpoint regions showed that  
P0277 . Detection of subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements  on chromosome 11, the spanning clone contains part of the excitatory  by FISH analysis in cases with idiopathic mental retardation with  amino acid transporter 2 (SL
C1 A2) gene. Subsequent Southern blot  dysmorphic features hybridizations indicated that the SL
C1 A2 gene is disrupted between  M. Ozcan Caliskan1, S. Berker Karauzum1, E. Mihci2, S. Tacoy2, G. Luleci1;  exon 9 and exon 10. The SL
C1 A2 gene product, EAAT2, is primarily  responsible for clearance of glutamate from the synaptic cleft, and is  1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Antalya,  therefore an excellent candidate MR gene. Loss of EAAT2 has been  Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey. previously reported in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and AlzheimerÓs  Mental retardation (MR) has a 2-3% frequency in general population.  disease. One of its main causes is chromosomal rearrangement, which occurs  On chromosome 1 the breakpoint-spanning clone contains a small  in 40% of the cases with severe MR, and in 5-10% of the cases with  fragment of an uncharacterised gene. Sequence alignments with  mild MR. However, the etiology is not known in 40% of the cases  human and mouse mRNAs and ESTs from GenBank database  with moderate and severe MR, and in 70% of the cases with mild  indicated that the 5ª end of this gene is very likely incomplete.  MR. As the subtelomeric regions of the chromosomes have rich  Cloning the DNA fragments that contain the breakpoints, together Cytogenetics 143 with RT-PCR experiments for determining the 5Ó end of the  
P0282 . Topology of the imprinted Prader-Willi/ Angelman and  novel gene, will soon show if this gene is also truncated by the  Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome loci in cycling cells chromosomal rearrangement and if the rearrangement resulted in  K. Teller1, I. Solovei1, K. Buiting2, B. Horsthemke2, T. Cremer1;  fusion genes. 1LMU, Department Biologie II, M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Humangenetik,  Klinikum Essen, Germany. 
P0280 . Two cases of Cri Du Chat syndrome in the same family  Spatial association of oppositely imprinted regions in late S-phase  without a familial translocation or inversion. but not at other stages of the cell cycle was reported for the Prader- K. Boduroglu, D. Aktas, Y. Alanay, E. Tuncbilek;  Willi/ Angelman Syndrome (PWS/AS) in human cells (LaSalle and  Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. Lalande. Science 272: 725-728 (1996)). We re-investigated this  The cri du chat syndrome, a chromosomal disorder characterized  Ðkissing phenomenonÑ using 3D-FISH with locus speciÜc probes and  by a partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5, was Ürst  replication labeling for a precise S-phase staging. Average relative  described by Lejeune et al in 1963. About 85% of the cases are  distances (ARDs) between the two PWS/AS loci were determined  caused by de novo deletions, the remanining 10-15% of cases are  in 3D image stacks collected with a confocal microscope. In PHA- familial with a parental translocation in more than 90% and a para- or  stimulated lymphocytes ARD was signiÜcantly smaller in late S- pericentric inversion in 5%. Over 80% of deletions are of paternal  phase compared to early S-phase and quiescent lymphocytes. A  origin. Although the size of the lost 5p material leading to the cri  corresponding decrease was found for chromosome 15 centromeres,  du chat syndrome varies, all patients appear to have a deletion of  which is located in close vicinity to both ribosomal genes on 15p  5p15.2. and the PWS/AS region on 15q11-13. In lymphoblastoid cells of  Here we present two cases with cri du chat syndrome who are  a PWS patient with a complete deletion of the PWS/AS region in  second cousins. The Ürst case (DO) was diagnosed in 2000, when  15pat we noted the same decrease of ARD in late S-phase. In gorilla  he was 2 months old. He had cat-like cry, microcephaly, round face,  lymphoblastoid cells, however, where the human #15 homolog bears  micrognathia and hypertelorism. The chromosome analysis with GTG  the PWS/AS locus but no ribosomal genes, the ARD between the two  banding showed partial 5p deletion distal to 5p14. Karyotypes of the  loci remained unchanged during S-phase. SigniÜcant ARD changes  parents were normal. Four years later, the daughter of the paternal  during S-phase of lymphoblasts were also not detected for another  uncle of DOÓs father gave birth to a baby girl. This baby had failure  imprinted locus, i.e. the Beckwith-Wiedemann region on 11q15.5. In  to thrive, feeding difÜculties and was refered to our department by  summary, our data provide strong evidence against the postulated  the parents of DO because they had noticed the clinical similarities  Ðkissing phenomenonÑ. with DO. The chromosome analysis with GTG banding revealed  deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5 distal to 5p14. Karyotypes  
P0283 . Genetic investigation in male infertility of the parents were normal again. As far as we know, this is the Ürst  S. Kutsev, S. Sakunov, M. Kogan;  family in which the cri du chat syndrome recurs without a familial  Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. translocation or inversion. Background. Infertility affects about 15% of couples and  approximately in a half of cases males are affected. Among the latter  
P0281 . Interstitial non-reciprocal translocation with an inverted  one of the most important cause is abnormal spermatogenesis due to  insertion 46,XY,inv ins(2;4)(p23;q28.1q31.1) associated with  chromosomal aberrations. primary hypogonadism Methods. We report the results of the cytogenetic (GTG) and  C. Ramel1, U. Cordes2, X. Schmitt2, T. Liehr3, M. Hoeltzenbein4, J. Decker1, D.  molecular cytogenetic (FISH) study carried out in 68 infertile males  Steinberger1;  with azoospermia as an only selection criterion. Clinical examination  1BIOSCIENTIA Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Endocrino- and semen analysis were performed according to the WHO  logy and Internal Medicine, Mainz, Germany, 3Institute for Human Genetics and  recommendations. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis were performed  Anthropology, Jena, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,  with Axioplan-2mot microscope (Carl Zeiss) and ikaros and isis  Berlin, Germany. software (Metasystems). Here we report on a 30 years old male patient with suspected  Results. Cytogenetic abnormalities were 47,XXY karyotype in  diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome. Clinical and endocrinological  6 patients, 46,XY/47,XXY with low level mosaicism in 1 patient,  examinations revealed a primary hypogonadism. Conventional  46,XY,del(Y)(q11q23) in 1 patient, 47, XYY in 1 patient and one  chromosome analysis on peripheral blood demonstrated a derivative  46,XX, male. Thus, 14,7% of azoospermics presented chromosomes  chromosome 2 and 4 with a suspected balanced reciprocal  aberrations and sex chromosomes abnormalities were in 100%  translocation 46,XY,t(2;4)(p23~p24;q28~q31). Karyotyping  cases. Moreover, it were revealed heterochromatin variants totally in  of the parents showed a normal paternal karyotype (46,XY)  20,6%: 46,XYqh- in 11 azoospermic males, 46,XYqh+ in 1 patient and  while the maternal karyotype presented a pericentric inversion  46,XY,inv(9)(p11q13) in 2 patients. 46,XX,inv(2)(p11.2q13). Subsequently performed chromosome  Conclusion. Genetic study is very important for detection of possible  painting with chromosome 2 and 4 speciÜc libraries revealed that  causes of male infertility. The received results allow us to suggest  only material from chromosome 4 was translocated interstitially to  the possible role of pericentric heterochromatin polymorphysm in  chromosome 2, hence this process was not reciprocal. To exclude  a parentage of an infertility. The correlation between phenotype,  cryptic reciprocity, for evaluation of orientation of the insertion and to  spermatogenic abnormalities and the revealed genetic aberrations  enable precise breakpoint analysis, multicolor banding (MCB) was  will be discussed applied. With these results it was proven that (1) neither loss nor  gain of chromosomal material occurred with respect to the affected  
P0284 . The frequency of chromosome aberrations in somatic  chromosomes, (2) the translocated segment was inverted and (3)  cells of children living at iodine endemy territory of Ukraine that the translocation was a non-reciprocal event. The breakpoint  M. Pilinskaya, O. Shemetun, O. Talan;  regions at chromosome 2 and 4 harbor a number of genes which  Research Center of Radiation Medicine, Kiev, Ukraine. can be categorized as candidate genes. One of them, the steroid- The frequency of chromosome aberrations in peripheral blood  5-alpha-reductase-gene (SRD5A2; OMIM264600), is located in the  lymphocytes of children 12-16 years old lived in iodine endemy  breakpoint region at chromosome 2 and is coding for an enzyme  territory from Lviv region of Ukraine have been determined with G- which plays a pivotal role in steroid metabolism. Further analyses  banding staining. In individuals without morpho-functional disorders  are ongoing to study whether the patientÓs phenotype is caused by  of thyroid gland the mean-group rate of chromosome aberrations  alteration(s) of this or other genes in the breakpoint regions. Based  (1.03°0.32 per 100 cells) corresponded to the population Ukrainian  on former observations of interchromosomal effects we discuss a  level. These data served as the indicators of the genome stability  possible functional association between the translocation identiÜed in  owing to the strong compensation of children endocrine system  the patient and the maternal pericentric inversion. under iodine deÜciency and conÜrmed the relative ecology safety of  observed territory. In children with chronic thyreoiditis the increased Cytogenetics 144 mean-group frequency of chromosome aberrations (2.10+0.49 per  Ürst, no development delay is observed despite a high level blood  100 cells) have been observed. Both chromatid (1.05°0.34) and  mosaicism; second, this tetrasomy 9p is associated with clinical  cromosome (0.94°0.33) deletions predominated among all types of  manifestations of scleroderma. These two unusual aspects of  chromosome aberrations. The most of chromosome breakes (68%)  tetrasomy 9p are discussed. in euchromatin regions, especially in the band 5p15, have been  localizated. Thus, the inÝuence of thyroid gland pathology at the  
P0287 . IdentiÜcation of repeated sequences at chromosomal  increased chromosome instability have been registered. breakpoints of translocated Cri du Chat Syndrome patients. M. Malacarne1, S. Cavani1, G. Zerega1, P. Cerruti - Mainardi2, F. Dagna  
P0285 . Delineation of the breakpoint regions in two patients  Bricarelli1, M. Pierluigi1;  with mental retardation, multiple congenital anomalies, and  1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Genoa, Italy, 2Pediatric Department - Vercelli  chromosome rearrangements Hospital, Vercelli, Italy. I. Wimplinger1, U. Frank2, S. Spranger3, A. Gal1, K. Kutsche1;  In recent years, several studies showed that repeated sequences  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89tsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,  can predispose to homologous unequal recombination, leading  Germany, 2St\x89dtisches Klinikum Braunschweig, Sozialp\x89diatrisches Zentrum,  both to chromosome microrearrangements (deletions, duplications,  Braunschweig, Germany, 3Praxis f\x9er Humangenetik Bremen, Bremen, Germa- inversions) and to supernumerary inverted duplication chromosomes.  ny. It seems likely that several chromosome rearrangements may be  Disease-associated, balanced chromosomal aberrations are  mediated by the same mechanism. Repeated sequences located on  powerful tools for gene identiÜcation. We report two patients with  different chromosomes could be responsible also for translocations,  a chromosome rearrangement and a unique disease phenotype.  as demonstrated for the constitutional t(11;22)(q23;q11). The Ürst patient is a female with microcephaly, Dandy-Walker  Cri du Chat Syndrome (CdCS) is associated with a deletion of the  malformation, aplasia of the vermis, conductive hearing impairment,  short arm of chromosome 5 (5p-), the size of the deletion ranging  and severe psychomotor retardation. She carries a paracentric  from the entire short arm to only 5p15.3. CdCS has an estimated  inversion on one of her X chromosomes, 46,X,inv(X)(p11.4;p2 incidence of 1:50,000 live births. Most CdCS cases are de novo  2.32). We delineated the breakpoint regions by Ýuorescence in  deletions (90%), parental translocations accounts for approximately  situ hybridization (FISH) and identiÜed four BAC clones spanning  10% and rare chromosomal aberrations about for 1%. Although  the breakpoint in Xp22.32 and Üve spanning that in Xp11.4. The  CdCS is a deÜned clinical entity individuals with 5p deletion show  breakpoint in Xp22.32 is proximal to the pseudoautosomal boundary,  phenotypic and cytogenetic heterogeneity. At present the etiology  in a gene-poor region. In Xp11.4, we mapped the breakpoint in intron  of CDC syndrome is unknown and no data is indicating if a gene  5 of the CASK gene. CASK encodes a protein with similarity to Ca2+/ clusters or speciÜc genomic polymorphisms are involved in mediating  calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and membrane-associated  the recurrent chromosomal rearrangements present in this syndrome. guanylate kinase. Male mice carrying a transgene insertion in Cask  In this study we examined 3 CDCS patients with an unbalanced  show hypoplasia of the mandible and a cleft secondary palate  translocation involving 5p and another autosome in search of  suggesting that Cask is involved in craniofacial development. possible repeated sequences at breakpoints that could have been  The second patient is a male with facial dysmorphisms, sensorineural  responsible in mediating the translocation events. All 3 patients  hearing loss, and mental retardation. Cytogenetic analysis revealed  presented the same breakpoint on 5p, deÜned by YAC probes 951
E9   a de novo 1;10 translocation, t(1;10)(p13.1;p13). By FISH, we  and 933G1. BAC/PAC contigs, covering the breakpoints on the  narrowed down the breakpoint regions and identiÜed an overlapping  different chromosomes, were created and their sequences searched  clone for each breakpoint. The insert of R
P11 -188D8 (1p12) contains  for LCRs, LINEs, SINEs with different databases. a large part of the MAN1A2 gene suggesting that this gene might be  disrupted. MAN1A2 encodes an alpha-mannosidase that plays an  
P0288 . A Romanian population study of 10 Y-chromosome STS  essential role in the elaboration of complex and hybrid N-glycans in  loci from infertile men mammalian cells. Studies are in progress to establish the association  F. Raicu1, L. O. Popa1, O. M. Popa1, L. Ilinca2, L. L. Dracea2, B. Marinescu2, L.  between the disrupted genes and the phenotype of the patients. Gavrila1;  1University of Bucharest, Bucuresti, Romania, 2Clinical Hospital of Obstetrics  
P0286 . Unusual tetrasomy 9p mosaicism in a non-mentally  and Gynecology Panait Sarbu, Bucuresti, Romania. retarded 52-year-old woman with clinical manifestations of  About 30% of couple infertilities are of male origin. They appear  scleroderma in some cases de novo and are considered idiopathic. The long  F. Girard, G. Rudolf, B. Doray, N. Carelle, E. Flori;  arm of the human Y chromosome contains factors which are  Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Strasbourg, France. involved in male fertility. Deletions in AZF region can cause severe  Tetrasomy 9p is a chromosomal aberration which has been described  spermatogenic defects ranging from non-obstructive azoospermia  in mosaic status in a few patients. All display abnormal phenotype  to oligozoospermia. The intracytoplasmatic sperm injection  including variable dysmorphic features and development delay. In the  technique (ICSI) is rapidly becoming a versatile procedure for human  reported case, blood tetrasomy 9p mosaicism was found in a non- assisted reproduction in case of male infertility. But, the use of  mentally retarded 52 year-old-woman . Medical history has included  intracytoplasmatic sperm injection may allow Y chromosome defects  lymphoedema of lower limbs since birth, Raynaud syndrome since  to be passed from father to son. The goal of our study is to evaluate  childhood, pregnancy-induced-hypertension followed by asymmetrical  the frequency of microdeletions in the long arm of Y chromosome,  essential paroxysmal hypertension. Given this symptomatology and  within the AZF regions, in these cases of Romanian male with  , at present, arthralgia of hands, elbows and knees, fat Üngers, thick  infertility. Forty infertile men with azoospermia or oligozoospermia,  skin, right upper limb oedema and morning stiffness, scleroderma at  determined by spermiogram, were studied. Peripheral blood DNA  the beginning has been hypothesized. Morphological examination  was extracted from each patient, then ampliÜed by multiplex PCR  showed hypopigmentated skin areas on the back and left upper and  with STS genomic markers from the Y chromosome AZF zones. PCR  lower limbs. products were then analysed on agarose gels. Due the difÜculty of  A karyotype was performed because of the four pregnancies of this  conÜrming the absence of a signal in molecular biology, each case  woman, two resulted in late fetal losses and one in unexplained  was checked by multiplex PCR through coampliÜcation with the  neonatal death; only one pregnancy resulted in a healthy girl. An  SRY marker. Three men with microdeletions of the long arm of the Y  extra isodicentric 9p chromosome was present in blood cells at a  chromosome were diagnosed among the 40 patients, corresponding  high level (24%) but not in 100% skin Übroblasts, accounting for  to a proportion of 7,5%. blood-limited mosaicism. No increased chromosomal breakage was  observed. Parental karyotypes of the patient were normal and their  
P0289 . Distribution of R- and G-band assigned Bacs in different  medical history was not contributive. Molecular studies demonstrated  interphase chromosome territories the maternal meiotic origin of the extra 9p. K. K\x9epper1, M. Cremer1, J. von Hase2, N. Kepper2, D. Biener1, C. Cremer2, T.  This tetrasomy 9p mosaicism report is remarkable for two reasons:  Cremer1; Cytogenetics 145 1LMU, Department Biologie II, M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Kirchhoff Institut f\x9er Physik,  term peripheral blood culture and karyotype analysis was done after  Universit\x89t Heidelberg, Germany. G-banding, and C-banding techniques by using P
S1  power gene  Chromosome territories (CTs) contain G-band and R-band domains.  karyotyping system. The latter have a higher transcriptional activity and replicate earlier.  Analysis of 100 metaphases (G-banding and C-banding) conÜrmed  Using 3D-FISH and confocal microscopy we studied the 3D topology  constitutional 46,XY,r(15) karyotype in majority of all the cells,  of bacterial artiÜcial chromosomes (BACs) assigned to R- and G- associated with ring chromosome instability and mosaicism (double  band domains of human CTs #18 and #19. These CTs were chosen,  ring, dicentric ring, etc.,) Karyotype of the parents were normal  because CTs #18 are built up mostly of G-band domains, while CTs  46,XX and 46,XY. conÜrming de novo origin of the ring chromosome  #19 consist mostly of R-band domains. In human Übroblast nuclei  formation due to terminal deletion. we determined (1) BAC signal distributions within each CT, (2) 3D  Ring chromosome syndrome cases present with extreme clinical  distances of the BAC-signals from the nuclear centre provided  heterogeneity and varying degree of prenatal and post-natal growth  by the DNA counterstain, (3) distances of each BAC signal to the  retardation, and mental retardation with variable severity. Clinical  corresponding CT border, (4) distances between each BAC signal  manifestation and pathogenesis in r(15) cases is inÝuenced by the  and the CT intensity gravity centre, and (5) the vertical spacing  extent of mosaicism and extent of monosomy secondary to the break  between G- and R-band speciÜc BACs, respectively. Our analysis did  points. Majority of the cases are sporadic. Formation of a ring in  not reveal a signiÜcant difference between the 3D arrangements of R-  certain cases might be regarded as a ástructural mutationÐ, i.e. an  and G-band speciÜc BACs in #18 and #19 CTs. In contrast, previous  alteration in the structure of the genetic material per se, rather than a  (Zink et al. Exp Cell Res 247:176 (1999)) and ongoing studies of  loss or gain of genetic dosages. other CTs, including #12 and #13, indicate a different distribution of  R- and G-band speciÜc BACs. Notably, these CTs are much more  
P0292 . De novo ring chromosome 6 and eye anomalies inhomogeneous with regard to R- and G-band content than #18  C. B. van der Hagen1,2, T. Prescott2, E. Ormerod2, B. Burulf2, H. Ramstad2, P.  and #19 CTs. Whether these differences in band composition cause  Str¾mme2, K. Eiklid2;  differences in CT organization remains to be explored. 1University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Ulleval university hospital, Oslo, Norway. We report a case of de novo ring chromosome 6 in a 16 week old girl  
P0290 . Micro-array CGH analysis of 4p microdeletions reÜnes  (46,XX,r(6)(p25q27)[100]. She is the second child of normal, healthy  the genotype-phenotype map of the region and pinpoints low  parents. Birth weight 1980g, length 41cm, head circumference 30  copy repeats as susceptibility sites for terminal chromosomal  cm. She remains below the <2.5 centile for weight and length. She  deletions is microcephalic and slightly dysmorphic, with a depressed nasal  J. R. Vermeesch1,2, N. Maas1, C. Melotte1, G. Van Buggenhout1, R. Thoelen1,  bridge, short palpebral Üssures, a deformed and malrotated right ear,  G. Froyen2,3, B. Dutta4, P. Van Hummelen5, P. Marynen2,3, J. Fryns1;  a long philtrum and micrognathia. She has dark pigmented spots on  1U.Z. Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics, Leuven,  both irides and depigmented areas in both retinae. Clinical cardiac  Belgium, 3VIB4, Leuven, Belgium, 4Microarray Facility, Vib, Belgium,  examination is normal. Intra-ocular pressure and hearing are normal.  5Microarray facility, Vib, Belgium. Cerebral MR revealed a structurally normal brain. Apart from feeding  The Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome is caused by partial deletions of  problems and respiratory infections she is thriving. Metaphase  the short arm of chromosome 4 and is phenotypically deÜned by  FISH with subtelomeric probes (Vysis) showed no 6p signal but a  mental and growth retardation, seizures and peculiar craniofacial  normal 6q signal in the r(6). Microsatellite marker genotyping and  manifestations. To improve the phenotypic map of the region and  FOX
C1  gene analysis as well as detailed cytogenetic Ündings will be  investigate the mechanism by which both terminal and interstitial  presented. 4p deletions arise, we wanted to localize the breakpoints of these  chromosomal anomalies. To this end, a 4pter speciÜc micro-array  
P0293 . Seven Ýuorochrome multicolor interphase FISH on  was developed consisting of 170 4pter clones and 130 clones  parafÜn embedded tissue sections derived from the other autosomes and the X chromosome. The  J. Kraus1,2, A. Schipf3, J. Diebold3, M. R. Speicher1,2;  complete BAC tiling path of the Ürst 20 Mb and a single clone every  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, TU M\x9enchen, M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Hu- Mb between 20 and 47 Mb of the short arm of chromosome 4 was  mangenetik, GSF-Forschungszentrum f\x9er Umwelt und Gesundheit, M\x9enchen- represented. DNA of over 10 patients with aberrations on the 4pter  Neuherberg, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er Pathologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit\x89t,  short arm was analysed by array CGH. M\x9enchen, Germany. Two patients with small interstitial deletions allowed us to further  The stronghold of molecular cytogenetics is the analysis of single  reÜne the phenotypic map of the region. These analyses pinpoint  cells. This is in particular true for interphase FISH, which allows  hemizygosity of WHS
C1  as the cause of the typical WHS facial  the simultaneous evaluation of various DNA-regions independent  appearance. Our results indicate that the other key features,  of the cell cycle and -if applied to tissue sections- within the  microcephaly, cleft palate and mental retardation probably result from  natural tissue context. Formalin Üxed and parafÜn embedded  haploinsufÜciency of more than one gene in the region. In addition,  tissue samples represent the vast majority of archival material. If  our results suggest that a substantial number of breakpoints co- interphase cytogenetics is applied to such archival material it can  localize with low copy repeats present in the 4p terminal region. This  be corroborated with clinical data to establish the prognostic value  may imply that low copy repeats present in the human genome are  of chromosomal copy number changes in a tumor genome. Here,  not only susceptibility loci for chromosomal rearrangements but, in  we present advances in technology for the simultaneous analysis  addition, are susceptibility sites for terminal chromosomal deletions. of multiple DNA-probes within tissue sections of various thickness.  Images are captured using an epiÝuorescence microscope equipped  
P0291 . Ring chromosome 15 - Clinical heterogeneity and ring  with a motorized table to collect a stack of images at deÜned levels  chromosome instability - A case report and Review in z-direction. For probe labeling we use up to seven different  D. S. Krishna Murthy, R. A. Al-Najjar, S. A. Al-Awadi;  Ýuorochromes (DEAC, Alexa488, CY3, Texas Red, CY5, CY5.5  Kuwait Medical Genetics Center, Sulaibikat, Kuwait. and CY7). In addition, DAPI is used for a volume rendering of  Ring chromosome 15 is not commonly observed, and the clinical  nuclei which allows us to deÜne the shape and borders of individual  manifestations/pathogenesis may be extremely mild and variable.  nuclei. Subsequently, images are processed with deconvolution- We report here the Ürst case of a ring chromosome 15 among 16,750  programs to remove out-of-focus information. In a next step probes  cases karyotyped in the heterogeneous population of Kuwait referred  are color-classiÜed. Finally, color-classiÜed probes and nuclei can  for chromosomal analysis. be reconstructed to reveal 3D-images. We have developed several  A young healthy 7 year-old boy with short stature, undescended/ multicolor probes which are relevant for different tumor entities. Here  retractile testes and mild dysmorphic features was referred for routine  we will focus on our current applications on specimen derived from  cytogenetic investigation. The family history was unremarkable.  colon tissue. Examples include the evaluation of normal colon tissue  ProbandÓs 3 brothers and four sisters are all normal. Metaphase  and colon adenoma. chromosomes of proband and his parents were prepared from short Cytogenetics 146 
P0294 . Breakpoint characterisation of two patients with small  We report on a 10-year-old male patient with classical features of  14q deletions : genotype-phenotype correlation Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). High resolution GTG banding revealed  S. Sodia1, M. Wright2, B. Plecko-Startinig3, C. Windpassinger1, W. Emberger1,  a loss of the Prader-Willi critical region (PWCR) originated by an  H. Zierler1, K. Wagner1, P. M. Kroisel1, E. Petek1;  unbalanced translocation t(15;21)(q13;p13) and putative subsequent  loss of the derivative chromosome 15. NOR-banding showed an  1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics Medical University of Graz,  interstitial active NOR in the resulting derivative chromosome  Graz, Austria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre of Life, New- der(21). Findings were proved by FISH technique using probes  castle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Department of Pediatrics,Medical Universi- for PWCR (LSI D15Z1,SNRPN,PML). Whole chromosome paints  ty of Graz, Graz, Austria. (wcp15, wcp21) and an all telomeric probe conÜrmed the setting of  Isolated interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 14 are  translocation as described above and could show the presence of an  relatively rare. We describe two patients with small 14q deletions.  interstitial telomere within chromosome der(21). Patient one is a 3ď year old boy with a 3.5 Mbp interstitial 14q12- Furthermore an apparently balanced whole-arm translocation t(10;17)  q13.1 deletion. Mapping of the deletion was performed using FISH  was detected. Investigations by FISH (wcp10, wcp17; cep10, cep17)  analysis with region-speciÜc BAC clones. BAC clones R
P11 -26M6  and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) demonstrated the  and R
P11 -81F13 were absent from one chromosome 14 from the  presumed balanced state. Evidently, both translocations, t(15;21) and  patient. Molecular analyses of 16 polymorphic markers helped to  t(10;17), have arisen de novo - they were not detectable in parental  narrow down the breakpoints and demonstrated that the derivative  karyotypes. So we deal with an uncommon complex chromosome  chromosome 14 is of maternal origin. In this study, we have also  rearrangement involving four chromosomes causing PWS. generated a contiguous transcription map of the genomic interval  deleted in our patient, linking the regions near markers D14
S1060   
P0297 . Constitutional 3p deletion including the entire MITF gene  and D14
S286 . Several known genes including TITF1, PAX9, and  causes an intermediate Tietz / Waardenburg type IIA Syndrome  MIPO
L1  could be identiÜed in this genomic segment. Patient two,  Phenotype a 11 months old boy, shows a deletion of 14q12-q13.1 between the  L. Ofner1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2, B. Schaperdoth2, C. Windpassinger1, K.  polymorphic markers D14
S262  and D14
S975 .The deletion was found  Preisegger1, K. Wagner1, E. Petek1, P. M. Kroisel1;  to be of paternal origin. Some known genes are located within the  deleted region including the COCH gene, known to be responsible for  1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Universitatsklinikum Essen, Essen,  autosomal dominant deafness. A genotype - phenotype correlation of  Germany. this two patients as well as a review of literature was performed. We report on a 3 years-old patient with symptoms of Tietz- and  Waardenburg type IIA syndrome and general developmental delay,  
P0295 . A patient with a supernumerary analphoid marker  psychomotoric retardation as well as mild additonal dysmorphic  chromosome identiÜed as inv dup 6q associated to terminal  features. Analysis of G-banded chromosomes of the propositus  deletion 6q. showed a de novo interstitial deletion of the short arm of chromosome  A. Delicado1, P. Lapunzina1, J. C. Cigudosa2, L. Fern\x86ndez1, M. Palomares1, R.  3, del(3)(p14p11). Fine mapping of deletion breakpoints was  Gracia1, I. L\x96pez Pajares1;  performed using FISH analysis with region-speciÜc BAC clones.  Six BACs (R
P11 -582M4, R
P11 -152N21, R
P11 -450I19, R
P11 - 1Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de  520D19, R
P11 -485H21, R
P11 -544A22) were absent from one  Investigaciones Oncol\x96gicas, Madrid, Spain. chromosome 3. Molecular analyses using polymorphic markers  We report a child with moderate mental retardation, craniofacial  helped to further narrow down the breakpoints and demonstrated  dysmorphism and malformations who was previously found to have  that the derivative chromosome 3 is of paternal origin. The deleted  a « de novo« small supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC),  s segment encompasses about 14 Mb between marker D3
S1261  and  from unidentiÜed origin. A re-evaluation at 17 years of age applying  SHGC-106366. Only a small number of known genes including MITF,  spectral karyotyping (SKY) revealed that the marker chromosome  which is known to be mutated in the autosomal dominantly inherited  was derived from chromosome 6. Tietz syndrome or in a proportion of Waardenburg type IIA patients,  FISH analysis. Whole chromosome 6 probe conÜrmed that  are mapped to this genomic region. This is the Ürst patient with an  marker chromosome was derived from chromosome 6. However,  intermediate Tietz-/Waardenburg type IIA syndrome phenotype that is  centromeric speciÜc 6 probe (D6Z1) failed to show signal in the  caused by a constitutional 3p deletion including the entire MITF gene. marker chromosome, demonstrating absence of ŋ-satellite DNA and  suggesting that a Neocentromere had been formed. In addition,  
P0298 . Characterization of six mosaic and non-mosaic marker  subtelomeric 6q probe revealed two signals in both terminal ends  chromosomes by comparative genomic hybridization of the SMC and no signal on the distal segment of long arms of  s J. M. Belloso1,2, M. R. Caballin2, E. Gabau1, N. Baena1,3, R. Vidal4, S. Villatoro1,  one chromosome 6. Therefore, the karyotype was interpreted as  M. Guitart1;  a inverted duplication of the distal portion of long arms of  chromosome 6, associated to a terminal deletion of the long arm  1Laboratori de Gen\x8etica. UDIAT-centre diagn\x97stic. Corporacio Parc Tauli,  of chromosome 6. Thus, the patient had a partial trisomy for the  Sabadell, Spain, 2Unitat dªantropologia. Universitat aut\x97noma de barce- duplicated segment 6q25.3-qter. lona, Cerdanyola, Spain, 3Laboratori dªanalisis cliniques Balague Center,  His karyotype was: 47,XY, del(6) (q25.3-qter), + mar. ish del (6)  LªHospitalet, Spain, 4Servei de Pediatr\x91a. Hospital de Terrassa, Terrassa,  (wpc+, D6Z1+, subtel 6q-), inv dup (6) (wcp+, D6Z1-, subtel 6q ++)  Spain. de novo. In the present study we apply comparative genomic hybridization  Microsatellites analysis: Uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome  (CGH) in six patients with de novo prenatal or postnatal extra marker  6 was excluded. chromosome, four in a mosaic state and one observed in less  Clinical features in our patient are similar to that of other cases  than 50 % of cells. In all cases CGH, conventional cytogenetic and  previously reported, conÜrming that the region 6q26-qter is the  FISH techniques allowed the identiÜcation of the origin of the extra  minimum critical region for the phenotypic characteristics of trisomy  marker chromosome. After normal CGH results, in two prenatal and  6q syndrome. one child with an abnormal phenotype (mental retardation, lack of  attention, facial dysmorphism, and macrorchidism) heterochromatic  
P0296 . A case of Prader-Willi syndrome caused by an  composition was deduced. This is supported by high resolution- uncommon unbalanced de novo translocation t(15;21) presented  CGH result and a normal phenotype at birth in one case. In the  with interstitial active NOR and an additional de novo whole-arm  others three cases, in a boy with facial dysmorphism, hyperactivity  translocation t(10;17). and speech delay CGH analyses showed a gain of material in  R. Richter1, J. Burger1, S. Wiegand2, H. Neitzel1, H. T\x99nnies1;  8p10-p12. According to what was reported our patient showed a  mild abnormal phenotype but close to that detected in patients with  1Institute of Human Genetics, Chromosome Diagnostics, Charit\x8d, Campus  chromosomal reorganizations of this region. In a case of a healthy  Virchow Clinic, Berlin, Germany, 2Children Hospital, Charit\x8d, Campus Virchow  man with a history of spontaneous abortions, CGH proÜle showed  Clinic, Berlin, Germany. a deviation in 8q10-q12. Meiotic study showed an increased of Cytogenetics 147 aneuploid gametes suggesting an interchromosomal effect. In a girl  originated by a de novo translocation in a paternal germinal cell. We  with speech delay, motor skill and object manipulation difÜculties, an  concluded that the phenotype observed in our patient results from the  invdup(15)(q11q13) was characterized. The phenotype is milder than  combination of defects described in the isolated dup(3q) and distal  reported manifestations, despite having PW/SA region on the marker  del(8p) syndromes and discuss that olfactory receptor (OR) gene  chromosome. clusters may be responsible as a the possible mechanism implicated  We conclude that CGH is a very useful tool to characterize prenatal  in this chromosomal rearragement or postnatal de novo marker chromosomes, even when the mosaic  state is below 50 % of cells. 
P0301 . Familial acrocentric pericentromeric cryptic translocation  14;22 ascertained by miscarriages 
P0299 . Cell lines of patients with a congenital autosomal- A. T. Midro1, S. Langer2,3, B. Panasiuk1, R. Lesniewicz1, M. R. Speicher2,3;  recessive disorder characterised by premature chromosome  1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 2Institut  condensation show in addition delayed chromosome  f\x9er Humangenetik, Technische Universit\x89t, M\x9enchen, Germany, 3Institut f\x9er  decondensation and a DNA repair defect conÜned to the  Humangenetik, GSF-Forschungszentrum f\x9er Umwelt und Gesundheit, Neuher- condensed chromatin berg, Germany. M. Trimborn1, M. Stumm2, D. Schindler3, H. Neitzel1;  We describe a family in which several family members had recurrent  1Institute of Human Genetics, Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Human  miscarriages. Routine GTG and RBG banding chromosomes in  Genetics, Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Department of  one family member revealed presence of a de novo supernumerary  Human Genetics, University of W\x9erzburg, W\x9erzburg, Germany. marker chromosome. To characterize this marker we used AcroM- Recently, we described a syndrome associated with microcephaly,  FISH [Langer et al.(2001)HumGenet109:152-158]. As most marker  mental retardation and a cell cycle defect characterised by an  chromosomes are derived from acrocentric chromosomes, AcroM- increased fraction of prophase-like cells in standard cytogenetic  FISH uses a special probe mix consisting of painting probes for all  preparations. Cell cycle analysis revealed premature entry of the  acrocentric chromosomes, centromere probes for chromosomes 13/ chromosomes into condensation in the early G2-phase of the cell  21, 14/22, 22, 15, and a probe speciÜc for rDNA, each labeled with a  cycle. Treatment of lymphoblastoid cell lines of these patients with  speciÜc combination of Ýuorochromes. The SMC was stained with the  the inhibitor of cytokinesis cytochalasin B six hours prior harvesting,  centromere probe for chromosomes 13/21. There was no signal for  revealed a high fraction of binucleated cells in G1-phase displaying  the rDNA probe or for a painting probe and we described the marker  condensed chromatin. We conclude that the cells do not only  as der(13or21)(pterŗq10)(D13/21Z1+). We found in addition a  show premature chromosome condensation, but also a prolonged  rearranged chromosome 14, where the centromeric region was found  chromosome decondensation process. Thus, the underlying gene  to be derived from chromosome 22. Acrocentric pericentromeric  defect is also disturbing timely decondensation in G1 phase after  abnormalities were recently found in high frequencies in couples with  mitosis. These results suggest that chromosome decondensation is a  three or more miscarriages [Cockwell et al.(2003)HumGenet112:298- regulated and active process. 302]. These abnormalities may be the underlying cause of recurrent  48 hours after treatment with DNA-damaging agents or ionising  miscarriages as they may result in abnormal pairing conÜgurations  radiation the cell lines of the patients showed no increased sensitivity  at meiosis. We analyzed the patientÓs mother, also having a history  in Ýow cytometry studies and chromosome breakage rate was not  of recurrent miscarriages. Using AcroM-FISH, we found the same  elevated 24 hours after irradiation. The metaphase index drops  t(14;22). Currently, we analyze other family members, including  drastically already one hour after irradiation, indicating that the  the grandmother and siblings having no history of recurrent  induced damage seems to be detected even on the condensed G2  miscarriages. If the t(14;22) segregates together with the history  chromatin. However, if cells are exposed to ionising radiation 5 hours  of miscarriages, it could represent further indication that cryptic  before chromosome preparation to increase the fraction of analysed  acrocentric pericentromeric abnormalities may represent a cause for  metaphases irradiated in the condensed prophase-like state, a  miscarriages. AcroM-FISH appears to be an efÜcient approach to  higher rate of chromosome breakage is found in the patient cell lines  identify such chromosomal changes and may be included in work-up  compared to normal controls. This result points to a possible DNA  of couples after miscarriages. repair defect which is conÜned to and speciÜc for the condensed  status of the chromatin. 
P0302 . An apparently balanced de novo translocation t(3;9)(p12- p13;p21-p22.1) in a boy with psychomotor retardation and  
P0300 . Trisomy 3q25-qter and monosomy 8p23.1-pter:  dysmorphic features cytogenetic and molecular analysis with delineation of the  S. Fuchs1, S. L\x9ettgen1, S. Nagel2, B. Schr\x99der1, K. Wenner2, A. Gal1;  phenotype. 1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89tsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,  C. Venegas1, G. Zafra2, G. Bucio2, U. Friedrich3, M. Houman3, N. Monroy1, S.  Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik f\x9er Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universit\x89tsklini- Kofman1, A. Cervantes1;  kum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. 1Genetics Dept. Hospital General de Mexico-Fac de Medicina UNAM, Mexico  We report a 2-year-old boy with severe psychomotor delay, muscular  City, Mexico, 2Gen\x8dtica Medica, Hospital Espa\x95ol de M\x8dxico, Mexico City,  hypotonia, and dysmorphic features including prominent forehead  Mexico, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark, Aarhus,  with high anterior hairline and small mandible. He is the Ürst child of  Denmark. non-consanguineous parents, born by caesarean section due to CTG  We describe a 4-year-old boy with a karyotype 46,XY,der(8) (8qterŗ worsening at 42nd gestational week of an uncomplicated pregnancy.  8p23.1::3q25ŗqter). The dup(3q) syndrome is due to a partial  Birth weight was 2990 g, length 52 cm, and head circumference  trisomy of (q26.31-27.3) and the phenotype of these patients  36 cm. Statomotor delay was obvious at the age of 10 months for  resembles to Cornelia de Lange syndrome. The clinical Ündings  the patient could not turn and crawl. At 22 months of age he was  include typical facial features, mental and growth retardation,  able to walk with holding hands. He did not speak and react to  genitourinary malformations and congenital heart anomalies. Patients  speech, although hearing was normal as was the EEG. Conventional  with monosomy 8p exhibit a recognizable syndrome characterized by  cytogenetic analysis on peripheral lymphocytes revealed an  growth and mental retardation, microcephaly, minor facial anomalies,  apparently balanced de novo translocation, 46,XY,t(3;9)(p12-p13;p21- congenital heart defects and characteristic behavior. Our patient  p22.1). The reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 3 and 9  showed delayed mental and growth development, facial anomalies,  was conÜrmed by FISH analysis [t(3;9)(wcp3+,wcp9+;wcp3+,wcp9 ventricular septal defect, phimosis, cryptorchidism and behavioral  +)]. Hybridization of a panel of mapped BAC probes to metaphase  problems. Magnetic resonance image of the brain demonstrated  spreads of the patient delineated the breakpoint regions and  agenesis of corpus callosum and polymicrogiria. The cytogenetic  mapped one of them proximal to clone R
P11 -291
P10  (3p12) and the  analysis with GTG, CBG and QFQ reveled a 46,XY,add(8p)  second one proximal to clone R
P11 -220B22 (9p22.1). Further FISH  karyotype. Reverse painting and microsatellite analysis demonstrated  experiments to narrow down the breakpoint regions are in progress.  partial monosomy of 8p23.1ŗpter and partial trisomy of 3q25-qter.  Most of the patients with interstitial deletions including bands 9p21- The data suggest that the chromosomal abnormality was probably  p13 reported in the literature presented with developmental delay Cytogenetics 148 and minor unspeciÜc anomalies as did our case. Thus, it is tempting  rearrangement of chromosome 22. Further studies are necessary to  to speculate that this chromosomal region harbors a putative  explain observed rearrangement in details. gene for mental retardation that is affected in the patient by the  rearrangement. 
P0304 . Clinical heterogeneity and Genotype - Karyotype -  Phenotype correlations in 18p- Syndrome 
P0303 . Analysis of Cell-Free Fetal DNA from Maternal Plasma  S. Guarducci, E. Andreucci, L. Giunti, I. Sani, U. Ricci, C. Bacci, B. Toschi, E.  and Serum using a Conventional Multiplex PCR Lapi, M. Giovannucci Uzielli;  N. L. Satiroglu-Tufan1,2, A. C. Tufan3,2, B. Kaleli4, B. Yildirim4, C. N. Semerci1,  University of Florence, Florence, Italy. H. Bagci1,2;  Monosomy for the short arm of chromosome 18 is one of the most  1Pamukkale University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology,  frequent autosomal deletions observed in humans . Most cases  Denizli, Turkey, 2Pamukkale University Research Center for Genetic  result from terminal deletion of 18p, while 16% are the result of an  Engineering and Biotechnology, Denizli, Turkey, 3Pamukkale University  unbalanced whole arm translocation resulting in monosomy 18p. The  School of Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Denizli, Turkey,  parental origin of these deletions appears to be equally distributed,  4Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and  being half maternally and half paternally derived. From the study of  Gynecology, Denizli, Turkey. a group of unpublished subjects, observed in our Centre, we report  Recent technology enables usage of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal  interesting data on the broad clinical spectrum, and on the natural  plasma and serum for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. We compare  history of this disorder, recently enriched by new aspects. the success of two different DNA extraction techniques (heat- In particular we report the results of detailed clinical and laboratory  based or the QIAamp DNA Blood-MiniKit method) on maternal  studies in few 18p- patients with rare clinical patterns: Turner  plasma and serum samples in conventional multiplex PCR-setting  syndrome- like phenotype, holoprosencephaly - cyclocephaly with  to determine the best material and protocol to be used for prenatal  proboscis, congenital heart defects, dystonia of the lower extremities  gender diagnosis. Analysis of material from 5 healthy male and 5  and visual defects not accompanied by malformations of the central  healthy, non-pregnant women revealed gender speciÜcity of either  nervous system, schizophrenia. DNA extraction method from either material was 100%, and in  Cytogenetic, molecular and Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization  multiplex PCR setup the DY
S14  sequence represented the male  analyses of short arm of chromosome 18 were performed on  gender, GAPDH sequence was used as an internal control for  chromosomes and genomic DNA to determine the size and parental  the presence of extracted genomic DNA. Cytogenetic analysis of  origin of the deletion, and to get useful data on the genotype -  cultured amniocytes from 15 pregnant women revealed 11 male and  karyotype - phenotype correlation. 4 female fetuses. Only PCR results obtained with DNA extracted  The majority of the breakpoints were located between marker  from maternal plasma using the QIAamp DNA Blood-MiniKit method  D18s852 on 18p and the centromere, and the distribution of the size  were in complete concordance with cytogenetic analyses, whereas  of the deletions supports the presence of a breakpoint cluster in the  all other PCR attempts using DNA extracted from maternal serum  short arm of chromosome 18. via either extraction method or from maternal plasma using the heat- based direct method failed to have 100% accuracy for diagnosis of  
P0305 . Genome-wide BAC microarrays: Detection of copy  fetal gender. Statistically there was no signiÜcant difference between  number changes and mapping reduced genomic representations  the performance of serum and plasma samples within the same  at 1 Mb resolution DNA extraction group for either method. The cumulative accuracy  P. Brooks, C. Marcaillou, M. Vanpeene, J. P. Saraiva, F. Rousseau, F. Tores, A.  of QIAamp DNA Blood-MiniKit extraction (96.6%) was signiÜcantly  Philippi, P. Lindenbaum, P. Gesnouin, J. Hager;  higher than that of heat-based direct extraction (83.3%;P<0.05).  IntegraGen, Evry, France. These results suggest that DNA extraction may be a major success- A microarray has been developed to detect genomic copy number  limiting step and preferably at least one sample from each material,  changes and map reduced representations of the human genome.  (maternal plasma and serum), has to be utilized for such prenatal  The arrays contain 2779 BAC clones with a median spacing of 0.95  genetic diagnosis. Mb. Clone identity was validated by end sequencing, Üngerprinting  and STS content. SufÜcient DNA for printing arrays is assured  
P0303 . Partial trisomy 22q11 and tetrasomy22q13 resulting  by generic ampliÜcation of BAC miniprep DNA. The clone DNAÓs  from complex rearrangement of chromosome 22 in a child with  and various controls are printed in quadruplicate. Industrial-scale  distinct morphological phenotype. batches of about 80 slides are qualiÜed by SyBr Green staining and  R. Posmyk1, S. Langer2, A. Sawicka1, A. T. Midro1, M. R. Speicher3;  hybridisation in real experimental conditions. Signal/noise ratios  1Department Clinical Genetics, Bialystok, Poland, 2Institut fur  ranging from 4 to 200 are typical, thus providing a 50-fold dynamic  Humangenetik,Technische Universitat Munchen, Munchen, Germany, 3Institut  range, with an average signal/noise ratio of about 8 for self-self  fur Humangenetik, Technische Universitat Munchen, Munchen, Germany. hybridisations. Detection of copy number changes is illustrated  Phenotypic consequences of unusual genome rearrangement of  by analysis of DNA isolated from human tumor tissue. The arrays  chromosome 22 has been described in a one year old girl seen  enable the detection of ampliÜed and deleted regions in tumors with  because of several craniofacial features, developmental delay and  turbulent chromosomes, despite the presence of substantial levels  agenesis of the left kidney. A detailed catalogue of well-deÜned traits  of DNA from euploidic cells. Two examples of mapping reduced  for systematic morphological descriptions, such as one proposed  representations are shown. The arrays are used tomap reduced  by Stengel-Rutkowski was used. Chromosome analysis by GTG  representations generated by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP- and RBG showed enlargement short arm of chromosome 22. In M- chip). IntegraGenÓs Genome Hybrid Identity ProÜling (GenomeHIP)  FISH, the extra material clearly showed the chromosome 22 speciÜc  produces a reduced representation from a mixture of the genomes  spectral signature. In addition, the Cy3.5 and the Cy5.5 channels are  of affected sib-pairs, such that the Ünal product is enriched for  depicted. Chromosome 22 was labeled with these two Ýuorochromes  DNA that is Ðidentical by descentÑ between the siblings. The BAC  and the extra material was stained in both color channels, as  arrays are used to simultaneously map the GenomeHIP reduced  the normal chromosome 22 material. For further conÜrmation we  representation and evaluate copy number changes.. Processing of  hybridized a chromosome 22 speciÜc painting probe, which yielded  hundreds of arrays of affected sib-pairs has revealed genomic loci,  the same result. In FISH experiments with the commercial DiGeorge  and subsequently genes, linked to complex diseases such as obesity  probe from Vysis the green probe for 22q13 showed two signals,  and autism. a small signal close to the centromere and distally a larger second  signal un the short arm of the der(22).The red 22q11 probe showed  one signal which was Ýanked by the two green signals. Based on this  hybridization we would currently describe the der(22) as der(22)(: 22q13->22q?::22q11->22q13::22pter->22qter) and interpretate as  partial trisomy 22q11 and tetrasomy22q13 resulting from complex Cytogenetics 149 
P0307 . Sex determination by Nested-PCR using amelogenin  42% ultrasound abnormalities. Ultrasound examination is now  gene more effective than before. However the age of pregnant women is  A. Rahimi;  increasing in our country and therefore age-indications will be more  frequent in the future. Generally about 60 % of inborn chromosomal  CinnaGen Inc., Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). aberrations are detected in Czech Republic by prenatal diagnoses.  Sex determination is to determine fetus sex in X-linked genetic  All pregnancies with pathological karyotypes were terminated in our  diseases. The aim of this project in clinical aspects is to determine  group under study. the sex of fetus in initial stages of pregnancy in pre-pregnancy  Supported by Research Project CEZ MZOL 340000001 diagnosis as well as IVF cases, biopsy being done from fetus. At Ürst,  the system being optimized by blood test on 16 male and female  
P0310 . Cystic Hygroma: unexpected cytogenetic study candidates and then 74 sampleÓs chorionic villi (C.V) and sampling  R. Pinto Leite, M. Souto, B. Carvalho, E. Ribeiro;  was done by transabdominal. SampleÓs sex being determined  by nested-PCR and this technique has shown high speciÜty and  Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da R\x8dgua,S.A., Vila Real, Portugal. sensitivity. The system sensitivity increased up to ampliÜcation of a  Although the ultrasonography development allows the early detection  single cell and it was validated by ampliÜcation of DNA from fertileÓs  of fetal development and since the ultrasound at 10-14 weeks  oocyte. Also, the DNA of 16 samples of human fetus, which were in  of gestation is a routine analyse to detect congenital anomalies,  different cellular stages, and sex of 13 fetus being determined.The  including the cystic hygroma, we continue to Ünd several situations  target gene in this research is amelogenin which is on X and Y  where a late diagnostic has been done. Unfortunately the Health  chromosomes thus this system is contained to a positive internal  Promotion and Education is not yet a reality of our country. control. After PCR in second round, observation of 484 and 672 bp  We report a case of a young pregnant woman with an abnormal  fragments indicating that its sex is male, and observation of only  ultrasound scan at 17 weeks of gestation. It revealed an abnormal  484 bp fragment indicating that its sex is female. In the other hand ,  fetus with several ecographic anomalies: cystic hygroma, anasarca,  the observation of 484 bp fragment indicate the effectiveness of the  oligohydramnios, ascytis, pleural effusion, no bladder was found and  system and 672 bp fragment will determine the sex. In single cell  the umbilical cord had two vessels. PCR in order to prevent ampliÜcation only single allele or preferential  ItÓs a young, health, non-consanguineous couple, with a normal  ampliÜcation will increase the initial temperature of denaturation so  obstetric and familial history (the Ürst pregnancy resulted in a normal  that to prevent the occurrence of allele dropout . boy). At the prenatal counselling, the couple understood the situation  
P0308 . A Novel Microdeletion, Del(2)(q22.3q23.3) in a Mentally  and elected termination of pregnancy and once there was no  Retarded Patient, Detected by Array-based Comparative  amniotic liquid, we opted to do the punch in the cystic hygroma for  Genomic Hybridization cytogenetics study of the fetus. B. B. A. de Vries, D. A. Koolen, L. E. L. M. Vissers, W. Nillesen, D. Smeets, C.  After the termination of the pregnancy, blood, skin and placenta,  M. A. van Ravenswaaij, E. A. Sistermans, J. A. Veltman;  were taken to cytogenetics studies. The blood and cystic hygroma  karyotypes were 45,X and 47,XX,+20/46,XX (90-10%) respectively.  University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Unfortunately it was not possible to achieve a result with skin and  A novel interstitial submicroscopic deletion in the long arm of  placenta. chromosome 2 detected by genome wide array-based comparative  Whenever we have hygromas we attempt to make comparative  genomic hybridization (arrayCGH), is reported in a mentally retarded  studies between blood and cystic hygroma`s results. This case was  14-years old girl with additional facial dysmorphisms. The deletion  the Ürst that we found a difference between them. included three clones (R
P11 -89
L3 , R
P11 -90K5, R
P11 -72H3) mapping  in a 2 Mb genomic interval located on 2q22.3q23.1, just distal from  
P0311 . Quick procedure for quality testing of culture medium in  the Mowat Wilson critical region (SIP-1). Molecular analyses of 11  prenatal cell culture polymorphic microsatellite markers delineated the deletion to a 3-5  B. Sikkema-Raddatz, R. Suijkerbuijk, J. van der Vlag, M. Stoepker, C. Buys,  Mb region spanning 2q22.3q23.3 and demonstrated the maternal  G. te Meerman;  origin of the derivate chromosome. Similarities between clinical  features in our patient and in patients with deletions including the  University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. 2q22.3q23.3 region were observed, such as psychomotor retardation,  To increase the reliability of amniotic Ýuid (AF) cell culture, quality of  hypotonia, microcephaly and facial dysmorphic features. The deleted  new batches of medium needs to be evaluated before use. Until now,  region encompassed 9 well transcribed sequences including four  growth curves of secondary AF cultures were compared for new and  known protein coding genes (Activin A Receptor type II gene, the  old medium over several days. The new batch was only introduced  Origin Recognition Complex subunit 4 gene, DKFZ
P566 F2124  in routine if growth was better or equal. Since this method is not  and the Kinesin Family Member 5C gene). HaploinsufÜciency of  objective, we wanted to develop an absolute test based on number  one or more genes within the deleted region could be causative  of clones and culture failures in primary AF cultures. Differences  for the phenotype. In the near future an increasing number of  in quality might be better detectable under sub-optimal conditions.  submicroscopic deletions and duplications will be identiÜed by  Therefore, we cultured AF cells in medium containing different  arrayCGH. Clinical comparison of cases with overlapping deletions  proportions of PBS. Primary cultures were started with 0.8 ml pooled  will be imperative to understand the meaning of these Ündings and  AF. Undiluted medium served as control. The number of clones  will allow us to identify genes involved in mental retardation and  was counted on days 6 and 8. A dilution to 30% appeared to a 50%  human malformation. reduction of number of clones. Three cultures of 10 individual patients  were initiated. The average number of clones was 4 (SD 2.93).  Prenatal diagnosis One culture failed. Based on this result, we set the threshold for  the minimum number of successful cultures at 26 out of 30 and the  
P0309 . Actual efÜciency of prenatal diagnosis in IInd trimester minimum mean number of clones to 3, theoretically leading to a bad  M. Kucerova, L. Krofta, O. Benesova, I. Kucerova, A. Sipek, K. Oplestilova;  result due to random Ýuctuations only 1 in 100 times. The procedure  has been tested with different batches of medium resulting in uniform  Inst. for the Care of Mother and Child, Prague 4. 14710, Czech Republic. data. This procedure implies a high probability that no medium will be  Survey of results of 1000 amniocenteses done between 2001- accepted with less than required quality, while rejection of batches  2003 (two and half year). Detection of inborn chromosomal  that would have sufÜcient quality if tested more extensively will be  aberrations was 1.9% (19). Only 8 were M. Down - trisomy 21. One  minimal. was Edwards syndrome, two were Patau syndromes, one partial  deletion of 18q, one partial trisomy of chromosome 5q and the  rest were abnormalities of sex chromosomes. Type of indications:  26% age-indications (35 years and more), 36% were abnormal  results of biochemical screening (Tripletest -AFP, HCG, 
E3 ), and Cytogenetics 150 
P0312 . Haplotype Analysis of Related ATM Markers Facilitate  1John F Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Danish Cytogenetic Central  Prenatal Diagnosis in Iranian Ataxia Telangiectasia Patients Register, Aarhus, Denmark. B. Bayat;  The Danish Cytogenetic Central Register has a complete registration  of all cytogenetic analyses carried out in Denmark since 1969. The  National Research Center of genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran,  Ürst prenatal diagnosis in Denmark for a clinical purpose was carried  Iran (Islamic Republic of). out 1970, and in 1978 it was decided politically to offer prenatal  Ataxia Telangiectasia is an autosomal recessive disorder in 1/40000  diagnosis to all women >35 years. Currently around 10% of all  to 1/100000 in reported populations. There is 25% possibility  pregnancies are investigated for chromosome abnormalities using  for having an affected child when parents are carrier for ATM  chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis. gene mutation. There is no cure available for this disease and  From theoretical calculations based on the increased risk of Down  prenatal testing is strongly recommended in preventation of this  syndrome associated with maternal age it can expected that prenatal  disease.Although preference method is the direct mutation analysis  diagnosis in women > 35 years (with subsequent termination of  of ATM gene, but large size of the ATM gene with 63 exons and  pregnancies with Down syndrome) would lead to a reduction in the  the large number of possible mutation in patients considerably limit  birth prevalence of Down syndrome with approx. 30%. During the  the facibility of mutations analysis as a choice in diagnosis. Indirect  period 1969-2002 the incidence of children born with Down syndrome  method is a better tool when parent are not carrier of founder  Ýuctuated between 0.66 and 1.17 per thousand liveborns/yr. No  mutation and pass different mutations to their children. Indirect  signiÜcant decline in the incidence was registered over time. In the  molecular diagnosis using ATM related molecular markers facilitate  same period the incidence of prenatally diagnosed fetuses with Down  prenatal diagnosis of AT children. In this study four molecular  syndrome increased from zero to about 1,1 per thousand liveborns/ markers: D11
S2179 ,D11
S1787 ,D11
S535 ,D11
S1343  are genotype in  yr. The main reason for these observations is the increase in mean  18 unrelated families from different region of IRAN. Those markers  maternal age (from 24 years to 30 years). are ampliÜed using extracted sequence primers from Gene Bank  The Danish National Board of Health is about to propose new  with their described PCR conditions. The ampliÜed products were  guidelines for prenatal counselling offering Nuchal Translucency  separated using denaturing PAGE gels, and the data were analyzed  ultrasound screening and/or serum screening to all pregnant women. to detect their pattern of inheritance in each family. In all families  Data on the past and present developments will be presented. segregation of alleles were recording to mandelian inheritance and  affected chromosomes were distinguishable from unaffected ones.  
P0315 . Mutation detection and prenatal diagnosis of iranian  All carriers and affected patients were diagnosed accurately. Thus  families with SMA (I-III) this method is effectively usable in prenatal diagnosis of ataxia  P. Derakhshandeh1,2, M. Esmaili1, S. A. Rahmani2, E. Attaran2, M. M. Sajedi- telangiectasia Far1, D. D. Farhud1,2, F. Babrzadeh1;  
P0313 . ConÜdential enquiry into pre-natal genetic care 1Dep. of Human Genetics, School of Public Health, Tehran Univ. of Medical  I. Nippert1, C. Vogel1, J. Horst1, B. Eiben2, F. Louwen3, P. Miny4, H. Neitzel5, J.  Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Genetic Clinic, Tehran, Iran  Schmidtke6;  (Islamic Republic of). Spinal muscular atrophy (SMAs) are autosomal recessive disease,  1Universit\x89tsklinikum M\x9enster, M\x9enster, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik  in its severe form, after cystic Übrosis, in its milder forms, the second  und Zytologie Nordrhein, Oberhausen, Germany, 3Klinik der J.W. Goethe-Uni- most common pediatric neuromuscular disease after Duchene  versit\x89t, Frankfurt, Germany, 4Universit\x89ts-Kinderspital beider Basel, Basel,  muscular dystrophy. Depending on the age at the time of onset and  Switzerland, 5Charit\x8d, Berlin, Germany, 6Medizinischen Hochschule Hannover,  severity, SMA is classiÜed into three types (Werdnig-Hoffmann=type  Hannover, Germany. I, intermediate form=type II and Kugelberg-welander=type III). SMA  Introduction: ConÜdential enquiry is an accepted form of clinical audit  causes early death (type I) or increasing disability in childhood (type  that scrutinizes factors which may inÝuence quality and outcome of  II, III). All three types of SMA map to chromosome region 5q11.2- care. Genetic prenatal diagnosis is part of routine ante-natal care  q13.3. Homologous deletions in exon 7 and 8 of the survival motor  for women with a known a priori risk for a genetic disorder or for  neuron (SMN) gene have been described in >96% of patients with  those who are identiÜed to be at increased risk by maternal serum  SMA. screening and/or fetal ultrasound. This study was undertaken to  The aims of this study were to screen the deletions of SMA gene  assess how obstetricians manage the genetic aspect of care for  (exon 7 & 8) and NAIP gene (exon 5 & 6) in Iranian patients for  these women. prenatal diagnosis of SMA. We have studied 47 families with SMA  Methods: The study was designed to investigate the antecedents and  types I-III, partly with their affected children and their chorion villus  sequelae of positive cytogenetic and molecular tests and of positive  samples (CVS). DNA deletion genotypes were determined by PCR- ultrasound Ündings. A total of 19.334 pregnancies were followed at  RFLP analysis amplifying exons 7 and 8 of SMN. Results revealed  different health care settings including university hospitals and private  the homozygous deletions of exon 7 and 8 of the SMN gene in 46/ practice. 47(97%). 19 samples (CVS) from the pregnant women with affected  Results: The majority (76%) of women with positive test results  children, have been tested for deletions of exons 7 and 8 of SMN  were offered qualiÜed pre-test genetic counseling although major  gene. differences were observed at different settings ranging from 59%- The percentage of homozygous deletions in the study is almost as  92% of women who received counseling. However only 29% of all  high as that reported in other investigations. This method is useful,  women received qualiÜed post-test counseling Î again signiÜcant  fast and effective for gene diagnosis and prenatal diagnosis of SMA. differences (17%-100%) in different settings were observed.  Termination of pregnancy took place at an average of 3.8 days after  
P0316 . Prenatal diagnosis of CATCH22 the information of the test result was provided (range: 0-13 days).  M. Hejtm\x86nkov\x86, M. Nĩmeěkov\x86, M. Brouěkov\x86, J. Marek, M. BĹeĀĿ\x86k, V.  86% of all terminations took place until 24th week of gestation  Nedomov\x86;  (overall range: 11+6 Î 32+3 weeks). Conclusions: Whilst genetic testing is increasingly offered in pre-natal  GENNET CZ, Praha 1, Czech Republic. care, only a minority of women undergo qualiÜed genetic counseling  Foetal conotruncal malformation was diagnosed during IIIrd level  after a positive test result. ultrasound indicated by high maternal alpha-fetoprotein in the  The study was funded by the German Human Genome Project. second trimester. Amniocyte interphase FISH revealed deletion of  the DiGeorge syndrome critical region (DGCR). Because of motherÓs  
P0314 . Unchanged birth prevalence of Down syndrome in  facial dysmorphy, cleft palate and uterus septus the same FISH  Denmark 1969-2002 - effects of prenatal diagnosis and increased  assay was performed on her peripheral blood with positive result  mean maternal age as well. Family decided pregnancy termination. Further genetic  K. Brondum-Nielsen1, J. M. Hahnemann1, H. Hjalgrim1, M. Mikkelsen1, J.  analysis revealed double heterozygozity of common methylenenet Hansen2;  etrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene polymorphisms - 
C677 T:  CT and A1298C :AC at both parents and foetus as well. CATCH22 Cytogenetics 151 inheritance, possible phenotypic effect of MTHFR polymorphisms and  their children. Patients have to go through in vitro fertilization in order  our prenatal diagnosis system are discussed. to produce embryos from which one or two cells are removed at the  8-cell stage for diagnosis. Since not affected embryos are transferred,  
P0317 . Analysis of meiotic segregation products of different  PGD avoids the need for the termination of an affected pregnancy. kind of balanced chromosomal rearrangements in sperm nuclei  Direct analysis of the CTG triplet was used for fully informative  of carriers; FISH analysis with different probe combinations couples and for half informative or not informative couples the Tripled  T. Yakut1, N. Ercelen2, H. Acar3, Y. Kimya4, A. Yilmaz4, B. Yigit1, U. Egeli5;  Primed PCR (TP-PCR) protocol was applied. Between 1995 and  2002, 122 PGD cycles were performed in 44 couples. The mean  1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty of Uludag University,  age was 31.5 years. In 11 of the couples the man was affected, in  Bursa, Turkey, 2Department of Genetics, American Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,  33 the woman. Reasons to opt for PGD were infertility, objection  3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty of Selcuk University, Konya,  to termination of pregnancy or bad experience with previous  Turkey, 4Department of Gynaecology,Medical Faculty of Uludag University,  termination. Bursa, Turkey, 5Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty  In 94 of the 122 cycles with oocyte retrieval, at least one unaffected  of Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey. embryo could be transferred to the uterus. Twenty four pregnancies  Balanced chromosomal rearrangements could lead to unbalanced  with 31 positive fetal heart beats (18 singletons, 5 twins, 1 triplet)  segregation patterns during the meiosis. Fetuses or live born  were recorded. After 2 reductions of multiple pregnancies, 2  offsprings donÓt indicate real information about meiosis segregation  miscarriages and 1 termination for a misdiagnosis, 21 deliveries  products due to early missing of abnormal conception. We present  occurred and 26 children (16 singletons and 5 twins) were born. our primary Ündings for evaluation of products of different kind of  With a delivery rate of 17 % per cycle, 22 % per transfer and 48 %  balanced chromosomal rearrangemets including; Robertsonian and  per couple (after a mean of 2.8 PGD cycles) PGD seems to be a  reciprocal translocations, paracentric and pericentric inversions.  reasonable option for those couples of which one member is affected  Semen samples were obtained from these balanced rearrangement  with myotonic dystrophy. carriers. The use of interphase sperm-FISH technique with different  probe combination, in sperm nuclei has proved to be an accurated  
P0320 . Prenatal cerebral enlarged ventricles, choroid plexus  approach to determine products of meiotic segregation and could  cysts and 22q13 monosomy: part of the syndrome or fortuitous  provide to better establish the reproductive prognosis and genetic  association? counseling. The different kind of centromere, locus and telomere  B. Gilbert, D. Couet, M. Dugue-Marechaud, E. Descombes, O. Ingster;  speciÜc probes including rearranged regions of chromosomes were  used to compare the frequency of recombinant and nonrecombinant  CHU Poitiers, Poitiers, France. meiotic products. According to our results we conclude that the  At the term of 20 weeks of pregnancy, a fetal UV examination  frequency of sperm nuclei bearing abnormal signals, representing  showed bilateral cerebral ventriculomegaly (11-12 mm) and choroid  recombinant segregation products of reciprocal translocation carriers  plexus cysts. Fetal cerebral MRI showed no associated abnomaly.  was more than other rearrangement carriers and also paracentric  Fetal karyotype (RHG banding) on amniotic cells was normal :  inversion carriers had the second frequency of recombinant  46, XX. Fetal growth was normal. At birth, the child presented  segregation products. The fertilization of these gammets bearing  with global hypotonia. Neonatal cerebral MRI showed persistant  recombinant chromosomes constitutes an embryo to have trisomic or  ventriculomegaly but choroids plexus cysts had receded. At 7  monosomic for these chromosome regions. months of age, she presented with severe developmental failure and  slight dysmorphic traits. A new karyotype on blood cells with RMBG  
P0318 . Ten years of preimplantation genetic diagnosis: outcome  banding revealed a de novo 22q13 monosomy, conÜrmed by FISH  of pregnancies and children follow-up analysing with the 22q11 probe which showed lack of a control spot  I. Liebaers, H. Godoy, M. Bonduelle, H. Joris, W. Meul, P. Devroey, A. van  in 22q13. Steirteghem;  22q13 monosomy syndrome is not characterized by any speciÜc  symptoms. Affected children present with severe neonatal hypotonia,  Vrije Universiteit Brussel-AZ VUB, Brussels, Belgium. developmental failure, and slight dysmorphic traits, without growth  During the last ten years (1992 till 2002) preimplantation genetic  failure. Diagnosis of all reported cases of 22q13 monosomy were  diagnosis (PGD) was offered to 344 couples at risk for monogenic  done on karyotypes with RMBG banding or, by chance, when looking  diseases such as cystic Übrosis or myotonic dystrophy or  by FISH for the DiGeorges syndrome 22q11 deletion which showed  chromosomal aberrations such as robertsonian and reciprocal  lack of a control spot in 22q13. As there is no speciÜc prenatal sign of  translocations to avoid affected foetuses or children. Preimplantation  this syndrome, no prenatal diagnosis of 22q13 monosomy has been  genetic diagnosis for aneuploidy screening (PGD-AS) was offered  reported. In our case, association of prenatal ventriculomegaly and  to 353 infertile couples to possibly improve the success rate of their  choroid plexus cysts with 22q13 monosomy could be fortuitous but it  in vitro fertilisation treatment. In the respective groups, 716 cycles  raises the question of searching for this deletion in case of prenatal  led to 125 deliveries and 487 cycles to 73 deliveries. In total 243  ventriculomegaly leading to a fetal karyotype. It is an easy test to  children were born of which 74 twins and 12 triplets. Eleven children  do with the 22q11 probe and 22q13 monosomy is a very severe  of which 2 singletons were stillborn or died in the neonatal period.  syndrome. For the singleton children the median gestational age was 39.2  weeks and the median birth weight was 3335 grams with a range  
P0321 . Aneuploidy screening in polar bodies from 650 ICSI  between 1400 and 4630 gram. The major malformation rate in the  cycles using FISH total cohort of children was 2.5%. Compared to children born after in  B. Grossmann1, V. Beyer2, E. Schwaab3, O. Khanaga4, M. Schorsch5, T.  vitro fertilisation (IVF) with or without intracytoplasmic sperm injection  Hahn4, T. Haaf2;  (ICSI) the stillborn/neonatal death rate is high but gestational age,  birth weight and malformation rate compare favourably. Although the  1University School of Medicine, Mainz, Germany, 2University School of Medici- number of PGD children is still small it seems that embryo biopsy  ne, 55131 Mainz, Germany, 3Praxis f\x9er Humangenetik, Wiesbaden, Germany,  is not causing harm to the children of whom more then 50 % are  4Kinderwunschzentrum, Wiesbaden, Germany, 5Kinderwuschzentrum, Wiesba- younger than 2 years old den, Germany. One out of ten couples worldwide suffers from infertility.  
P0319 . Outcome of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for  Consequently, 1 in 100 newborns in Europe and USA has been  myotonic dystrophy conceived following artiÜcial reproductive technologies, most  M. de Rademaeker, K. Sermon, W. Verpoest, K. Boelaert, M. Bonduelle, A.  importantly in vitro fertilisation (IVF) and intracytoplasmatic sperm  van Steirteghem, P. Devroey, I. Liebaers;  injection (ICSI). However, especially in older women the implantation  rate after ICSI is low. In countries where preimplantation diagnosis  Vrije Universiteit Brussel-AZ VUB, Brussels, Belgium. is not possible by law, Üve-color FISH on polar bodies can be used  Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is an alternative to prenatal  to detect aneuploidies for chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21 and 22 in  diagnosis for patients at risk of transmitting an inherited disease to  fertilised eggs. This can be expected to increase the implantation Cytogenetics 152 rate and decrease the number of spontaneous abortions. One major  re-tested within 3 days scored negative. No long-term persistence  beneÜt of testing the above chromosomes is prevention of a child  was detected in 172 women with previous sons or abortions. SRY  with trisomy 13, 18 or 21. We performed Ürst and second polar body  quantiÜcation in pathological pregnancies revealed high fetal DNA  diagnoses on fertilised eggs from 500 patients with more than 650  increase in preeclampsia (median 168 ge/mL) and isolated IUGR  ICSI cycles because of advanced maternal age and/or more than  (median 155 ge/mL). For noninvasive diagnosis of genetic diseases  three previously failed cycles. Only embryos showing no detectable  we evaluated a microchip technology. We set up assays to detect 9  aneuploidies for the tested chromosomes were retransfered. The  beta-thalassemia mutations. The detection limit for a mutated DNA  pregnancy rates were 17.0% in woman up to 34 years, 17.8% in  sample diluted into a wild-type DNA sample was 5 ge. Peptide nucleic  women between 35 and 39 years, and 7.7% in women over 39 years.  acids (PNA) addition to the PCR reaction and the microchip allowed  Although the observed low rates may be mainly due to maternal/ 50% inhibition of the wild-type allele signals. Funded by Telethon  parental factors, the commercially available probe set used may not  GG
P02015 . be optimum to predict successful implantation of the tested eggs.  Therefore, we have developed an additional probe set for large gene- 
P0325 . Rapid FISH analysis Î experience of over 10,000 samples rich chromosomes for which aneuploidies may already exert negative  B. Eiben1, R. Glaubitz2;  effects during preimplantation development. 1Institut f\x9er Klinische Genetik Nordrhein, Oberhausen, Germany, 2Labor Wag- ner, Stibbe & Partner, Hannover, Germany. 
P0322 . Hyperechogenic fetal bowel: dilemmas in counselling. FISH has proved to be a reliable tool for rapid prenatal diagnosis  D. Marcus-Soekarman1, J. Offermans2, D. Halley3, A. Mulder4, N. Muntjewerff1,  of genetic abnormalities in uncultured amniocytes taken from over  M. Vossen2, W. Kleijer3, C. Schrander-Stumpel1, D. Dooijes3;  10,000 pregnant women in Germany referred for genetic screening  1Department of Human Genetics, Academic Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands,  of the fetus. Women were counseled about the different invasive  2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Academic Hospital, Maastricht,  methods of testing. Consenting women had 4Î5 ml of amniotic Ýuid  Netherlands, 3Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus Medical  taken for cell culture, and a further 2Î5 ml for a FISH assay. Sampling  Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatrics, Academic Hospital,  was limited to a maximum of 8 ml in early gestation. FISH testing was  Maastricht, Netherlands. done on a minimum of 30 nuclei using the AneuVysion kit (Abbott  Dense fetal bowels, detected by ultrasound examination in the  Diagnostics) with speciÜc probes for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X  second trimester of pregnancy, may be a harmless observation or a  and Y. FISH was successfully performed in over 95% of cases and  sign of a pathologic condition. We report the case of a 24-year-old  showed 99.3% concordance with karyotype analysis in diagnosing  woman who came for counselling. An amniocentesis was offered.  normal cases, 0.7% were suspected to be mosaic (Table1). Of 424  The karyotype of the fetus was normal, however one mutation for  samples found to be aberrant by karyotyping, 338 were found to be  Cystic Fibrosis was identiÜed. Dilemmas in counselling this particular  aberrant also by FISH, 35 were suspected to be mosaic and 51 were  case are discussed and follow-up results are presented. found to be normal by FISH. Over half of the aberrant karyotypes  deemed normal by FISH had no phenotypic relevance (eg. balanced  
P0323 . A case of chromosomal aberration in fetus translocations, inversions). There was only one false-negative  N. Nikitina, O. Bushueva, E. Shirokova, M. Sumina, N. Cosovcova, E.  Ünding (a 45,X case- 0.01%). With FISH 64 cases were classiÜed  Nikolaeva;  as suspected mosaics. Most of these were found to be mosaics by  karyotyping and a small number were non-mosaic aneuploids. There  Medical genetic center, Ekatherinburg, Russian Federation. were no false-positive results. A 26-years old woman was consulted for determination of genetic  risk for fetus because of epilepsy and necessity of constant use  
P0326 . Prenatal diagnosis of mosaic sex chromosome  of phenobarbital and valproat. Her 37-years old husband suffered  aneuploidy. from mental disease and had some phenotypic microanomalies:  K. Kuuse, T. Ilus, P. Tammur, K. Ëunap, M. Sitska;  dolychocephaly, palpebral Üssures slant up, epicanthic folds, high  palate, dry skin and caf\x8d au lait spots. At 12 weeks of pregnancy  Tartu University Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Tartu, Estonia. pathologic meaning of PAPP-A was revealed (0,41 MOM), while  Prenatal diagnosis of sex chromosome mosaicism represents serious  AFP and hCG were normal. AFP, hCG, uE determined at 16 weeks  genetic counselling problems due to possible abnormalities of sexual  3 were also normal. Sonography conducted at 12 and 22 weeks  differentiation. We report a prenatally diagnosed sex chromosome  of pregnancy presented no markers of chromosomal pathology.  mosaicism 47,XYY/45,X/46,XY and the outcome of pregnancy. Taking into consideration abnormal result of PAPP-A and pointed  Amniocentesis was done due to maternal age on the 17. week  peculiarities of parents prenatal invasive test was offered to the  of pregnancy. Cultured amniocytes revealed mosaic karyotype  family. The fetusÒ karyotype turned to be 46,Xr(Y), parents karyotypes  47,XYY(57%)/45,X(39%)/46,XY(4%). Ultrasound examination on 20.  were normal. We noted the fact that chromosomal aberration  week showed normal fetal development with normal male genitals.  accompanied with the only marker (PAPP-A), while other biochemical  Family decided to continue the pregnancy and apparently normal boy  and sonography tests were normal. was born at term with birth weight 3864 g and length 52 cm. Detailed  examination of placenta revealed karyotype 47,XYY in three different  
P0324 . Fetal DNA analysis in maternal plasma: new perspectives  places of biopsy. Karyotypes from peripheral blood lymphocytes  for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. and skin Übroblasts showed the same mosaic karyotype as in  L. Cremonesi;  amniotic Ýuid. Blood - 47,XYY(78%)/45,X(19%)/46,XY(3%) and skin  - 47,XYY(76%)/45,X(22%)/46,XY(2%). IRCCS H. San Raffaele, Milan, Italy. At the age of four months obstructive megaureter was diagnosed and  Recent studies showed the presence of fetal DNA circulating in  operated. At the age of 7,5 months he a was normally developed boy.  plasma of pregnant women. This may represent an source of fetal  Ultrasound examination showed normal testis structure. The level of  genetic material which can be obtained noninvasively and opens up  testosterone and hCG was normal. Laparoscopy and testis biopsy is  new prenatal diagnostic applications. Fetal DNA was quantiÜed by  planned at the age of one year. SRY real-time PCR in 1583 women with physiological pregnancies  from 6 to 40 gestational weeks (median: 8.9, 17.3 and 51.4 ge/mL  
P0327 . II trimester serumscreening experience in Estonia. of maternal plasma in the I, II and III trimester of pregnancy). A  M. Sitska1, T. Reimand1, T. Ilus1, K. Kuuse1, P. Ilisson1, P. Tammur1, A. Ehren- subset of 400 samples analyzed blindly displayed 97.3% sensitivity,  berg2;  100% speciÜcity, 98.6% accuracy in fetal gender determination. We  also analyzed 55 multiple pregnancies with at least one male fetus.  1Tartu University Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu Univer- SRY quantiÜcation correlates with the number of male fetuses. For  sity WomenÒs Clinic, Tartu, Estonia. noninvasive testing the complete clearance of fetal DNA after delivery  Maternal serum screening (double test) started in Estonia in autumn  is mandatory. Short-term fetal DNA persistence was detected in  1998 in Tartu, and only in 2002 in whole of Estonia. In 2003,  plasma of 47/105 women within 2 days after delivery: 12/13 samples  altogether 70% pregnant women under 35 in Estonia were monitored. Cytogenetics 153 The proportion of pregnancies screened varies, 11% in eastern  aberrations, being 96% of them numerical chromosome  Estonia and 90-95% in Tartu and Tallinn, the two biggest cities in  abnormalities. Conventional cytogenetic studies (karyotyping or  Estonia. Laboratory testing of two serum markers (AFP, hCG) is  FISH) encompass certain problems such as culture failure, infection  performed in two public and one private laboratory. or maternal contamination. For this reason we have incorporated  During the 5 years (1998- 2003) altogether 25 500 screening  the QF-PCR technique as it is a rapid, sensitive, accurate and  tests were performed. Positive serum screening was indication  reproducible diagnostic method. for amniocentesis (fetal karyotyping) in 1076 (4,2%) cases,  We have carried out a rapid screening of numerical anomalies of  Chromosomal abnormalities were detected in 22 (1:49) cases, DS in  chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and Y in our clinical abortions. DNA was  12 cases. extracted from frozen tissues or cellular cultures. Two multiplex PCRs  Screening for DownÓs Syndrome (DS). In this period (1998- 2003)  were performed with D21
S1414 , D21
S1411 , D18
S535 , D18
S386 ,  17,6 % of DS born women under 35 years have been diagnosed  D13
S631 , D13
S634 , X22, HPRT and AMXY STR markers. In cases  prenatally. In advanced maternal age risk group chromosome  in which we did not detect those anomalies, they were screened with  anomalies have been screened since 1995. During the 9-year  another set of chromosomal markers such as those for chromosomes  period 61% of DS prenatally have been diagnosed. Incidence of  15, 16 and 22. Down Syndrome in Estonia after prenatal screening was started has  So far, 102 samples have been studied. Some of the cases, in which  decreased: provisional incidence of DS in Estonia is 1: 660 and after  the cytogenetic diagnosis failed, were diagnosed of having different  prenatal screening (1995-2003) the incidence of DS is 1: 919 in live  numerical chromosomal anomalies. In one speciÜc case we could  birth. also conÜrm the clinical diagnosis of an hydatidiform mole. Those  The decrease involves dominantly the advanced maternal age risk  cases in which a cytogenetic result was obtained were used as  group. In order to reduce the rate even further, a greater percentage  controls to conÜrm our results, Ünding no discrepancies in any of  of pregnancies over a longer period of time in age group under 35  them. have to be monitored by maternal serum screening. Thus, we consider QF-PCR as a complementary tool to cytogenetic  We thank laboratory LTKH and private laboratory HTI for allowing to  studies in abortions, offering also the possibility of knowing the  use their data. parental origin of the extra chromosomal material. 
P0328 . Double trisomy in spontaneous abortions 
P0330 . First trimester screening for trisomy 21 in more than 5000  I. Lorda-Sanchez, D. Diego-Alvarez, J. Diaz-Recasens, M. Rodriguez de Alba,  pregnancies M. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Garcia-Arevalo, R. Cardero, C. Ramos;  S. von der Haar, S. Neubauer, M. Kossakiewicz, M. Sch\x89like, A. Kossakiewicz;  Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. Gyn\x89kologen - Med. Genetik, N\x9ernberg, Germany. More than 60% of the spontaneous abortions (SAs) in the Ürst  In prenatal diagnosis, the constant increase of maternal age over the  trimester have an abnormal karyotype. The most common  last years has intensiÜed the efforts to develop early non-invasive  abnormality observed is trisomy, but double trisomies are rare. Their  methods to screen for trisomy 21. In so called OSCAR clinics (One- frequency among karyotyped SAs varies in the literature from 0.21 to  Stop Clinics for early Assessment of fetal Risk), maternal age, fetal  2,8%. nuchal translucency, as well as maternal levels of free ¦-human  We have found 5 cases of double trisomy among 343 SAs  chorionic gonadotropin (f ¦-hCG) and pregnancy-associated plasma  karyotyped in our laboratory (1.6%). protein-A (PAPP-A) are used as screening markers. We report  about our own experience of combining these biochemical and  Gestations ultrasonographic markers in more than 5000 completed pregnancies.  Gestation Maternal Paternal  Gravida/  CASE age (wks) age age Para/  Karyotype The speciÜc Down syndrome risk was calculated by using Fetal  Abortions Medicine Foundation software. Karyotyping was offered to women  with risks greater than 1:300. Until December 2003, a complete  1 10 45 36 G6/
P2 /A4 48,XX,+9,+21 follow-up was available for 5000 pregnant women. 107 chromosomal  2 7 37 39 G4/
P2 /A2 48,XX,+15,+22 defects (2,1%) including 48 cases of trisomy 21 (0,96%) were  3 8 40 49 G4/
P2 /A2 48,XX,+8,+21 detected. 42 out of 48 Down syndrome pregnancies were found  4 9 36 35 G3/
P2 /A1 48,XY,+2,+8 resulting in a detection rate (DR) of 87,5% and a screened positive  5 11 40 42 G3/
P1 /A2 48,XX,+20,+22 rate (SPR) of 12,5%. The DR and the SPR both increased with  Mean 9 39.6 40.2 maternal age; they were 75% and 8%, respectively, for women aged  34 years and younger, and 94% and 23%, respectively, for women  Acrocentric chromosomes were the most frequently implicated, as  aged 35 years and older. After the introduction of the Ürst trimester  described in literature, but others like chr-16, are absent in our cases.  screening to our clinic, the numbers of invasive genetic testings  The low gestational ages and the increased maternal ages observed  decreased especially in women between 33 and 35 years of age.  are in accordance to the previously described. In our experience, the combined Ürst trimester screening has a high  In case 2, we determined the origin of trisomies 15 and 22 by  sensitivity, an acceptable speciÜcity and the advantage of a risk  comparing inheritance of microsatellite markers. The results were  assessment early in pregnancy. consistent with a maternal origin due to a meiosis-I error of both  extra-chromosomes. This contrasts with the previously described  
P0331 . Validation of QF-PCR assay for detection of aneuploidy  origin of a double trisomy in SAs (Robinson et al,2001), which was  in an Australian population. consequence of both a maternal and paternal meiotic error. However  M. V. Traversa, D. Leigh;  it concurs with the idea that double trisomy, like single trisomy, is  predominantly a result of meiotic errors related to increased maternal  Sydney IVF, Sydney, NSW, Australia. age. As the majority of the double trisomies were observed within  A sixteen marker, two-reaction assay was developed using a  couples with recurrent SAs, a higher risk for aneuploidy in some  combination of previously reported markers along with additional  population can not be excluded. X/Y chromosome markers to improve the determination of sex  chromosome aneuploidies. 
P0329 . Diagnosis of common aneuploidies in spontaneous  Prospective analysis was carried out on 544 samples comprising  miscarriages by Quantitative Fluorescent - PCR with STR  CVS, amniotic Ýuids and products of conception. The results of  markers. the quantitative Ýuorescence PCR were conÜrmed by cytogenetic  D. Diego-Alvarez, I. Lorda-Sanchez, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Gonzalez- karyotype analysis. Gonzalez, M. Garcia-Hoyos, V. M. Martinez-Gonzalez, F. Infantes, C. Ramos,  Of the samples analysed, 514 (94.5%) showed no allele peak  C. Ayuso;  imbalances for the markers representing chromosomes covered by  this assay. Fourteen cases of trisomy 21, six cases of trisomy 18 and  Fundaci\x96n Jim\x8dnez D\x91az, Madrid, Spain. three cases of trisomy thirteen were correctly identiÜed. Seven cases  More than 50% of spontaneous miscarriages present chromosomal  involving sex chromosomal aneuploidies were also detected.Cytogenetics 154 Results were achieved within 24-48 hours for the majority of  
P0334 . Prenatal diagnosis in Myotonic Dystrphy type 1 (DM1):  samples, showing that QF-PCR is a suitable alternative to FISH for  thirteen years of experience rapid aneuploidy screening. This study allowed us to investigate  L. Martorell1, M. Baiget1, J. Parra2, M. Calaf1;  the heterozygosity of the chosen markers in our ethnically diverse  1Hospital Sant Pau, Genetics Unit, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Pau,  Australian population, which is useful in predicting the amount  Gynecology and Obstetrics, Barcelona, Spain. of further testing which will be required due to lack of sufÜcient  Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common form of  chromosomal information. adult muscular dystrophy. ItÓs an autosomal dominant disorder  Our results also indicate that the QF-PCR assay is more versatile  characterised by myotonia, progressive muscle weakness and  than FISH for problematic samples as well as being more cost  wasting, cataracts, frontal balding and cardiac conduction defects.  effective for general use. The severity of the disease is highly variable and patients can be  Test referral patterns in the initial introduction phase of this test and  divided into four groups: asymptomatic, mild, classical and congenital  further ideas on future reÜnements of the test/service in order to  forms. improve sensitivity/informativity shall be discussed. Myotonic dystrophy is characterised by anticipation (earlier age of  onset and more severe clinical course in successive generations in a  
P0332 . Evaluation of clinical application of a real-time PCR  DM1 family). method with multiplexed Ðmini-ÜngerprintingÑ to preimplantation  The molecular basis is the expansion of an unstable CTG repeat  genetic diagnosis (PGD) in 34 cycles at risk for sickle cell and  located into the DMPK gene on chromosome 19. thalassaemia syndromes Genetic counselling for myotonic dystrophy is difÜcult and complex,  J. R. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Vrettou1, M. Tzetis1, G. Palmer2, S. Davies3, M.  owing to the extreme variability of the disorder, in both severity and  Mastrominas3, G. Kokali4, K. Pandos4, E. Kanavakis1;  age of onset, the anticipation and the inÝuence of the sex of the  1Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Mitera IVF Unit,  affected parent. Mitera Maternity Hospital,, Athens, Greece, 3Embryogenesis Centre for  We have carried out 130 PND, most of which (70%), the mother is  Reproductive and Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 4Athens IVF, Centre for  the transmitting progenitor, with expansions ranging from 65 -1166  Assisted Reproduction, Athens, Greece. CTG. The remaining 30% of PNDs are of paternal origin, ranging  Beta-thalassemia and sickle-cell syndromes are amongst the  between 42-600 CTG. 48% of PND where positive for the DM1  commonest monogenic disorders worldwide, and PGD represents  mutation, with expansions between 45 - 3666 CTGs in foetuses. an alternative to prenatal diagnosis (PND) for them. PCR-based  In maternal transmissions we detected a predominance of  PGD methods have inherent difÜculties, but real-time PCR with  expansions, with few contractions or no-variations. All the congenital  hybridization probes (LightcyclerTM), represents a potentially sensitive,  cases are of maternal origin, and according to our data, if a female  accurate and rapid means for genotyping single-cells. For application  has one congenital infant, all her next affected descendants will be  to PGD we established a real-time PCR protocol capable of detecting  congenital cases. the majority of common Ȳ-globin gene mutations worldwide.  The contractions or small variations are predominant in paternal  To monitor chance contamination we multiplexed this to allow  transmissions, although, the foetuses inherited alleles clearly into the  parallel analysis (in an automatic sequencer) of two polymorphic  pathological range. microsatellite markers, GABRB3 and D13
S314 . Clinical application  in 34 PGD cycles (25 couples, 17 different Ȳ-globin mutation  
P0335 . Amnio-PCR in routine use interactions) gave genotype results (available within 5-6hours) at all  M. Brouckova;  3 loci in 248/290 single blastomeres (86%). ADO at the Ȳ-gene locus  GENNET CZ, Praha 1, Czech Republic. was detected in 14% of blastomeres, although transfer of affected  Amnio-PCR has become routine adjunct to conventional prenatal  embryos is precluded by transferring only those with normal allele(s)  cytogenetic analysis at our institution. 53 per cent of all prenatal  detected (141/248 (57%) deÜnitely unaffected). Contamination  procedures (1151/2137) have undergone this procedure since its  was detected (non-parental microsatellite alleles) in 3 cycles (6  introduction in January 2003. Amnio-PCR was offered at 1/ antenatal  blastomeres), including 3 embryos with unaffected Ȳ-genotype (not  screening positivity, 2/ fetal morphological defect, 3/ gestational age  transferred). Transfer of at least one unaffected embryo/cycle (total  over 20th week, 4/ discoloured amniotic Ýuid , 5/ motherªs anxiety  112/34cycles), initiated 12 pregnancies. Four were lost, but PND in  but not at pure age indications. If deÜned Down syndrome risk  7 conÜrmed unaffected status in 4 twin pregnancies and 3 singleton  was the main reason for prenatal diagnosis only chromosome 21  pregnancies. Five pregnancies have gone to term (8 healthy babies),  together with XY speciÜc markers was used. 54 per cent of Amnio- including one without PND (parental choice). Additionally, PGD  PCRs (623/1151) belonged to this group. Common (X, Y, 21, 18  Ȳ-genotypes were conÜrmed on re-analysis of 50 non-transferred  and 13) aneuploidies were searched for at the rest (528/1151) using  embryos. This multiplex real-time PCR protocol appears to fullÜll all  different marker combinations according to informativity. Conclusion:  requirements for a clinical PGD method ie sensitivity, accuracy, speed  Chromosome 21 speciÜc Amnio-PCR can quickly reveal stress of  and relative simplicity, with internal monitoring for contamination. false screening positive mothers. Together with Ünding of a serious  fetal morphological defect the positive Amnio-PCR can be indication  
P0333 . Prenatal sonographic Ündings in 5 cases of trisomy 22 for termination of pregnancy. Amnio-PCR can replace short term CVS  K. Haug, G. Hickmann, M. Mazauric, S. K\x99rtge-Jung, R. Stressig, P. Kozlowski;  cultivation. Praenatal-Medizin und Genetik, D\x9esseldorf, Germany. We describe 5 cases of trisomy 22 detected prenatally on  
P0336 . Cvs Study Of Spontaneous Abortions In The First  second-trimester sonography. Fetal abnormalities shown on  Trimester. sonography includes nuchal thickening, generalized skin edema,  C. Ramos, M. Sanchez-Gutierrez, M. Rodriguez de Alba, A. Bustamante-Ara- an atrioventricular septal defect, tetralogy of Fallot, ascites, a single  gones, J. Plaza, J. Fernandez-Moya, I. Lorda-Sanchez;  umbilical artery, hydronephrosis, microcephalus and Dandy-Walker  Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. malformation. All 5 fetuses had karyotypes indicating trisomy 22.  Chromosomal abnormalities are the most important cause of  Our literature search revealed only 2 reports of second-trimester  spontaneous abortions (SAs). However, the cytogenetic study is  sonographic diagnosis of trisomy 22. We will compare our cases with  not always possible, thus making difÜcult the subsequent genetic  the published cases. counselling. The collection of villus samples before surgical evacuation has been  described as a good method to obtain a karyotype. Transcervical villus samples were obtained from 61 SAs. Forty-eight  were valid for this study according to the following criteria that ensure  reliability: 1) pregnancies up to 90 days, 2) obtention of results from  the direct and long term culture study, 3) concordance between Cytogenetics 155 both studies. Seven of the 48 pregnant women underwent assisted  from men in IVF program (Median: 25.3% vs. 8.8%; Wilcoxon test:  reproduction techniques (ART). p=0.003). There was a positive correlation between the percentage of  An abnormal karyotype was found in 52% of the 48 cases.  fragmented DNA and semen samples with poor quality. The anomaly most frequently found (48%) was the trisomy  We conclude that the DNA fragmentation is like other standard sperm  (specially tri16), followed by Turner Syndrome (20%), unbalanced  parameters a poor predictor for the rate of fertilization as long as we  translocations (16%), triploidy (12%) and presence of a marker  can generate a selective advantage by the ICSI treatment. chromosome (4%). The mean maternal age in those cases in which  a normal karyotype and a trisomy were observed were 34.8 and 37.1  
P0339 . Prenatal diagnosis of a de novo terminal deletion of  years old respectively. chromosome 11q The anomalies found are in accordance with the low gestational age  I. Bartels1, D. Boehm1, P. Burfeind1, S. Herold1, F. Laccone1, C. Schubert1, B.  and the advanced maternal age. Zoll1, J. Maenner2, H. Pauer3;  Analyzing separately the 7 cases coming from ART, the proportion  1Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany, 2Department of Anatomy/ of cases with an abnormal karyotype was 57%. The anomalies  Embryology, Goettingen, Germany, 3Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,  observed were Turner Syndrome (50%), tris16 (25%) and tris17  Goettingen, Germany. (25%). The mean maternal age in those cases presenting a trisomy  A 34-year-old woman presented for amniocentesis at 17 weeks  was 38. of gestation due to oligohydramnios and reduced movements  Although there are a few cases from ART there is no signiÜcant  of the fetus. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniocytes and  difference in the incidence of anomalies and the mean maternal age. parental lymphocytes revealed a de novo terminal deletion of  chromosome11q23-ter in the fetus (Jacobsen syndrome, OMIM  
P0337 . Prenatal diagnosis in the population of Emirates (UAE)  147791). Repeated ultrasonography at 20 weeks showed  - A report of 459 cases. moderate cerebral ventricular dilatation and a two-weeks growth  A. K. Malhotra1, M. T. A. Ali1, E. E. Al-Rawaished1, M. Naveed1, D. S. Krishna  retardation. Clinical features of Jacobsen syndrome were  Murthy2;  discussed with the couple during genetic counselling. The couple  1Department of Human Genetics, Al Wasl Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United  decided to terminate the pregnancy at 20 weeks of gestation. On  Arab Emirates, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Medical Genetics Center, Maternity  fetopathological examination of the female fetus, no externally visible  Hospital, Al-Sabah Area, Kuwait. dysmorphological features were recorded. Measured dimensions  Chromosomal anomalies usually invoked as major cause of birth  (145 mm sitting height, 27 mm maximal foot lenght) corresponded  defects, repeated fetal loss and bad obstetric history, or when  to fetuses at 18/19 weeks of gestation. Examination of the internal  they have an increased risk of carrying a fetus with chromosomal  organs did not disclose prominent malformations but only a few  abnormalities as assessed from various etiological parameters  minor anomalies (MeckelsÒ diverticulum, adhesion between the gall  including advanced maternal age. We present here our experience in  bladder and the transverse colon, bilaterally bilobed lungs without  investigating 459 cases referred for prenatal diagnosis, by culturing  further signs of situs anomalies). The brain appeared normal on  amniotic Ýuid samples between 16-20 weeks of pregnancy, in the  gross morphological examination. Due to poor preservation of the  heterogeneous population of United Arab Emirates. brain, measurements of the ventricles could not be performed. The  Chromosomal abnormality was conÜrmed in 17(3.7%) of the cases.  molecular breakpoint on chromosome 11q was further mapped by  Trisomy 21=6 (one mosaic), TrisomyÎ18=2, 1 case each of XXY,  a quantitative PCR approach with SYBRgreen detection. A genetic  XYY, mosaic 46,XX/45,X. and one case of tetraploidy 92,XXXY. Iso- marker analysis was performed to show the parental origin of the  chromsome X was found in case. Robertsonian translocation (centric  deleted chromosome. Patients with Jacobsen syndrome show a  fusion) was found in 4 cases. The cytogenetic abnormalities in this  wide spectrum of phenotypes depending on the breakpoint. The  preliminary study emphasizes the importance of antenatal diagnosis  phenotype/breakpoint correlation in the present study is discussed  in high risk pregnancies and in the prevention of birth of children with  with respect to cases reported previously in the literature. chromosomal abnormalities. Prenatal diagnostic services is not available in most of the Arab  
P0340 . Differentiation of foetal genotype and maternal  countries for socio-cultural reasons. There is a great need to  contamination of amniotic Ýuid by innovated QF PCR. establish a Registry of high risk families, particularly with balanced  R. Vodicka1, R. Vrtel1, S. Skranc2, D. Svabova1, A. Santava1, J. Santavy1;  translocation (heterozygous) parents and sibs, to provide proper  1Department of Clinical Genetics nad Foetal Medicine University Hospital and  genetic counselling and prevent birth of children with major  Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Haemato-Oncological Clinic,  chromosomal abnormalities, often lethal. University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic. QF PCR is routine prenatal diagnostic technique to rapid, cheep and  
P0338 . Difference in nuclear DNA fragmentation in sperms  reliable sex and common aneuploidy determination. The method of  between IVF and ICSI patient analysis DNA from amniotic Ýuid permits unambiguous diagnostic  N. Ditzel1,2, W. Vogel1, W. Paulus2, W. Just1, K. Sterzik3;  conclusion. 1University Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Christian Lauritzen Insitute, Ulm, Germany,  However the interpretation in cases of mosaics or maternal  3Christian Lauritzen Institute, Ulm, Germany. contaminations is more complicated and it is difÜcult to assess ratio  Male factor infertility patients can have abnormalities of their sperm  of particular genotypes exactly. Especially if the genotypes differ  nuclei and or display high levels of loosely packaged chromatin and  in several orders. In those events the mosaic can be missed or  damaged DNA. Standard sperm characteristics are used to choose  undervalued. the procedure, IVF or ICSI, but are poor predictors of the success.  To eliminate and decrease of non exact assessment mosaics or  On the contrary, sperm genome quality has been emphasized for  maternal contamination the innovated (I)QF PCR was introduced in  several years as playing a major role in early embryogenesis, thus  our department. This method makes corrections of QF PCR by manual  in the success of IVF or ICSI attempt. The aim of this study was to  real-time PCR. IQF PCR was evaluated and calibrated in D21
S1411   analyse the correlation between the percentage of spermatozoa with  and Penta D loci using 0,2% - 100% prepared mosaics. The aim of our  fragmented DNA and fertilization rates after IVF and in ICSI. study was to assess and optimise IQF PCR quantitative possibilities  A total of 60 semen samples was collected. 30 men underwent  to invasive and non-invasive prenatal diagnostic purposes. Results  semen analysis for IVF andrology assessment and 30 men for  proved that the sensitivity of DNA quantity change detection is a  ICSI. Semen samples (50000 sperms per sample) were diluted and  few percent and conÜrmed assumption that the same samples can  resuspended in PBS. The sperms were stained with propidium- demonstrate different Ýuorescent ratio values in different PCR cycles  iodide as previously reported (Nicoletti et al., 1991), with slight  which leads to misrepresentation of results. IQF PCR reÜnes molecular  modiÜcations. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using the  diagnostics based on analysis of PCR products. Its sensitivity can be  Ýuorescence activated cell sorter equipped with an argon laser. important in foetal DNA and DNA chimerism analysis.Supporting grant:  Spermatozoa of poor quality, as used for ICSI, contained a  MSMT CR CEZ J1498:15110000006 signiÜcantly higher amount of fragmented DNA than spermatozoa Cytogenetics 156 
P0341 . Possibilities of fetal DNA analysis on capillary  We present 41 cases of skeletal dysplasias diagnosed prenatally by  electrophoresis in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. ultrasound and characterized by gene mutation detection. Detailed  R. Vrtel, R. Vodicka, D. Svabova, A. Santava, J. Santavy, E. Krejcirikova;  clinical and molecular data as well as the results of pathological  examinations are available for each case and will be presented. Department of Clinical Genetics and Foetal Medicine University Hospital and  We could diagnose 13 cases of thanatophoric dysplasia type I, 3  Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. cases of thanatophoric dysplasia type II, 2 cases of achondroplasia,  Pre-implantation diagnosis and non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of  2 cases of Apert syndrome, 1 case of Pfeiffer syndrome, 7 cases of  foetal nucleic acid in maternal tissues are in the fore front of taking  osteogenesis imperfecta, 2 cases of hypochondrogenesis, 1 case  prenatal diagnosis to early stage of pregnancy. of achondrogenesis, 2 cases of diastrophic dysplasia, 2 cases of  Then foetal nucleated cells or free extra-cellular DNA or bound RNA  hypophosphatasia, 2 cases of campomelic dysplasia, 1 case of Ellis- in maternal plasma are used. The concentration of free foetal DNA  van-Creveld syndrome and 1 case of oto-palato-digital syndrome  is approximately thousand times higher than DNA amount in intact  type II. In this last case X inactivation studies in the mother conÜrmed  foetal cells circulating in maternal peripheral blood. the diagnosis and an indirect molecular genetic diagnosis could be  For diagnostic purposes precise diagnosis and quantiÜcation of foetal  offered in the next pregnancy revealling a non affected boy. In12  DNA is crucial. other cases an early direct prenatal molecular genetic diagnosis  Determination of foetal sex from maternal serum by real-time PCR  could be performed in the next pregnancy. of Y speciÜc sequences in male foetuses is relatively well developed  The identiÜcation of the underlying mutation in skeletal dysplasia  and reliable, but detection of foetal aneuploidies from maternal serum  syndromes is essential for genetic counselling for the ongoing and  is complicated. The main objective of this study was to assess and  further pregnancies and in order to offer an early prenatal diagnosis  optimise quantitative possibilities of innovated QF PCR in detection  in the next pregnancy. of free foetal DNA in maternal serum. ArtiÜcial DNA mosaics, DNA  from plasma, amniotic Ýuid, and maternal and paternal peripheral  
P0344 . Prenatal diagnosis of mosaicism for trisomy 21 and  blood were analysed by innovated QF PCR in D21
S1411 , D21
S1446 ,  double trisomy Y and 13 AMELY and TSPY loci. M. Malikova, D. Novotna, M. Palanova, M. Matejckova, E. Kocarek, Z. Vlckova,  Variance assessment of mean RFU values of alleles ratio proved  L. Hornofova, P. Goetz, M. Havlovicova;  increase or decrease of those values compare to normal lineage.  In one case free foetal DNA was proven in TSPY and twice in  2nd Medical School Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague,  D21
S1446  loci. Czech Republic. Innovated QF PCR enables mosaics differentiation on level of several  We report the case of a 30-year-old primigravida who underwent the  percentages. To decide if foetal DNA diagnostics is feasible for  amniocentesis at 17 weeks gestation because of increased nuchal  distinguishing disomy/trisomy by quantiÜcation STRs from desired  translucency (3,8mm) detected in the 12 week of pregnancy. The  chromosome the curve of normal foetal DNA concentrations during  cytogenetic examination revealed an equal mosaic of cells with  normal pregnancies must be compiled. karyotypes 47,XY,+21 and 48,XYY,+13 in two independent culture  Supporting grant: MSMT CR CEZ J1498:15110000006 Ýasks. The pregnancy was terminated at the 20 week; there was no  evidence of relevant external either internal developmental defects.  
P0342 . Evaluation of molecular methods applicable to PGD for  Post-mortem tissue cultures of the foetal skin and the placenta were  monogenic disorders established. Foetal karyotype was found 47,XY,+21 with a minority  S. Stock-Myer, L. Wilton;  (4%) of 48,XYY,+13 cells meanwhile in placenta the ratio 47,XY,+21  / 48,XYY,+13 was 1:2. The origin of supernumerary chromosomes  Melbourne IVF, Melbourne, Australia. was determined using QFPCR to be paternal, arisen from the second  Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for monogenic diseases  meiotic division or (more probably) due two postzygotic errors. This is  such as Cystic Fibrosis (CF) and Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy  the Ürst report of this kind of mosaicism. (DMD) involves PCR ampliÜcation from a single cell from a pre- implantation embryo. As single cell PCR is prone to allele drop-out  
P0345 . Prenatal diagnosis in a twin pregnancy of spinal  (ADO), ampliÜcation failure of single loci (AF), and contamination,  muscular atrophy with respiratory distress (SMARD) tests must be set up such that they minimise the occurrence of these  F. Sangiuolo;  events, as well as essentially eliminate the risk of misdiagnosis if they  do occur. Additionally, as embryos have a limited viability in culture,  Universit\x87 Tor Vergata -Roma 2-, Roma, Italy. the diagnosis must be obtained within as short a time as possible. Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory  In establishing PGD for monogenic disorders, an evaluation of current  distress type1(SMARD1;OMIM604320) is the second anterior  molecular methods available for mutation detection in the context of  horn cell disease in infants in which the genetic defect has been  a PGD lab was made. The methods chosen for mutation detection  deÜned. SMARD1 results from mutations in the gene encoding  were required to address the issues of ADO, AF, contamination and  the immunoglobulin Ⱥ-binding protein 2 (IGHMB
P2 ), located on  time constraints, as well as be economically feasible. The evaluated  chromosome 11q13. methods included allele-speciÜc PCR, single primer extension,  We performed molecular prenatal diagnosis of SMARD in a twin  melting curve analysis, the ligase detection reaction, restriction  gestation at 11 weeks on chorionic villus samples (CVS). Parents  digestion, and the use of microsatellite markers. Certain PCR  were both heterozygote for a 1540GŗA transition in exon 11, causing  parameters were also investigated. a glutamic acid to lysine substitution(
E514 K). Molecular analysis was  The most important strategy proved to be the inclusion of informative  performed on CVS DNA by automated sequence analysis, evidencing  microsatellites that are co-ampliÜed alongside mutation speciÜc loci  a foetus heterozygotes for 
E514 K mutation and one homozygotes  in a single cell multiplexed reaction. These microsatellites not only  wild-type. The intrafamilial segregation of the mutation was also  conÜrm the diagnosis, they also provide an internal control for PCR  demonstrated by primer-induced restriction analysis. Haplotype  and maternal contamination. The evaluation of molecular methods  analysis in both CVS samples conÜrmed the results obtained with  for the detection of CF, DMD and Beta Thalassemia mutations will  mutation screening end excluded any maternal contamination. be presented, with particular reference to the unique requirements of  Kariotype analysis was performed on cultured CVS evidencing  single cell analysis for PGD dichorionic twins of different sex: in one of these, an extra  chromosome marker mosaicism was evidenced. For this reason  
P0343 . Prenatal molecular diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia  amniocentesis was performed at 17 week of gestation and a normal  syndromes kariotype in both foetuses was obtained, demonstrating the presence  C. Daumer-Haas1, M. Klehr-Martinelli1, A. Nerlich2, K. Gloning1, S. Minderer1,  of a conÜned placental mosaicism. T. Schramm1;  Also molecular analysis, performed on cultured amniocytes,  conÜrmed the genotypes for IGHMB
P2  locus.At birth molecular tests  1Pr\x89natal-Medizin M\x9enchen, Munich, Germany, 2Institut f\x9er Pathologie, St\x89dti- on peripheral blood samples gave the same results as above. sches Krankenhaus Bogenhausen, Munich, Germany. This is the Ürst case of molecular prenatal diagnosis of SMARD1 Cytogenetics 157 reported up to date. SMARD1 diagnosis results of particular  between 1983 and 2003. importance for offering accurate genetic counselling and for initiation  A total of 29 couples and 3 singles were seen for genetic counselling  of mechanical ventilation of an affected infant. of SCD. The majority was of West/Central African origin (97%). Six  couples came more than once, resulting in a total of 51 consultations.  
P0346 . Running CGH on very low DNA quantities At Ürst referral, 24 of 29 couples (83%) had an ongoing pregnancy,  J. Weimer1, U. Wiedemann2, R. Grunewald1, H. G. Klein2, D. Wahl3, H. T\x99nnis4,  37.5% in the Ürst trimester. Nine couples already had an affected  W. Jonat1, N. Arnold1;  child; 11 further at-risk couples were identiÜed by genotyping. All  but one at-risk couples (19/20, 95%) accepted PND in principle;  1Universit\x89ts Klinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 2Laboratory of Medi- however, only 14 of these (74%) requested foetal testing at the Ürst  cal Genetics; Dr. Klein, Munich, Germany, 3OfÜce of doctor med. Dagmar Wahl,  opportunity.The remaining 5 couples chose to have at least one  Augsburg, Germany, 4Dept. Human Genetics; Charit\x8d; Campus Virchow-Clinic,  pregnancy without PND, resulting in the birth of 2 affected children.  Berlin, Germany. Explanations included fear of abortion (2/5), religious, ethical or  Pre implantation genome diagnosis (PGD) demands a method which  personal reasons. In all, 30 PND (18 CVS, 12 amniocenteses) were  meaningfully analyses the presence or absence of as many human  performed. Seven affected foetuses were identiÜed (23%); 4 medical  chromosome types or parts as possible. The use of speciÜc FISH  abortions were requested. probes for PGD reaches limits which are caused by a low number of  In conclusion, we believe 1) that potentially at-risk couples in this  available colours. Different working groups have already used a CGH  population are under-referred; 2) that they are commonly referred too  with blastomeres or with polar bodies successfully. Both causes, that  late, either during pregnancy or after the birth of an affected child;  the CGH provides a meaningful result even if it starts out from very  3) that the decisions to request prenatal diagnosis or to terminate  few DNA. Thus, the small quantity of DNA must be ampliÜed and  affected pregnancies are very complex. This study reveals the need  marked at Ürst. Here we would like to introduce the effectiveness  for further investigation of attitudes concerning SCD and PND in  of the CGH outgoing from a small DNA quantity, ampliÜed by  African communities. degenerated oligo-primed (DOP)-PCR before. In order to this, we  compare two known genomes in a CGH by an increased demand of  
P0349 . Hb Neapolis (Dhonburi) causing silent beta-thalassemia  sample DNA between one to four nuclei each. in a family of Northern Iran We have examined two postnatal striking karyotypes with one  S. Hosseini Amini1, M. Yavari2, C. Oberkanins3, B. Moghimi4, A. Khatami5, S.  derivative chromosome each by microdissection. The Ürst, female  Rouhi5, R. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi6;  karyotype, showed a partial trisomy 16q21-qter; 46,XX, der add  (14)(q). rev ish der t(14;16)(qter;q21). The second, male karyotype,  1Kariminejad/Najmabadi Genetic and pathology Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  an abbreviated Y chromosome pointed; 46,X, der(Y). rev ish  Republic of), 2Bandar-Abbas University of Medical Sciences, Bandar-Abbas,  del(Y)(q11.2-qter). The comparison of both genomes let expect  Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Viennalab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria,  an exactly deÜned result. We have isolated nuclei of both cell  4Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of),  suspensions by microdissection, and ampliÜed them separately with  5Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 6Genetic Research Center,  DOP-PCR. The ampliÜcation products of both cases were marked  The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic  and hybridised for a CGH with each other. of). Thalassemias are the most common heredity disease in Iran,  
P0347 . Prenatal Ürst trimester screening in Saint-Petersburg. resulting from synthesis defects in one or more hemoglobin subunits.  T. K. Kascheeva, E. S. Nekrasova, A. L. Koroteev, T. V. Kuznetzova, V. S.  The majority of patients suffers from beta-thalassemia, but cases with  Baranov;  microcytic hypochromic anemia and normal electrophoresis pattern  are suspected to be alpha- or silent beta-thalassemia. OttÓs Inst. Obstetrics & Gynecol., Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. A family from the northern part of Iran, which is an area highly  Since February of 2003 all pregnant women, irrespective of age,  prevalent for thalassemias, was referred to us for prenatal  can have a new Down syndrome screening test in Saint-Petersburg.  diagnosis. The hematological data of the father indicated a pattern  Assessment of risk of fetal chromosomal diseases proceeds due  of beta-thalassemia minor. Reverse-hybridization analysis for the  to maternal age, concentration of PAPP-A, free Ȳ-hCG, value of  most common beta-globin mutations identiÜed IVSII-I G>A in the  nuchal translucency (NT) and nasal bone. The effectiveness of  heterozygous state. The maternal laboratory data (MCV: 77.8 fL,  combined ultrasound and biochemical screening in the Ürst trimester  HbA2: 3.0%, HbA: 96.5%) indicated a case much more compatible  of pregnancy will be compared with second trimester screening  with alpha-thalassemia. Iron-deÜcient anemia was ruled out, and  results. It is important to make such analysis due to lack of such  common alpha-thalassemia point mutations and deletions were  investigations in russian literature. We investigated 637 women  investigated. As no mutation was detected, chain synthesis was  at 10-13 weeks of pregnancy. We use ultrasound scanner Aloka  performed showing an alpha/beta ratio of 2.1, which was in the range  SSD-2000 and system of prenatal screening Life Cycle (Pribori Oy,  of beta-thalassemia minor. DNA sequencing of the entire beta-globin  Moscow). In 26 of 637 patients have NT 2,5 mm and more, 10 of  gene identiÜed a heterozygous GTG>GGG (Val>Gly) mutation  them have chromosomal diseases. In 4 of 637 patients there was  in codon 126, also known as Hb Neapolis (Dhonburi). Prenatal  absence of fetal nasal bone, 3 have chromosomal diseases and one  diagnosis of the fetal DNA showed an absence of both IVSII-I and  fetus has severe malformations. In 64 of 637 have increased risk of  the cd 126 mutation.This result demonstrates the importance of  fetal chromosomal pathology due to results of biochemical screening,  screening mild microcytic hypochromic individuals for both alpha- as  7 of them have chromosomal pathology. Totally we Ünd out 4 fetuses  well as silent beta-thalassemia mutations. with Down syndrome, 2 fetuses with EdwardÓs syndrome, 2 fetuses  - 47,XXY(X), 4 fetuses with Turner syndrome, one fetus with triploidy.  
P0350 . Zygosity studies of twins conceived by in vitro  Combined screening in the Ürst trimester of pregnancy increases the  fertilization effectiveness of detection of fetal chromosomal diseases. K. Wielgus1, B. Siemieniako1, K. Kowalska2, G. Breborowicz3, R. Slomski2;  
P0348 . Experience of prenatal diagnosis for sickle cell disease  1Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Agriculture,  amongst Africans in Geneva Poznan, Poland, 2Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Poznan, Poland,  A. Wonkam1, M. A. Morris1, M. Gersbach-Forrer1, C. D. Delozier-Blanchet1,2, S.  3University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Fokstuen1;  It is already known that in vitro fertilization is associated with an  increase in embryo splitting and monozygotic twinning. It may be  1Service of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Geneva, Switzerland,  also associated with an increase risk of embryonic fusion before  2Kaiser permanente, 7300 north Fresno Street, Fresno, CA 93720-2942, CA,  implantation. Zygosity studies on DNA extracted from peripheral  United States. blood of 50 twins conceived by in vitro fertilization, born in Clinics  Direct molecular testing for sickle cell disease (SCD) was introduced  of University of Medical Sciences, were undertaken. Analysis of  in Geneva in 1983. We retrospectively evaluated the clinical and  restriction fragments length polymorphism (RFLP) detected by  laboratory records of all referrals for prenatal diagnosis of SCD  hybridization with molecular probes and detection of polymorphic Cytogenetics 158 minisatellite and microsatellite DNA sequences (STR) by PCR was  
P0353 . An Analphoid Marker Chromosome Inv Dup(15)(q26.1),  performed. Fingerprinting analysis was made and 9 genetic markers  Detected During Prenatal Diagnosis and Characterized via  covering 6 chromosomes were analyzed. The results of analysis  Chromosome Microdissection. show that in two cases blood chimerism may be considered, which  F. Mahjoubi1, R. HIll2;  suggests that the inÝuence of in vitro fertilization on early embryonic  1NRCGEB, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2CSIRO, Sydney, Australia. development requires further investigation. A small, mosaic, C-band negative marker chromosome was detected  on culture of amniocytes during prenatal diagnosis related to  
P0351 . Complex chromosome rearrangements in prenatal  advanced maternal age. Following spontaneous premature labour  diagnosis at 29 weeks gestation, a dysmorphic infant was delivered, with Ýat  I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. Muzinic, R. Lasan, L. Letica,  nasal bridge, short palpebral Üssures, micrognathia, high forehead,  D. Begovic;  low-set ears, telecanthus and corneal dystrophy. Additional folds of  Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University  skin were present behind the neck, and feet and Üngers and toes  Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. were abnormally long. The child died at age Üve days, after two  Complex chromosome rearrangements (CCR) are deÜned as  days in renal failure. The origin of the marker chromosome was  reciprocal exchanges between three or more chromosomes. It has  subsequently identiÜed from a cord blood sample, via chromosome  been observed that most CCR carriers are female. CCr are very  microdissection. Through reverse FISH, we found the marker to  rare, with the risk for phenotypic abnormalities increasing as the  be an inverted duplication of the region 15q26.1-qter. FISH with  number of chromosomes and chromosomal breaks involved in the  alphoid satellite probe was negative, while whole chromosome 15  rearrangement increases. The normal phenotypes of such balanced  paint was positive. Both ends of the marker were positive for the  carriers CCRs suggests that presented breakpoints are not in gene  telomeric TTAGGG probe. These data, plus the G-banding pattern,  regulatory or critical functional chromosomal regions. identiÜed this as an analphoid, inverted duplicated marker, lacking  We report pregnancy outcomes and prenatal diagnosis of three cases  any conventional centromere. We discuss the aetiology and clinical  with CCRs. effects of this marker, comparing it to the few other reported cases of  A de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement involving  Ðtetrasomy 15qÑ syndrome. chromosomes 4,7 and 14 was detected prenatally at 18 weeks of  gestation made for advanced maternal age. Using routine cytogenetic  
P0354 . Oocyte aneuploidy testing for 8 chromosomes by Ürst  analysis of cultured amniotic Ýuid cells with GTG-banding, it was  and second polar body FISH analysis. found interstitial deletion of band 4p15.2ŗ15.32 and reciprocal  T. Buchholz1, A. Clement-Sengewald1, R. Suttner2, W. W\x9erfel2, D. Berg3;  translocation t(7;14)(p13;q11.2), but it was impossible to be correct  1Praenatal-Medizin M\x9enchen, M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Kinderwunsch Centrum,  karyotypically determined. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH)  Frauenklinik Dr. Kr\x9esmann, M\x9enchen, Germany, 3Gemeinschaftspraxis Prof.  with centromeric and ápaintingÐ chromosome - speciÜc probes  Berg/Dr. Lesoine, M\x9enchen, Germany. was used to explain this rare chromosome rearrangement. The  Introduction: Polar body (PB) analysis during ART cycles identify  chromosome 4 paint reveald chromosome 4 material inserted in  oocytes with chromosomal non-disjunctions. By Ýuorescence  derived chromosome t(7/14). in situ hybridization (FISH) it is possible to test Ürst and second  In two cases mothers had a balanced complex chromosome  PBs in a Ürst round with 5 chromosomes (13, 16, 18, 21 and 22)  rerrangement, detected through abnormal offspring and spontaneous  followed by a second round with 3 chromosomes (8, 15 and X). The  abortions. The karyotype of CCR carrier was determinated as 46,XX,  results are completed prior to pronuclear fusion. With the standard  t(1;8;9)(q25q41;q13;p22), and the other as 46,XX,t(4;8;15)(p15p16;p 5 chromosome analysis, we detect approx. 35% of trisomies. By  11;q13). Although balanced carriers of CCR have a relativly high risk  investigating 3 more chromosomes the detection rate is increased up  of producing unbalanced gametes, prenatal diagnosis in those cases  to 60% of all trisomies found in miscarriages. showed that thay can have healthy offspring. Material and methods: Out of a total of 48 PB-cycles we were  able to extract 464 polar bodies (353 Ürst and 121 second PBs)  
P0352 . De novo chromosome rearrangements in prenatal  from 367 oocytes by standard methods. After pre-treatment they  diagnosis were hybridized with the 5 probe set. 60 PBs were rehybridized in a  K. Crkvenac Gornik, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, D. Muzinic, R. Lasan, L. Letica, D.  second round with the additional 3 probe set . Begovic;  Results: Altogether 59% of the evaluated oocytes (161/272) were  Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University  aneuploid. Aneuploidy for the additional tested 3 chromosomes were  Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. identiÜed for 10 of the 28 oocytes (36%). Balanced or unbalanced structural abnormalities may be inherited  Conclusion: The extension of PB analysis for 3 more chromosomes  from a carrier parent or may occur as de novo rearrangements.  is achievable even in the very tight time frame of the German Embryo  When the abnormality occurs as a de novo event, the risk for  Protection Law. According to our preliminary results it is worth while  genetic disease or phenotypic effects is increased, even when the  investigating 8 chromosomes for aneuploidy testing of oocytes, even  rearrangement appears balanced. if that means a tougher schedule. Extended data is necessary to  The aim of this study was to examine the incidence and clinical  prove that the beneÜt of excluding non-disjunction for 8 chromosomes  outcome of de novo chromosomal aberrations. results in an increased baby take home rate. Prenatal cytogenetic analyses were performed in 20,506 pregnancies  at our hospital from 1979 to 2004. Karyotyping by G-banded  
P0355 . OppenheimÒs dystonia: The challenging genetic  metaphase chromosome analysis of cultured amniotic Ýuid samples  counseling associated with prenatal diagnosis was performed using standard techniques. T. C. Falik-Zaccai1,2, L. Shachak3, M. Khayat1, M. Frydman4,5, Z. Borochowitz3,6,  In our study we found 31 case of the de novo chromosomal  N. Giladi7,5;  rearrangements in 20,506 cases of prenatal cytogenetic analysis.  1Division of Medical Genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel,  Out of the 31 de novo aberrations, 14 had balanced translocations;  2Rappaport Faculty of Medicin, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 3Institute of Human  13 had balanced reciprocal translocations and 1 had balanced  Genetics,Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 4Institute of Human Genitics,  Robertsonian translocation. Of 17 unbalanced de novo aberrations,  Shiba Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5Sakler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv  10 had one structurally abnormal extra chromosome, 1 had  University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 6Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa,  unbalanced reciprocal translocation, 5 had unbalanced Robertsonian  Israel, 7Movement Disorder Unit, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. translocation, and 1 had a de novo inversion. All unbalanced  OppenheimÓs dystonia (OD) is an autosomal dominant (AD)  translocations were terminated. movement disorder with a variable phenotype and penetrance of  The outcome of pregnancies and the clinical follow up of rare cases  30-40%. It is characterized by early onset, sustained, involuntary  with apparently balanced de novo translocations are very helpful for a  muscle contractions that cause signiÜcant morbidity. The identiÜcation  better risk assessment in prenatal genetic counselling. of the causative GAG deletion in the DYT1 gene enabled prenatal Cytogenetics 159 diagnosis (PND). We have ascertained 53 OD affected individual  skin lesions (Xeroderma Pigmentosa) and one PND test for Ataxia  within 28 families, conÜrmed molecularly. Five couples requested  Telengectasia have been done, the results and details of Ündings are  PND in which three men were non-manifesting carriers and two  being presented. women were affected with OD. Comprehensive genetic counseling  was provided twice by a medical geneticist, genetic counselor and  
P0358 . Prenatal diagnosis of a 5p trisomy resulting from familial  a movement disorder specialist before prenatal testing and when  balanced reciprocal translocation including a de novo extra  results were delivered. Seven PNDs were preformed. Three fetuses  structurally abnormal chromosomes (ESACs) of three coupes were found to carry the GAG deletion. Genetic  M. H. Lee;  counseling in OD is challenging and presents intellectual, emotional,  Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Samsung Cheil Hospital, Seoul, Republic of  and moral dilemmas. The fact that only one parent is ÐresponsibleÑ,  Korea. that inheriting the mutation does not necessarily mean being affected,  We report a case of partial trisomy 5p combined with marker  and the modern treatments that allow most patients a relatively good  chromosome. To the best of our knowledge, this is the Ürst reported  quality of life, contribute to its complexity. A multidisciplinary approach  case of a 5p trisomy involved the region of 5pter5p12, resulting  and possibly preimplantation diagnosis are suggested to best meet  from the rearranged chromosomes in a familial balanced reciprocal  the needs of couples at risk. translocation. Cytogenetic analysis of amniotic Ýuid cells at 17  weeks gestation showed 47,XX, der(13)t(5;13)(p12;p11.2),+mar. The  
P0356 . Lethal forms of bone dysplasias - prenatal diagnosis,  probandÓs mother was a carrier of a balanced reciprocal translocation  obstetrical management with 46,XX,t(5;13)(p12;p11.2). NOR banding, CBG banding, RBG  G. Iliev1, C. Rusu2, D. Scripcaru1, X. Boian1;  banding, and high resolution banding were performed to precise  1ÑCuza VodaÑ Maternity Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2Human Genetics Dept,  characterization. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis  University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania. showed that the marker chromosome was a dicentric chromosome  The main objective of this study is to present the importance of  derived from chromosome 15. No physical abnormalities were shown  routine fetal ultrasound scan in the prenatal diagnosis of three types  in the targeted fetal ultrasonography examination. The FISH analysis  of lethal bone dysplasias. was useful to elucidate the nature of these rearrangements. Material and method: Echographic examination was done according  to the protocol for fetal morphology. For all the cases the examination  
P0359 . Prenatal diagnosis of a partial trisomy 11q21-qter was followed by termination of pregnancy, radiologic and pathologic  H. Elghezal1, D. HÓmida1, Z. Saideni2, M. Yakoubi1, H. Sennana1, A. Saad1;  examination of the fetus. The Ünal diagnosis was established by the  1Hopital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Hopital Fattouma Borguiba,  geneticist. Monastir, Tunisia. Results: Team examination of the cases allowed the diagnosis of  We report a new prenatal diagnosis case of chromosome 11 partial  the following lethal bone dysplasias: 1) Achondrogenesis type I  trisomy in a foetus from a Ürst pregnancy of healthy parents. diagnosed at 24 weeks gestation, Ürst child of a 21 years old woman;  Amniocentesis was performed after 23 weekÓs gestation because  2) Jarcho-Levin spondylo- thoracic dysplasia diagnosed at 32 weeks  of ultrasonographic detection of a cystic hygroma with ascites and  gestation, third child of a 29 years old woman; 3) Thanatoforic  oligoamnios. dysplasia type I diagnosed at 26 weeks gestation, second child of  Foetal karyotype was performed after amniotic liquid culture  a 27 years old woman. Detailed presentation of the cases will be  according to conventional techniques. An additional chromosomal  included. materiel was detected in one chromosome 13. Conclusions: In the cases mentioned above routine echographic  Parental karyotype showed a balanced reciprocal translocation  examination done for fetal morphology identiÜed major bone  t(11;13)(q21;qter) in mother chromosomes. So the foetus had  abnormalities that indicated the proÜlactic termination of pregnancy.  the derivative chromosome 13 of this translocation and he has  Multidisciplinar examination of the fetuses allowed the identiÜcation of  consequently a partial trisomy 11q21-qter. 3 rare variants of lethal bone dysplasias. In spite of genetic counselling, the couple decided to carry on the  pregnancy. The infant was born at a correct term, by a caesarean  
P0357 . 14 years experience in prenatal diagnosis. Report of 3500  section for an acute foetal sufferance. At birth the infant presented an  PND tests immediate and sever breath distress with an Apgar score of 3/6. He  M. Kariminejad, H. Najmabadi, F. Afroozan, N. Almadani, F. Azimi, N. Nabavi- had dead at the 11th hour of life. Nia, S. Hosseini, Z. Golkar, M. Hoori-Parvin, A. Taromchi, R. Kariminejad, F.  Foetopatholgic exam, revealed hypotrophic and dysmorphic mal sex  Kermani, S. Jalil Nejad;  foetus. Extremities examination showed an arthrogriposis with limbs  Kariminejad Path&Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). amyotrophy. With advances in cytogenetics, molecular genetics and Prominent  Brain examination found a polymicrogyria and no visceral anomalies  improvement in ultrasonography, PND tests became a popular  were detected.Infant with trisomy11q present habitually less severe  and acceptable mean for prevention of genetic and congenital  phenotypes and, arthrogriposis was not described to be associated  disorders at early 1970s. We performed the Ürst amniocentesis for  with this chromosomal abnormality. chromosomal aberration in summer of 1986, then there have been  steadily increasing numbers up to 350 tests per year at present,  
P0360 . The Report of the National Prenatal Diagnostic Reference  totalling 2500. Laboratory in Iran for Thalassemia Syndromes The higher risk 12% belong to the couple in whom one is carrier  E. Mahdipour, N. Nikzat, M. Neishabury, K. Khahrizi, Y. Shafeghati, K.  of a balanced translocation, followed by 5.8% risk in mothers with  Jalalvand, S. Banihashemi, H. Najmabadi;  advanced maternal age and history of offspring with chromosomal  Genetics research center,Welfare and Rehabilitation University, Tehran, Iran  abnormality. The 2nd attempt was PND for hemoglobinopathies  (Islamic Republic of). started at the end of 1990, since then 869 PNDs tests have  Thalassemia is a major health problem in Iran with an estimated  been performed for Ȳ, ŋ thalassemia, sickle cells and other  two millions carriers. Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis is  hemoglobinopathies, using ARMS, RFLP and DNA sequencing when  the only way for prevention of this disease. Iranian scientists and  necessary. Ministry of Health have developed a national thalassemia prevention  PND for Fragile X Syndrome was established next, using  program, aimed at controlling thalassemia in Iran. According to the  cytogenetics and DNA analysis; testing more than hundred  National Thalassemia Prevention Program, which is consist of many  families, and 13 PND tests. PND for metabolic disorders with  different peripheral laboratories and two reference laboratories, our  collaboration of Clinical Genetics. Dept of Erasmus University was  aim is to improve our abilities in diagnostics. Here the activities of the  established in 1999, 82 PND tests have been performed for 45  national reference laboratory (GRC) during the last Üve yearÓs are  Mucopolyschardoses, 20 Lipid storage and 19 micromolecular. PND  presented. Sixty Üve families at risk of thalassemia were tested with  tests for neuromuscular diseases including 39 DMDs and 50 SMAs  direct and indirect mutation detection methods including ARMS-PCR,  by molecular analysis have been performed so far. Eight PND test for Cytogenetics 160 reverse hybridization assay and multiplex PCR. DNA sequencing  
P0363 . Strategies for preimplantation genetic diagnosis for  was performed for negative cases. Prenatal diagnoses were  single-gene disorders performed for 34 cases. Of these 5 fetuses were found to be normal,  B. Degn, J. Hindkj½r, H. S¾rensen, M. P. Lind, A. R. Jensen, H. J. Ingerslev;  10 homozygous or compound heterozygous for both alleles and 19  Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. heterozygous cases were identiÜed. Also a total of 114 DNA samples  Since 2002 have we offered PGD tests for single-gene disorders  with unknown Ȳ-globin gene mutations. Referred to our laboratories  on-demand when server dominant and recessive diseases are  were analyzed. Mutations in 93 cases were identiÜed. Including 14  present in the coupleÓs family. To fulÜl this offer we have standardise  cases of prenatal diagnosis. Sequence analysis for the negative  procedures in the PGD lab, especially concerning interpretation and  cases revealed a novel mutation. Our data supports the efÜciency of  veriÜcation of results to ensure a high rate of diagnosed embryos  the Iranian Thalassemia Prevention Program and a low rate of misdiagnosed embryos. All PGD tests were couple  speciÜc, i.e. couples were informative for at least one either linked  
P0361 . IdentiÜcation of mutations, Regional Distribution and  or unlinked marker. When a linked marker was used the haplotypes  Prenatal Diagnosis of Ȳ-Thalassaemia in Iran of the linked marker together with the disease speciÜc mutation or  M. T. Akbari, M. Karimipour;  together with a Ýanking marker were determined. The markers were  Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). microsatellites. Single-cell ampliÜcation efÜciency were assessed on  We have characterized the ¦-globin gene mutations in more  single lymphocytes by measuring allele drop-out (ADO). A test set-up  than 1500 carriers of ¦-thalassaemia and analyzed their regional  was only used if the ADO was ± 10%. All reagents used during cell  distribution in the context of prenatal diagnosis program in Iran.  biopsy, cell lysis, and PCR ampliÜcation were checked by testing for  The majority of the carriers were from Mazandaran and Gilan in  contaminating DNA. The contamination rate of the reagent should be  the Caspian Littoral in the North, Fars and Khuzistan in the South.  ± 1 in 96 blanks to be used in a PGD test. Utilizing the ARMS, DGGE and sequencing techniques the subjects  The diagnostic strategies for various PGD tests including Familial  were screened and 27 alleles were detected in the following  Adenomatous Colon Polyposis, Von Hippel-Lindau disease and  order: IVSII-1(G\x87A), IVSI-5(G\x87C), CD36/37(-T), IVSI-1(G\x87A),  Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia 1 and the outcome of PGD treatments  CD8/9(+G), CD44(-C), IVSI-110(G\x87A), IVSI-25del, CD30(G\x87C),  including diagnoses efÜciency, ADO rate on blastomeres, rate of  CD8(-AA), CD39(C\x87T), IVSII-745(C\x87G) , IVSI-6(T\x87C), CD37/38/39(- misdiagnosis and pregnancy rate will be presented. GACCCAG), CD22/24(-AAGTTGG), CD22(G\x87T), CD5(-CT), CD25/26(+T),  
P0364 . Prenatal diagnosis of 47,XX,t(2;18)(p21-q23),+18 due to  CD15(G\x87), CD82/83(-G), IVSI-130, IVSII-850(G\x87T), -101(C\x87T), IVSI- maternal balanced translocation of t(2;18)(p21-q23) 128(T\x87G), -88(C\x87T) , and new mutations -26(A\x87C) and -71(C\x87T).  A. Alpman1, T. Cankaya1, O. Cogulu1, S. Sagol2, F. Ozkinay1;  This study shows that the underlying genetic determinants for Ȳ- 1Ege University Medical Faculty,Dept. of Pediatrics,Subdivision of Genetics,  thalassaemia is heterogeneous and varies in different regions of Iran.  Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Medical Faculty,Dept. of Obstetric and  As far as prenatal diagnosis was concerned, fetal diagnosis was  Gynecology, Izmir, Turkey. made for 700 pregnancies. In those cases where parental mutations  The chromosome abnormalities due to non-disjunction of maternal  could not be identiÜed by ARMS, utilizing RFLP analysis the fetal  chromosomes during meiosis are associated with maternal age,  status was inferred. As a result of this combined approach, PND was  with a sharp increase in the slope of the trisomy-age curve between  made possible in 95% of the cases. the ages of 30 and 40 years. For detecting the chromosomal  abnormalities during pregnancy, Ürst and second trimester screening  
P0362 . Molecular analysis of beta-thalassaemia patients in a  and diagnostic tests including triple tests, nuchal translucency,  high incidence area of Southern Italy. amniocentesis, corionic villus biopsies, cordocentesis are available  C. Salpietro, A. Meo, C. Di Bella, V. Procopio, E. Canfora, K. Alessio, L. Rigoli;  according to the gestational age. Invasive prenatal diagnostic tests  Unit\x87 Operativa di Genetica ed Immunologia Pediatrica, Policlinico  have a risk of miscarriage and therefore this procedure has been  Universitario, Messina, Italy. used only for women who have been identiÜed as having a raised  The prevalence of 8 mutations in 84 patients with Ȳ -thalassaemia  risk of chromosome abnormality. In this case that we represent, as  major and in 16 subjects with thalassaemia intermedia has been  the estimated risk for trisomy 18 was 1/90 according to the screening  investigated. All the patients were Italian originating from Eastern  test. Because of the high risk in trisomy screening amniocentesis was  Sicily and Calabria. Genomic DNA was ampliÜed by polymerase  performed at the 18th week of gestation. Karyotype analysis showed  chain reaction (PCR). DNA molecular investigations were performed  47,XY, del(2)(p21-pter),+marker in the fetus. Maternal cytogenetic  by allele-speciÜc oligonucleotide (ASO) hybridization to determine the  analysis showed a karyotype of 46,XX,t(2;18)(p21-q23). Because  following Ȳ -thalassaemia mutations: CD39 (C-T), IV
S1 -110 (G-A),  of the 3:1 missegragation during the meiosis in gamets of resiprokal  IV
S1 -6 (T-C), IV
S1 -1 (G-A), IV
S2 -745 (C-G), IV
S2 -1 (G-A), -87 (C-G),  translocation carriers, the fetuses may have a trisomic pattern. The  CD6 A ( -A ) . fetus presented had an unbalanced karyotype of 47,XX,t(2;18)(p21- In thalassemia intermedia two mutations were statistically prevalent:  q23),+18 because of 3:1 missegregation during maternel meiosis.  IVS 1-6 Tŗ C ( P<0.001) and CD 6-A (P< 0.05). CD 39 was  After genetic counseling the family chose therapeutic abortion. statistically prevalent in Ȳ -thalassaemia major patients ( P<0.01).  We present this case because of its rarity as up to date no case has  The difference between the two groups was not statistically signiÜcant  been reported having an unbalanced karyotype found in our case due  for all the other mutations. Five different genotypes were recorded  to the parental balanced reciprocal translocation of t(2;18)(p21-q23) among thalassaemia intermedia and 15 among Ȳ -thalassaemia  major patients. Twenty-Üve percent of intermediate and 4.5% of  
P0365 . Automatic detection, selection and capture of fetal cells  major patients had homozygosity for mild mutations (group I); 62.5%  in maternal blood by the combination of MetaferP and LMPC. of intermediate and 26.2% of major patients had combinations  R. Burgemeister1, S. Mergenthaler2, R. Gangnus1, S. Hahn2;  of mild/severe mutations (group II). Moreover, homozygosity or  1PALM Microlaser Technologies, Bernried, Germany, 2Department of Obstetrics  double heterozygosity for severe mutations ( group III) in 12.5% of  and Gynecology, Basel, Switzerland. intermediate and 69% of major patients was found. Some genotypes  Fetal cells in maternal blood (FCMB) are still representing a future  were restricted to thalassaemia intermedia, including heterozygosity  aspect of prenatal diagnosis. Even if the analysis of FCMB never will  -87/IVS 1-6 and IVS 1-6/CD 6-A. It is essential to understand  replace invasive prenatal diagnostic procedures like chorionic villus  the distribution and frequency of the relevant mutations in each  biopsy or amniocentesis, it might be useful for e.g. validation of false  population where Ȳ -thalassaemias exist. This aspect is of particular  positives associated with current non-invasive screening methods. importance for the correlation genotype-phenotype and for the carrier  In a collaboration of the University of Basel and PALM Microlaser  detection, genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis. Technologies single labeled fetal cells from maternal blood were  automatically detected, selected and captured. The application of a  scanning software combined with a laser mediated collection of single Cytogenetics 161 cells allowed fast and reliable access to the selected cells. 21 was detected; 8 samples (0.6%) were trisomic for chromosome  The MetaferP software is capable of fast and automatic detection of  18; 2 samples (0.15%) were trisomic for chromosome 13; 3 samples  speciÜcally labeled rare cells. Data of single fetal cells, assessed as  (0.23%) was diagnosed as Turner Syndrome; one (0.09%) as  positive, were transferred to the PALM software. Pure retrievement of  Klinefelter Syndrome; 2 (0.15%) were diagnosed as 69,XXX for a  those cells was then performed by non-contact Laser Microdissection  total of 3.2% cases with chromosome aneuploidy. No false positive  and Pressure Catapulting (LMPC). results were obtained, while in three cases, due to maternal blood  This kind of investigation allows for detection, selection and capture  contamination the analysis gave ambiguous results. of every cell type which might be an interesting object in non-invasive  Our results conÜrm that QF-PCR technique is a rapid testing able to  prenatal diagnosis. Even for the cultivation of fetal cells, if desired,  diagnose chromosome aneuploidy accurately in prenatal diagnosis  the LMPC technology will bear good prospects. Collection of single  both on amniotic Ýuid and chorion villi. The use of QF-PCR as a  live cells allow to grow real single cells without the necessity to apply  stand-alone test for some referral indications is being considered at  techniques of selective stimulation of fetal cell growth. our institution. Application of the automated scanning software MetaferP combined  with the LMPC technology to capture single cells have promise to  
P0368 . The effect of previous pregnancies and maternal  a big step forward to develop protocols for non-invasive prenatal  transfusion on sex determination using the SRY region detection  diagnosis. with real-time PCR in maternal plasma L. Lazar, Z. Ban, J. Oroszne Nagy, C. Papp, Z. Papp;  
P0366 . Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for a male  I. Dept. Ob/Gyn. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. carrier of a Y;autosome translocation resulting in an ongoing  Non-invasive methods using maternal plasma for molecular genetic  clinical pregnancy. diagnosis become an important Üeld of interest in prenatal diagnosis.  C. Mackie Ogilvie1,2, S. Watson1,3, P. R. Braude1,4, S. Pickering1,4, P. N.  Detection of free fetal DNA in maternal plasma with real-time PCR  Scriven1,2;  has been shown to be useful for fetal gender determination. A few  1Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis, GuyÓs & St ThomasÓ Hospital  publications report that the fetal DNA can be detected in maternal  Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Cytogenetics Department, GuyÓs & St ThomasÓ  plasma years after delivery. The aim of our study was to control the  Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Genetics Centre, GuyÓs & St ThomasÓ  sensibility and speciÜty, of the real-time PCR ampliÜcation of the SRY  Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Assisted Conception Unit, GuyÓs & St  region from maternal plasma. Maternal plasma before amniocentesis,  ThomasÓ Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom. and amnionic Ýuid samples were obtained from 54 pregnant women.  Males with balanced Y;autosome translocations usually present  Real-time PCR analysis of the SRY region was performed in order  with infertility associated with azoospermia/oligozoospermia and/or  to determine the fetal sex. Routine karyotyping was also performed  abnormalities of sperm morphology. Sperm-FISH studies on carriers  on the samples. We found male fetuses in 26 of 51 pregnancies by  have reported a high prevalence of chromosomally abnormal sperm;  cytogenetic analysis. In 20 cases there previous child was male and  assisted conception using intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)  in 5 cases there was transfusion in maternal history. Real time PCR  may therefore be problematic. We report the use of PGD using a Üve- of maternal plasma has been positive for the SRY region in 27 cases.  colour FISH approach for a male with a balanced Y;13 translocation  In 51 cases the cytogenetic gender and the real-time PCR results  (46,X,t(Y;13)(q11.1;q21.3)) and severe oligoasthenoteratospermia.  were correlating. In one case of 46,XY karyotype the PCR reaction  Routine stimulation protocols were followed by ICSI treatment;  for SRY region was negative, in two cases of SRY positivity the  15 eggs were collected and 9 were injected, of which 4 had 2  karyotype was 46,XX. In one of the false positive cases the previous  pronuclei. Three embryos were suitable for biopsy on day 3; a single  child was male. The result of our study suggest that real time PCR  blastomere was taken from each embryo and the nuclei hybridized  detrmination of fetal gender from cell free fetal DNA in maternal  with probes for the chromosome 13 long arm subtelomere region, the  plasma seems to be not inÝuenced by the gender of previous  RB-1 locus in band 13q14, and the centromeres of the X and the Y  pregnancies and maternal blood transfusion. chromosomes, differentially labelled with Spectrum Green, Spectrum  Aqua, Texas Red and biotin. The biotinylated probe was detected  
P0369 . The predictive value of 45,X detected in CVS. Our  using Cy5-streptavidin and the nuclei were counterstained with  experience. DAPI. The nuclei from two of the embryos showed abnormal signal  A. Soler1, A. S\x86nchez1, M. A. Sala1, M. J. Rubio1, M. P. Villa1, A. Borrell2;  patterns, while the third nucleus showed a signal pattern consistent  1Servei de Gen\x8etica. Unitat de Diagn\x97stic Prenatal. Hospital Clinic, Barcelona,  with a carrier male embryo. This embryo was transferred and resulted  Spain, 2Dep. Obstetr\x91cia i Ginecologia. Unitat de Diagn\x97stic Prenatal. Hospital  in an ongoing clinical pregnancy (currently 32 weeks gestation), with  Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. delivery expected in April 2004. No abnormality was detected on fetal  The birth prevalence of Turner syndrome has been estimated to be  ultrasound; invasive prenatal diagnosis was declined. We are not  from 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 5,000 female live births. Approximately 1%  aware of any previously reported clinical pregnancies following PGD  to 2% of all conceptuses have a 45,X chromosome constitution.  for Y;autosome translocations. This approach provides a realistic  The majority of these spontaneously abort, usually during the  treatment option for Y;autosome translocation carriers with or without  Ürst trimester of pregnancy. However, not all the 45,X diagnoses  infertility. performed on chorionic villi samples reÝect the chromosome  constitution of the fetus. The loss of an X or Y chromosome in  
P0367 . QF-PCR: a Rapid Prenatal Detection of Common  placental tissue is a relatively frequent event We detected 22 cases  Chromosome Aneuploidies. of monosomy X among 5,896 Ürst trimester (CVS) diagnoses  C. Curcio, D. A. Coviello, C. Calderone, U. Nicolini, A. Kustermann, G. Pardi,  (0.37%), two of them mosaic. Seven cases turned out to be conÜned  M. Travi;  to placenta: fetal karyotypes were 46,XX (n=4), 46,XY (n=3). Two  Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy. other cases showed discrepant chromosome constitution between  Karyotype analysis from cultured cells needs, on average, 11-14 days  CVS (45,X) and fetal tissues (mos45,X/46,XX and mos 45,X/ for their results while autosomal trisomies, which account for about  46,i(Xq)). The remaining cases reÝected the fetal karyotype, since  80% of signiÜcant abnormalities, can be detected within 24-48 hours  ultrasonography revealed features usually associated with Turner  by quantitative Ýuorescence (QF) PCR. Most of these abnormalities  fetuses: increased nuchal translucency, cystic hygroma, lymphedema  are primary trisomies for chromosome 13, 18, 21, or numerical sex  or hydrops fetalis. We describe the indication for study, results and  chromosome abnormalities (1). We have used QF-PCR to assess  follow-up of all cases. From our experience we would recommend to  relative allele dosage at polymorphic loci of chromosomes 13, 18, 21  conÜrm the CVS Ünding of 45,X in amniocytes in those cases with  and sex chromosome in 996amniotic Ýuid and 281 chorionic villus  normal ultrasound scan. samples. The procedure uses a Ðone-tube testÑ in which markers  This work has been partially supported by the áRed de Centros de  are co-ampliÜed in one multiplex PCR assay. All samples were also  Gen\x8dtica Cl\x91nica y MolecularÐ (V-2003-Red-07-O) analysed by full karyotype on cultured cells. QF-PCR showed normal  results in 1277samples (98%), while in 25 samples (1.95%) trisomy Cytogenetics 162 
P0370 . Utilisation of PAPP-A / PROMBP-complex in early  of genetic disorders characterized by recurrent infections due to  screening of impaired prenatal development and detection of  deÜciency in T cell, B cell or both lymphocyte groups. Bone marrow  different types of acute coronary artery disease. transplantation is the only way to cure the disease. Because of the  M. Macek Sr., P. H\x86jek, ÿ. Vil\x91mov\x86, P. PotuĂn\x91kov\x86, M. Simandlov\x86, R. Vlk, M.  severe problems encountered during bone marrow transplantation,  Havlovicov\x86, M. Macek Jr., M. Hlad\x91kov\x86;  prenatal diagnosis is crucial. A 32-year old pregnant mother was referred to us at the 17th week  Charles University Prague, Prague 5, Czech Republic. of the gestation. The parents were Ürst cousins. The family had  EfÜciency of PAPP-A / PROMBP and beta-hCG maternal serum  3 healthy children and a child with SCID. Two previous children  screening was evaluated by degree of deviation from norm (1,6- (5-month old boy, 3-month old girl) of the family died from SCID.  1,9 MoM). This complex was also studied in patients with stable- The 5-year old SCID child had bone marrow transplantation at the  /unstable angina pectoris and with acute myocardial infarction,  age of 1. Until their referral to our center, no molecular tests have  versus controls. Delphia and Kryptor technologies were used in 1,494  been performed. Because of the advanced gestational age and the  women during the 11.-14. weeks of gestation. Analyte serum levels  absence of molecular analysis, an alternative diagnosis was planned  were adjusted according to weight and gestational age. Prenatal  for prenatal diagnosis. screening efÜciency was evaluated by proportion of pregnancies with  Cordocentesis was performed at the 20-21th week of gestation and  spontaneous abortions, prematurity and preeclampsia (PD) and/or  T and B lymphocyte levels were assessed. Lymphocyte culture  severe anomalies and aneuploidies (CA). No severe chromosomal  and fetal karyotype were performed in order to understand whether  anomalies were found in 570 controls (>0.6 - <1.9 MoM). In  there were lymphocytes circulating. HLA typing was performed to  pregnancies with 0.5-0.6 and 1.9-2.0 MoM 45,X/46,XX (1/127)  differentiate maternal and fetal blood. In fetal blood 46% of CD3, 4%  was disclosed. Trisomy 21 and FraX-A syndromes were detected  CD19, 35% CD4, 20% CD8 , 1% CD3+ HLA DR were detected . Fetal  in 1/414 cases with one analyte < 0.5 or > 2.0 MoM. Triploidy (1x),  karyotype was 46,XY. Maternal fetal contamination was excluded by  trisomy 13 (3x), trisomy 21 (2x), 45,X/46,XX (1x) were discovered  HLA typing. Regarding the lymphocytes distribution according to their  in 7 / 83 (8.4 %) pregnancies with both abnormal analytes. That is  immunological markers and the availability of fetal karyotype from  signiÜcantly higher than in controls (p < 0.001) and than the detection  lymphocyte culture, the fetus was considered to be normal. rate of trisomy 21 from II. trimester screening (2/400; 0.5%; p <  0.001). The risk of CA was not increased in this group contrary to  
P0373 . Prenatal diagnosis of de nova unbalanced translocation  the increased risk PD (2 / 83; 2.4 %; p < 0.001). The patients with  8p;21q using subtelomeric probes  unstable angina pectoris and acute myocardial infarction have highly  F. Ozkinay, H. Kanòt, H. Onay, O. Cogulu, C. G\x9end\x9ez, D. Erkal, C. Ozkinay;  signiÜcantly increased levels of PAPP-A / PROMBP compared to  healthy individuals and patients with stable coronary artery disease.  Ege University/Medical School Hospital, Izmir, Turkey. SpeciÜcity and sensitivity was signiÜcantly higher than in troponin I  We report an unbalanced translocation involving chromosomes 8  and CRP. Supported by ICA2-CT-2000-10012, MSMT-111300003,  and 21 in a fetus showing ultrasonographic abnormalities at the  MZCR-00000064203 second trimester of pregnancy. A 41 years old pregnant women,  gravida 1 para 0, was referred to genetics subdivision at the 16th  
P0371 . Prenatal Diagnosis and Deletion Screening of Duchenne  week of gestation because of advanced maternal age and fetal  Muscular Dystrophy in Iranian Families pelvicaliectasis on ultrasographic exmination. Pregnancy had occured  A. R. Noorian1, A. Tabarroki1, R. Karimi-nejad2, M. Golkar2, H. Najmabadi1,2;  following ICSI threatment. After genetic counseling amniocentesis  was performed. Fetal karyotype analysis revealed a karyotype of  1University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic  46,XY,8p+. Ulrasonographic examination repeated at the 20thweek  of), 2Karimi-nejad/Najmabadi Genetic Laboratory, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic  of gestation showed intrauterin growth retardation, ventriculomegali,  of). hypoplasic corpus callosum, cerebellar structural abnormality and  Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is one of the most common X- pelvicaliectasis. Both parents had normal chromosomal composition.  linked genetic disorders, which is caused by mutations in Dystrophin  Molecular cytogenetic studies (FISH) using chromosome-speciÜc  gene and manifests with severe muscle weakness and eventually  subtelomere probes showed a terminal deletion of 8p and trisomy  leads to death in the second or third decades of life. In the absence  of 21q subtelomeric region . Further analysis with Down Syndrome  of an appropriate cure, prenatal diagnosis appears to be the best  speciÜc region probes revealed two signals. The couple decided to  approach to reduce the burden of the disease on the individual family  terminate the pregnancy. This is the Ürst prenatally diagnosed case  and ultimately on the society. showing t(8p;21q) and born to parents having normal karyotaypes. During the last Üve years, prenatal diagnosis was offered on request  to approximately 85 families, having one or more affected male  
P0374 . Prospective evaluation of Ürst trimester risk screening in  children. Initially, the deletions in the DMD gene were identiÜed by  a single center Multiplex PCR, screening for 20 exons. Then, in all patients, three  P. Miny1, S. Tercanli2, G. Sartorius2, H. Struben2, P. Huber3, W. Holzgreve2;  intragenic RFLPs and two main CA repeats that have been shown to  be highly heterozygous in the previous studies, were used to perform  1Division of Medical Genetics, University ChildrenÓs Hospital, Basel,  carrier detection and linkage analysis. Switzerland, 2University WomenÓs Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 3Central  Deletions were found in 43 affected boys (50.5%).In 47 families the  laboratory, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland. intragenic RFLPs were utilized Close to 5000 consecutive pregnancies have been screened during  and in 26 of them one or more RFLPs were informative a six years period. Risk screening was offered after appropriate  (55%). In 30 families two microsatellite repeat analysis were done to  counseling to all patients in the outpatient clinic and those refered  identify the mutant alleles and in 12 families, 5Ó-Dys was informative.  for specialized ultrasound services with a fetal crown rump length  However, in Iranian families, CA repeats 3Ó- DYS analysis does not  between 45 and 86 mm (i.e. gestational ages 11+3 to 13+6 weeks).  have any signiÜcant heterogeneity. Individual risks were assessed based on nuchal translucency (NT)  Prenatal diagnosis was performed in 25 families. measurements and maternal age in all patients as well as maternal  Therefore, it is concluded that multiplex PCR technology and three  serum markers (free ¦ hCG, PAPP A) in a subset of patients using  intragenic RFLPs, can be used effectively for PND and carrier  the software of the Fetal Medicine Foundation, London. This  detection. New systems such as short tandem repeats (STRs) are  institution audits the program in regular intervals. being used to further improve DMD prenatal diagnosis. As of Feb 9, 2004 4730 consecutive pregnancies have been  screened. A total of 69 (1,5 %) unbalanced chromosomal  
P0372 . Autosomal Recessive Type SCID and Prenatal Diagnosis:  abnormalities including 36 cases of trisomy 21 were diagnosed in the  Case Report study group. The detection rate of risk screening based on NT and  H. Onay, F. Ozkinay, O. Cogulu, N. Kutukculer, S. Sagol, C. Ozkinay;  maternal age using a cut-off of 1:300 was 83 % for trisomy 21. It did  not differ for all unbalanced chromosome anomalies. A risk of 1 in 300  Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir, Turkey. or higher was calculated in a total of 531 pregnancies giving a false  Severe Combine Immune DeÜciency (SCID), consists of group  positive rate of about 10 %.Cancer genetics 163 These results are in good accordance with published data and  
P0377 . The detection of 11q23 and 13q14 deletions in patients  clearly demonstrate the advantages of Ürst trimester risk screening  with chronic lymphocytic leukemia by Ýuorescence in situ  as compared to traditional approaches still offered in a large number  hybridisation method of pregnancies. The decreasing number of invasive procedures  G. E. Karahan1, M. Aktan2, F. Aydòn1, Y. Pek\x8celen3, M. N. \x81arin1;  observed in our center and others appears to be a consequence of  1Istanbul University Istanbul Medical School, Department of Medical Biology,  the superior performance of Ürst trimester risk screening. Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University Istanbul Medical School, Department of  Haematology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University Istanbul Medical School,  
P0375 . Diagnostic problems in cytogenetic examinations of  Department of Haematology, Istanbul, Turkey. prenatally detected cases. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), is the most common leukemia  J. Bogdanowicz1, B. Pawþowska1, A. Ilnicka1, A. Tomankiewicz-Zawadzka1, T.  characterized by the accumulation of mostly CD5+ mature-appearing  Roszkowski2, E. Zdzienicka1, J. Zaremba1;  B lymphocytes in humans. 1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of  The data about the genomic aberrations occuring in CLL has  Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Postgraduate Centre of Medical Education,  improved recently and will undoubtedly provide important clues to  Warsaw, Poland. the clinical behaviour of the disease and new targets for effective  We present results of cytogenetic examinations in 5 cases of  therapy. FISH made it possible to identify chromosome aberrations  chromosomal rearrangements in prenatal diagnosis which were  in approximately 80% of CLL cases by using locus spesiÜc probes.  difÜcult or impossible to diagnose using routine cytogenetic banding  Deletions are the most frequent structural chromosome abnormalities  techniques. FISH was applied to identify these rearrangements.. in CLL and 13q14 and 11q22-23 are commonly deleted regions.  In case 1 we found small additional fragment on the long arm of the  Del (13)(q14) is considered to be the predictor of good prognosis  chromosome 13. After using painting probes this fragment appeared  whereas del (11)(q23) is the predictor of poor prognosis. to be a part of chromosome 21 and it is of paternal origin. Applying  The aim of our investigation is to evaluate the signiÜcance of 11q23  21q22 speciÜc probe we excluded trisomy of this region. In this  and 13q14 deletions in CLL patients and to correlate our laboratory  case we could not establish whether the karyotype of the fetus was  Ündings with clinico-biologic characteristics, for the Ürst time in  balanced or weather the father had balanced translocation 13;21. In  Turkey. case 2 of de novo translocation 6; 12 we used subtelomeric probes  40 patients with CLL were included in our study. We detected  and we found that a break point of chromosome 6 was located distal  deletions in 70% of the patients. Fifteen out of 40 (37.5%) patients  to used probes (using commercially available probes we could not  were found to have del (11)(q23) and 13 of them (32.5%) were  establish whether the translocation was balanced). found to have del (13)(q14). Twelve patients (30%) had none of the  In case 3 FISH with subtelomeric probes was applied to Ünd out  deletions and none of the patients had both. We compared these  whether paternally inherited translocation 1;17 was balanced. The  results with other prognostic factors but no statistically signiÜcant  break point of chromosome 17 was close to the subtelomeric region. correlation was established. In case 4 USG and echocardiography Ündings could indicate 22q11.2  We think that more patients must be included into the study and the  syndrome which was conÜrmed using TUPLE 1 probe. deletion analysis should be performed at different times during the  In case 5 cytogenetic examination was performed because of  progression of the disease to have an idea about the prognosis. abnormal USG. With routine methods the karyotype seemed to  be normal. However, phenotype of the newborn suggested Wolf- 
P0378 . Genetic polymorphisms of biotransformation enzymes in  Hirschorn Syndrome and it was conÜrmed with speciÜc FISH probes. patients with hematological malignances FISH is a very important but sometimes insufÜcient tool in solving  E. Yakupova1, T. Krasavtceva2, O. Malyevsky2, T. Victorova1;  cytogenetic problems, particularly in prenatal diagnosis. 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa scientiÜc center, Ufa, Russian  Federation, 2Children republic hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation. Polymorphisms in genes encoding carcinogen-metabolizing  enzymes may have relevance in determining susceptibility to cancer.  
P0376 . The Frequency of Human Papillomavirus Infection in  Individuals carrying the more active form of enzyme involved in  Iranian Patients with Cervical Cancer the activation of carcinogen, or less efÜcient alleles of detoxifying  N. Kohannia1, E. Keyhani2, N. Mahdieh2, N. Izadi3, M. LotÜan2, M. R.  enzymes, will be at great risk of cancer. Keikhaee2, R. Amini4, H. Najmabadi2;  PCR-RFLP-based genotyping assays were used to determine the  1Islamic Azad University, Lahijan, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Social Welfare and  frequency of polymorphisms in CY
P1 A1, CY
P2 E1
, mEPHX, NAT2,  Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Tehran  GSTM1, GST P1
, GSTT1, MDR1 genes in a case-control study  University-Mirzakouchakkhan Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of),  comprised 120 children patients with hematological malignancies and  4Reference Laboratory of Iran Research Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic  167 healthy individuals from Bashkortostan republic. of). We found statistical signiÜcant association of heterozygous genotype  Human papiloma virus (HPV) is a well-known etiologic factor of  of CY P1
A1in the patient group p=0,01; OR=3,75). The combination  cervical cancer in Western countries. However, despite a relatively  of normal alleles CY P1
A1/CY P2
E1  genes was higher in the group  high prevalence of cervical cancer in Iran, no studies are available  of healthy individuals (p=0,04; OR=0,44). We established that fast  on the relationship between HPV infection and cervical cancer. Of  mEPHX phenotype, assessed by genotyping, was higher in the whole  ninety plus types of HPV, HPV-16 is the most prevalent in cervical  patient group (0,22 versus 0,14), but normal mEPHX phenotype was  cancer, followed by HPV-18. A retrospective study was performed on  higher in the non-Hodgkin*s lymphoma (NHL) patient group. We  107 cervical cancer parafÜn-embedded histopathology blocks. DNA  determined more frequent genotype combinations of NAT2 gene in  extraction was performed through standard procedures followed by  patient groups (acute lymphoblastic leukemia - NAT2*5/6, NAT2*5/4;  Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction ampliÜcation with two pairs  acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) -NAT2*5/5, NHL - NAT2*5/4). The  of primers (one as internal control) which were designed to detect  frequency of GSTT1 gene deletion was decreased in the patients  HPV in the related tissues. The products were run on 8% acryl amide  group (p=0,03; OR=0,47), there was not anyone with GSTT1 gene  gel. HPV typing was done for the types 16 and 18 positive controls  deletion among patients with AML. We found increased frequency of  of which were available in Iran. We found 78 out of 107 cases with  GSTM1 gene deletion - 0,64 and decreased frequency of MDR1 gene  pathological indecices of cervical cancer were positive for HPV. In our  mutation - 0,36 in the group of AML patient (versus 0,40 and 0,49 in  study nearly 70% of the malignant cervical lesions were contaminated  controls, correspondingly). with HPV. This Ünding conÜrms the previous reports on the signiÜcant  Our Ündings seem to suggest an inÝuence of genetic polymorphisms  association of HPV with cervical cancer. of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes on the susceptibility to  hematological malignances.Cancer genetics 164 
P0379 . The SSCP proÜles of p53 gene in 3-methylcholanthrene  We screened the autosomes with 366 polymorphic microsatellite  and butylated hydroxytoluene induced rat lung tissues markers in a set of 49 breast cancer cases and 50 controls and  A. Colak, I. Sezgin, S. Akyildiz;  further analysed 69 markers Ýanking signiÜcant loci and calculated  differences between frequencies of the estimated two, three and four- Dept. of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet  marker haplotypes in case and control groups. Our results suggest  University, Sivas, Turkey. four breast cancer associated regions in three chromosomes in an  SUMMARY eastern Finnish population. In the present study it was aimed to Ünd out the mutagenic effects  of 3-Methylcholanthrene (MCA) and agent Butylated hydoxytoluene  
P0382 . Methylation inactivates expression of CDP-diacylglycerol  (BHT) on rat lung tissues. A group of rats (Rattus norvegicus wistar  synthase 1 (CD
S1 ) in hepatocellular carcinoma albino) were given one cancer induced agent once a week with a  J. Chang1, K. Yeh2, Y. Chen2, W. Su2, Y. Wang2;  MCA 40mg/kg for six weeks; the second group of rats were given  antioxydant BHT 200mg/kg once a week again for six weeks. For  1China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China,  the other dual experimental group rats were given a single dose of  2Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan Republic of China. MCA 40mg/kg and then BHT 200mg/kg intraperitonally for six weeks.  CD
S1  is an enzyme required for the regeneration of the signaling  After 26 weeks all rats were killed and lung tissues were taken for  molecular phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PI
P2 ) from  genomic DNA isolation. For the mutation analysis of exon-5 of p53  phosphatidic acid. These phosphoinositides and their cleavage  gene the PCR-SSCP based methodolgy was used in the present  products are a class of second messengers, which are involved  study. On the other hand rat tissues were evaluated radiological and  in cell growth and oncogenesis. We examined the expression of  scintigraphically for possible tumoral lesions. CD
S1  in 52 hepatocellular carcinoma and paired non-cancerous  According to our experimental results; no tumoral appearence  tissues by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase  was diagnosed in control and all experimental group rats tissues  chain reaction analysis. The results showed that the expression  histopathologicaly. In group one due to high dose administration of  levels of CD
S1  signiÜcantly decreased in hepatocellular carcinoma.  3-MCA, malign sarcoma were observed(55.55%) in the around of  Mutational analysis of the whole gene and methylation analysis of  injection areas. Mutations were determined in exon 5 of p53 gene  cytosine-phosphate guanosine (CpG) sites at the promoter area were  (11.11%) in experimental group one. In lung specimens of group  further performed to investigate the possible mechanisms. However,  two, high rate of(42.85%) p53 exon-5 mutation (which usually under  no mutation was found within the coding region. Interestingly, in  goes mutations in cancer cases) were also determined. No tumor or  the promoter area of CD
S1  gene, most of the CpG sites were  mutations were detected in control and experimental group three. methylated in 73% of the cancerous tissues; in contrast, only a partial  methylation of CpG was found in 50% of the non-cancerous tissues.  
P0380 . Proto-oncogene c-myc SSCP profiles in human bladder  Our results suggest that the down regulated CD
S1  expression in  urothelial carcinoma tissues hepatocellular carcinoma was due to the inactivation of the CD
S1   E. Yildiz1, O. Ozdemir2, S. Ayan3, E. G\x9el2;  gene by methylation and that the differential expression correlated  to the ratio of CpG sites being methylated. Therefore, methylation  1Department of Pathology, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 2Department  of CD
S1  may play a role in the oncogenesis of hepatocellular  of Medical Biology and Genetics, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey,  carcinoma. 3Department of Urology, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey. SUMMARY 
P0383 . IdentiÜcation of two putative telomerase suppressor  Although the process of bladder tumorigenesis requires multiple  gene loci on chromosome 4 involved in cervical carcinogenesis genetic events, it is unclear to what extent carcinogenesis proceeds  I. Frank1, B. Rudolph1, E. Stanbridge2, R. Ullmann3, F. Erdogan3, B. Meyer1, A.  through preferred secondary pathways following a speciÜc initiating  Schneider1, M. D\x9erst1, C. Backsch1;  oncogenic event. We studied the expression and mutation analysis  of the human c-myc proto- oncogene in human bladder urothelial  1Gyn\x89kologische Molekularbiologie, Abteilung Frauenheilkunde der FSU, Jena,  carcinoma tissues by both immunohistochemistry and PCR-SSCP  Germany, 2Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of  analysis, respectively. The immunohistochemical Ündings were  Medicine, Irvine, CA, United States, 3Max-Planck-Institut f\x9er Molekulare Gene- showed that the c-myc proto-oncogene is primarily expressed in cells  tik, Berlin, Germany. of both invasive and non-invasiv urothelial carcinomas that have a  Telomerase activity is detectable in most human cancers and  different histological grades and the exon-2 of c-myc gene was found  immortal cell lines. In contrast, in normal diploid human cells  to be mutated in one case which is in advanced stage of bladder  progressive reduction of telomere lenght to critically short sizes has  cancer. been correlated with the cessation of cell division and the onset  of senescence. Previously we have provided evidence for the  
P0381 . A genome-wide scan for linkage disequilibrium with  localization of a telomerase suppressor gene on chromosome 4. The  breast cancer in an eastern Finnish population aim of our study is to determine a region on chromosome 4 which is  J. M. Hartikainen1,2, A. M. Dunning3, H. Tuhkanen1,2, V. Kataja2, M. Eskelinen4,  associated with telomerase suppression. V. M. Kosma1,5, A. Mannermaa1,5;  Microcell-mediated chromosome transfer was performed to introduce  a single copy of the entire human chromosome 4 and different  1Department of Clinical Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Kuopio University,  derivative chromosome 4 into HPK II cells. Cell lysates were  Kuopio, Finland, 2Department of Oncology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio,  prepared directly from individual hybrid cell colonies (100-300 cells).  Finland, 3Cancer Research UK Human Genetics Research Group, Department  Telomerase activity was determined using a telomerase PCR ELISA  of Oncology, Strangeways Research Laboratory, University of Cambridge,  kit. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Department of Surgery, Kuopio University Hospi- Strong suppression of telomerase activity was only found in a subset  tal, Kuopio, Finland, 5Department of Pathology, Centre for Laboratory Medicine,  of HPK II hybrids in which chromosome 4 or three of the eight der(4)  Tampere University, Tampere, Finland. chromosomes had been introduced. Our data suggest that two  Breast cancer is the most common of cancers among women in  putative telomerase suppressor gene loci map to the long arm of  industrialised countries. Many of breast cancer risk factors are  chromosome 4 ((4p13-q13.2 and 4q25-q31.21). known but the majority of the genetic background is still unknown.  Currently, these loci will being deÜned more precisely by matrix CGH- Linkage disequilibrium based association is a powerful tool for  analyses. mapping disease genes and is suitable for mapping complex traits  in founder populations. Our aim was to Ünd new genetic medium  or low-penetrance breast cancer risk factors in an eastern Finnish  population by identifying chromosomal regions that are associated  with breast cancer. Our case-control set is from the province of  Northern Savo in the late-settlement area of eastern Finland.  This population is relatively young and genetically homogeneous. Cancer genetics 165 
P0384 . Prostate speciÜc antigen (PSA) in patients with prostate  
P0386 . Interphase FISH and Spectral Karyotyping analysis in  cancer or benign prostate hyperplasia(BPH): The Ürst molecular  B-CLL young patients investigation report from Iran. L. Intropido1, L. Doneda2, L. Trakhtenbrot3, E. Morra1, L. Larizza2;  L. Andonian1, D. Farhud1, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori1, K. Holakouie  1Department of Hematology, Niguarda CaÓ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy,  Naieni1, A. Razi2, J. Sanadizadeh3, G. Pourmand4, M. Nouraie1, L.  2Department of Biology and Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy,  Yepiskoposyan5, P. Derakhshandeh1, S. Rezaie1, H. Soleimanpour1, F. Saadat1,  3Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. N. Aalizadeh1, A. Berahme1, M. Norouzi1, M. Khorramizadeh1;  B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL) is the most common  1School of Public Health, Tehran Univeristy of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran  form of adult leukaemia in the Western countries, characterized  (Islamic Republic of), 2Shariati Hospital, Tehran Univeristy of Medical Sciences,  by accumulation in bone marrow and peripheral blood of mature  Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Mehrad Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  lymphocytes. Little is known about the genetic alterations underlying  Republic of), 4Sina Hospital, Tehran Univeristy of Medical Sciences, Tehran,  the pathogenesis of this disease, mainly because cytogenetic studies  Iran (Islamic Republic of), 5Institute of Man, Yerevan, Armenia. are hindered by the low mitotic index of tumour cells and the limited  Background: Prostate cancer is the second commonest form of  resolution of chromosome banding. Bone marrow samples of 50  cacer in men. Detection of circulating PSA transcripts has effectively  B-CLL patients were analysed by Interphase FISH (I-FISH) for the  been used for early diagnosis of prostate cancer cells. regions 13q14, 11q22-23, 17p13, 14 q32 and 12p11.1-q11.1. Fifteen  Objective: This investigation employed a reverse transcriptase  of the patients were also studied by Spectral Karyotyping (SKY), to  polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) technique to distinguish the  look for correlation between cytogenetic abnormalities and clinical  patients with either localized or metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) vs.  features. BPH and control subjects, as compared with clinical and pathological  Statistical correlations were evidenced by I-FISH between 11q23,  records. 13q14 and 14q32 deletions and patientsÓ clinical characteristics:  Methods: With reservation of ethical issues, blood samples were  14q32 deletion showed a signiÜcant association with the  collected from 60 cases. Based on pathological and clinical Ündings,  presentation age (p=0.008); while 11q23 deletion was associated  29 patients (24 with localized cancer, 5 with metastases), 18 with  with the presence of lymphoadenopathy (p=0.04), the need of  benign BPH, and 13 healthy (including 3 females) subjects as  chemotherapeutic treatment (p=0.0002) and a shorter treatment free  negative controls, were selected from Shariaty, Mehrad, Sina,,  interval (p<0.0001). Interestingly, the presence of 11q23 deletion was  Khatam and Atye hospitals in Tehran, Iran. An RT-PCR for a 260bp  found to predict rapid disease progression even in the patients with  PSA transcript was then performed. Clinical and pathological records  low-risk stage at diagnosis. Also the presence of 13q14 deletion is  were used for the assessment and comparison of PSA RT-PCR  associated with a shorter treatment free interval (p=0.0003). results. SKY analysis did not evidence numerical or structural changes,  Results: None of the control subjects and BPH (with 4 exceptions)  including those monitored by I-FISH, in the metaphases available  were found positive by RT-PCR (SpeciÜcity=72.7%). In patients  from a subset of patients. We conclude that I-FISH is a powerful  with localized prostate cancer, 21 out of 24 were found PSA positive  approach to detect genomic aberrations in diseases such as B-CLL  (Sensitivity=83.4%) and the remaining 3 have showed PSA negative  where abnormal clones may escape detection because of the low  (Positive predictive value=80%). All of 5 metastases patients (100%)  number of dividing cells. revealed PSA positive results. Conclusions: Our data reÝects the clinical relevance and  
P0387 . IdentiÜcation of an Alu-mediated 5.1 kb deletion  signiÜcance of RT-PCR results as assessed with clinical and  removing BRCA1 Exon 17 in a German Breast and Ovarian  pathological examinations. PSA RT-PCR might be used as a powerful  Cancer Family means for diagnosis, even when either pathological or clinical  A. L. John1, W. Hofmann2, W. Jonat1, H. K. Schackert3, S. Scherneck2, N. Ar- Ündings are negative, and could be employed for further molecular  nold1;  epidemiology surveys. 1University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Dept. of Gynecology and  Obstetrics, Kiel, Germany, 2Department of Tumorgenetics, Max Delbrueck Ce- 
P0385 . PTEN mutations in African and Caucasian patients with  ter for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Surgical Research,  endometrial cancer. Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. J. C. A. Jamison;  During the last years several methods have been developed  Tshwane University of Technology, Pretoria, South Africa. revealing a signiÜcant proportion of BRCA1 exon deletions or  PTEN/MMA
C1 /TE
P1 , a tumour suppressor gene on chromosome  duplications in breast/ovarian cancer families with high probability  10q23, has been implicated in the development and/or progression  of BRCA1/2-linked predisposition, which had been tested negative  of a wide range of cancers, when perturbed. PTEN, a lipid- and  by standard screening methods. Comprehensive data about the  protein phosphatase, negatively regulates cell growth, migration and  spectrum and frequency of large genomic rearrangements of the  invasion via the FAK-, MAPK- and PI3K- pathways. PTEN is most  BRCA1 gene in the German population are still missing. Establishing  commonly mutated in all stages of endometrioid adenocarcinoma of  a multiplex PCR of short Ýuorescent fragments enabled screening  the endometrium (EEC) with a frequency of 26 % to 52 %. In previous  a collective of 32 breast/ovarian cancer families, previously tested  studies, differences in the PTEN mutation frequency between African  negative for BRCA1/2 mutations by standard sequencing. This  and Caucasian women were observed, suggesting a possible  method allows a sensitive and speciÜc evaluation of the 22 coding  dissimilarity in the molecular pathogenesis of endometrial cancer in  exons and a fragment from the 5Ó untranslated region including the  these groups. promoter ŋ. Two deletions (exon 17 and exon 2) could be found  ParafÜn-embedded tissue samples from South African patients with  and conÜrmed by the MLPA technique. This corresponds to a  EEC [n=37] were analysed with PCR-SSCP. Aberrant migrating  frequency of 3.5% (2/58 tested individuals with BRCA1 mutations),  samples were sequenced. Sixty % (22/37) of the cancers had  which is lower than the frequency reported from other populations.  somatic mutations. Alterations were located throughout the gene  The rearrangement affecting exon 17 was proved by long range  with the exception of exons 2, 4 and 9. These changes include 10  PCR, and sequence analysis of the mutant allele revealed a 5.1 kb  frameshifts, 6 nonsense, 6 missense and 3 splice site mutations, 1  deletion. This deletion is the result of a recombination between two  in-frame deletion and 4 polymorphisms. Codon 130 in exon 5, which  closely related Alu sequences and is the third one in the genomic  lies within the phosphatase core motif of PTEN, is a mutational hot  region surrounding exon 17. These data show that Alu-mediated  spot limited to the African patients. Mutations occurred in 56 % (14/ recombination seems to be an important mechanism leading to  25) African, 64 % (7/11) Caucasian and 100 % (1/1) Indian patients.  pathological inactivation of the BRCA1 gene, and that this region  No ethnic disparity was observed between the African and Caucasian  might be a site especially prone to this type of rearrangement  patients. although the density of Alu sequences is not higher than in other  areas of the gene.Cancer genetics 166 
P0388 . 
P53  gene mutations in primer tumor tissues and surgical  Aims The aim of this study was to analyse neuroblastoma tumors in  margins of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head  order to assess a possible implication of this gene in neuroblastoma  and neck development. B. Tunca1, L. Erisen2, G. Cecener1, H. Coskun2, S. Ozuysal3, U. Egeli1;  Patients and Methods We have studied 29 neuroblastoma tumor  samples from different stages. Mutation search in genomic DNA  1Uludag University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology and  was carried out after individual ampliÜcation of each one of the 8  Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 2Uludag University Medical Faculty Department  SDHB exons by SSCP analysis and following sequenciation of those  of Otorhinolaryngology, Bursa, Turkey, 3Uludag University Medical Faculty  samples with migration pattern variants. Department of Pathologia, Bursa, Turkey. Results We have found no variant except for a polymorphism in  Head and neck cancers are involved in the six most common cancer  two neuroblastoma samples. The polymorphism was an A§C in  in the world. Tumors of these type cancer which is closely related  third position of codon 6 (exon 1) in heterozigosis, which implies no  with etiological factors such as smoking and alcohol habits, have  aminoacid change in the SDHB subunit. mutations in p53 gene as frequently as 50-60%. Furthermore,  Conclusion The SDHB gene, a positional candidate gene, is unlikely  because almost 10-30% of patients with head and neck cancer  related with the initiation or tumoral progression on neuroblastoma. develop local recurrences, it is necessary that surgical margins  should be evaluated with sensitive molecular genetic methods. In  
P0391 . The diffuse induction of NDRG1 gene expression in  this study, we examined p53 gene mutations on tumor samples and  human cancers surgical margins of 34 patients with head and neck squamous cell  H. Cangul1,2;  carcinoma localized larynx by heterodublex analysis (HDA) and  sequencing. 
P53  mutations were determined at totally 15 patients  1Uludag University School of Medicine, Bursa, Turkey, 2New York University  (44.12%) involved of 3 patients (8.82%) were at codon 175addAT,  School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. 1 patient (2.94%) was at codon 175delGC, 1 patient (2.94%) was  In vitro experiments showed that the RNA of NDRG1 gene is induced  at codon 206GŗA, and 11 patients (32.35%) were codon 248delC.  under conditions of severe hypoxia, nickel exposure or prolonged  Moreover, we determined same mutations at the surgical margins  elevations of intracellular calcium. Ndrg1 protein is expressed at  of 5 out of 15 patients (33.33%) which have a p53 mutation. As a  low levels in normal human tissues whereas overexpressed in a  results of present study, we belive that p53 gene mutations have  variety of cancers, including lung, brain, skin, liver, prostate, breast,  an important role for formation of squamous cell carcinoma of head  and kidney cancers. The mechanism of NDRG1 overexpression  and neck, and they play an important role at the increasing the rate  in cancer cells involves a state of hypoxia which develops at initial  of aggressive of tumor. Moreover, the histopathologically negative  stages of tumor progression, and Ndrg1 protein becomes a signature  surgical margins may be had a p53 mutations, but the follow up  for this hypoxic state. The induction of NDRG1 by hypoxia is mostly  period is necessary to be prolonged for understand whether p53  dependent on HIF-1 transcription factor. However, induction of the  mutations in surgical margins are effected to survival rate or not. gene by long term hypoxia involves some other HIF-1 independent  pathways, namely Ca2+ mediated c-Jun/AP-1 and PI3-K pathways.  
P0389 . Determination of Germline BRCA1 gene mutations in  Despite of being the major regulator of hypoxia response, HIF- Turkish breast and breast/ovarian cancer families 1 transcription factor is a very unstable protein which is rapidly  U. Egeli1, G. Cecener1, B. Tunca1, I. Tasdelen2;  degraded, and therefore itself is not a good tumor marker. In contrast,  its downstream products Ndrg1 protein and mRNA are extremely  1University of Uludag Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology and  stable. The low level of Ndrg1 expression in normal tissues compared  Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 2University of Uludag Medical Faculty Department of  to their cancerous counterparts combined with the high stability of the  General Surgery, Bursa, Turkey. protein and its RNA makes this gene a new, valuable cancer marker.  Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies affecting  Therefore, Ndrg1 could be used in early diagnosis of human cancers.  women in all the world. The Ürst major breast and ovarian cancer  Moreover, its strong induction by hypoxia and calcium suggests that  predisposition gene, BRCA1, was identiÜed in 1994 by Miki et al. This  Ndrg1 protein could play a pivotal role for cancer cell survival and  gene is a putative tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome  proliferation. Hence, it may also be possible to direct therapy towards  17q21 that has been implicated in DNA repair recognation. BRCA1  Ndrg1 protein with drugs that speciÜcally disrupt the functions of this  gene mutations are responsible for tumors in 40-50% familial breast  protein. cancers and in 80-90% of breast/ovarian cancers. There is little  knowledge about the contribution of BRCA1 gene mutations to breast  
P0392 . Molecular Analysis of the CALM/AF10 Fusion Transcripts  and breast/ ovarian cancers in the Turkish population. In the present  in Eight Cases of Leukemia and Expression ProÜling Revealing  study, we screened to BRCA1 gene of 92 individuals from 39 families  HOX Gene Deregulation with breast and breast/ovarian cancer by heteroduplex analysis  A. Krause1,2, A. Kohlmann1, S. Schnittger1, C. Schoch1, T. Haferlach1, C. Me- (HDA). As a result of DNA sequencing of HDA positive samples, four  cucci3, S. K. Bohlander1,2;  different variants in BRCA1 were identiÜed in six (15.4 %) families.  Three of these variants were novel mutations such as intronic  1Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany, 2GSF, Clinical Cooperative  5396+36 CŗG;5396+38 CŗA ,and missense 3663 CŗA. Fourth  Group áLeukemiaÐ, Munich, Germany, 3Ematologia, Policlinico Monteluce, Pe- variant was 5382insC mutation observed in speciÜcally Ashkenazi  rugia, Italy. and Russian population. Missense 3663 CŗA mutation was  The CALM/AF10 fusion gene, which is a result of the  observed in four families (%10.3). Intronic 5396+36 CŗG; 5396+38  t(10;11)(p13;q14), is found in undifferentiated leukemia, acute  CŗA variants , and frameshift 5382insC mutation were determined  myeloid leukemia (AML), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and  only one each family (%5.1). Our results revealed that the mutations  malignant lymphoma. It was reported to be the most common fusion  were clustured with in exon 11 of BRCA1 gene in Turkish population. protein in T-ALL with TCR gamma/delta rearrangement. We have analyzed samples from eight patients with different types of  
P0390 . The Sdhb Gene Is Non-implicated In Neuroblastoma leukemia: case 1 (AML), case 2 (AML M0), case 3 (pre T-ALL), case  E. Grau, S. Oltra, C. Orellana, M. Hern\x86ndez-Mart\x91, V. Castel, F. Mart\x91nez;  4 (acute leukemia), case 5 and case 6 (ALL), case 7 (T-ALL), case  8 (pro T-ALL) with t(10;11) without MLL involvement. The samples  Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. were tested for the presence of the CALM/AF10 and AF10/CALM  Introduction Neuroblastoma and pheochromocytoma have the  fusion mRNA by RT-PCR and sequence analysis. We found two  same embrional origin. They are originated from neural crest cells,  different breakpoints in CALM at nucleotide 1926 and 2091 and a  and usually affects suprarenal glands. The SDHB gene encodes to  new exon, with 106 bases after nucleotide number 2091. In AF10  the B subunit of succinate dehydrogenase, a protein implied in the  three breakpoints were identiÜed: at position 424, 883 and 979. In  electronic transport chain and Krebs cycle. Some mutations have  Üve patients it was also possible to amplify the reciprocal AF10/ been described in this gene in pheochromocytoma, and because of  CALM fusion transcript. There was no corrrelation between disease  its localization in 1p35-36 this gene could be an appropiate candidate  phenotype and breakpoint location. Expression proÜling using  for its study in neuroblastoma. Affymetrix technology was performed in 5 cases. Preliminary analysis Cancer genetics 167 of microarray expression proÜling revealed high expression levels of  Ýuoropyrimidine responsiveness in patients with advanced colorectal  the HOX genes HOXA5, HOXA9, and HOXA10 in four cases and of  cancer. the homoeobox gene MEI
S1  in all cases. The observed overexpression of HOX genes is reminiscent of the  
P0395 . Overexpression of exon 1B in mutant Ptch1 transcripts in  pattern seen in leukemias with rearrangements of the MLL gene,  tumors of heterozygous Ptch1neo67/+ mice normal karyotypes and komplex aberrant karyotypes suggesting a  A. Uhmann1, U. Ferch1, Z. Arziman1, C. Chen2, B. Hemmerlein3, L. Wojnowski4,  common effector pathway (i.e. HOX gene deregulation) for these  H. Hahn1;  diverse leukemias. 1University of G\x99ttingen, Institute of Human Genetics, G\x99ttingen, Germany, 2La- boratory of Genetics, NIMH/NCI, Bethesda, MD, USA, Bethesda, MD, United  
P0393 . Unraveling the genetics of Patched-related  States, 3University of G\x99ttingen, Department of Pathology, G\x99ttingen, Germany,  rhabdomyosarcoma and medulloblastoma 4Institute of Pharmacology, Mainz, Germany. R. Kappler1, B. Hemmerlein2, J. Schlegel3, H. Hahn1;  Disregulation of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway leads  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany,  to formation of various tumors and is often caused by mutations of  2Department of Pathology, University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany, 3Insti- the tumor suppressor and SHH receptor PATCHED1 (PTCH1). The  tute of Pathology, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany. resulting tumors overexpress several downstream target genes of the  The human homologue of the Drosophila segment polarity gene  pathway including GLI1 and PTCH1 itself. Heterozygous Ptch1neo67/+  PATCHED 1 (PTCH1) is a member of the sonic hedgehog (Shh)  mice develop rhabdomyosarcoma (RMSs) that highly express Ptch1.  signaling pathway, which plays an important role in development and  The wild-type-Ptch1 (Ptch1Wt)-allele is retained in these tumors, but  tumorigenesis. Germline mutations in PTCH1 are found in patients  overexpressed Ptch1 transcripts are derived from the mutant allele.  with basal cell nevus syndrome, which is characterized by a high  In normal muscle, Ptch1 transcripts contain one of three alternative  incidence of basal cell carcinoma (BCC), medulloblastoma (MB),  exon 1 sequences, which are expressed at similar levels. Here we  and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Somatic PTCH1 mutations have  show that the alternative Ptch1 exon 1B, which is known to block Shh  been detected in sporadic cases of BCC and MB. The signiÜcance  signaling, is overabundant in mutant Ptch1Ș67-transcripts in RMS. We  of Ptch1 as a tumor suppressor gene is also highlighted by the  also show that the Ptch1Wt transcript number in RMSs is reduced in  phenotypic consequences of its inactivation in mice, which develop  comparison to normal skeletal muscle of heterozygous Ptch1neo67/+  RMS and MB. These tumors consistently overexpress downstream  mice. Altogether our data suggest that overexpression of exon 1B  targets of the activated Shh signaling pathway such as Gli1, Igf2  in mutant Ptch1Ș67-transcripts results in a mutant protein that is no  and Ptch1. In order to examine other molecular events associated  longer able to inhibit the Shh signaling cascade, Ünally resulting in  with formation of these tumors, we used cDNA microarrays to deÜne  runaway activation of the pathway and tumor formation. transcriptional changes in RMS and MB. Our data show that cell  cycle regulators (cyclins, Cdk4, p21), cell survival factors (Igf2, Bcl- 
P0396 . Somatic PTPN11 mutations in childhood Acute Leukemia 2), signal transduction proteins (members of Shh, Wnt, Jak/Stat,  S. Martinelli1, G. Cazzaniga2, V. Cordeddu1, I. Iavarone1, M. Spinelli3, C.  Tgf-beta signaling) and suppressors of metastasis (Cd63, Nme2)  Palmi2, C. Carta1, A. Pession4, M. Aric\x975, G. Masera2, G. Basso3, M. Sorcini1, B.  are transcriptionally up-regulated in Ptch1-associated tumors.  D. Gelb6, A. Biondi2, M. Tartaglia1,6;  We furthermore describe that overexpression of the growth arrest  1Istituto Superiore di Sanit\x87, Rome, Italy, 2Universit\x87 di Milano Bicocca, Monza,  and DNA-damage-inducible gene Gadd45a is common in Ptch1- Italy, 3Universit\x87 di Padova, Padua, Italy, 4Universit\x87 di Bologna, Bologna, Italy,  associated tumors and Ptch1 null embryos. These results suggest  5Ospedale dei Bambini ÐG. Di CristinaÑ, Palermo, Italy, 6Mount Sinai School of  that cDNA microarray technology is a useful tool to discover genes  Medicine, New York, NY, United States. involved in the development of RMS and MB that arise in response to  SHP-2 is a cytoplasmic protein tyrosine phosphatase functioning  a persistent activation of Shh signaling. This approach may provide  as signal transducer downstream to growth factor and cytokine  novel data for diagnosis, treatment and prevention of human PTCH1- receptors. SHP-2 is required during development, and we  related malignancies. demonstrated that germ-line missense mutations in PTPN11, the  gene encoding SHP-2, cause Noonan syndrome (NS). Hematologic  
P0394 . A Single Nucleotide Polymorphism in the 5Ó Tandem  malignancies have been reported in children with NS. This  Repeat Sequences of Thymidylate Synthase Gene Predicts for  association, combined with the key-role of SHP-2 in hematopoiesis,  Response to Fluorouracil-Based Chemotherapy in Advanced  led us to consider PTPN11 involvement in leukemogenesis, and we  Colorectal Cancer Patients. recently documented that somatic PTPN11 defects represent a major  M. Baiget1, E. Marcuello2, A. Altes3, E. Del Rio1, A. Cesar1, M. Gomez-Pardo1;  event in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). 1Genetics. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Medical Oncology. Hospital  Here we extended our study on SHP-2 role in leukemogenesis by  Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Esperit Sant, Sta. coloma de gramanet,  investigating the prevalence, spectrum and distribution of PTPN11  Spain. mutations in two large cohorts of children and adolescents with acute  Thymidylate synthase (TS) is a key enzyme in folate metabolism and  myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We  the primary target of 5-Fuorouracil (5-FU). A repeat polymorphism  report that PTPN11 lesions are recurrent in B-cell precursor ALL (7%  in the TS promoter region (TS*2 versus TS*3) is associated with  of cases) and acute monocytic leukemia (25% of cases), providing  TS expression and with the efÜcacy of 5-FU-based chemotherapy  evidence for a wider role of PTPN11 lesions in leukemogenesis. In  in colorectal cancer (patients homozygous for TS*3 have a higher  the former, mutations prevalently occur in TEL-AM
L1 -negative cases  TS activity and a poorer response to 5-FU therapy than patients  with CD19+/CD10+/cyIgM- immunophenotype. Leukemia-associated  homozygous for TS*2). Recently, a common G>C SNP at the  PTPN11 mutations are missense, and are predicted to result in  12th nucleotide of the second repeat in the TS*3 alleles that alters  SHP-2 gain-of-function. While PTPN11 defects identiÜed in JMML,  transcriptional activity has been described. According to the  AML and ALL are similar to those observed in NS, the distribution of  combination of SNP and VNTR, three alleles can be deÜned: *2, *3G  mutations differs substantially and the molecular lesions are mutually  and *3C. The *3G allele had three to four times greater efÜciency of  exclusive. translation that other polymorphic alleles. The allelic frequencies in  Our Ündings provide Ürst genetic evidence of a mutated protein  Spanish individuals are as follows: 43% correponds to *2 allele; 25%  tyrosine phosphatase acting as oncoprotein in both lymphoid and  to *3G and 32% to *3C, indicating that the G to C base change is a  myeloid malignancies, but also suggest a lineage- and differentiation  common polymorphism in this population. stage-related contribution of these lesions to clonal expansion. TS genotypes of the 89 patients diagnosed with metastatic colorectal  cancer and undergoing 5-FU-based chemotherapy were classiÜed  into high expression type (2R/3G; 3C/3G; 3G/3G) and low expression  type (2R/2R; 2R/3C; 3C/3C). The obtained results indicate that the double polymorphsim in the TS  tandem repeat sequence may provide a potential for more effective Cancer genetics 168 
P0397 . Establishment and long term follow-up of a sensitive  probes showed ampliÜcations of the RUNX1 gene, ranging from 3 to  interphase FISH-assay for the early detection of Fanconi  8 copies. The 21 chromosome painting revealed metaphases with  Anemia-speciÜc MDS- and AML-associated chromosomal  one normal chromosome 21 and one larger size derivative 21. DNA  imbalances on uncultivated bone marrow and peripheral blood  probe for the 21q22.13 - 21q22.2 region and CGH also revealed  cells RUNX1 ampliÜcations. The multiple RUNX1 copies were the product  H. T\x99nnies, E. Volarikova, S. Huber, H. Neitzel;  of tandem duplications in chromosome 21. Analysis of major clinical  and biological features revealed that all patients had B-cell precursor  Charite, Institute of Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany. ALL, the median age was 8 years (range 2-15) and the peripheral  Bone marrow (BM) failure, MDS and AML in Fanconi Anemia (FA)  white blood cells (WBCs) counts at diagnosis were low. With respect  patients are strongly associated with the occurrence of FA-speciÜc  to the outcome, 3/17 patients died and three more relapsed. As far as  clonal aberrations in BM cells (T\x99nnies et al., Blood 2003). Our  we know 40 patients have been reported as having multiple copies of  data revealed, that gains of 3q and following polyclonal losses of  RUNX1; they share several features suggesting that they represent a  chromosome 7 represent an adverse risk factor for the progression  speciÜc subtype of B-cell precursor ALL. into MDS/AML. Here we present our long-term interphase FISH study  for the highly sensitive routine detection of clonal aberrations in FA  
P0400 . Genetic alterations in stromal cells of malignant and  cells. We screened BM and PB direct preparations (PBD) of non  borderline epithelial ovarian tumors cycling cells, BM smears, and cultured BM cells for the presence of  3q and chromosome 7 imbalances by interphase FISH. Our long-term  H. Tuhkanen1, M. Anttila1, V. Kosma1,2, S. Yl\x89-Herttuala3, S. Heinonen1, A.  series included 91 FA patients with 490 single FISH analyses (500- Kuronen4, M. Juhola4, R. Tammi1, M. Tammi1, A. Mannermaa1,5;  1000 interphase cells/analysis). Healthy blood and BM donors served  1University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland, 2Center fo Laboratory Medicine,  as controls. The comparison of BM versus PBD data showed a strong  University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 3A.I. Virtanen Institute, University  correlation by means of non-aberrant and aberrant cells. Furthermore  of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland, 4Jyv\x89skyl\x89 Central Hospital, Jyv\x89skyl\x89, Finland,  our Ündings clearly demonstrate that evolving polyclonal aberrations  5Center for Laboratory Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. found in BM cells are sensitive detectable in PBD of FA patients. In  There is growing evidence that tumor stroma is an active and integral  two FA patients, subtle 3q aberrations have been detected primarily in  part of a neoplasm. Using six microsatellite markers from 3p21.3,  PBD without former bone marrow analysis. Based on this interphase  a region harboring potentially important tumor suppressors, allelic  FISH assay a detailed risk proÜle for each FA patient serves as a  imbalance was found in 60-87% of the informative tumor cells  decision support towards bone marrow transplantation. microdissected from histologic sections of 58 patients with epithelial  ovarian cancer. Adjacent stromal cells showed allelic imbalance at a  
P0398 . Analysis of NF1 gene in sporadic colon cancer frequency almost as high as the tumor cells (52-80%). Furthermore,  T. Cacev1, S. Radosevic2, R. Spaventi2,1, K. Pavelic1, S. Kapitanovic1;  laser capture microdissected epithelial and stromal compartments of  borderline tumors (10) showed also a high rate of allelic imbalance  1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2PLIVA d.d., Zagreb, Croatia. both in the epithelial and stromal cells. Tumorigenesis of colon cancer is a multistep process of mutation  Another example of the importance of stroma is hyaluronan that  accumulation in a number of oncogenes and tumor suppressor  accumulates in the peritumoral matrix of ovarian carcinomas, and  genes. NF1 protein product, neuroÜbromin, acts as a tumor  acts as an independent, unfavorable prognostic factor for tumor  suppressor by turning the active form of Ras into an inactive one.  spreading and patient survival. Allelic imbalance was not correlated  This molecular switch has an important role in the control of cell cycle  with the accumulation of hyaluronan, nor clinicopathological  and differentiation and the changes in the Ras activity are involved in  parameters. The results suggest that factors other than inactivation  number cancers. Several different isoforms are formed by alternative  of the HYA
L1 -3 genes, coding for hyaluronan degrading enzymes,  splicing of NF1 mRNA. Isoform type I was the Ürst isolated isoform  on 3p21.3 are responsible for hyaluronan accumulation in epithelial  that lacks any insertions. Isoform type II contains an additional  ovarian tumors. 63 bp insertion (exon 23a). These two isoforms are expressed at  More important, the results indicate that the stromal cells of the  varying ratios in different cell types Several studies have shown that  epithelial ovarian cancers not only respond to the signals from  alterations in the type I vs. type II mRNA ratio can be associated with  malignant epithelium, but have themselves undergone genetic  the development of certain malignancies. alterations in regions partly identical to those in the malignant  In this study we investigated the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of  epithelial cells, and may actively contribute to the development of  the NF1 gene in 100 sporadic colon cancers. Quantitative RT-PCR  the tumor from its early stages to the late determinants of patient  was used to determine the NF1 mRNA expression in tumor and  mortality. corresponding normal mucous tissue. Relative ratio of NF1 types I  and II expression was examined as well. The results were correlated  
P0401 . The RING Ünger protein OSTL Interacts with HAX1 and  with the patientsÒ clinicopathological features. SIVA: Possible Role in B Cell Signaling and Apoptosis LOH was observed in 20.7 % of informative samples. Expression  L. Fontanari-Krause1,2, S. K. Bohlander1,2;  of NF1 mRNA was higher in well differentiated tumors and tumors  classiÜed as DukesÓA. NF1 isoform type II was dominantly expressed  1Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany, 2GSF, Clinical Cooperative  in normal mucous tissue, while the isoform type I was dominantly  Group áLeukemiaÐ, Munich, Germany. expressed in tumor tissue. The translocation t(6;12)(q23;13) results in the fusion of ETV6  with STL in a childhood B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)  
P0399 . AmpliÜcation of the RUNX1 Gene in Childhood Acute  cell line (SUP-B2). OSTL shares the Ürst exon with STL but is  Lymphoblastic Leukemia. transcribed in the opposite direction (OSTL = Opposite STL). Since  A. Carnevale1, P. Perez-Vera1, O. Montero1, A. Valladares2, S. Fr\x91as1, R.  the ETV6/STL fusion gene encodes only a very small protein, which  C\x86rdenas1, R. Paredes1, D. Arenas1;  lacks any known functional domains, we hypothesize that the main  leukemogenic effect of this translocation is the deregulation of OSTL. 1Instituto Nacional de Pediatr\x91a, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Hospital de Pediatr\x91a,  The human STL/OSTL genomic locus spans more than 450 kbp on  CMN Siglo XXI, Mexico D.F., Mexico. 6q23. OSTL encodes for a protein of 307 amino acids containing  The bone marrow of seventeen pediatric patients with precursor- a RING Ünger related motif, a modiÜed B-box domain and a RING  B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) was analyzed by  Ünger motif. The OSTL protein is highly conserved: the human and  conventional GTG bands, the FISH method using ETV6-RUNX1, 21  mouse proteins are 99% homologous and between the human and  chromosome painting, 21q22.13-21q22.2 unique sequence probes  puffer Üsh protein there is still 83% homology. and CGH. Conventional cytogenetic showed seven patients having  A yeast two hybrid screen identiÜed HAX1 and SIVA as OSTL  normal karyotypes, while in 9, chromosomal markers or chromosome  interacting proteins. HAX1 also co-immunoprecipitated with OSTL  21 tandem triplications or quadruplications were found, in some  in an in vitro pulldown assay. HAX1 (H
S1  binding protein X1) was  cases, associated with other abnormalities. In two patients the  originally identiÜed as a binding partner of the hematopoietic cell- karyotype was not obtained. The FISH study using ETV6 and RUNX1  speciÜc Lyn substrate1 (HCL
S1 , H
S1 )which is involved in B-cell Cancer genetics 169 receptor signaling. HAX1 has also been shown to protect cells from  I
L6 -pathway and ii) is only expressed in the I
L6 -dependent cell lines,  BAX induced apoptosis. SIVA binds to the CD27 (TNFRSF7) receptor  whereas no expression of this gene could be detected in the I
L6 - and has pro-apoptotic properties. CD27 signalling is important in B  independent cell line MM.1S. cell survival and differentiation. These results suggest that OSTL plays a major role in the regulation  
P0404 . Genome-wide analysis of acute myeloid leukemia with  of apoptosis in hematopoietic cells and supports our hypothesis that  normal karyotype by using microarray-based comparative  deregulated OSTL expression can lead to hematologic malignancies. genomic hybridization J. Tchinda1, J. Knijnenburg2, T. B\x9echner3, C. Rosenberg2, J. Horst1;  
P0402 . Investigation of k-ras codon 12 and p53 gene mutations  1University Clinic Muenster, Institute of Human Genetics, Muenster, Germany,  in tumor tissues and surgical margins of NSCLC 2LUMC, Dept of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden, Netherlands, 3University Clinic  O. Vatan1, B. Tunca2, G. Cecener2, T. Yakut2, C. Gebitekin3, N. Urer4, U. Egeli2,  Muenster, Dept of Hematology and Oncology, Muenster, Germany. R. Bilaloglu1;  Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease for which  1University of Uludag Faculty of Science Department of Biology, Bursa, Turkey,  cytogenetics is one of the most important prognostic factors, since  2University of Uludag Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and  cytogenetic abnormalities provides valuable information of diagnostic  Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 3University of Uludag Faculty of Medicine Department  and prognostic relevance. An abnormal karyotype is found in 54-78%  of Cardio-vascular Surgery, Bursa, Turkey, 4Hospital of Yedikule, Chest Surgery,  of AML at presentation. Although molecular genetics detects more  Department of Pathologia, Istanbul, Turkey. aberrant cases than metaphase cytogenetics, the percentage of  Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the world with  cases with apparent normal karyotype at presentation is high. over million cases diagnosed every year. Some oncogenes including  We used a molecular cytogenetic technique called microarray- K-ras and several tumor suppressor genes including p53 play an  based comparative genomic hybridization (Array CGH) to search  important role in the developing of lung cancer. K-ras codon 12  for submicroscopical gains or losses in 14 AML cases with normal  mutation which is the most common mutation ranges from 15-30%  karyotype after G-banding. Six patients had an AML-M1 (myeloblastic  in lung cancer. Furthermore, p53 gene have a very important role  leukemia without maturation) and eight had an AML-M2 (myeloblastic  in biological properties of the tumor cell and it is mutated in about  leukemia with maturation). Using a 1Mb whole genome chip,  50% of non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Moreover, residual  chromosomal abnormalities were detected in 5 patients with AML- tumor cells remain in the surgical margins diagnosed as tumor- M1 and in 1 patient with AML-M2. None of the aberrations was  free by histopathological techniques and they can play a role in  greater than the size of 1 BAC/PAC. There were 11 gains and 1 loss  forming the local recurrence. Molecular methods may be exploited  of chromosomal material. Gains were on Y chromosome, 8q, 9q,  that are sensitive enough to detect small numbers of tumor cells.  and17q. The only deletion was on 15q. All abnormalities we found  In the present study, we examined p53 gene mutations and K-ras  were unique. The loss on 15q could not been validated by using  codon 12 mutations on tumor samples and surgical margins of 34  FISH technique. FISH was not the suitable technique to validate such  NSCLC patients by heterodublex analysis (HDA) and PCR-restricted  small gains, since with this technique it is no possible to quantify the  fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) methods, respectively. 
P53   intensity of the signals.In conclusion we suggest to reexamine AML  mutation was detected in primary tumors of 3 subjects (8,82%) by  cases with apparent normal karyotype for submicroscopic alterations  HDA. Mutations were clustured in exon 5. Moreover K-ras codon 12  by using array CGH. The recurrence and clinical relevance of the  mutation was detected in both primary tumor tissues and surgical  abnormalities detected in our cases need to be proved in a larger  margins of two out of 34 patients (5,88%) by PCR-RFLP method.Our  collective. mutation rate was determined as a very low range than literature.  We think that different mechanisms related with other oncogenes or  
P0405 . Chromosomal aberrations in follicular Non-Hodgkin- tumor supressor genes and individuals genetic differencies might be  Lymphomas (NHL) of Japanese patients detected by PCR and  play a role in forming cancer in our study group. CGH analysis J. G. DÒHaese1, F. W. Cremer1, B. Schoell1, K. Tsukasaki2, C. R. Bartram1, A.  
P0403 . Integrated analysis of SKY-, CGH- and gene expression  Jauch1;  data identiÜes a gene within the I
L6 -pathway that is lost in the  1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Atomic Bomb Disease  I
L6 -independent Multiple Myeloma cell line MM.1S. Institute, Nagasaki, Japan. I. Grandy1, A. Herr1, M. Chatterjee2, R. C. Bargou2, A. Rump1, E. Schr\x99ck1;  The incidence of follicular lymphoma (FL) as well as the frequency  1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Technical University, Dresden, Germany,  of the translocation t(14;18)(q32;q21) in FL-patients is lower in Asia  2Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumor-Immunology, Helios Clinics,  compared to Western countries. The question was raised if this is  Robert-R\x99ssle Cancer Center, University Medical Center Charit\x8d, Berlin,  due to a different molecular pathogenesis. Therefore, we have done  Germany. the Ürst study in 23 Japanese FL-patients using both comparative  Introduction Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a B-cell neoplasm  genomic hybridization (CGH) and PCR analysis of t(14;18) with  characterized by the accumulation of clonal malignant plasma cells  primers for the major breakpoint (MBR), minor and intermediate  in the bone marrow. Although the pathogenesis of the disease  cluster region (mcr and icr) on 33 biopsy samples. still remains unclear, it is well established that interleukin-6 (I
L6 )  In 18/23 patients, CGH analyses detected genomic imbalances.  plays an essential role in the malignant progression of MM. Since  Gains affected most frequently chromosomes 18p (6/23), X (5/23),  the existence of I
L6 -independent MM cells in end-stage patients  5 (4/23), 12 (4/23), 2 (3/23), and 16 (3/23). The only recurrent loss  may correlate with a poor response to anti-I
L6  treatment, the  affected chromosome 6q (2/23). PCR analysis for t(14;18) revealed  understanding of the mechanisms that lead to I
L6 -independency are  in 13/23 patients breakpoints in the MBR (n=10), 3ÒMBR (n=1), mcr  of crucial importance for the development of an effective MM therapy. (n=1), and icr (n=1). Correlating CGH with PCR data, recurrent  Goal and experimental approach To explore the mechanisms which  aberrations were more frequent in primary samples from patients with  may lead to I
L6 -independency, we have compared genomic (i.e. SKY-  t(14;18). and CGH-) data from one I
L6 -independent MM cell line (MM.1S) and  In summary, we showed that there is no difference in the overall  two I
L6 -dependent cell lines (INA-6 and ANBL-6) with proprietary  frequency of aberrations compared to previous studies on  as well as public [Croonquist et al., Blood. 102 (2003) 2581] gene  westerners, but the frequency of t(14;18) was lower. Additional  expression data (Affymetrix) from these cells. studies are required to assess the reason for geographic variation in  Results Firstly, the data demonstrate signiÜcant correlation between  the incidence of FL. gains / losses of genomic material and the gene expression level in  the respective areas. Secondly, we have identiÜed a genomic region,  which is present in both I
L6 -dependent cell lines, but absent in the  I
L6 -independent cell line. This observation lead us to a detailed  analysis of the expression pattern of the genes located in that region.  Interestingly, we found one gene, that i) is known to be involved in the Cancer genetics 170 
P0406 . Association of common RASSF1A polymorphisms with  Chromosomal aberrations such as 13q14 deletions or translocations  breast cancer involving 14q32 are described to be common cytogenetic Ündings in  U. Schagdarsurengin1, J. Dittmer2, H. Koelbl2, R. Dammann1;  multiple myeloma (MM). Especially, deletions of 13q14 has been associated with an adverse  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle, Germany, 2Frauen- outcome and it has been proposed as one of the most important  klinik der MLU Halle, Halle, Germany. prognostic factors for MM patients. The RASSF1A tumor suppressor gene, located at 3p21.3, is found to  Because metaphase cytogenetic studies in MM are hampered by a  be polymorphic in patients with breast cancer, however the presence  low proliferative activity of myeloma cells, interphase Ýuorescent in  and incidence of polymorphic RASSF1A has not been evaluated.  situ hybridization (FISH) using speciÜc DNA probes is the technique  We studied the association between 2 common single nucleotide  most widely used for the determination of genomic aberrations in this  polymorphisms in the RASSF1A gene (at codons 28 and 133) and  disease. risk of breast cancer in a group of 220 cases and 107 controls from  In the present study we have performed FISH experiments with  Sachsen-Anhalt, Germany. The histological examination of the tumor  probes directed to the 13q14 and 14q32 chromosomal regions in 30  probes showed following Ündings: 140 carcinomas and 80 other  patients with MM. alterations (Übroadenomas, mastopathy, Übrosis or hypertrophy).  For identiÜcation of malignant plasma cells in bone marrow  To genotype these polymorphic variants we used SSCP and  samples, we have used cytoplasmic immunoglobulin (cIg) labelling  sequencing. The distribution of the CGT to CGA polymorphism  methodology (Ahmann et al. 1998). This method allowed us to  (silent) at codon 28 showed no signiÜcant difference between the two  identify simultaneously monotypic plasma cells by monoclonal  groups (A allel carriers: controls 1,9 % and patients 4,3 %). However  antibody Ýuorescence (AMCA anti-kappa or anti-lambda chain) and  the GCT to TCT polymorphism at codon 133 (A133S), which alters a  detect chromosomal abnormalities by FISH (cIg-FISH). potential phosphorylation site of the ATM kinase, exhibited a different  FISH studies revealed that monoallelic deletions of 13q14 or  genotype distribution. The patients with carcinoma had more mutated  monosomy 13 were present in 15 of 30 (50 %) patients, 14q32  T allel (29/140, 20,7 %) than the control group (17/107, 15,9 %). The  abnormalities were observed in 9 of 30 (33 %) patients with MM. highest frequency of the T allel was found in Übroadenomas (4/12,  Our results conÜrmed that by combining immunoÝuorescent labelling  33,3 %). In contrast, the lowest rate of this allel was detected in cases  of myeloma cells and FISH, 13q14 deletion can be proved also in  with mastopathy (2/41, 4,9 %, p<0,03). Our data demonstrates that  patients with apparently normal karyotype in unselected bone marrow  polymorphic RASSF1A at codon 133 occurs in an increased number  sample. of breast tumors, especially in Übroadenomas. Thus, alteration of the  We conclude that cIg-FISH procedure represents simple and  RASSF1A genotype may play a role in the pathogenesis of breast  reliable methods that can increase the incidence of chromosomal  cancer. This study was supported by BMBF. abnormalities required for prognostic evaluations of patients with MM. 
P0407 . Multicolor banding Ýuorescence in situ hybridization  
P0409 . Mutation analysis of MUTYH by DHPLC in autosomal  (mBAND) technique in the evaluation of 5q deletions. recessive FAP families K. Michalova1, Z. Zemanova1, J. Brezinova2, L. Sindelarova1, S. Kurkova2, M.  H. S\x99llner1, M. Grabowski1, B. Kerker1, E. Holinski-Feder1,2;  Siskova1, J. Cermak2;  1Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Center of Medical  1General Faculty Hospital, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Haematology  Genetics, Munich, Germany. and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a premalignant disease  Exact frequency of del(5)(q31) in bone marrow cells of patients  characterized by adenomatous polyps of the colon and rectum. The  with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia  number of polyps can range between a myriad of polyps in extreme  (AML) can be established only by FISH with locus speciÜc probes  cases to 10 or less. One or more polyps progress through dysplasia  for 5q31 region. Deletion can be present as sole aberration and/ to malignancy, leading to cancer at any age from late childhood  or as one of complex karyotype rearrangements. Del(5)(q31) is  through the seventh decade. thought to occur in myeloid precursor cell as a primary chromosomal  The autosomal dominant FAP is associated with mutations in the  defect, which is in close relationship with the origin of the disease.  APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) tumor-supressor gene. It has  The exact breakpoints are sometimes difÜcult to determine by G- recently been demonstrated that autosomal recessive FAP is caused  banding. The aim of this study was to reveal the breakpoints of  by mutations in the base excision repair DNA glycosylase MUTYH  del(5)(q) by mBAND and to establish the most frequent type of  encoding a component of the mismatch repair system of oxidatively  deletion with possible correlation between cytogenetic Ündings and  damaged DNA. clinical parameters. We present 22 patients with MDS or AML all  We established mutation analysis for MUTYH using denaturing  studied with locus speciÜc probe 5q31(VYSISTM) and mBAND with  high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). Deviations  the XCyte5 probe kit (MetaSystemsTM). Suspected rearrangements  were conÜrmed by direct DNA sequencing. In addition, sequencing  of 5q were examined by multicolor FISH (mFISH) (three cases).  has been performed for the two exons with known homozygous  mBAND revealed that the most common type of deletion was  mutations. del(5)(q13.3q33.3) (six cases). In all other patients the breakpoints  We screened for germline MUTYH mutations in 40 APC mutation- differed from case to case. Unusual interstitial deletion with 5q31  negative patients with multiple (3 to >100) colorectal adenomas and  region conserved on deleted chromosome 5 was found in one female  mostly without positive family history. Here, we report 2 patients with  with MDS-del(5)(q14q23.3). It was proved by mBAND and mFISH  compound heterozygous MUTYH germline mutations and 5 patients  that 5q deletions appear in variety of forms with certain clinical  with monoallelic heterozygote missense or nonsense mutations.  correlations found between different types of aberrations. mBAND is  These include two new MUTYH variants: a missense mutation  highly recommended to be utilized in all cases where the extent of  (
E476 K) and one mutation resulting in deletion of one amino acid  the deletion cannot be proved by classical banding techniques. del476E. Supported by grants GACR 301/01/0200 and GACR 301/04/0407. 
P0410 . Mutation screening of APC gene in Czech FAP patients 
P0408 . Detection of chromosome 13 abnormalities and 14q32  translocations in multiple myeloma using simultaneous  M. Kohoutov\x86, J. ÿtekrov\x86, J. Vandrovcov\x86, J. Kotlas, V. Kebrdlov\x86;  immunoÝuorescent labelling of malignat plasma cells and  Charles University, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty  Ýuorescent in situ hybridization of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. P. Kugl\x91k1, H. Filkov\x862, V. Vr\x86nov\x861, R. Kupsk\x862, A. Oltov\x862, R. H\x86jek3;  Germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene  are responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is a  1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk  dominantly inherited colorectal tumour predisposition, which shows  University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics,  substantial phenotypic variability. Patients with classical polyposis  University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Departments of Internal Medicine- develop more than 100 colorectal adenomas, whereas those with  Hematooncology, and Clinical Hematology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech  multiple adenomas have fewer than 100 adenomas. The later  Republic.Cancer genetics 171 patients are classiÜed as attenuated familial polyposis (AFAP) or  sporadic form of the disease. as ÐmultipleÑ adenomas patients. Mutation screening involves the  The aim of the study was to Ünd out if the EGFR gene is ampliÜed in  entire APC coding region using PCR, PTT, DGGE methods and  order to assess its connection with colorectal cancer development.  sequence analysis. This study examined 82 unrelated individuals  FISH was performed using dual colour LSI EGFR spectrum orange  with colorectal polyposis. Germ-line mutations were detected in 57  (for detection of EGFR gene signals) / CEP 7 spectrum green (for  (69,5%) probands. Of these, 20 (35%) were detected in exons 1-14  centromers) probe. The analysis showed neither an ampliÜcation of  and 37 (65%) in exon 15. Altogether, we report 30 previously reported  EGFR gene in tumour cells nor gain (number of gene copies less  mutations and 27 novel mutations, which are unique for Czech  than three times of centromer signals). population. The most commonly reported mutations at codon 1309  From the present study, we can conclude that the tumour  were found in 5 (9%) and at codon 1061 in 3 (5%) of the patients  characteristics, its development and phenotype in the case of colon  examined. Additionally, we detected a relatively higher proportion  cancer are not in association with quantitative changes of EGFR  of mutations at codons 935 (7%), 541 (5%) and 213 (5%). Routine  gene. In this case EGFR gene canÓt be taken as a prognostic marker  mutation detection techniques fail to detect APC germ-line mutation  of the colon cancer development. in approximately 30% of patients with classical polyposis and 90% of  those with AFAP/multiple adenomas. The failure to detect germ-line  
P0413 . HNPCC: genomic deletions in MLH1 and MSH2 in 10% of  mutations might be caused by large submicroscopic deletions or by  the patients mutations in other candidate genes. In our set of patients the biallelic  M. Grabowski1,2, B. Kerker1, Y. Mueller-Koch1, G. Henke1, G. Keller3, W. Diet- germ-line mutation in the MYH gene was detected as we previously  maier4, E. Holinski-Feder1,2;  reported. 1Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Dept. Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany,  Supported by the grant project MS CR:CEZ:J13/98:111100004 and  2Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3Technical University, Dept.  partly by IGA MZ CR NK/7230-3 Pathology, Munich, Germany, 4Technical University, Dept. Pathology, Regens- burg, Germany. 
P0411 . Clinical and molecular characteristics of hereditary  Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is the most  breast or/and ovarian cancer in Russian population frequent autosomal dominant predisposition for early-onset colorectal  L. N. Lyubchenko1, N. I. Pospekhova2, V. V. Bryuzgin1, S. A. Zharkov1, Y. I.  cancer caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes.  Podistov1, E. E. Makhova1, A. A. Lushnikova1, E. E. Makhova1, A. V. Karpukhin2,  We studied a cohort of 420 colorectal cancer families selected on the  R. F. Garkavtseva1;  basis of the Amsterdam and the Bethesda criteria. Within this cohort,  1N.Blochin Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research  we found 64 patients with MSI-H tumors and loss of expression for  Center for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. either MLH1, MSH2 or MSH6 but without detectable mutation in one  Frequently hereditary gynecologic cancers are present as site- of these genes. To determine the relative copy number of each MLH1  speciÜc breast cancer, breast/ovarian cancer syndrome and site- and MSH2 exon we performed multiplex ligation-dependent probe  speciÜc ovarian cancer and are conÜrmed by testing of cancer- ampliÜcation (MLPA) method from MRC Holland. We found 8 different  prone genes. Germline mutations of BRCA genes are independent  genomic deletions in 9 unrelated families, 7 in MSH2 and 1 in MLH1.  molecular markers of these disorders. This equals 10% of the mutation-negative cohort. Evidently, genomic  Spectrum, frequency and penetration of mutations and sequence  deletions in MSH2 and to a lesser extent in MLH1 can cause HNPCC  variations of BRCA-associated breast or/and ovarian cancer were  in German colorectal cancer families. Thus, screening for genomic  analyzed. We selected 114 individuals (98 families), from it 34  rearrangements in MSH2 and MLH1 should be a further step in the  site-speciÜc breast cancer patients (s-s BC), 21 breast/ovarian  molecular diagnosis of HNPCC. However, beside point mutations and  cancer patients (BOC) and 22 site-speciÜc ovarian cancer patients  deletions in MLH1, MSH2 or MSH6, other mutation mechanisms must  (s-s OC) and 37 healthy Ürst/second degree relatives. The entire  occur, as no mutations were found for 52 patients with pathologic  coding regions of BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 genes were screened by  results in immunohistochemistry and microsatellite analysis. conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE). All structural  variants of ampliÜed DNA fragments were sequenced on both  
P0414 . Unexpected chromosomal rearrangement t(6;14)  strands.Among probands 7 BRCA 1 mutations and set of 8 SNPs  identiÜed in a case with myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative  that are inherited as a haplotypes of BRCA 1 gene were found, 6  disorder at Ürst presentation mutations and 6 SNPs of BRCA 2 gene. S-s BC in 47.0% (16/34)  A. A. Arghir1, O. Ciocan2, N. Berbec2, A. Lupu2, A. Lungeanu1;  was associated with BRCA 1 mutations and SNP of BRCA 1/2; in  1ÑVictor BabesÑ National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2ÑCarol DavilaÑ  35.3% (12/34) of case - with mutations and SNP of BRCA 2. 12 BOC  University of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania. patients (57.1%) were carriers of pathologic BRCA 1/2 genotype.  Recently proposed WHO category myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative  BRCA 1 germline mutations have been identiÜed in 17 (77.2%)  (MDS/MPD) diseases exhibit both dysplastic and proliferative  affected s-s OC patients. High frequency of mutations 5382 insC  features at the time of Ürst presentation. BRCA 1 (76.4% of all mutations) was shown. About 52% of s-s BC /  We report the case of a 59-year old man who was admitted to  BOC patients were positive by the env MMTV gene-like sequences.  the Coltea Clinical Hospital - Department of Hematology and in  Changes in BRCA 1/2 genes have been found in 11 (29.8%) healthy  whom hematological and cytogenetic investigations discovered  relatives. splenomegaly, abnormal blood and marrow Ündings and structural  chromosomal abnormalities. 
P0412 . Tissue microarray analysis of epidermal growth factor  Peripheral blood cell count revealed thrombocytopenia, anemia  receptor gene in Bulgarian patients with colorectal carcinoma and leukocytosis with circulating myeloid blasts, basophilia and  R. Jankova1, D. Petrova1, I. Dimova1, V. Tzenova2, V. Yordanov1, T. Todorov2,  eosinophilia. The bone marrow biopsy performed at diagnosis  A. Yosifova1, B. Zaharieva1, D. Toncheva1;  described an aspect consistent with MDS/MPD. 1Department of Medical genetics, Medical University-SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria,  Cytogenetic investigation was performed on GTG-banded  2Department of pathology, Medical University-SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria. chromosomes obtained after short-term cultures, from bone marrow  Tissue microarray analyses are a quite new and promising technique  sample, using classical methods. Several structural rearrangements  which allows investigation of different quantitative genetic changes in  were identiÜed: translocation t(6;14)(q21;q32), del(11)(p?) and also  numerous samples. With Ýuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) on  a genomic instability with the presence of chromosome breaks and  tissue microarray can be analysed such changes of speciÜc genes  double minutes. involved in cancer development pointing out to a possible correlation  Although recently recognized, MDS/MPD category represents a  of ampliÜcation of these genes with tumour progression and patient  challenge due to difÜculties in diagnosis and poor prognosis. The  prognosis. cytogenetic investigation of these cases may bring useful data for a  We have analysed 243 tumour samples with different stage, grade  better understanding of pathogenetic mechanisms involved. and localization (colon, sigma and rectum) for epidermal growth  Acknowledgements. National Program VIASAN, Project 089/2001-  factor receptor (EGFR) gene ampliÜcation. All the patients were with  2004.Cancer genetics 172 
P0415 . Mitochondrial heteroplasmy in hematologic malignancies t(8;21), but there are reported few cases with der(13)(q10;q10)  L. Buscemi, C. Turchi, V. Onofri, M. Pesaresi, A. Tagliabracci;  (van Limbergen et al 2002, Yaspo et al 1992) as a part of complex  karyotypes. Istituto di Medicina Legale - Universit\x87 Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy. It remains still unclear whether an association between t(13;21)  MtDNA is only transmitted through the maternal line and is not  and adverse prognostic in AML-M2 is possible. Anyway, this Ünding  subject to the mechanism of recombination: mutation is thus the only  underlines the fact that, apart of classical cytogenetic rearrangement  possibility of genetic diversity. It has been suggested that MtDNA  already assigned to a type of leukemia, every patient may exhibit new  is involved in carcinogenesis, because of its high rate of mutations  rearrangements of cellular genome. These aberrations need to be  and limited repair mechanisms. The most frequent genetic defects  characterized in order to elucidate their involvement in pathogenesis  of the mitochondrial genome are due to point mutations rather than  of malignant myeloid disorders. deletions, and pathogenetic mutations are usually heteroplasmic  Acknowledgements. National Program VIASAN, Project 089/2001-  [Lightowlers RN et al, Trends Genet, 1997;13:450]. It has also  2004. been observed that the substitution rate for the control region is not  signiÜcantly different from that for the coding region [Cavelier et al,  
P0418 . Genomic proÜling of gangliogliomas Hum Genet, 2000;107:45] A. Hoischen1, J. Fassunke2, B. Radlwimmer3, M. Ehler1, J. Schramm4, P. Lich- The aim of this study was to gain knowledge of mtDNA heteroplasmy  ter3, A. J. Becker2, R. G. Weber1;  conditions in families and the possibility of etiological correlation  between a particular mitochondrial genetic proÜle and cancers of  1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn University Medical Center, Bonn, Germany,  various kinds. The mtDNA control region was studied by sequence  2Institute of Neuropathology, Bonn University Medical Center, Bonn, Germany,  analysis in capillary electrophoresis of blood samples from 25  3German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Department of Neu- mother-child pairs, from 50 patients with hematological neoplastic  rosurgery, Bonn University Medical Center, Bonn, Germany. pathologies and subjected to bone marrow transplant, and from their  Gangliogliomas (GG) are neuroepithelial tumours frequently  healthy sibling donors. associated with epilepsy. They are composed of dysplastic neuronal  This study revealed a higher percentage of heteroplasmy in blood  as well as neoplastic glial elements and are generally benign (WHO  samples from individuals affected by hematological diseases and  grade I or II). Little is known about their molecular pathogenesis. In  in their donors, with respect to blood samples from normal cells of  this study, we aimed to identify chromosomal regions involved in GG  mother-child pairs. Cases of heteroplasmy identiÜed in sibling pairs  tumorigenesis. Sixty-three GGs (57 WHO grade I, 6 WHO grade II)  involved length and sequence heteroplasmy conditions. were screened for chromosomal imbalances by comparative genomic  hybridization (CGH). Chromosomal aberrations were detected in  
P0416 . Hypermethylation of the CpG islands in the promoter  22 of 63 GGs (35%). The number of aberrations per tumour ranged  region Ýanking GST
P1  gene is a potential plasma DNA  from 1 to 11 with an average of 2.32°0.51 (mean°SEM). Recurrent  biomarker for detecting prostate carcinoma gains were identiÜed on chromosome 7 (6/63); 8 and X (5/63 each);  D. Chu1, C. Chuang2, R. Tzou1, J. Fu1, J. Chia3, C. Sun4;  5 (4/63); 12q (3/63); 9q, 17, 19 and 20 (2/63 each). Recurrent losses  were found on chromosomes 9 (5/63); 10 and 16 (2/63 each); Y  1Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Chang Gung  (2/33 tumours from male patients). Combined gains on 7, 8 and  Memorial Hospital, Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Lin-Kou, Taiwan  5 or 12q were detected in 4 cases. To achieve a higher resolution  Republic of China, 3Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Lin-Kou, Taiwan Republic  in the detection of genomic imbalances, 7 tumours were analyzed  of China, 4Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Lin-kou, Taiwan Republic of China. by matrix-CGH. A whole genome array of 6000 BACs/PACs with a  Purpose: to investigate whether our newly developed methylation- resolution of at least 1Mb was used. In all cases, the results obtained  sensitive real-time quantitative PCR protocol could be used to detect  by chromosomal-CGH were conÜrmed. In 3 of 7 GGs, additional  cancer genomes in prostate cancer patientsÓ circulation. Study  aberrations could be identiÜed by matrix-CGH. In conclusion, our  design: Plasma or serum DNA samples were extracted from thirty-six  study provides the Ürst comprehensive overview of DNA copy number  prostate cancer patients and 27 benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH)  changes in gangliogliomas. The ongoing investigations show that  cases. After extensive methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme,  matrix-CGH improves genomic resolution and can be informative  HpaII, digestion, the DNA samples were subjected to the real-time  even for aberrations in cell subpopulations. quantitative PCR ampliÜcation. The dissociation curves analysis was  Supported by BONFOR. applied to know if hypermethylation occurred in the promoter region  Ýanking the GST
P1  gene among these patients. Results: 11 of 36  
P0419 . Characterisation of cytogenetic subgroups in  prostate cancer patients showed positive peak pattern, indicating  myelodysplastic syndromes with complex chromosome  methylation changes occurred. However, 25 of the 27 BPH cases  rearrangements showed no peak, suggesting no methylation changes happened in  D. Trost1,2, B. Hildebrandt1, U. Germing3, B. Royer-Pokora1;  the CpG islands these cases. The sensitivity and speciÜcity of this  protocol performed on plasma or serum samples were 31% and  1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, D\x9esseldorf, Germany, 2Institute  93%, respectively. Conclusions: We have successfully analyzed  of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Heamatology, Oncology  prostate cancer genome in the peripheral blood in 31% prostate  and Immunology, D\x9esseldorf, Germany. cancer patients with this protocol. This method can effectively  The presence of a complex rearranged karyotype (CCA) in bone  distinguish BPH from prostate neoplasm. Using plasma or serum  marrow cells of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)  DNA samples is an ideal noninvasive detection of prostate neoplasm  or acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) has a negative impact on the  or for treatment follow-up, when enough amounts of cancer genomes  individual risk stratiÜcation following the international prognostic  presented in the circulation. scorings system (IPSS), regardless of the nature of the aberrations.  We performed a comprehensive molecular cytogenetic analysis  
P0417 . Unfavourable translocation t(13;21) in a case of AML-M2 including SKY and FISH on 16 patients with primary MDS and  A. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir1, N. Berbec1, D. Mut-Popescu2, A. Lupu2;  four additional patients with primary AML. All patients had CCA  by conventional cytogenetic analysis at Ürst diagnosis of the  1ÑVictor BabesÑ National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2ÑCarol DavilaÑ  haematological disease. In addition to SKY we have performed  University of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania. FISH analysis with probes from chromosome 5q in all patients and  Cytogenetic investigation performed by classical GTG-banding in  from the MLL- and AM
L1 -gene in selected cases. WCP-probes for  13 patients diagnosed with different types of AML, revealed normal  chromosomes 5 and 21 were used to verify the SKY results. All  karyotype in 15% of them. The other 85% of AML cases exhibited  patients with deletions of chromosome 5 showed loss of both critical  complex chromosomal aberrations. regions for MDS and AML in 5q31and q33. 10 patients had interstitial  Among the 13 AML cases, one young man, aged 28, exhibited an  deletions of chromosome 5q of various extend and 10 patients had  unusual translocation t(13;21), with an adverse prognosis. The  an unbalanced translocation with breakpoints in 5q resulting in loss  patient died within 5 months from diagnosis. of 5q material. The translocation breakpoints were shown to be  The most characteristic chromosomal aberration in AML-M2 is  heterogeneous using BAC-probes mapping to each band on 5q. The Cancer genetics 173 most common imbalances of genetic material were: -5q (20/20), -7/7q  
P0422 . Assessment of gene expression proÜlings in endometrial  (14/20), cancer -18/18p (8/20) and -16 (6/20), complete trisomy 8 (5/20), +21q (5/ T. Kubiatowski, A. Filip, K. Rozynska, M. Laskowska, K. Futyma, R. Tarkowski,  20), +11q (3/20) and +22q (3/20). Interestingly in patients with gains  B. Marzec, G. Polak, J. Kotarski, J. Wojcierowski;  of chromosome 11 or 21 ampliÜcations of the MLL or AM
L1  genes  Medical Academy of Lublin, Lublin, Poland. respectively were excluded. A cluster analysis of the SKY results  Endometrial cancer is one of the most common neoplasms of  identiÜed two main cytogenetic subgroups. reproductive system. According to data accumulated in last decades  it has been concluded that microsatellite instability and PTEN, K- 
P0420 . Genetic variability between clonal lines of tumor  ras, Ȳ-catenin gene mutations are crucial for endometrial cancer  hepatocytes with various differentiation under different  etiopathogenesis. Moreover, it is well known that all genes encoded  conditions of cultivation revealed by RAPD-PCR proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, cell differentiation or  S. A. Alexandrova;  surrounding tissues inÜltration contribute to tumor and metastases  Institute of Cytology RAS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. development. It has been stressed that different factors such as  It is of a special interest to Ünd out to what degree the capability of  VEGF, which play a key role in neoplastic angiogenesis are also  tumor cells for differentiation and loss of malignancy depends on  very important for tumor growth. The role of DCC and BRCA genes  genetic variability taking place at cell malignant transformation and  is still unclear but it is highly possible that these genes, in some  tumor progression. Unlike the earlier used methods of studies of  extends, could be involved in endometrial cancer etiopathogenesis.  genome instability, the RAPD-PCR method allows detecting the most  Complexity of molecular mechanisms leading to endometrial cancer  variable DNA fragments and revealing genes or their fragments in  development implies that only experiments utilizing array technique  ampliphicated DNA fragments. can collect enough data to understand all relationships between  Using the RAPD-PCR method, genetic variability in clonal lines  different molecular pathways during tumor development and to  of mouse hepatoma MH-22a was studied at their proliferation in  identify new clinically usable markers of neoplasm. subcutaneous connective tissue (SCT) and anterior chamber of  Using MacroArray technique we analyzed expression of more  the eye (ACE). The comparative analysis of the genetic structure  than thousand different genes involved in oncogenesis such as  of the clonal line populations in vitro and in vivo has revealed that  oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes and others encoding cell cycle  the amount of clones with the high, intermediate, and low variability  regulators, growth factors, growth factor receptors and proteins  is approximately the same in both cases. It was also shown that  crucial for apoptosis and extracellular matrix maintaining. Comparison  indexes of genetic variability (GVI) in various clonal lines in vitro  of obtaind data with tumor grade allowed us to give shape to  correlated with their vital ability: the clones yielding clone lines had  preliminary gene expression proÜlings reÝecting tumor progression.  the lowest GVI. The same GVI value was found in the clonal lines  Further analysis based on gene expression proÜling and performed  proliferated in the ACE regardless of their capability for differentiation.  on protein level can reveal new markers of endometrial cancer useful  Intraclonal analysis has shown that the highest values of changes  in routine diagnostic procedures. revealed on Üngerprints of the ampliÜcation of DNA products do not  prevent from differentiation of tumor hepatocytes in the ACE. 
P0423 . PAX5 and T
P53  analysis in superÜcial bladder carcinoma  These data allow concluding that tumor cells can preserve ability for  tissue. Correlation with pathological Ündings and clinical  differentiation in spite of signiÜcant changes in their genome. outcome. J. Mares1, M. Babjuk2, J. Duskova3, V. Soukup2, M. Trkova1, Z. Sedlacek1;  
P0421 . AmpliÜcation of the BCR/AB
L1  fusion gene after Imatinib  12nd Medical Faculty, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 5,  - one way of drug resistance in CML therapy Czech Republic, 21st Medical Faculty, Clinic of Urology, Prague 2, Czech  A. Pelz1, A. R\x99pke1, G. M\x9eller2, P. Wieacker1;  Republic, 31st Medical Faculty, Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Prague 2,  1University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Therapeutic community for  Czech Republic. Oncology and Heamatology, Magdeburg, Germany. The expression pattern of PAX5 in the tissue of superÜcial bladder  The recently developed tyrosinkinase inhibitor STI571 (Gleveec,  transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), its prognostic value and its  Imatinib) led to a signiÜcant improvement of the therapy of CML, AML  correlation with T
P53  immunohistochemistry and T
P53  mutation  and ALL. However, drug resistance can be observed in 4% of CML  analysis were evaluated. 61 patients with histologically conÜrmed  patients in chronic phase during therapy. Mutations of the tyrosine  superÜcial bladder TCC were involved to the study. Expression level  kinase domain has been detected as one way of this drug resistance.  of PAX5 was evaluated by means of the RT-PCR semiquantitatively.  We describe a second way caused by an ampliÜcation of the BCR/ T
P53  mutations were identiÜed by the SSCP and conÜrmed by direct  AB
L1 -fusion protein. We report on a 54 years old male patient with  sequencing. The T
P53  imunohistochemistry was performed with the  CML. Since four years he is staying in chronic phase. The therapy  DO1 antibody and semiquatitatively evaluated using the HSCORE  was changed from conventional chemotherapy to Imatinib three  (HS) method. 8 men with benign prostatic hyperplasia served as  years after diagnosis. Conventional cytogenetic analysis (CCA) and  control group for PAX5 expression. Detectable PAX5 expression  Ýuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) with the D-FISH probe [Q  was found by 50 patients with TCC but in no patient from the control  BIOgene] were performed on unstimulated bone marrow cells. At  group. Its quantity however correlated neither with the stage nor  the time of diagnosis and one year later CCA and FISH revealed  with the grade of the tumour. T
P53  mutations were conÜrmed by 7  46,XY,t(9;22) and BCR/AB
L1 -rearrangement in all cells. 15 months  patients. On the contrary, positive immunohistochemical staining of  later two additional clones with add(6)(p) and add(19)(p) could be  T
P53  was detected in most patients. Using cutoff value of HS 200,  detected. Therefore Imatinib therapy was initiated. Four years after  57% of patients showed T
P53  overexpression. Quantity of T
P53   diagnosis CCA showed altogether Üve different clones and FISH  immunohistochemical positivity did not correlate with the quantity of  detected four different clones with up to Üve fusion signals, one  PAX5 expression. Using the cutoff values of HS 200 for T
P53  and  on the der(9) and up to four on the derivative chromosomes 22.  0.2 for PAX5, 7 of 8 patients with future progression had T
P53  and 4  One to two of the derivative chromosomes 22 could be identiÜed  had PAX5 overexpression respectively. The PAX5 gene expression  as isochromosome 22 [i(22)(q11)t(9;22)(q34;q11)]. Although the  is a frequent Ünding in the TCC. From prognostic point of view, high  patient was treated with Imatinib an increase of the aberrant clones  expressions of both PAX5 and T
P53  seem to be related to a higher  with i(22)-chromosomes was detected. In contrast to the typical  recurrence and progression rates. Supported by the grant IGA MZ  Philadelphia-chromosome the i(22)-chromosomes showed an  NC/5961-3 and IGA MZ 7519-3. increased fusion signal intensity, suggesting an ampliÜcation of the  BCR/AB
L1 -fusion product. 
P0424 . Genetic analysis of the EZH2 gene in prostate cancer N. Bachmann, J. H\x89usler, J. H\x99gel, W. Vogel, C. Maier;  University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. Genetic alterations of chromosome 7 have been implicated in the   Cancer genetics 174 prostatic tumor progression. It is supposed that overexpression of  response (mCR) if between 35-95% Ph1+ and absent cytogenetically  the EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) gene, a polycomb group  response if 100%Ph1+ mitosis. All the 10 pts with chronic phase  transcriptional repressor located on chromosome 7q35, is involved  have shown classical t(9;22) in 100% of the metaphases. The 2  in the development of metastases. Furthermore, we had shown  cases with accelerated phase have shown additional chromosomical  that there is linkage of prostate cancer to chromosome 7q31-33  aberrations. The pts have been given the standard doses.The  particularly in 10 families with aggressive disease. We screened  cytogenetically evaluation was made at 6, 12 and 18 months. After  these 10 families encompassing 24 patients for changes within  6 months at two pts CCR has been attained and in the rest, mCR  the EZH2 gene by exon sequencing in order to assess if there is a  has been noticed. After 12 months better results have been attained.  genetic predisposition for the aggressive form of prostate cancer  If after 12 months the lack of MCR is still noticed the doses will be  due to a genetic variant of EZH2. No mutations were observed in  upgraded. the open reading frame of EZH2. Next, we conducted an association  These results conÜrm GlivecR efÜciency in controlling the Ph1+ clone.  study with controls, sporadic cases and familial cases to evaluate if  The impact of such an effect on the survival rate however requires a  there is an association between the disease and the polymorphisms  long term conÜrmation. found in the intronic sequences of the EZH2 gene. No single SNP  Acknowledgements to Novartis for Ünancial support. showed evidence of association, even taking into account the TNMG  classiÜcation and the follow up of the patients. In the ongoing study  
P0427 . Differential regulation of different 5Ò-end variants of the  we investigate if a certain haplotype of the EZH2 gene may be  oncogene EVI1 predisposing for the formation or progression of prostate cancer.  M. Aytekin, U. Vinatzer, C. Fonatsch, R. Wieser;  Presently, we are extending this approach to the promoter of EZH2.  Medizinische Universit\x89t Wien, Wien, Austria. In order to search for promoter variations, we are actually sequencing  The EVI1 gene has been implicated as an oncogene in myeloid  the 5` region of EZH2 of the 24 patients. leukemia. Its overexpression appears to confer a particularly bad  prognosis to the affected patients. Recently, EVI1 has been found  
P0425 . Comparative genomic hybridization in diffuse  to exhibit great variability at its 5Ò-end. While some of the alternative  astrocytoma - a WHO grade correlated meta-analysis of 399  transcripts give rise to alternative protein products, others differ from  cases each other only in their 5Ò-untranslated sequences. This suggests that  R. Koschny1,2, H. Holland3, T. Koschny4, H. Vitzthum5;  EVI1 may be subject to complex regulatory mechanisms that could  1DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Internal Medicine, University of  act on both the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of  In this study, we began to adress the role of this 5Ò-end variability  Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 4Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser, Founda- for the regulation of EVI1 expression. We assessed steady state  tion for Research and Technology, Heraklion, Greece, 5Clinic of Neurosurgery,  levels of the different transcript variants in a variety of human tissues,  University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. and in response to the only EVI1-inducing agent known to date, all- A lot of CGH data about genetic imbalances in astrocytic astrocytoma  trans retinoic acid. Our data show that the EVI1 mRNA variants are  has been accumulated so far. Analysing only limited case numbers  differentially expressed under these experimental conditions. As a  some studies revealed genetic aberrations probably associated with  next step, we compared the stability of the different mRNA variants,  malignant progression. In order to perform a statistical meta-analysis  and found that certain transcript types had signiÜcantly longer half  of genomic aberrations in astrocytoma we summarized and analysed  lives than others. The highly variable length of the different 5Ò- the CGH results of 399 cases published between 1992 and 2003.  untranslated regions furthermore suggests that they differ in their  After the expansion of all aberrations to the 850-bands level the  translation efÜciency, a hypothesis currently under investigation. speciÜc aberration patterns of WHO grade II, III and IV astrocytoma  were calculated. Next we quantiÜed the differences of these  
P0428 . Comparing methylation proÜle of p16, MLH1 and RB1 in  aberration patterns between low grade and anaplastic astrocytoma as  cervical carcinoma in situ, cervical nondisplasia and cervical  well as between anaplastic astrocytoma and glioblastoma multiforme.  inÝammatory diseases For this the relative frequencies of aberrations of the lower graded  T. V. Kekeeva1, Y. Podistov2, A. Zhevlova3, Y. Solovjeva4, M. V. Nemtsova3;  malignancy were subtracted from that of the higher grade of  1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre  malignancy for each GTG-band of the tumor genome. for Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre for Medical  For instance, in low grade astrocytoma gains of 7q32 and 8q24 were  Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Spaso-Perovsky Hospital,  the most prominent aberrations. Anaplastic astrocytoma showed a  Moscow, Russian Federation. tremendous increase in the aberration frequency with gains of 1q32,  DNA methylation of CpG sites in the promoter regions of tumor  7q32, 12p13, 17q24-q25, 20q and losses of 9p, 10, 13q21-q22.  suppressor genes is a frequent epigenetic event in the pathogenesis  Glioblastoma multiforme showed a higher frequency of +7, +19p, -10  of cancers. Methylated DNA also can be a predicting factor for  and Î13, but also a shift of the dominant peak on chromosome 7 from  monitoring the onset of cancer. 7q32 to 7p12 (EGFR- locus). The method presented here enables  We analysed 55 high-grade CIN or CIN3 ( severe dysplasia and  the quantiÜcation of differences of aberration patterns and to verify  carcinoma in situ) samples and 67 cervical smears from women with  predicted markers of malignant progression in a larger number of  inÝammatory process. 37 nondisplasia tissues adjacent to carcinoma  cases leading to a higher degree of signiÜcance. in situ, 31 preoperative blood samples and 90 blood samples of  healthy donors were also evaluated. Methylation status of 3 genes  
P0426 . Cytogenetical Follow-up of Patients with Chronic Myeloid  (p16, MLH1 and RB1) was determined using methylation-sensitive  Leukemia Ph1+ treated with Glivec PCR. C. Gug;  There is no methylation determined in peripheral lymphocytes in the  University of Medicine and Farmacy, Timisoara, Romania. blood of healthy donors, which was suggested as control. Methylation  GlivecR is the Ürst of a new generation of drugs which blocks the  percentages of the genes in CIN3 were: p16, 56%; MLH1, 46%; RB,  effect of the oncoprotein that is coded by the chimera gene bcr-abl  16,7%. Methylation percentages in nondisplasia adjacent tissues  given by the translocation t(9;22) characteristically for LMC.In our  were statistically lower, except for RB1: p16, 34,6%; MLH1, 18,5%,  center, the treatment with GlivecR for LMC patients, has been initiated  RB1, 11%. In inÝammatory cases, promoter methylation was detected  since the year 2002. at a statistically signiÜcant lower frequency than in the carcinoma  We folowed: clinical-hematological and cytogenetically response.We  cases, but signiÜcantly higher than in blood of healthy donors, except  have performed a cytogenetic study in 24h non-stimulated cultures  for MLH: (p16, 7,58% versus 0%, P=0.01; RB1, 6,15% versus 0%,  of bone marrow cells from 12 pts with CML at diagnosis and during  P=0,03; MLH1, 3% versus 0%, P=0,18). Methylation percentages of  the treatment. The GTG analysis revealed the karyotypes. We  the genes in preoperative blood were: p16, 2,7%; MLH1, 5,6%; RB,  have considered: complete cytogenetical response (CCR) if there  0%. are 0%Ph1+ metaphases, major cytogenetically response (MCR)  The epigenetic alterations found in nondisplasia tissues adjacent  if there are less than 35%Ph1+ mitosis, minor cytogenetically  to carcinoma in situ and in inÝammatory tissues suggest their Cancer genetics 175 participation in the transforming of the cells, but not necessarily in  
P0431 . Glutathione S-transferase (GSTM1, GSTT1,GST
P1 ) genes  malignancy, although it can help identify groups of increased risk of  polymorphisms in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia cancer development. O. A. Kuznetsova1, E. V. Yakupova2, S. L. Teppone3, T. V. Viktorova2, E. B.  Blohina4, O. A. Maiorova4, O. V. Babenko1,3;  
P0429 . Functional analyses of Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1) in human  1Institute of Molecular Medicine at Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian  prostate and breast cancer cells Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation,  M. Grzmil1, S. Voigt1, P. Thelen2, B. Hemmerlein3, S. Schweyer3, P. Burfeind1;  3Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Child  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany,  Hematology Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. 2Department of Urology, University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany, 3Depart- Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are enzymes involved in  ment of Pathology, University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany. the detoxiÜcation of environmental mutagens, carcinogens and  Recently, the novel anti-apoptotic gene Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1) was  drugs.We investigated the association between GSTM1, GSTT1  shown to be overexpressed in prostate cancer and its speciÜc down- and GST
P1  genes polymorphisms and risk of acute lymphoblastic  regulation by RNA interference leads to cell death in human prostate  leukemia (ALL). GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotypes exhibit deletion  carcinoma cells. These Ündings clearly indicate that the human BI-1  polymorphisms, which in case of homozygosity (GSTM1 0/0, GSTT1  gene contains the potential to serve as a prostate cancer expression  0/0) lead to absence of enzyme activity. GST
P1  gene displays  marker and as a potential target for developing therapeutic strategies  polymorphisms within its coding region at codon 105 (Ile105Val). The  for prostate cancer. In this report, to evaluate the pattern of BI-1  coding region polymorphisms within GST
P1  have been suggested to  expression in different human cancers, the Cancer ProÜling Array  confer different catalytic activities. technique was applied and revealed an up-regulation of BI-1 in  We analyzed GST genotypes in 254 children with ALL and 246  breast, uterus, and ovarian cancer, whereas down-regulation of BI- control individuals.In this study frequencies of combined GSTM1  1 expression was determined in stomach, colon, kidney, lung and  0/0 and GSTP Ile/Ile genotypes and combination of GSTT1 1/1 and  rectum cancer. Furthermore, BI-1 was shown to be expressed in  GST
P1  Ile/Ile were higher among the ALL patients, than control  six different human breast cancer cell lines. Next, to investigate the  group (30% versus 19%, P = 0.005, 48% versus 32.5%, P = 0.0005,  function of BI-1 in vitro, RNA interference (RNAi) or RNA silencing  correspondingly). Frequency of combined GSTT1 1\\1 and GST
P1 - was applied for a speciÜc down-regulation of BI-1 expression in  Ile/Val genotypes was elevated signiÜcantly in control group ( 40%  estrogen-dependent MCF-7 and estrogen-independent MDA-MB- versus 26%, P = 0.001). ALL cases were separated by the following  231 breast cancer cells. Suppression of BI-1 expression caused a  criteria: remission and relapse. The frequency of combined GSTM1  signiÜcant increase in spontaneous apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells,  1/1 and GSTT1 1/1 genotypes , GST
P1 -Ile/Val allele prevailed in  whereas MCF-7 cells remained unaffected. After determination of  children with relapses (56% versus 39%, P = 0.04, 63% versus  BI-1 function in vitro in both prostate and breast cancer cells, we are  33%, P = 0.0003, accordingly), but frequency GST
P1 -Ile/Ile allele  currently investigating the potential of duplex siRNA oligonucleotides  signiÜcantly higher in remission (65% versus 28%, P = 0.0001).We  against BI-1 gene expression for the suppression of tumor growth in  have also found statistically signiÜcant differences in distribution of  vivo. combination GSTT1 0/0 and GST
P1 -Ile/Ile genotypes according to  sex (elevated on girls, P = 0.01). Overall no associations were found  
P0430 . TNR/11q#1 trinucleotide (GCC)n repeat alleles and  with age at diagnosis and GSTs variants. predisposition to acute and chronic leukemia A. A. Klinkov1, E. A. Nikitin2, O. V. Maiorova3, M. A. Ivanov4, E. B. Kuznetsova4,  
P0432 . BRAF Mutations and RET/PTC Rearrangements in  D. V. Zaletayev1;  Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical  E. V. VasilÒev1, P. O. Roumiantsev2, V. A. Saenko1, A. A. IlÓin1, E. Y. Polyakova3,  Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Hematology Research Center of  M. V. Nemtsova1, D. V. Zaletayev1;  Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Child Hematology Research Institute,  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation,  Russian Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Research Institute  2Medical Radiological Research Center, RAMS, Obninsk, Russian Federation,  for Molecular Medicine, Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian  3Research Center of Endocrinology, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Federation. Rearrangements of the RET proto-oncogene (RET/PTC) and  TNR/11q#1 is a polymorphic trinucleotide (GCC)n repeat located  BRAF gene mutations are the major genetic alterations in the  within the minimal region of 11q deletion in chronic lymphocytic  etiopathogenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). We have  leukemia (CLL). It was recently shown that certain alleles of this  analyzed a series of 118 benign and malignant follicular cell-derived  repeat are associated with worse prognosis in CLL patients. To  thyroid tumors for RET/PTC rearrangements and BRAF gene  investigate the role of TNR/11q#1 variants as risk-modifying factors  mutations. Oncogenic rearrangements of RET proto-oncogene was  in leukemogenesis, we conducted a case-control study on 113  revealed by semiquantitative RT-PCR of simultaneously generated  acute lymphatic leukemia (ALL) patients, 82 CLL patients and 146  fragments corresponding to tyrosine kinase (TK) and extracellular  healthy controls of Russian origin. Comparison of allele and genotype  RET domains. The clear quantitative shift toward the TK fragment  distributions in control, ALL and CLL groups performed by FisherÓs  is indicative for the presence of RET rearrangements. The overall  exact test with two-sided P-value showed signiÜcant decrease in  frequency of RET/PTC rearrangements in PTC was 14% (12 of  the presence of GC
C6  allele in ALL and CLL compared to controls.  85), including 7 RET/PT
C1 , 2 RET/PT
C3 , 1 deltaRFP/RET and 2  Moreover, ÒrareÓ alleles GC
C7 -8 and GC
C13 -14 were signiÜcantly  apparently uncharacterized rearrangements. The most common  overrepresented in ALL versus control. We found that CLL risk  T1796A transversion in BRAF gene was detected in 55 of 91 PTC  genotypes were those with both alleles containing more than 6 GCC  (60%) using mutant-allele-speciÜc PCR. We also identiÜed two  repeats (P=0,0212, odds ratio=1,68 (95% CI 1,121\x982,531)). ALL risk  additional mutations: the substitution G1753A (
E585 K) and a case  genotypes include three allele combination variants: 1) both alleles  of 12-bp deletion in BRAF exon 15. Moreover, there was no overlap  containing more than 6 GCC repeats (P=0,0019, odds ratio=1,756  between PTC harboring BRAF and RET/PTC mutations, which  (95% CI 1,223\x982,502)); 2) one of the alleles containing 7 or 8  altogether were present in 75.8% of cases (69 of 91). Taken together,  repeats (P=0,0155, odds ratio=18,22 (95% CI 1,93\x98136.37)), 3)  our observations are consistent with the notion that BRAF mutations  one of the alleles containing more than 12 repeats (P=0,0209, Odds  appear to be an alternative pathway to oncogenic MAPK activation in  ratio=2,599 (95% CI 1,161\x985,815)). PTCs without RET/PTC activation. Neither RET/PTC rearrangements  Considering these data altogether, we resume that TNR/11q#1 is  nor BRAF mutations were detected in any of 3 follicular thyroid  linked to a gene whose alterations create a strong predisposition to  carcinomas, 11 follicular adenomas and 13 nodular goiters. The  clinically severe forms of leukemia and may be lethal, thus creating  high prevalence of BRAF mutations and RET/PTC rearrangements  a natural selection of certain alleles and leading to the disturbance of  in PTCs and the speciÜcity of these alterations to PTC make them  the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. potentially important markers for the preoperative tumor diagnosis.Cancer genetics 176 
P0433 . Role of a promoter polymorphism in the CY
P17  gene in  analysis on metaphase spreads to ~30%. familial aggregation of Prostate Cancer We applied interphase-FISH with 8 speciÜc DNA probes for  Z. Vesovic1, K. Herkommer2, W. Vogel1, T. Paiss2, C. Maier1;  chromosomes 1q21, 6q21, 8p12, 9q34, 11q23, 13q14.3, 17p13, and  22q11 on puriÜed CD138+ BM-cells from 50 newly-diagnosed MM  1Department of Human Genetics, University Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Department  patients. A copy number score (CS) was calculated for each patient  of Urology, University Ulm, Ulm, Germany. by subtracting the number of probes showing losses from the number  The CY
P17  gene, encoding the cytochrome 
P450 c17a enzyme, is  of probes indicating gains. a likely candidate for prostate cancer because it is directly involved  Signal changes were detected for a median of 3/8 probes per patient.  in the production of testosterone. A thymidine to cytosine transition  The most frequent gained signals were found for 9q34 (65%), 11q23  (designated A2 variant) identiÜed in the promoter region of CY
P17 ,  (60%), 1q21 (48%), and 6q21 (21%). Common losses were observed  has previously been associated with a familial history of prostate  for 13q14.3 (50%), 17p13 (28%), 6q21 (21%), and 8p12 (20%). CS>0  cancer in North-American families. The purpose of our study was to  was found in 28/50 and CS± 0 in 22/50 patients. Two peaks (CS=-1  determine whether a correlation of the CY
P17  A2 allele with familial  and CS=+2) were found by plotting patient numbers over CS values.  prostate cancer could be replicated in a European population. An  Monosomy of 13q14.3 was present in 19/22 patients with CS± 0, and  association study was conducted, including 82 unrelated familial  6/28 with CS>0 (p=0.0001). Gains of 9q34 and 11q23 were highly  prostate cancer probands, 92 prostate cancer probands without  associated and more frequent in clones with CS>0 (p=0.0004). Gains  affected relatives (sporadic cases) and 88 healthy men from  of 1q21 as well as deletions of 17p13 and 8p12 were distributed  Germany. Genotypes of the restriction fragment length polymorphism  evenly between clones with CS>0 vs. CS± 0. in the promoter of CY
P17  were assessed by MspAI digestion. Case Î  In summary, CS indicates the presence of two distinct MM subgroups,  control comparisons were performed by modelling a dominant (A1/A2  with predominant losses vs. predominant gains. We hypothesize that  + A2/A2 vs. A1/A1) and a recessive (A2/A2 vs. A1/A2 + A1/A1) effect  these correspond to the metaphase-deÜned non-hyperdiploid and  of the promoter modiÜcation. An insigniÜcant overrepresentation of  hyperdiploid types of MM, respectively. homozygous carriers of the A2 allele (recessive effect) was found in  sporadic prostate cancer cases, as compared to controls (OR = 2.2;  
P0436 . Characterization of polymorphic trinucleotide repeats in  95%CI, 0.96 Î 5.0). However the A2 variant was not related to familial  genes TGFBR1 and RG
S19 I
P1  in various tumors. disease, neither under the dominant (OR = 0.7; 95%CI, 0.4 Î 1.2) nor  D. Mikhaylenko1,2, V. Strelnikov1, E. Nikitin3, L. Lubchenko4, I. Zborovskaya5, T.  under the recessive model (OR = 1.0; 95%CI, 0.5 Î 1.9). Our results  Viktorova6;  do not suggest a role of CY
P17  as a high risk susceptibility gene for  familial prostate cancer nor as a modiÜer for the disease risk in the  1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian  European population. State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Hematology Research  Center of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Research Center for  
P0434 . IdentiÜcation of two novel large genomic deletion in  Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Institute of Carcinogenesis, Moscow,  MSH2/MLH1 and evaluation of different screening techniques Russian Federation, 6Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian  J. Zhang, A. Russell, M. Attenhofer, H. Mueller, K. Heinimann;  Federation. Genes TGFBR1 and RG
S19 I
P1  encode proteins that take  Research group of Human genetics,Division of Medical Genetics, University of  part in transforming growth factor Ȳ (TGF-Ȳ) signaling, mainly  Basel, Switzerland. resulting in inhibition of cell proliferation. TGFBR1 encodes TGF-Ȳ  Large genomic rearrangements in the mismatch repair genes MSH2  receptor type 1, transmitting signal from TGF-Ȳ receptor type 2 to  and MLH1 are estimated to account for up to 27% of all mutations  intracellular mediators R-Smads. The 1st exon of TGFBR1 contains  in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC).  a polymorphic GCG-repeat; (GCG) was previously reported as  Since large genomic deletions are missed by direct DNA sequencing,  6 tumor susceptibility allele associated with breast and colorectal  two novel methods were recently introduced to overcome this  cancers. RG
S19 I
P1  encodes a PDZ domain-containing protein, that  problem: i) the quantitative multiplex PCR assay (QMPA), ii) the  interacts with TGF-Ȳ receptor type 3 protecting it from degradation  multiplex ligation dependent probe ampliÜcation (MLPA) assay.  and facilitating the receptor interactions. The 5Ó-untranslated region  Whereas the Ürst method divides all 35 exons of MSH2 and MLH1  of RG
S19 I
P1 contains a CGG-repeat the polymorphism of which  into 7 separate groups for PCR multiplexing, MLPA ampliÜes up to 45  hadnÓt been studied before. We conducted a case-control study  sequences simultaneously. on 194 samples of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), 56 non- We tested both methods on 4 veriÜed MSH2/MLH1 deletion samples  small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 75 breast cancer (BC) and 203  to subsequently investigate a group of 35 Swiss patients clinically  healthy controls. Our BC cases had statistically signiÜcant positive  suspected of HNPCC, in whom no germline mutation could be  association with the (GCG)-allele ( 13.8% versus 6.1%, P = 0.016,  identiÜed by direct DNA sequencing. In 13 of 26 (50%) available  6 OR = 2.47 (95%, CI (1.21 - 5.07)), FisherÓs exact test, while cases  colorectal cancers microsatellite instability was present, 9 of which  of CLL and NSCLC didnÓt differ signiÜcantly from controls. We have  showed immunohistochemical loss of either MSH2 or MLH1. identiÜed a polymorphism of CGG-repeat in RG
S19 I
P1  with at least  Both techniques, QMPA and MLPA, readily identiÜed the deletions  8 alleles: 4 major (CGG ) with frequencies 20.4%, 41.6%, 27.6%,  in the control samples. In addition, a novel MLH1 germline  10-13 9.4%, respectively, the rest alleles are rare with overall frequency  deletion spanning exons 7 to 9 as well as a novel MSH2 deletion  1% in control; heterozygoty 0,729. Our BC cases had statistically  encompassing exons 7 and 8 were detected. The mutations were  signiÜcant positive association with the rare alleles (4.7% versus  found to segregate with disease and were further characterized by  1%, P = 0.01, OR = 4.92 (95%, CI 1.42 - 17.1)), NSCLC cases - with  RT-PCR and long-range PCR. An additional MSH2 deletion detected  CGG  (49.1% versus 27.6%, P = 0.0001, OR = 2.53 (95%, CI 1.65  by QMPA could not be conÜrmed by other methods. 12 - 3.9)). In conclusion, we have identiÜed two novel large genomic deletions  in MSH2 and MLH1, respectively. Both methods, QMPA and MLPA,  
P0437 . Genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with  appear to be of comparable sensitivity albeit with different speciÜcity. hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) S. Rondot, K. Frank-Raue, E. Schulze, F. Raue, MEN 2 Study Group;  
P0435 . Multiprobe interphase cytogenetics delineates two  subgroups of multiple mylema Endokrinologisch humangenetische Gemeinschaftspraxis, Heidelberg, Germa- F. W. Cremer, I. Buck, J. Bila, M. Kartal, D. Hose, A. M\x99bus, M. Brough, F.  ny. Bellos, M. Moos, H. Goldschmidt, C. R. Bartram, A. Jauch;  Germline mutations in the RET-protooncogene predispose to  MEN2B, MEN2A and FMTC with a decreased risk and a delay  University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. of developing MTC in this line. Patients with FMTC have mainly  Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a malignancy of clonal plasma cells  mutations in exon 10, 13, 14 and 15, while RET mutation of codon  accumulating in the bone marrow (BM). Deletions of chromosome  634 (exon 11) is typical for MEN2A. 13 and hypodiplody as deÜned by metaphase cytogenetics confer  We compared the phenotype of 73 patients (out of 29 families) with  an inferior prognosis. However, the low proliferation rate limits the  a RET mutation in exons 13-15 (codons 790, 791, 804 and 891) with Cancer genetics 177 66 patients (out of 25 families) with a RET mutation in codon 634.  mutations in 6 patients: the mutations 703C>T (exon 6) and  Mean age of the 24 index patients with mutations in exon 13-15 was  1018delA (exon 10), each are present in one patient, the 1828insA  signiÜcant higher compared with the 16 index patients with codon 634  (exon 11) mutation was observed in 4 patients without apparent  mutation. In the index cases with mutations in exons 13-15 tumour  relationship between the families. Since 2 DNA regions on 7p22.1  stage at operation was favourable, cure rate was better and the  and 14q32.31 share more than 90% sequence homology with exon  death rate was lower. In the screening group the cure rate was better  11 (including Ýanking introns), we currently conÜrm the presence of  (93% in patients with mutations in exons13-15, compared to 77%  the 1828insA mutation by RT-PCR using unique Ýanking primers. As  in patients with mutations in exon 11). The natural course of C-cell- DNA sequences highly homologous to PM
S2  may mask mutations,  carcinoma in patients with germline mutation affecting exons 13, 14  screening the mRNA should further help identifying pathogenic  and 15 seems to be less aggressive, presents at higher age and has  alterations in our patients. To date, we found no evidence for bi-allelic  a reduced penertance as compared to exon 11. A modiÜcation of the  PM
S2  mutations/autosomal-recessive inheritance. recommendation concerning age of prophylactic thyroidectomy in  RET-mutations exons 13 -15 should be discussed. 
P0440 . Missense mutations within RING Ünger domain of BRCA1  * Participants of the MEN 2 Study Group: H\x99ppner, Hamburg; Wahl,  gene detected in high risk Czech patients with hereditary breast  Usadel, Happ, Frankfurt; Vogt, Heidemann, Augsburg; Schneyer,  and ovarian cancer Halle; Langer, Saarbr\x9ecken; Fuchs-Hammoser, Wei¦, Berlin; Varma,  E. Machackova1, M. Lukesova1, J. Damborsky2, M. Navratilova1, H. Pavlu1, L.  Karlsruhe; Schr\x99der, Brandenburg; Hiort, L\x9ebeck; Kummerich,  Foretova1;  Stuttgart; Meng, Greifswald. 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk  University, Brno, Czech Republic. 
P0438 . Low IFITM1 and high CXC
L3  expression correlate with  Germline mutations in highly penetrant cancer susceptibility gene  high-risk chronic myeloid leukemia BRCA1 cause genetic predisposition to breast and ovarian cancers.  C. B. Akyerli1, M. Beksac2, K. Dalva2, M. Holko3, M. Frevel3, B. R. G. Williams3,  Mutations generating a premature stop codon are considered to  A. Demirkan4, U. Ozbek4, T. Ozcelik1;  be pathogenic. However, distinguishing disease-causing missense  1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara,  mutations from rare polymorphisms remains problematic. Three  Turkey, 2Department of Hematology, Ankara University School of Medicine,  different missense mutations located within conserved CHC RING  3 4  Ankara, Turkey, 3Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH, United States,  Ünger domain of BRCA1 gene were repeatedly detected in unrelated  4Department of Genetics, Institute of Experimental Medicine, ĕstanbul  high-risk Czech breast and/or ovarian cancer families: p.Met18Lys  University, Istanbul, Turkey. (M18K); p.Cys39Arg (
C39 R); p.Cys61Gly (
C61 G). The RING Ünger  We investigated the peripheral blood gene expression proÜles in  motif of BRCA1 gene is involved in protein-protein interactions. The  sixty-seven chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients classiÜed  p.Cys61Gly is frequent mutation and was proved by many authors  according to new prognostic score (NPS). Seven genes were chosen  to segregate with the disease in several breast cancer families.  from a preliminary cDNA microarray study in which two high versus  However, p.Met18Lys detected in 3 Czech families is not recently  two low-risk patients were analyzed. Semi-quantitative and real-time  present in BIC database and p.Cys39Agr detected in 3 Czech  reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis  families has been submitted only twice to BIC database. None of  of these differentially expressed transcripts highly correlated with the  these missense mutations was present in our control group of 50  microarray data. Expression levels of all genes, except PTG
S1 , were  postmenopausal unrelated healthy women without family history of  signiÜcantly different between the high (n=9) and low-risk (n=7) CML  breast cancer. In the poster we present pedigrees of these high-risk  by semi-quantitative RT-PCR (IFITM1 and CXC
L3  p=0.001; CCNH  breast/ovarian cancer families and summarize all the arguments  p=0.012; RAB1A p=0.01, PRKAR2B p=0.016; UC
P2  p=0.04; and  including structural consequences why we assume that also the  PTG
S1  p=0.315). Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed similar results  p.Met18Lys and p.Cys39Agr mutations are likely to be disease- for IFITM1 expression in thirty-four low and eleven high-risk patients  causing. (p=9.7976 x 10-11). Higher IFITM1 or lower CXC
L3  expression  Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic:  correlated with improved survival (p=0.01 and p=0.059 respectively).  MZ00020980501; Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health  Gene expression proÜling is a valuable tool to identify candidate  of the Czech Republic, contract grant number: NC 5561-3 and NC  risk group indicator genes for the development of a molecular  6396-3. classiÜcation system for CML, which may also predict survival.  (Supported by grants from T\x85BĕTAK-SBAG and Bilkent University  
P0441 . Chromosomal Band 8p22 and its Contribution to Tumor  Research Fund). Formation in Ovarian Cancer D. Pils1, M. Roessler1, A. Gleiss2, P. Horak1, R. Zeillinger1, C. Zielinski1, M.  
P0439 . Molecular characterization of colorectal cancers with  Krainer1;  loss of PM
S2  expression 1Department of Internal Medicine I / of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Vienna  J. Luz1, K. Truninger2, G. Marra3, J. Jiricny3, A. Russell1, H. J. Mueller1, K. Hei- University Medical School, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Medical Computer  nimann1;  Sciences, Section of Clinical Biometrics, Vienna University Medical School,  1Research Group Human Genetics, University of Basel, Switzerland, 2Division  Vienna, Austria. of Gastroenterology, Kantonsspital Aarau, Switzerland, 3Institute of Molecular  Chromosomal band 8p22 is frequently affected by chromosomal  Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland. loss in nearly all solid tumor types. Eight genes from 8p22 were  Germline mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2,  associated with tumor biology with rather poor supporting evidence  MSH6, PM
S1 , PM
S2 ) are responsible for hereditary nonpolyposis  and functional characterization. None of them is associated with  colorectal cancer (HNPCC) which account for 2-5% of all colorectal  ovarian cancer, although the percentage of loss of heterozygosity  cancers. Mutations in PM
S2  (7p22.2) are relatively rare and thought  is most impressive throughout 8p22. This fact led us to perform a  to account for <5% of HNPCC patients. To date 5 pathogenic PM
S2   systematic investigation of genes located on 8p22 with respect of  mutations have been reported, of which 3 displayed an autosomal  ovarian cancer. We collected information about LOH and analyzed  dominant and 2 a recessive mode of inheritance. the expression pattern of genes using published gene proÜling  Out of a consecutive series of 1048 colorectal carcinomas  data, and integrated this information with a comprehensive in silico  from 5 Swiss hospitals, screened for MMR expression by  annotation. Finally, we concentrated on eight genes which are  immunohistochemistry, we investigated 14 patients with colorectal  reliably expressed in the ovary and either show frequently reduced  tumours showing selective PM
S2  loss for microsatellite instability  expression or have interesting proposed functions. We have acquired  (MSI) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the PM
S2  locus.  quantitative real-time PCR data from primary ovarian tumor samples  Furthermore, we screened all 15 exons of PM
S2  for germline  and cell lines. The results provide strong evidence for the involvement  mutations by direct DNA sequencing. of at least two genes (N33, EFA6R) in ovarian cancer biology.  MSI was present in 13 (93%) and consistent LOH in 7 (50%)  Additionally, we identiÜed several ovarian tumor cell lines lacking the  colorectal tumours. Thus far, we identiÜed 3 novel PM
S2  germline  expression of these genes. Now, we assess the methylation status Cancer genetics 178 of these two genes, as epigenetic regulation of gene expression may  be reduced in peripheral blood lymphocytes compared with controls  provide us further evidence for their role as tumor suppressor genes.  (p=0.015). Our results of chromosome breakage, apoptotic response  Further analysis of these candidate tumor suppressor genes will  and cell cycle dynamics will be discussed in relation to possible  include reconstitution experiments in cell lines lacking the expression  mechanisms for cancer susceptibility and cell cycle control. in combination with xenotransplant experiments. We believe that our  systematic approach will provide deeper insights into pathogenesis of  
P0444 . The importance of the detection of telomerase activity  ovarian cancer and elucidate the role of the chromosomal band 8p22  in patients with chronic lymphocytic and acute myeloblastic  in this deadly disease. leukemia: Our Ürst results M. \x84zdemir1, H. V. G\x9enes2, A. Basaran3, I. Degirmenci3, M. Solak1, D. Cosan3;  
P0442 . Aberrant gene expression in chronic myeloid leukemia is  1Department of Medical Biology, Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of  not associated with recurrent MEC
P2  mutations Medicine, Afyon, Turkey, 2Osmangazi \x85ni. Faculty of Medicine, Eskiėehir,  K. Dalva1, M. Beksac1, C. B. Akyerli2, T. Ozcelik2;  Turkey, 3Department of Medical Biology, Osmangazi University, Faculty of  1Department of Hematology, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara,  Medicine, Eskisehir, Turkey. Turkey, 2Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University,  Telomeres, which are located at the ends of eukaryotic linear  Ankara, Turkey. chromosomes protect ends of chromosomes against degradation.  Aberrant gene expression in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has  Telomere lenght is controlled by telomere proteins and telomerase  been linked to epigenetic alterations (methylation of CpG islands, loss  enzyme complex. Telomerase activity is not detectable in somatic  of imprinting-LOI) or mutations in the genes that make complexes  cells except for testes, fetal ovary, hematopoietic stem cells,  with histone deacetylase. LOI of insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF2)  lymphocytes, hair follicles and cryptic cells in the intestine. However  is speciÜcally associated with disease progression independent  high telomerase activity had been detected in %85 of human  of hypermethylation of the H19 CpG island in the accelerated and  malignancies. Thus it has thought that telomerase activity is a  blastic crisis phases of CML (Randhawa et al., Blood 91, 3144,  important marker in the cancer diagnosis. 1998). Methylation-dependent silencing at H19 imprinting control  In our study telomerase activity was determined by using  region (ICR) is mediated by methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene  TeloTAAGGG Telomerase PCR ELISAPLUS (Roche) kit in total 21  (MEC
P2 ) (Drewell et al., Nucl. Acids Res. 30, 1139, 2002). Based  peripheral blood samples collected from 7 chronic lymphocytic  on these observations we hypothesized that somatic inactivation of  leukemia (CLL), 7 acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) patients and 7  MEC
P2  may play an important role in disease progression in CML,  healthy persons. and investigated MEC
P2  gene mutations in the peripheral blood  As a result, telomerase activity was low in the CLL patients and high  samples collected from 36 CML patients at chronic, accelerated  in the AML patients according to control group. But the differences  and blastic phases. DNA was extracted and eight mutation hotspots  between the groups statistically was not signiÜcant. in MEC
P2  (R106W, 
P152 R, F155S, T158M, R168X, R270X,  V288X, and R306C) were screened by PCR and restriction enzyme  
P0445 . APC gene variants among patients with familial  digestion. None of the mutations was present in any of the samples  adenomatous polyposis investigated, and an association between MEC
P2  mutations and  T. A. Muzaffarova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, I. Y. Sachkov2, A. M. Kuzminov2, E. K.  CML disease progression was not observed. However, inactivation of  Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  MEC
P2  by epigenetic alterations cannot be ruled out (Supported by  1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2State  grants from T\x85BĕTAK-SBAG and Bilkent University Research Fund). ScientiÜc Centre of Colo proctology, Moscow, Russian Federation. Among 66 probands with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP)  
P0443 . BRCA 1 and BRCA 2: Breaking the cycle and repairing  37 mutations (55%) were found. Seventeen mutations (47%) were  the damage revealed for the Ürst case. Mutations 1309del5 and 1061del5 were  J. Barwell1, I. Kesterton2, L. Pangon2, A. Georgiou2, R. Gilchrist3, J. Ball2, A.  found recurrent in Russia (25% of all mutations). Because mutations  Arden-Jones4, K. Bishop4, I. Locke4, S. Shanley4, R. Houlston4, C. Chapman5,  in genes another than APC explains only small percent of FAP  C. Brewer6, A. Brady7, H. Dorkins7, T. Homfray1, J. Morris2, H. Hamed2, L.  without APC mutations we analysed the APC polymorphisms in  Wilkinson1, E. Solomon2, Z. Docherty2, R. Camplejohn3, J. Berg8, R. Eeles4, S.  attempt to Ünd speciÜc the gene variants. Three polymorphisms  Hodgson1;  located within exons of APC and one in 3Ó untranslated region of the  1St. GeorgeÓs Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2GuyÓs Hospital, London,  gene were investigated among probands and in control group. These  United Kingdom, 3St. Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4The Royal  polymorphisms deÜned 7 haplotypes, two of which were common and  Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Oxford Regional Genetics  Üve - relatively seldom. The latter may be characterized as a result  Service, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6The Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital,  of the common haplotype rearrangement. Homozygotes on the most  Exeter, United Kingdom, 7The Kennedy-Galton Centre, London, United  frequent haplotype were less frequent among probands without the  Kingdom, 8Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom. mutations than in control group (OR=0.37) but this difference was  BRCA1 and BRCA 2 proteins are both known to be involved in cell  not statistically signiÜcant (95% CI: 0.15-1.06). However, the proband  cycle check points, the repair of DNA breaks and breast cancer  group without APC mutations is not homogeneous. It was divided  susceptibility. However, it is not known whether individuals who are  in two subgroups: with the many affected relatives of proband (> 2;  heterozygous for BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 mutations have a speciÜc  the mean quantity 5) and with small quantity of affected relatives  phenotypic response to irradiation compared with age matched  (< 2). The frequency of the homozygotes in the latter subgroup  controls. We have investigated mutation carriers for apoptosis and  was signiÜcantly less than in the control group (OR=0.20; 95% CI:  chromosome breakage in response to irradiation in peripheral blood  0.02-0.67). The genomes with the seldom haplotypes were more  lymphocytes. Using a BRDU incorporation assay and Ýow cytometry,  frequent among probands without the mutations than in control  we have also assessed the cell cycle dynamics of peripheral blood  individuals (OR=3,38; 95% CI: 1.49-9.22). These results may suggest  lymphocytes in BRCA1 and BRCA 2 mutation carriers who have  an association of the APC variants with another gene (that confer  never been diagnosed with cancer,compared with age matched  increased risk of FAP) or with non-observed APC defects. controls. At present, we have recruited 32 BRCA mutation carriers and  
P0446 . Eukaryotic releasing factor 3 gene expression in gastric  controls for these patients. In the Ürst seven BRCA mutation carriers  cancer there is limited evidence that there may be a reduction in the repair of  R. Brito1, J. Malta-Vacas1, C. Aires1, P. Costa1, B. Carmona1, J. Gon\x8calves1, S.  chromosome breaks, excluding gaps, between carriers and controls  Ramos2, A. R. Conde3, A. P. Martins2, C. Monteiro3;  (p=0.05). On average, there are more abnormalities per cell, other  1Escola Superior de Tecnologia da Saude de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Servi\x8co  than gaps, in the carriers than the controls for each of the six time  de Anatomia Patol\x96gica, Hospital de Santa Cruz, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Faculdade  points (p=0.014). de Farm\x86cia da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. In the Ürst 29 BRCA mutation carriers there is also evidence that the  Gastric cancer is a major cause of cancer-related dead worldwide.  apoptotic response (apoptotsis at 4Gy - spontaneous apoptosis) may Cancer genetics 179 Despite this fact, the knowledge of the molecular events underlying  Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany, 8Department of Medical  the development of gastric tumors is still poor. In a recent  Genetics, Heinrich Heine University, D\x9esseldorf, Germany, 9Department  past, several initiation and elongation factors were found to be  of Surgery, Heinrich Heine University, D\x9esseldorf, Germany, 10Department  overexpressed in different kinds of tumors, but any study has been  of Molecular Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany,  done to investigate the expression patterns of releasing factors.  11Department of Medical Genetics, Knappschaftskrankenhaus Ruhr-University,  The eukaryotic releasing factor 3 (eRF3/GSPT1), which regulates  Bochum, Germany, 12Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Kassel, Kassel, Germany. protein synthesis as a GTP-dependent stimulator of eRF1 in  Mutations in DNA MMR genes, mainly MSH2 and MLH1, account for  termination of translation also has other non-translational roles,  HNPCC, an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition to colorectal  namely participating in the mRNA decay machinery, regulating the  cancer and other malignancies. Evaluation of current HNPCC  cell cycle and apoptosis. In this study we analysed the expression  surveillance recommendations or mutation detection requires well  pattern of eRF3/GSPT1 using a quantitative real-time RT-PCR, and  characterised HNPCC cohorts of reasonable size. A large HNPCC  we also determined the gene dosage by quantitative real-time PCR  cohort is currently established by the German HNPCC Consortium. in 25 gastric tumors. Different histological types of gastric tumors  This study presents the spectrum and frequencies of germline  and adjacent non-neoplasic tissue were used for gene expression  mutations in MSH2 and MLH1 in 1425 unrelated HNPCC suspects.  analysis. From all the tumors analysed about 35% revealed  Microsatellite analysis in tumor tissue was applied to pre-select  overexpression of eRF3/GSPT1. Moreover, 70% of the intestinal  patients eligible for mutation analysis. type tumors overexpressed the gene while only 10% of the diffuse  High microsatellite instability (MSI-H) was detected in 72% of  type tumors did so. A quantitative real-time PCR was also performed  patients meeting the Amsterdam criteria (AC) and in 37% of the  to determine eRF3/GSPT1 gene dosage, and no ampliÜcations  patients fulÜlling less stringent criteria. 465 patients (406 MSI-H, 11  were detected. There was no correlation between eRF3/GSPT1  MSI-low and 48 meeting the AC in whom no tumor samples were  expression and gene copy number. We postulate that overexpresson  available) were screened for mutations. In 134 patients a pathogenic  of eRF3/GSPT1 in gastric adenocarcinomas can be due to the  MSH2 mutation and in 118 patients a pathogenic MLH1 mutation  need to increase translation of speciÜc oncogenic transcripts.  was identiÜed. 160 distinct mutations were detected. Of note,  Alternatively, eRF3/GSPT1 can be involved in tumurigenesis by its  MSH2,c.942+3A>T and MLH1,c.1489_1490insC were identiÜed in  non-translational roles, namely (des)regulating cell cycle, apoptosis  11% and 18% of the MSH2 and MLH1 mutation carriers, respectively. or transcription. Our Ündings underscore the value of microsatellite analysis as a pre- Grant FCT - POCTI/MGI/40071/2001. selection tool in patients not meeting the AC and have implications  for mutation detection in Central European HNPCC populations. The  
P0447 . Analysis of BRCA1 gene mutations in breast cancer  large number of mutation carriers detected by our study represents  patients in Moscow Region of Russia using biochips an ideal basis for detection of genetic modiÜers or exogenous factors  O. Fedorova1, M. Yakubovskaya2, T. Nasedkina1;  inÝuencing the HNPCC phenotype and evaluation of the current  surveillance recommendations. 1Engelhard Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation,  Acknowledgement: This study was supported by the Deutsche  2Blokhin Russian Oncological Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. Krebshilfe. Germ-line mutations in BRCA1 gene account for a substantial  proportion of inherited breast cancers. The mutation frequency of  
P0449 . Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer: Pitfalls in  BRCA1 gene in women with breast cancer varies according to family  deletion screening in MLH1 and MSH2 history, age at diagnosis and ethnicity. In the Russian population, the  frequency of different BRCA1 mutations has not studied thoroughly  M. Leister, C. Pagenstecher, W. Friedl, Y. Wang, M. Sengteller, P. Propping, E.  yet. We have begun the screening of BRCA1 mutations in women  Mangold;  of Moscow Region (age 32 to 75) diagnosed with breast cancer and  Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. unselected for family history of this disease. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an  The method of BRCA1 mutations carriers identiÜcation based on  autosomal-dominant disease, based on germline mutations in DNA  hybridization with microarray of gel-immobilized oligonucleotides  mismatch repair genes, mainly in MSH2 and MLH1. About 10% of  (biochip) has been developed. Five different mutations: 300T>G,  mutations are large genomic deletions encompassing one or more  185delAG, 4153delA, 4158A>G and 5382insC were selected for the  exons. MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliÜcation) is a  analysis. reliable, easy to perform method for deletion screening in both genes  To date, we have analyzed DNA of 61 women with breast cancer for  in one single step. Therefore deletion screening was proposed to be  BRCA1 gene mutations. 5382insC mutation was identiÜed in three  performed in patients suspected of HNPCC before further labour- patients with ductal breast cancer (4.9%). The other mutations were  intensive screening for point mutations in MSH2 and MLH1. not detected. During deletion screening in 202 patients by MLPA we detected  Our results suggest that BRCA1 mutations in unselected breast  deletions of one or more exons in 19 patients. In two patients we  cancer in our region likely to be found in high risk families only. We  identiÜed a deletion of exon 13 of the MLH1 gene. Interestingly  have shown that the gel-based microarray technology provides a  it could be conÜrmed by sequencing of cDNA only in one of the  rapid and a reliable detection method for the analysis of mutations  patients. Sequencing of genomic and cDNA of the second patient  and will be useful for screening of larger breast cancer populations. revealed a point mutation that is localized in the hybridization  The study is currently in progress and the preliminary results will de  sequence of the MLPA probe of exon 13. discussed at the meeting. We observed a similar case when we applied deletion screening by  Ýuorescent multiplex PCR: a deletion of MSH2 exon 10 only has  
P0448 . Two recurrent mutations in MSH2 and MLH1 account for  been detected in one patient. Sequencing revealed a point mutation  14% of germline mutations detected in a large series of German  in exon 10 that was also localized in the primer sequence. patients with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer  We conclude that results of the MLPA test (or other methods applied  (HNPCC) for deletion screening) are usually correctly interpreted when two ore  E. Mangold1, C. Pagenstecher1, W. Friedl1, M. Mathiak2, C. Engel3, M. L\x99fÝer3,  more adjacent exons are concerned. However, when only one exon  E. Holinski-Feder4, H. Vogelsang5, G. Keller6, J. Plaschke7, S. Kr\x9eger7, T.  appears to be deleted it has to be veriÜed by an additional method. Goecke8, G. M\x99slein9, M. Kloor10, J. Gebert10, E. Kunstmann11, T. Brodegger12,  Supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe P. Propping1, on behalf of the German HNPCC Consortium;  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute  of Pathology, University Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Medical  Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,  Germany, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Munich, M\x9enchen,  Germany, 5Department of Surgery, TU, M\x9enchen, Germany, 6Institute of  Pathology, TU, M\x9enchen, Germany, 7Department of Surgical Research, Cancer genetics 180 
P0450 . IGH/MYC complicons in human IGH/BC
L2 -positive  
P0452 . Chromosomal rearrangements affecting the BC
L6  and  germinal center B-cell lymphoma MYC loci are rare events in classical Hodgkin lymphoma B. Saez1,2, J. I. Martin-Subero1, M. D. Odero2, R. Hernandez3, J. C. Cigudosa4,  J. I. Martin-Subero1, C. Renne2, S. Grohmann1, R. Schmitz3, R. K\x9eppers3, M.  X. Agirre5, R. D. Gascoyne6, M. J. Calasanz2, R. Siebert1;  L. Hansmann2, R. Siebert1;  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,  Germany, 2Department of Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain,  Germany, 2Senckenberg Institute of Pathology, University of Frankfurt, Frank- 3Hematology Department, Txagorritxu Hospital, Vitoria, Spain, 4Centro Nacional  furt, Germany, 3Institute for Cell Biology (Tumor Research), University of Essen,  de Investigaciones Oncol\x96gicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 5Foundation of Applied  Essen, Germany. Medical Research, Area of Cancer, University Clinic, University of Navarra,  Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a peculiar B-cell malignancy in which  Pamplona, Spain, 6Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, BC  the tumor cells only represent 0.1-1% of the affected tissue. HL is  Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. subdivided into classical (cHL) and nodular lymphocyte predominant  Oncogene activation via juxtaposition to the IGH locus by a  (NLPHL) Hodgkin lymphoma. The tumor cells of cHL, called  chromosomal translocation, or less frequently, genomic ampliÜcation,  Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells, express CD15 and CD30,  is supposed to be a major mechanism of B-cell lymphomagenesis.  whereas the tumor cells of NLPHL express B-cell markers like  However, ampliÜcation of an IGH/oncogene fusion, recently coined as  CD20. Chromosomal alterations involving the BC
L6  and MYC loci  a complicon, is a rare event in human cancers and has been reported  are among the most frequent genomic changes in various B-cell  to be associated with poor outcome and resistance to treatment. We  malignancies. In cHL, despite its predominant B-cell origin, the  observed two cases of clinically aggressive germinal center derived  presence of chromosomal changes involving BC
L6  and MYC has not  B-cell lymphomas with IGH/BC
L2  fusion, which additionally displayed  yet been studied. Here, we have evaluated 32 cHL by FISH applying  ampliÜcation of an IGH/MYC fusion. The Ürst case contained  probes Ýanking the BC
L6  and MYC loci. Only large hyperploid nuclei  the IGH/MYC complicon in multiple double minutes whereas the  suggestive for HRS cells were scored. Signal patterns pointing to  second case showed a BC
L2 /IGH/MYC triple fusion complicon  translocations targeting MYC were not observed in any of the 28  on a derivative chromosome 8, as shown by Ýuorescence in situ  cHL evaluable. With regard to numerical changes, a median number  hybridization. Additional molecular cytogenetic analyses revealed that  of 3 copies of MYC (range 3-8) was observed. One cHL displayed  the Ürst case also contained a chromosomal translocation affecting  a high-level MYC ampliÜcation. Translocations affecting BC
L6  were  the BC
L6  oncogene and a biallelic inactivation of T
P53 . The second  detected in 2/32 (6%) cHL. The median number of BC
L6  copies was  case additionally harbored a duplication of REL and acquired a  4 (range: 2-5). Additionally, cryosections of 14 NLPHL were studied  translocation affecting IGL and a T
P53  deletion during progression.  by combined immunoÝuorescence for CD20 and FISH for BC
L6 .  Complicons affecting IGH/MYC have been previously reported in  Breakpoints affecting the BC
L6  locus were detected in 5 cases (36%)  lymphomas of mouse models simultaneously deÜcient for T
P53  and  suggesting a signiÜcantly higher incidence in NLPHL than in cHL  the non-homologous end joining DNA repair pathway. To the best of  (2/32 vs. 5/14; p=0.02). Our results indicate that rearrangements  our knowledge, this is the Ürst time that an IGH/MYC complicon is  of BC
L6  and MYC are less frequent in cHL than in other B-cell  reported in human lymphomas. These Ündings imply that that the two  lymphomas. mechanisms resulting in MYC deregulation, i.e. translocation and  Supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe (70-3173-Tr3/B1). ampliÜcation, can occur simultaneously. 
P0453 . Molecular cytogenetic breakpoint mapping of a  
P0451 . Modelling the MLL-gene translocation in vivo reciprocal balanced translocation (11;21)(q23.3;q11.2) in bone  K. Stout1, T. Hardt1, T. Heiden1, E. Schr\x99ck2;  marrow cells of two patients with myelodysplastic syndrome C. Fauth1, E. Gunsilius2, D. Wolf2, R. Greil3, F. Fresser1, P. Probst1, G. Uter- 1Charit\x8d Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical  mann1, M. Erdel1;  Genetics, Technical University, Dresden, Germany. MLL-gene translocations are the most common abnormalites  1Institut f\x9er Med. Biologie u. Humangenetik der Med. Universit\x89t, Innsbruck,  occurring in secondary leukaemias resulting from treatment with  Austria, 2Universit\x89tsklinik f\x9er Innere Medizin, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Landesklinik  topoisomerase-II-inhibitors. Several in vitro studies have indicated  f\x9er Innere Medizin III, Salzburg, Austria. that the MLL-locus is cleaved as a result of apoptotic processes. This  Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal disorder of  to our knowledge has not yet been studied in vivo. haematopoietic stem cells characterized by cytopenia and bone  A normal EBV-transformed cell line was treated with 25´M etoposide,  marrow dysplasia that mostly affects elderly persons and frequently  after which 4% of the interphase nuclei showed MLL-cleavage (0.5%  evolves to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Loss of genetic material  in controls). Using MLL-FISH and TUNEL- or cleaved caspase-3- such as -5/del(5q) and -7/del(7q) is frequently associated with  assays, which detect apoptotic cells, we envisioned MLL-cleavage  primary MDS, reciprocal translocations are less common. Here,  and apoptosis status simultaneously. Only 13% of MLL-split signals  we present data on two patients with MDS with a rare recurrent  occurred in apoptosis positive cells. This showed that the MLL-gene  translocation t(11;21)(q23.3;q11.2). A previous molecular cytogenetic  broke in non-apoptotic cells or before apoptosis may have occurred. study in one case with t(11;21) mapped the translocation breakpoints  We induced metaphases by premature chromosome condensation  to a genomic area deÜned by two Ýanking YAC clones in 11q23.3  (PCC) after etoposide treatment to test whether MLL-breaks detected  and within a 800 kb region in 21q11.2 (Wlodarska et al., 1999).  in interphase nuclei are indicative of MLL-gene translocations. A  Based on these data the aim of the present study was to identify  total of 137 metaphases were tested for MLL-status on random days  breakpoint spanning clones by FISH using publicly available PAC  after etoposide treatment. Two translocations were found one day  and BAC resources (Ensemble, UCSC, NCBI) in order to identify  and one translocation seven days following treatment. Fourteen  candidate genes disrupted or deregulated by this translocation. FISH  days following treatment, only one metaphase in 850 showed  with selected clones resulted in the identiÜcation of one breakpoint  an MLL-gene translocation. An additional interphase analysis 50  spanning clone in 21q11.2 and one deleted clone in 11q23.3.  days after treatment showed four MLL-splits in 1600 treated cells  Clones from the critical regions might also be involved in cryptic  (control: 1 in 2500). Thus, cells containing an MLL-gene translocation  rearrangements and will be tested subsequently on metaphase  following etoposide treatment are rare. They may survive due to a  spreads of MDS patients with normal karyotypes.(Supported by the  selection process in viable cells and not always undergo apoptosis.  Austrian Cancer Society/Tirol) Furthermore, even though MLL-gene translocations occur, the  MLL-gene is not a preferential target of etoposide, since many cells  
P0454 . A genome wide linkage search for prostate cancer  showed numerous other chromosomal aberrations when analysed  susceptibility genes in families from Germany with SKY. C. Maier1, J. Hoegel1, K. Herkommer2, W. Vogel1, T. Paiss2;  1Dept. Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Dept. Urology,  University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. Prostate cancer is a complex disease with a substantial genetic Cancer genetics 181 contribution involved in the disease risk. Several genome wide  with respect to several types of cancer. Laryngeal squamous  linkage studies conducted so far have demonstrated a strong  cell carcinoma (LSCC) is one of the Üve most common cancers  heterogeneity of susceptibility loci. In order to assess candidate  worldwide. Epidemiological studies suggested that the etiology  regions which are particularly relevant for our population, we applied  of LSCC is multifactorial such as smoking, alcohol consumption,  a genome wide linkage approach on 139 German prostate cancer  viral infection, and genetic factors. Although smoking and alcohol  families, representing 405 affected men. Out of these, 309 cases  consumption play a major role in the etiology of LSCC, only a fraction  as well as 116 healthy relatives were genotyped at 500 markers  of smokers and drinkers suffers from this disease, suggesting  (panel 
P1400 , deCODE) with an average spacing of 7.25 cM. We  a genetic susceptibility in the general population. Therefore, we  used GENEHUNTERplus to calculate nonparametric Zlr-Scores in  conducted a case-control study to analyze the genetic susceptibility  the entire family sample and in subsets. In our unselected family  of LSCC in patients and investigated the gene polymorphism of the  collection linkage was most evident at 8p22 (Zlr = 2.47), close  two enzymes; GST-M1 and GST-T1. In the present study, the primary  to the previously identiÜed susceptibility gene MSR1. Further  Ündings of allelic distribution GST-M1 and GST-T1 in the patient  local maxima with Zlr > 2 were observed at 1q, 5q and 15q. In a  group and a cancer-free control were determined, and the association  subgroup of 47 families which matched the Johns Hopkins criteria  between the GST-M1 and GST-T1 polymorphisms and LSCC were  of hereditary prostate cancer, suggestive linkage was found at a  evaluated. previously undescribed region on 1p31 (Zlr = 3.37). The remaining 92  pedigrees without a strong disease history yielded a maximum Zlr =  
P0457 . Analysis of the 3D-chromatin architecture of the MLL- 3.15 at 8q13, possibly indicating a gene with reduced penetrance or  gene region within the chromosome 11 territory and in relation  recessive inheritance. Our results show that predisposition to prostate  to its most frequently found translocation partner chromosomes cancer in Europe may be similarly heterogeneous as demonstrated  T. Heiden1, G. Kreth2, I. Solovei3, K. Hermann4, E. Schr\x99ck5;  already for North American populations. In Germany, the MSR1  1Humboldt University Berlin, Charite, Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin,  gene could play a signiÜcant role. Other conspicuous loci, like 1p31  Germany, 2Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Kirchhoff-Institute of Physics,  and 8q13, would need further investigation in order to verify their  Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Biology II, Human Genetics, Ludwig  relevance and to identify candidate genes. Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 4metaGen Pharmaceuticals, Berlin,  Germany, 5Institute of Clinical Genetics, Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus,  
P0455 . The BRCA1 and BRCA2 association among patients with  Dresden, Germany. sporadic and familial breast cancer without the genes mutations It is poorly understood why chromosome translocations are  N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, S. M. Portnoy2, R. F.  recurrently found at speciÜc tumor translocation breakpoints (TBP)  Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  in the genome of cancer cells. The region of the mixed-lineage  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer  leukaemia (MLL-) gene on 11q23.3 represents such a TBP frequently  Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. showing translocations with speciÜc partner chromosomes in acute  Under investigation of familial breast cancer we found 36% of  leukemias. probands with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations (32% and 4%,  We hypothesize that higher-order spatial genome organization might  respectively) in our sample of Russian families. The hypothetical  be a contributing factor in the formation of MLL-gene translocations.  additional gene BRCAX that could explain the rest part of the families  Therefore we are testing if the MLL-region shows a preferential  is not found up to now. With the aim to clarify possible role of BRCA1  spatial localization within the nucleus in particular in relation to the  and BRCA2 gene variants as low penetrance genes we analyzed a  territory of chromosome 11 as well as to chromosomes 4, 9, and 19  combination of frequent polymorphisms of these genes in population- representing the most frequently found translocation partners and,  based series of breast cancer patients (n=94) in comparison with  as a control, to chromosome 3 that is not found as a translocation  control sample (n=109). partner. SNPs analysis has deÜned two major haplotypes of BRCA1 gene:  Experiments include a) hybridizations of one BAC-clone covering  consensus sequence (haplotype A) and sequence with a set of SNPs  the MLL-gene in combination with paints for chromosomes 3, 4,  in strong linkage disequilibrium (haplotype B; frequency equals 0.36).  9, 11, and 19 to normal human Übroblasts, lymphoblastoid cells,  The BRCA2 contains frequent polymorphism N372H (frequency  and possible MLL-precursor cells with highly preserved in-vivo  equals 0.22). We revealed that the haplotype B of the BRCA1 gene  spatial chromatin architecture using 3D-FISH, b) analysis of the  is associated with the variants 372H of the BRCA2 not by chance  hybridizations with 5-color confocal microscopy, and c) comparison of  among patients (P=0.033). There was no association between these  the frequencies of experimentally determined chromosome vicinities  haplotypes in genomes of control individuals. The frequency of the  with vicinities found in simulated cell nuclei with random distribution  haplotype B - 372H combination was signiÜcantly higher among  of chromosome territories. the patients in comparison with the control individuals (odds ratio:  Preliminary results obtained in normal human Übroblasts and  [[Unsupported Character - &#1054;]]R=1,93; [[Unsupported Character  lymphoblastoid cells do not indicate preferential vicinities of  - &#1056;]] = 0,039). It is interesting that the same phenomenon  chromosomes frequently involved in MLL-gene translocations, but  was observed on the sample of probands with familial breast cancer  it appears to exist a preferential localization of the MLL-locus in the  without BRCA1/2 mutations. The odds ratio for haplotype B - 372H  periphery of the chromosome 11 territory. combination among the probands was equal to 3,29 (95% CI: 1,19  - 8,51), that is higher than among the patients with sporadic breast  
P0458 . Tissue microarray analysis of cyclin D1 gene  cancer. ampliÜcations and gains in colorectal carcinomas B. Zaharieva1, D. Petrova1, V. Tzenova2, I. Dimova1, R. Yankova1, V.  
P0456 . Analysis of Association Between Glutathione S- Yordanov1, D. Damjanov3, T. Todorov2, D. Toncheva1;  Transferase M1 and T1 Polymorphisms and Laryngeal  1Department of medical genetics, Medical University of SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria,  Squamous Cell Carcinoma: A Case-Control Study 2Department of pathology, Medical University of SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 3Surgical  H. Acar1, K. Ozturk2, M. H. Muslumanoglu3, H. Arbag2, O. Cilingir3, B. Ozer2;  clinic, Hospital ÐQueen JoannaÑ, Medical University of SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine,  Colorectal cancer is one of the most common neoplastic diseases  Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Otolaryngology, Selcuk University, Faculty  and one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths. There  of Medicine, Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Osmangazi  are two forms of the disease - hereditary and sporadic. Sporadic  University, Faculty of Medicine, Eskisehir, Turkey. colorectal cancer is the most frequent, predominantly affecting  Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a family of cytosolic  individuals of over 70-75 years of age. or microsomal enzymes that catalyze a number of reduced  Elevated beta-catenin levels in colorectal cancer caused by mutations  glutathione (GSH)-dependent reactions. This ability to metabolize  in beta-catenin or in the adenomatous polyposis coli molecule gene  reactive metabolites of carcinogens has been related to a  (APC) result in the binding of beta-catenin to LEF-1 and increased  regulating susceptibility to cancer. Interindividual variation in GST  transcriptional activation of mostly unknown target genes. CCND1  polymorphisms has been associated with differences in risk,  gene is a direct target for transactivation by the beta-catenin/LEF-1 Cancer genetics 182 pathway through a LEF-1 binding site in its promoter region. analysis of early patch-plaque as well as late nodular stages of  CCND1 ampliÜcation is the main cause for protein overexpression in  AKS and EKS using microdissection of tumor areas, global DNA  numerous human carcinomas such as breast carcinomas, squamous  ampliÜcation, and CGH in 1 patch EKS, 9 nodular EKS, 8 patch AKS,  cell carcinomas of the head and neck, epithelial ovarian tumors and  and 11 nodular AKS cases. bladder cancers. In colorectal cancer, no CCND1 ampliÜcation was  Preliminary results show no aberrations in early lesions and sporadic  reported so far. non-recurrent copy number changes in small chromosome segments  The aim of the study was to determine the frequency of CCND1  in late stages. Only one nodular EKS case shows gross losses of  ampliÜcations and gains in a large number of colorectal carcinomas,  whole chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 13, 15, and 16. Lack of gains and losses  arranged in a tissue microarray, in order to assess their role in the  in early lesions supports the idea that KS initially represents an  colorectal cancer development. reactive lesion. Increased gene copy number was found in 42 out of 386 tumors  (10.1%). The copy number changes were predominantly gains (7.6%)  
P0461 . Analysis of the Mitotic-arrest-deÜcient-1(MAD1) genotype  and much more rarely ampliÜcations (2.5%). No association was  proÜles in a cohort of primary breast cancers, reduction  established between the copy number changes and the tumor stage,  mastectomy specimens and normal blood samples. grade or localization. B. T. L. Flynn;  We concluded, that even in a small group of colorectal tumors,  Conway Institute, UCD, Dublin, Ireland. CCND1 gene ampliÜcation is a possible mechanism for cyclin D1  The faithful duplication and separation of genetic material into two  oncoprotein increased level. daughter cells during mitosis is crucial to the task of cell division.  This task is in part monitored by the mitotic assembly checkpoint  
P0459 . Relevance of RNASEL mutations for prostate cancer  system (MSC) involving at least 8 different proteins. Two important  predisposition in Germany components of this checkpoint are the resultant proteins of the  W. Vogel1, Z. Vesovic1, K. Herkommer2, T. Paiss2, C. Maier1;  mitotic-arrest-deÜciency-1 (MAD1) gene located at 7p22 in humans  1Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Dept. of Urology,  (Jin et al, 1999) and the MAD2 gene at 4q27 (Krishnan et al, 1998).  University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. This interaction occurs by means of two leucine zipper motifs.  Germline mutations predisposing to prostate cancer have been found  Importantly, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at exon 17 of  in three candidate genes so far: ELA
C2  at 17p11, RNASEL at 1q25  MAD1 within a 2nd leucine motif results in a nucleotide change from  and MSR1 at 8p22. RNASEL, encoding the 2ª,5ª-oligoadenylate- arginine[R] (Arg-588 R) to histidine [H] (His-588 H) resulting in a  dependant RNase L, seems to have rare founder mutations in  decreased efÜciency of hsMAD1 binding to hsMAD2 (Iwanaga et  different ethnicities, like M1I in Afro-Americans, 
E273 X in men of  al, 2002) . The objectives of the current study was to determine the  European descent and 471delAAAG in Ashkenazi Jews. In order  frequency of R/R, R/H and H/H alleles by genotyping the MAD1 exon  to evaluate the relevance of this gene in the German population  17 SNP in a prospectively collected cohort of breast tumours (n=96),  we determined the spectrum and frequency of RNASEL germline  reduction mastectomy specimens (n=15) and blood samples from a  mutations by sequencing of the coding exons 2 - 7. This screening  normal population (n=15). The methodology involved DNA extraction  included 325 affected men from 145 Caucasian families, of which  from fresh frozen tissue, RFLP analysis using AccII/BstU restriction  48 met the Johns Hopkins criteria for hereditary prostate cancer.  enzyme and 6% PAGE analysis. This technique identiÜed that 6/15  In addition, we used 230 non-familial prostate cancer patients and  (40%) of reduction mastectomy specimens, 4/15(27%) of normal  209 healthy, elderly men as controls. Sequencing revealed only two  blood samples and 19/96 (20%) of tumour samples displayed the  sib pairs (1.4% of our families) segregating conspicuous RNASEL  correct R allele. In the clinical setting, functioning of this system may  variants with the disease, the nonsense mutation 
E273 X and a new  compromise the efÜcacy of microtubule inhibitors, such as, taxol and  amino acid substitution (R400P) of unknown functional relevance.  taxotere which are increasingly being used in the metastatic breast  Both alleles were also found in our sample of healthy men, with 1.4%  cancer. and 0.5%, respectively. The common polymorphisms I97L, R462Q  and D541E were observed with equal frequencies among prostate  
P0462 . Detection of CCND1 and ZNF217 copy number changes  cancer families, non-familial patients and controls. in ovarian tumors - tissue microarray analysis In contrast previous studies we did not Ünd evidence that common  I. Dimova1, B. Zaharieva1, A. Yosifova1, S. Raicheva2, N. Doganov3, D.  variants (i.e.R462Q) may modify disease risk. Moreover, our results  Toncheva1;  are not consistent with high penetrance of deleterious RNASEL  1Department of Medical genetics, Medical University-SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria,  mutations. According to the low frequency of germline mutations  2Laboratory of Gynecopathology, SBALAGÑMaichin domÑ, SoÜa, Bulgaria,  present in our sample, RNASEL may not have a signiÜcant impact on  3Gynecological clinics, SBALAGÑMaichin domÑ, SoÜa, Bulgaria. prostate cancer susceptibility in the German population. Literature data for the occurrence and signiÜcance of CCND1 and  ZNF217 copy number changes in ovarian tumors are insufÜcient.  
P0460 . Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH-) analysis of  The objective of this study was to asses these alterations in a large  microdissected early and late stage KaposiÓs sarcoma (KS) number of ovarian tumors and its relation to the tumor phenotype  E. Casta\x95os-V\x8dlez1, U. Montag2, P. Pyakurel1, E. Kaaya3, P. Biberfeld1, E.  - malignancy, histological type, tumor stage and grade. We applied  Schr\x99ck4, T. Heiden1,2;  FISH on a tissue microarrays, containing 900 ovarian tumors -  1Immunopathology Laboratory, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden,  benign, low malignant potential and malignant. 2Humboldt University Berlin, Charite, Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin,  CCND1 ampliÜcation was found in 8.46% of malignant, in 8.11% of  Germany, 3Muhimbili University College, Anatomical Pathology Department,  low malignant potential and was not found in benign ovarian tumors.  Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania, United Republic of, 4Institute of Clinical Genetics,  CCND1 ampliÜcation was associated with mucinous type of ovarian  Medical Faculty Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany. cancer (p<0.0001).CCND1 genetic gain was revealed in 9.06% of  Dramatic increase in AIDS-related KS (AKS) has been seen in  malignant, in 2.70% of low malignant potential and in 4.87% of benign  association with the HIV-AIDS epidemic that in affected patients  ovarian tumors. CCND1 gains and ampliÜcations were not associated  usually is accompanied with various lethal infections and secondary  with the tumor grade and stage. tumors. Other forms of KS comprise iatrogenic KS (IKS) of  The frequency of ZNF217 alterations in carcinomas was 25.50%  immunosuppressed transplantation patients, sporadic KS (SKS) of  (10.74% gains and 14.76% ampliÜcations). There was not statistically  Mediterranean males, and endemic KS (EKS) found in Equatorial  signiÜcant difference between the frequencies of ZNF217 copy  Africa. number changes in different grade tumors. The frequency of gains  Besides the involvement of human herpesvirus 8 that is associated  and ampliÜcations increased signiÜcantly from stage I to stage II to  with all forms of KS, the biological nature of KS is still largely  stage III tumors. Our results showed association between increases  unknown and it is not clear whether the disease represents a reactive  ZNF217 copies and advanced tumor stage. We concluded that  hyperplastic process or a true clonal sarcoma. genetic alterations in ZNF217 are of prognostic signiÜcance for stage  The aim of our study is to do a comprehensive DNA copy number  progression of the ovarian cancer.Cancer genetics 183 
P0463 . Molecular analyses of the gene encoding the  The WT1 tumor suppressor gene at 11p13 encodes a zinc-Ünger  methyltransferase SUV39H1 in mantle cell lymphomas transcription factor that is required for proper development of the  I. Niel\x89nder1, S. Gesk1, N. Arnold2, J. I. Martin-Subero1, W. Grote1, R. Siebert1;  kidney with a major role in the epithelial transition of the metanephric  blastema. Mutations in the WT1 gene are associated with WilmsÓ  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,  Tumor (WT), a childhood renal malignancy, but are found in only 5- Germany, 2Oncology Laboratory, Gynecology and Obstetrics Clinic, University  10% of sporadic cases. It therefore has become apparent that several  Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. genetic events contribute to WilmsÓ tumorigenesis. WT1 mutations  The human SUV39H1 gene encodes a methylating enzyme, which  in premalignant lesions of WTs (i.e. nephrogenic rests), suggest  maintains H3-K9 trimethylation at pericentric heterochromatin  additional genes involved in the WT1-initiated pathogenesis of WT. and plays a dominant role in heterochromatin organization and  We previously presented data on a one-year old girl affected  chromosome segregation. Double knockout mice of the murine  with bilateral WT without any other symptoms. We identiÜed a  homologues Suv39h1/h2, display a dramatic genome instability, and  heterozygous germline WT1 nonsense mutation in exon 2, creating  are predisposed to late-onset B-cell lymphomas. SUV39H1 is located  a truncated protein of 165 amino acids. In addition, tumor-speciÜc  on human chromosome X, which has been suggested to harbor  11p LOH was detected by microsatellite analysis. Cytogenetic  a gene associated with predisposition to mantle cell lymphomas  studies revealed a seemingly balanced chromosomal translocation  (MCL). This subtype of lymphoma is characterized by a marked  t(7;12)(p22;q22) in tumor tissue. We established a cell line from tumor  male predominance with a male to female ratio of up to 7:1. Its  tissue and applied FISH with PAC clones as well as polymorphic  function and genomic location render SUV39H1 a good candidate  microsatellite marker analysis for closer molecular characterization.  associated with predisposition of human MCL. Thus, a total of 24  We isolated a PAC clone overlapping the translocation breakpoint  DNA samples (12 males, 10 females, and 2 male cell lines) from  on chromosome 12, and identiÜed a 1,5 Mb deletion on derivative  t(11;14)-positive mantle cell lymphomas was screened by SSCP and  chromosome 7p. This deletion is Ýanked by the markers sWS
S1035   DHPLC for mutations in the six coding exons and the promotor region  (centromer) and sWS
S1796  (telomer), affecting chromosomal bands  of SUV39H1. No mutations affecting the amino acid composition or  7p21.3-7p22.1. transcription factor binding sites were detected. Moreover, in three  SNPs located within the SUV39H1 locus, the allele frequencies were  
P0466 . Mutation analysis of candidate genes for chordoma  comparable in MCL cases and healthy controls. The MCL samples  development were also studied for gross deletions of the SUV39H1-locus by  F. Orzan1, M. Longoni1, M. Miozzo1, L. Dalpr\x872, P. Mortini3, L. Larizza1, P. V.  Ýuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), but only one case out of 24  Riva1;  displayed a chromosomal deletion in the tumor cells. In summary, the  present study failed to detect an association of genetic changes of  1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 3S.  SUV39H1 and the development of mantle cell lymphomas. Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy. Suported by the Lymphoma Research Foundation. Previous studies pointed out a correlation between 1p36.13 and  development of chordoma, a rare embryogenetic neoplasm arising  
P0464 . Deletions in the von Hippel-Lindau Tumorsuppressor  from notochord remnants. Gene detected by MLPA LOH analysis allowed us to observe LOH in 29/33 tumors, 25 of  G. Wildhardt1, J. Tr\x9ebenbach1, K. Lentes1, D. Reutzel1,2, D. Steinberger1,3, B.  which sharing a minimal LOH interval between D1
S436  and D1
S2826   Zabel2, J. Decker1;  markers. We applied RT-PCR on 12 chordomas to investigate the role  1Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Childrenªs Hospital, Mainz, Germany, 3Insti- of CAS
P9 , EPHA2, PAX7, DAN and DV
L1  genes, selected as  tute of Human Genetics, Gie¦en, Germany. candidates on the basis of their mapping in LOH region and of their  Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a tumor susceptibility syndrome  plausible tumor-suppressor function. We observed DAN, DV
L1  and  based on germline mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor gene  PAX7 speciÜc transcripts in all the chordomas analyzed, while we  (chromosome 3p25-p26). It is characterized by a variety of benign  didnÓt detect CAS
P9  cDNA in one sample. We also found that one  and malignant tumors, including renal cell carcinomas, cerebellar and  tumor lacks the extracellular region of EPHA2, while intracellular  retinal hemangioblastomas, pheochromocytomas and other tumors  EPHA2 speciÜc-transcripts were observed in all samples. To search  and cysts. for inactivating mutation/s on candidate genes, we started sequence  More than 270 mutations in VHL are identiÜed so far. About 80%  analysis of EPHA2 and CAS
P9  cDNAs. EPHA2 study allowed us  of the mutations are smaller alterations usually identiÜed by  to identify 1) a novel G->A substitution in a patient constitutionally  sequence analysis. However, large genomic and intragenic deletions  heterozygous for G/A alleles and emizygous for the A allele in  necessitates quantitative southern blotting or Ýuorescence in situ  tumor DNA, predicting an Arg -> His substitution; 2) a novel C->T  hybridization (FISH). synonymous substitution in a patient constitutionally heterozygous  Here we report the results of a deletion screening in VHL-patients.  for C/T alleles, predicting a change in mRNA folding. The CAS
P9   This study was performed by applying multiplex ligation-dependent  cDNA analysis allowed us to detect in 5/7 patients two reported  probe ampliÜcation (MLPA). MLPA is a recently developed technique  SNPs, both present in the mRNA and transcribed from the same  which enables, in contrast to the southern-blot technique, the  allele, one of which predicting an Arg-> Gln substitution and a change  detection of deletions or duplications of single exons relatively fast  in mRNA folding. Additional studies are in progress to elucidate the  and in small amounts of DNA. With this method we could clarify  pathogenetic role, if any, of the above sequence alterations. the meaning of exceptional sequencing results in a VHL-family.  By sequencing exon 1 of the index patient the alteration 
P25 L was  
P0467 . CD3-CD4+ T cells from two hypereosinophilic patients  demonstrated to appear in a homozygous state. A larger deletion  : characterization of their chromosomal aberrations and gene  could be excluded by FISH analysis. Sequencing data revealed the  expression proÜling  mutation heterozygous in the healthy father whereas the mutation  M. Ravoet1,2, H. Duvillier2, C. Sotiriou2, F. Roufosse3, M. Goldman3, P. Martiat2,  analysis of the affected mother revealed no indication for the  K. Willard-Gallo2, C. Sibille1;  existence of a mutation. Applying MLPA analysis a deletion of exon 1  and 2 was found in both, the index patient and his mother. 1Genetic Medical Center, Clinique St Luc, Catholic University of Louvain,  The results of our screening study indicate that MLPA is a sensitive  Belgium, 2Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institut J. Bordet, University  and useful method for the molecular genetic diagnostic of VHL. of Brussels, Belgium, 3Dept. of Immunology, H\x98pital Erasme, University of  Brussels, Belgium. 
P0465 . Molecular reÜnement of the breakpoints in a  The lymphocytic variant of the hypereosinophilic syndrome (LV-HES)  WilmsÓTumor cell line with a translocation t(7;12)(p22;q22) is deÜned by a monoclonal T cell population with increased I
L5   C. Spangenberg, S. A. Fees, T. M. Trost, T. Enklaar, D. Reutzel, G. Klemm, S.  production in vitro, which is thought to provoke eosinophil expansion  Blattner, A. Langer, E. Lausch, D. Prawitt, B. U. Zabel;  in vivo. We are currently studying a group of LV-HES patients  that are characterized by an abnormal CD3-CD4+ T lymphocyte  Universit\x89tskinderklinik, Mainz, Germany. clone. We identiÜed three cytogenetic subclones in fresh blood Cancer genetics 184 from patient 
P3  using FISH : (6q-): 46,XX,del(6)(q13q22.2) ; (10p-)  with approx. 6,000 clones resulting in a resolution of less than 1Mb.  : 46,XX,del(10)(p11.1p13) ; (6q-10p-) : 46,XX,del(6)(q11.1q23.1), Furthermore, we covered a 7 Mb region on chromosomal band 11q23  del(10)(p11.1p13). In patient 
P4 , we also detected a 6q- subclone  with a tiling-path-array. del(6)(q13q22.31), thus delineating the region 6q13q22.2 as  We tested the hypothesis whether the common Fragile Site (cFS)  commonly deleted in both patients. A retrospective interphase FISH  FRA11J (11q23) is a Ðhot spotÑ for DNA double-strand breaks and  analysis revealed that the 6q abnormalities occured early and were  non-homologous recombination events in 48 acute leukemias  present throughout the chronic phase of disease in 
P3  and 
P4 . The  showing an MLL-gene translocation (11q23.3). For this purpose  6q- subclone emerged predominantly during 
P3 Ós clinical progression  we determined the precise location of FRA11J. Using array-CGH  to a T cell lymphoma, representing 92% of the CD3-CD4+ T cell  we identiÜed DNA gains and losses in the MLL-leukemias with a  population at this stage. We postulate that this genetic abnormality  resolution of less than 1 Mb and screened for genetic instability  reÝects the pre-malignant nature of LV-HES and thus are interested in  around both the MLL-gene-breakpoint and FRA11J with a resolution  identifying the target gene(s) associated with the 6q-deletion. Using  of 100kb. Our data demonstrate a stable genome at the MLL-gene  Affymetrix microarrays (the U133A chip, containing 22,000 genes),  translocation breakpoint and the nearest neighboring cFS FRA11J. we have assessed gene expression in puriÜed CD3-CD4+ T cells from  both patients 
P3  and 
P4  and compared these to normal CD3+CD4+  
P0470 . T
P53  mutations in BarrettÒs oesophagus T cells from 
P4 . Genes located in the 6q13-q22.2 region as well as  K. Novotna1, M. Trkova1, A. Pazdro2, M. Smejkal2, A. Soukupova1, P. Smejkal2,  those involved in cell proliferation were found to be underexpressed  Z. Sedlacek1;  in the CD3-CD4+ T cells. They include : p53-regulated PA26 protein,  1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Second Medical School, Charles  caspase 8 associated protein 2, CD164 and others are currently  University, Prague, Czech Republic, 23rd Department of Surgery, First Medical  being investigated further. School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. BarrettÓs oesophagus (BE) is characterised by the presence of  
P0468 . Copy number changes of different loci in a tissue  metaplastic columnar epithelium containing goblet cells which  microarray of bladder carcinomas replaces the normal squamous mucosa. The most important  D. Toncheva, B. Zaharieva;  clinical aspect of BE is the increased possibility of development of  Department of medical genetics, Medical University of SoÜa, SoÜa, Bulgaria. oesophageal adenocarcinoma. It is thought that this adenocarcinoma  Bladder cancer is the Üfth most common cancer in Europe. Minimally  develops as a result of progression from a metaplastic columnar  invasive (pT1) and muscle invasive (pT2-4) tumors show remarkable  epithelium via increasing degrees of dysplasia to an invasive  genetic similarities although the prognosis is deÜnitely worse in pT2-4  carcinoma. Not all patients with BE develop cancer. Because of  tumors. difÜculty of predicting this risk, all patiensts undergo endoscopic  The aim of our study was to analyze the copy number changes of  biopsy surveillance for early detection of cancer. Better genetic  9p21, erbB-1, erbB-2, 11q13 (CCND1, FGF4/3, FGF3, EM
S1 ), CMYC  characterization of risk factors could help the clinicians to select  and 20q13 in the invasive bladder cancer. A tissue microarray (TMA),  patients with higher risk for increased surveillance. In search for  containing 159 transitional cell bladder tumor samples, were analyzed  potential prognostic markers, we analysed BarrettÓs oesophagus  by FISH for each of these molecular targets. tissues and adenocarcinomas in the terrain of BE for T
P53  gene  FISH revealed decreased copy number of 9p21 in 31.5% of the  mutations. A total of 30 endoscopic biopsy specimens from 27  tumors. The frequency was lower in pT-2 than in pT1 tumors,  patients were histologically classiÜed by a pathologist into one of  concerning both homozygous and heterozygous deletions.  the following groups: 1) BE with metaplasia only (16 samples from  AmpliÜcation of erbB-1 was detected in 4.6% of the tumors, all  15 patients), 2) low grade dysplasia (LGD) (0 samples), 3) high  being muscle invasive. The frequency of erbB-2 ampliÜcation  grade dysplasia (HGD) (2 samples), 4) adenocarcinoma in BE (12  increased from pT1 to pT2-4 (4.5% vs 6.7%). 11q13 ampliÜcation  samples). Exons 5 to 9 of the T
P53  gene were sequenced. Our  was found in 4.2% of the tumors. Gains were more frequent than  results show that while 4 of 12 carcinoma samples tested (30%)  ampliÜcations (9.2%). CMYC ampliÜcations were detected in 1.6% of  contained a T
P53  mutation, none of 16 samples from BarrettÓs  the tumors and gains in another 9.5%. Gains were associated with  oesophagus and none of 2 samples from BE with HGD was mutated.  the tumor grade but not with the tumor stage. With regard to 20q13,  This observation may suggest that T
P53  gene mutation may be a  ampliÜcation was recorded in 5.3% and gains in 9.6% of the tumors.  relatively late event in the progression from BarrettÓs oesophagus to  Gains were associated with the muscle invasion (p<0.05) and with  adenocarcinoma of oesophagus. the tumor grade (p<0.001). In conclusion, only erbB-1 and 20q13 showed relation to tumor  
P0471 . B-cell malignancies with a t(14;19)(q32;q13) involving  muscle invasion. the BC
L3  locus predominantly derive from IgVH unmutated  precursors 
P0469 . BAC-Array-CGH screening for submicroscopic deletions  R. Siebert1, J. I. Martin-Subero1, R. Ibbotson2, E. Callet-Bauchu3, L. Harder1,  and duplications at the tumor speciÜc translocation breakpoint  L. Michaux4, S. Gesk1, N. Parry-Jones5, A. Gardiner2, R. K\x9eppers6, R. D.  11q23.3 and the nearest common Fragile Site FRA11J Gascoyne7, D. E. Horsman7, D. Oscier2, I. Wlodarska4;  A. Matth\x89i1, A. Snjiders2, W. Ludwig3, G. Ehninger4, S. Armstrong5, J. Wiemels6,  1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,  B. Schlegelberger7, F. Trotier1, K. Stout1, B. Ylstra8, G. Meijer9, D. Pinkel2, D.  Germany, 2Department of Haematology, Royal Bournemouth Hospital,  Albertson2, E. Schr\x99ck1;  Bournemouth, United Kingdom, 3Laboratoire Central dÓHematologie, Centre  1Institute of Clinical Genetics, University of Technology, Dresden, Germany,  Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon, France, 4Center for Human Genetics, Catholic  2Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, CA,  University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Academic Department of Haematology  United States, 3Department of Hematology, Robert-R\x99ssle-Clinic, Humboldt  & Cytogenetics, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Institute  University, Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Medicine I, University Hospital  for Cell Biology (Tumor Research), University of Essen, Essen, Germany,  Carl Gustav Carus, University of Technology, Dresden, Germany, 5Dana  7Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia Cancer  Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States,  Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 6Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San  The t(14;19)(q32;q13) translocation juxtaposing BC
L3  in 19q13  Francisco, CA, United States, 7Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology,  with IGH in 14q32 is a recurrent chromosomal change in B-cell  Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 8Microarray Core Facility, VU  malignancies, particularly B-CLL. Recently, two types of B-CLL with  University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Pathology,  distinct prognosis have been described according to the presence  VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. (favorable outcome) or absence (unfavorable outcome) of somatic  The array-CGH-technology raises the power of detecting  mutations of the immunoglobulin heavy chain variable (IgVH) genes.  chromosomal gains and losses in patient material from 5-10 Mb  The clinical outcome of patients with t(14;19) is usually poor, and  offered by conventional CGH to a resolution of 1 - 2 Mb using an  so far, their IgVH mutation status has not been investigated. We  array with approx. 2,500 BAC clones (Snijders et al. 2001). In  established a novel break apart FISH assay for the detection of BC
L3   collaboration with G. Meijer and B.Ylstra we established an array  chromosomal rearrangements. After validation in normal controls, Cancer genetics 185 34 B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders with cytogenetically-proven  decreased at a combination of NAT2*4, NAT2*5 or NAT2*7 alleles  t(14;19)(q32;q13) were studied by FISH. In 33 cases, involvement  and V/V genotype MnSOD (20,3% vs. 36,1%; P=0,0068; OR=0,45  the BC
L3  locus was conÜrmed. The IgVH mutation status was  (95%CI 0,25-0,79)). investigated in 24 of these 33 B-cell lymphomas (16 B-CLL and  8 non-Hodgkin lymphomas). In 19 cases (79%), IgVH sequences  
P0474 . Der(Y)t(Y;1)(q12;q12~21) in hematological malignancies :  showed 98.1% to 100% homology to germline VH-genes and, thus,  A new case report and review. by deÜnition lacked somatic mutations. In the remaining 5 cases, the  B. Quilichini, H. Zattara, C. Gavril, C. Fossat, G. Michel, N. Philip;  homology to germline IgVH ranged from 92.6% to 97.8% indicating  CHU Timone, Marseille, France. the presence of somatic hypermutation. These results suggest that  Translocations involving Y chromosome are rare in haematological  tumor cells in cases with t(14;19) predominantly belong to the IgVH  malignancies. A der(Y)t(Y;1)(q12;q12~21) has been already  unmutated group, which might account for the poor prognosis of  described in myelodysplastic syndromes and myeloproliferative  patients with t(14;19). As IGH breakpoints in t(14;19) mostly involve  disorders. switch regions, the observation of frequently unmutated IgVH genes  We report a case of BurkittÓs cell acute leukaemia with an atypical  suggests that most of the t(14;19) result from an error in class  association t(8;14)(q24;q32) and der(Y)t (Y;1)(q12;q12~21) in a 25  switching during T-cell independent immune responses. month infant. Supported by grant GO33801 from the Fund for ScientiÜc Research  Cytogenetic studies revealed clonal abnormalities : 46, XY,  (FWO). dup(1)(q12~21qter), t(8 ;14)(q24 ;q32) [5] /46, X, der(Y)t(Y ;1)(q12 ;  q12~21), t(8 ;14)(q24 ;q32) [29] / 46, XY[6]. 
P0472 . Investigation of alterations in fanconi anemia FANCE  FISH technique was realized on interphase nuclei using C-MYC  gene in human breast cancer probe and showed a c-myc rearrangement. On chromosomal  C. Hellweg, S. Singh;  preparations, using Y alpha satellite probe and chromosome 1 WCP  Institute of Human Genetics, Hamburg, Germany. simultaneously, we observed three clones : one clone with two  Breast cancer in western world has a high population frequency  chromosomes 1 and a chromosome Y, one clone with one normal  of about 10% in females. Only a small fraction of it manifests  chromosome 1, one duplicated chromosome 1 and a chromosome Y  clustered in families mainly due to germline mutations in the BRCA1  and one clone with two chromosomes 1 and a der(Y) t(Y ;1). and BRCA2 genes. The rest 95% of the breast cancers occur  In the review of literature, 13 cases only of hematological  spontaneously as somatic mutations of probably polygenic origin and  malignancies with der(Y)t(Y;1)(q12;q12~21) had been reported to  the underlying gene defects and mechanisms are not clear. Likely  date. candidates are defects in processes of cell cycle, DNA repair, and  Our case is the Ürst case in literature showing a clonal evolution from  apoptosis including the genes whose products interact or interfere  a dup(1)(q12~21qter), which represents an intermediate step, to a  with DNA repair functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 Proteins. Recently  der(Y)t(Y;1)(q12;q12~21) in BurkittÓs cell with a c-myc rearrangement. a novel Fanconi anemia/BRCA pathway has been elucidated which  The fact that this translocation has been described in myeloid  shows Üve FA proteins (A, C, E, F, G) interacting with BRCA proteins  and lymphoid malignancies suggests that a pluripotent stem cell  in a common signalling pathway involved in DNA repair. In order to  is affected at the beginning of pathogenesis and not a myeloid  evaluate the contribution of alterations in the FA genes we started  progenitor cell as it was suggested by most authors. screening these genes at genomic and expression level in our  collective of breast tumors. In this report we present the Ürst results of  
P0475 . MYH-associated polyposis with early-onset endometrial  mutation screening of FANCE gene. carcinoma and multiple pilomatricomas. In a subcollective of 40 breast cancers and 5 breast cancer cell  S. Baglioni1, F. Gensini1, G. Melean1, M. Scatizzi2, F. Tonelli3, L. Papi1, M.  lines without mutations in BRCA genes all exons and intron exon  Genuardi1;  boundaries of FANCE gene were investigated by PCR ampliÜcation,  1Medical Genetics, Dept Clinical Pathophysiology, Florence, Italy, 2Surgery Unit,  SSCP and diret sequencing. Only one mutation in exon 5 has been  Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Surgery Unit, Dept Clinical Pathophysiology,  found. This would argue that mutations in FANCE gene are unlikely  Florence, Italy. to be involved as a frequent cause of defects in the Fanconi Anemia/ It has recently been demonstrated that recessively inherited defects  BRCA pathway in breast cancer. of the MYH gene, a DNA glycosylase involved in the base excision  repair (BER) pathway, predispose to multiple colorectal adenomas  
P0473 . DNA-polymorphisms of NAT2 and MnSOD and  and carcinomas through a signiÜcant increase of somatic G > T  predisposition to breast cancer. transversion in the APC and KRAS genes. In particular, the Y165C  V. V. Artamonov;  (exon 7) and G382D (exon 13) variants have been shown to play a  Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. pivotal role in Caucasian patients with MYH-associated polyposis  Breast cancer is one of the major cancers around the world (ad 20%  (MAP). Herein we describe two unrelated Italian kindreds, both  of incidence of cancer) but its etiology is still not well understood.  with consanguineous parents, characterized by unusual tumour  Only about 50% of the disease are associated with known risk factors  associations. In the Ürst kindred, the proposita presented with multiple  including high-penetrance genes and lifestyle factors. Candidate  adenomatous colonic polyps and an endometrioid endometrial  low-penetrance genes are involved in a variety of pathways, for  carcinoma at the age of 45 years. She was found to be homozygote  example, DNA damage by free radicals. The enzymes involved in  for the Y165C MYH mutation. In the second kindred, two affected  this mechanism are N-acetyltransferase2 (NAT2) and manganese  siblings presented with multiple pilomatricomas and colorectal  superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). NAT2 catalyzes acetylation  adenomas. A previously unreported MYH frameshift mutation, 1186- of aromatic amines and hydrasines and forms of free radicals,  1187insGG (in exon 13), was present in the homozygous state in  and MnSOD catalyzes their dismutation. We have assessed the  both siblings. frequency of frequent allelic variants of NAT2 (NAT2*4 (wild type),  To our knowledge these are the Ürst reports of an association  NAT2*5 (T341C), NAT2*6 (G590A), NAT2*7 (G857A)) in 123 breast  between MAP and early-onset endometrial carcinoma and  cancer cases and 121 controls. We have found allele NAT2*11 in  multiple pilomatricomas. These observations suggest that MYH  Russian sample as well. Our breast cancer cases had statistically  mutations may predispose to additional tumours arising outside  signiÜcant positive association with NAT2*6/*6 or NAT2*11 (33,4% vs.  the gastrointestinal tract, possibly by increasing the rate of G > T  11,0%; P=0,0005; OR=3,06 (95%CI 1,62-5,77) (cases vs. controls)).  transversions in speciÜc target genes. The frequency of NAT2*5 and NAT2*7 alleles was not signiÜcantly  elevated in our breast cancer sample compared with controls.  MnSOD gene was studied for polymorphism of valine (V) vs. alanine  (A) in the leader peptide at position 16. V/V genotype (MroNI-/-) was  associated with decreased risk of breast cancer (24,4% vs. 38,0%;  P=0,0268; OR=0,53 (95%CI 0,03-0,91)). The risk of breast cancer Cancer genetics 186 
P0476 . Array-CGH- and conventional CGH-analysis of laser- of Pathology, Institute of Experimental Pathology and Parasitology, SoÜa,  microdissected early breast cancer lesions - DCIS, LCIS and  Bulgaria. atypical hyperplasia The copy number alterations of erbB-1(EGFR) and erbB-2(HER-2)  U. Montag1, E. Casta\x95os-Vel\x8dz2, S. Steinhoff3, A. Matth\x89i1, K. Friedrich4, G.  have been investigated in a variety of solid tumors. To appreciate  Baretton4, C. Klein5, R. Steinbeck3, E. Schr\x99ck1;  their role in the development and progression of squamous cell  carcinoma of the larynx, we used probes for the 7p12 (EGFR) and  1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Technical University, Dresden, Germany, 2meta- 17q21 (HER-2) regions for Ýuorescence in situ hybridization. Gen Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 3Labor for Molecular Pathology,  A tissue microarray containing 1395 tumors was constructed and  Kiel, Germany, 4Institute of Pathology, Technical University, Dresden, Germany,  analyzed. 5Institute of Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. AmpliÜcation of erbB-1 was found in 10.3% of the tumors in  A multistep model of breast carcinogenesis suggests a transition  comparison to erbB-2 - only 1%. The analysis revealed lack of  from normal epithelium to invasive carcinoma via non-atypical and  correlation between the ampliÜcation of the oncogenes and the tumor  atypical hyperplasia and carcinoma in situ. The introduction of  phenotype as well as between the ampliÜcation of the oncogenes and  mammographic screening has led to the increased detection of these  the nodal involvement. preinvasive breast lesions and has caused problems for diagnostics  These results suggest that the copy number alteration of erbB- and management of patients. Therefore, speciÜc molecular markers  1 and erbB-2 are not signiÜcant for the tumor differentiation and  are needed for objective classiÜcation and prognostication of early  progression. breast lesions. The aim of our project is the identiÜcation and validation of new  
P0479 . Exon 20 of BRCA1 gene is involved in more than the  genetic markers in order to facilitate diagnostics of patients with  half of mutation carriers identiÜed in Greek patients with family  early breast tumors. Four ´m sections of parafÜn-embedded breast  history of breast ovarian cancer lesions were dissected using laser capture microdissection (LCM).  D. Yannoukakos1, A. Ladopoulou1,2, I. Konstantopoulou1, S. Armaou1, G. Niko- Additional sections were cut for interphase cytogenetics and  lopoulos1, N. Pandis3;  immunohistochemistry analysis of p53, Ki67, Her2/neu, PR and ER.  For CGH, whole genome ampliÜcation was performed by ligation- 1National Center for ScientiÜc Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2Biome- mediated PCR. Using this procedure, we analyzed 20 cases of  dica Life Sciences s.a., Athens, Greece, 3Department of Genetics, Saint Savas  ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 15 cases of lobular carcinoma in situ  Hospital, Athens, Greece. (LCIS) and 10 cases of atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH). None of  Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndromes can be caused by  these tissues showed any invasive cancer areas. Conventional CGH- loss-of-function germline mutations in one of the tumor suppressor  analysis revealed frequent gains in DCIS on chromosomes 1q, 6p,  genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. In order to characterize these mutations  6q, 8q, 17q, 20p and 20q. Recurrent losses in DCIS were seen on 8p,  in the Greek population we have been collecting samples from  11p, 11q, 12p, 12q, 17p, 18p and 18q. Most cases of LCIS showed  breast/ovarian cancer patients with family history in collaboration  gains on 1q and a loss of the whole long arm of chromosome 16. with Greek Hospitals. Our DNA bank contains samples from more  The very same cases are now being subjected to high-resolution- than 350 patients, corresponding to approximately 300 families. In  array-CGH using our custom-built 6,000 BAC-clone array. terms of family history this group consists of three subgroups (i) very  early onset (<30yrs) without family history (10%) (ii) moderate family  
P0477 . Detection of chromosomal imbalances in childrenÓs  history (2 members affected, <50yrs) (40%) (iii) strong family history  tumors (3-7 members affected) (50%). Screening of BRCA1 & BRCA2 genes  G. Petkovic, M. Nakic, M. Cepulic, A. Cizmic;  with direct sequencing, in 200 patients has revealed deleterious  mutations in 43 unrelated patients. In exon 20 of BRCA1 we have  University Childrenªs Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. identiÜed three deleterious mutations in 26 patients, 12 carrying  The cytogenetic analyses of childrenÓs solid tumors are rare, due to  5382insC, 3 R1751X and 11 carriers of G1738R. Other mutations  low proliferative activity and difÜculty in obtaining adequate number  identiÜed in BRCA1 gene include a splice junction mutation in exon  and quality of mitotic cells. In this study we present the results of  23 (5586G>A) in two patients and six truncating mutations in exon 11  cytogenetic analysis in 15 children with solid tumours. The aim  (1623del5, 3099delT, 3277insG, R1203X, 3741insA, 3896delT) in 6  of this study is to identify numerical and structural chromosome  patients. With respect to BRCA2 gene we have identiÜed 7 different  aberrations, and to determine the feasibility of using the interphase  truncating mutations (in exons 2, 10 & 11) in 9 patients. Although  FISH method in the investigation of genomic imbalances. Cytogenetic  there is an important number of novel or recurrent mutations  investigations were performed on slides obtained by direct method  identiÜed with low frequency in both genes, approximately 60 % of  of tumor tissue treatment. GTG- and CBG- banding method were  the mutations are localized in exon 20 of BRCA1 gene. This fact  used for chromosome identiÜcation. FISH analysis was carried out  facilitates the genetic screening in Greek patients with family history  using locus speciÜc and chromosome speciÜc centromeric probes  of breast ovarian cancer. (Vysis). Analyzable metaphases were obtained from 14 specimens,  and in one tumor the data on genomic imbalance were obtained by  
P0480 . Birt-Hogg-Dub\x8d syndrome in Dutch families interphase FISH. Clonal chromosome abnormalities were found in  J. J. P. Gille1, E. M. Leter1, K. Koopmans2, M. Brageeth3, P. E. Postmus4, M. E.  14 cases, while in one tumor normal diploid karyotype was identiÜed.  Craanen5, R. A. Manoliu6, T. M. Starink2, F. H. Menko1;  Most tumor presented numerical aberrations ranging from near- diploidy to near-octoploidy. Double-minute chromosomes were  1Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  identiÜed in three specimens, ring and telomere fusions in one.  2Dermatology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  Aberrations of chromosome No. 1 were the most frequent clonal  3Urology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  rearrangements. Interphase FISH revealed N-myc ampliÜcation in  4Pulmonology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  one out of three investigated samples and loss of the short arm of  5Gastroenterology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  chromosome 17 in one patient. Our early results conÜrm that FISH  6Radiology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. is not suitable for initial screening of chromosomal aberrations  Birt-Hogg-Dub\x8d syndrome (BHD) is a rare autosomal dominant  in solid tumor, but is a valuable tool for detecting tumour-speciÜc  genodermatosis characterized by multiple benign skin tumours,  chromosomal aberrations that have diagnostic and prognostic  designated as Übrofolliculomas. Affected individuals are at  signiÜcance. increased risk for pneumothorax, renal carcinoma and possibly  other neoplasms. The BHD gene has been mapped to chromosome  
P0478 . Tissue microarray analysis of erbB oncogenes copy  17p11.2 and recently identiÜed. The aim of our study was to identify  number alterations in squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx and characterize Dutch families with BHD both at the clinical and  D. Koynova1, V. Tsenova2, P. Gurov3, D. Toncheva1;  molecular level. Patients were clinically evaluated and limited family  data were collected. In addition, BHD germline mutation analysis was  1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, SoÜa, Bulgaria,  performed using DNA sequencing. At present 12 index patients with  2Department of Pathology, MHAT ÐQueen JoannaÓ, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 3Department  (suspected) BHD have been identiÜed. Presumably, six cases are Cancer genetics 187 sporadic and six familial. Neoplasms in index cases include breast  
P0483 . Detection of speciÜc chromosomal aberration in de novo  and skin cancer. One family member died due to a mixed clear cell  adult acute leukemia with FISH method and papillary renal carcinoma. Pneumothorax was found in two  M. G. Velizarova1,2, B. Zaharieva1,3, I. Dimova1,3, D. Toncheva1,3, M. Penev1,2, K.  cases. The Ürst screening round for BHD germline mutations in three  Alexandrova4;  index patients revealed mutation c.1740dupC in two patients and  1Medical University, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Chair of clinical  c.875delC in one patient. Current Ündings indicate a large degree  laboratory, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 3Medical University, Chair of Human Genetics, SoÜa,  of clinical variability both between and within BHD families. Further  Bulgaria, 4University Hospital ÐAleksandrovskaÑ, SoÜa, Bulgaria. insight into the tumour spectrum and genetic heterogeneity in BHD  We studied 23 patients over 18 years old with de novo acute  kindreds will direct counselling and preventive screening in the future. leukemia. We carried out 26 FISH analyses with locus speciÜc and  centromere DNA probes (Vysis). In 13 of 26 analyses were found  
P0481 . Prognostic value of K-ras and p53 gene mutations in  molecular changes. Turkish colorectal cancer patients Bcr/abl fusion gene was found in 3 of 7 analyses (range 30-95% of  M. Akkiprik1,2, F. D\x9eė\x9enceli1,3, \x84. S\x99nmez1,2, \x81. Ataizi-\x81elikel1,4, B. G\x9ell\x9eoĔlu1,3,  cells), were 1 case was with AML M5 and 2- with ALL; R. Yalòn1,3, A. Sav1,4, A. \x84zer1,2;  MLL rearrangements were found in 3of 8 cases (range 70-100%)- 1Marmara Univ. School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Medical Biology, Istanbul,  7 patients with M5 or M4 (MLL was presented in our study only in  Turkey, 3Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey. M5) and 1- with ALL and t(4;11). In 2 cases we proved cytogenetic  Mutations of the p53 and K-ras genes has been reported to be of  Ündings with alteration of chromosome 11q23 and in 1 patient MLL  prognostic importance in colorectal cancers. In this study, K-ras and  was detected after unsuccessful cytogenetic analysis. p53 gene mutations were examined for their prognostic value and  FISH for inv (16) was implemented in 3 cases with M4. Only in one  their relationship with histopathological parameters of patients in  of them was found inv (16) in 57% of the metaphases. Another 2 of  stages I-II (T N) colorectal cancer. Tumor samples were collected  3 patients were with t (8; 21)(q22;q22)- rare genetic aberration in this  1,2,3 0 from stages I-II colon-rectum cancer patients who underwent curative  FAB group. surgical treatment. No patient recieved any postoperative adjuvant  The activation of C-MYC protooncogene was detected in 2 cases  therapy. Mutations in exons 5-8 of the p53 gene and codons 12 and/ with 
L3  (BurkittÓs leukemia) and t(8;14). In both of them was affected  or 13 of the K-ras gene were assayed in parafÜn-embedded tissue  the central nervous system. by PCR-SSCP method. A total of 43 cases (20 men; median age 64;  The investigation of -7/7q- was carried out in 2 patients with M6 and  range: 42-86) was collected. Twenty-eight (65%) patients had stage  in 1 with M0. Clonal changes were found in all cases (range 44-64%  II cancer. Mutations of the p53 gene were found in 22 (51%) tumours.  of cells). These chromosomal aberrations were associated with bed  Six (14%) cases showed a mutation of the K-ras gene. In one case  answer to therapy and short remission. (2,3%) p53 and K-ras mutations coexisted. Five out of six K-ras and  12 of 22 p53 mutations were found in stage II cancer. The median  
P0484 . IdentiÜcation of People with an Increased Risk of Cancer follow up time was 76 months (range, 6-168). Fourteen patients  S. Dragan, M. Puiu, D. Stoicanescu, D. Mihailov;  developed recurrence, 11 of whom (79%) had tumors with K-ras or  University of Medicine & Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. p53 mutation. The 5-year disease free survival rates indicated that  Methods of genetic risk assessment include assessment of family  no signiÜcant differences existed between the patients with wild type  history of disease and genetic testing. The aim of the present  p53 (74%) or K-ras (71%) and mutant p53 (65%) or K-ras (0%).  study was to identify and follow-up individuals at risk for cancer,  p53 mutations were found in high frequency in both stages (I and II)  and their families. Methods: Collecting family history information,  colon-rectum cancer but K-ras mutations showed high frequency only  using risk factors questionnaire and diet questionnaire. Knowing  in stage II. None of these mutations showed a signiÜcant prognostic  that women with Ürst- and second-degree affected relatives have  value.  a signiÜcantly higher risk of developing breast cancer, that the  risk increases with the number of affected relatives, younger age  
P0482 . p53 intron 3 16bp duplication polymorphism in Turkish  of onset, bilateral disease, and the occurrence of ovarian and  women with breast cancer breast cancer in the same relative within the affected lineage, we  \x84. S\x99nmez1,2, U. AbacòoĔlu1,3, M. Akkiprik1,2, H. Kaya1,4, P. Demirkalem1,5, H.  investigated the presence of these risk factors within families. Data  \x81aĔlar1,3, B. G\x9ell\x9eoĔlu1,5, A. Sav1,4, A. \x84zer1,2;  collected from 300 women from investigated families are stored in  1Marmara Univ. School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Medical Biology, Istanbul,  order to initiate a cancer registry in the western part of Romania, to  Turkey, 3Radiation Oncology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey,  establish individuals at risk and the necessary preventing measures.  5Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey. Cancer genetic counseling often involves a multidisciplinary team  The functional and structural changes of p53 gene has a role in  of health professionals who have expertise in this area. The team  progression of breast cancer; the polymorphisms of p53 gene  may include a genetic counselor, genetic advanced practice nurse  may affect phenotype of tumor. In this study, p53 16bp duplication  or medical geneticist, mental health professional, and medical expert  polymorphism frequency and its risk factor for breast cancer were  such as oncologist, surgeon, or internist. Cancer genetic counseling  examined among Turkish population. Breast cancer samples (98  may involve several family members, some of whom may have  cases) were collected from parafÜn embedded tissue. Controls (107)  had cancer, and others who have not. In some cases, DNA-based  were collected from voluntearÓs blood who have no family cancer  testing can be used to conÜrm a speciÜc mutation as the cause of  history and matched to caseÓs age and sex. Touchdown-PCR and  the inherited risk, and to determine whether family members have  immunohistochemistry analysis were used. In our patients who have  inherited the mutation. homozigot duplicated alleles (A2) were found %2, in controls %4,  homozigots A1 alleles %60 in patients, %57 in controls and also  
P0485 . FISH analysis for diagnosis and disease management in  heterozigots alleles were found %38 in patients, %39 in control. Since  myeloid leukemias 
P53  16bp duplication polymorphism frequency was detected as %24  R. Talwar, V. P. Choudhry, K. Kucheria;  in white population, our result showed this polymorphism as %43  All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. in Turkish population (p < 0.001). There is no signiÜcant correlation  Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and Acute Myeloid Leukemia  between the cases and the controls. Immunhistochemically mutant- (AML) are hematopoietic malignancies characterized by the  p53-positive patients were found as %44. In the therapy of this  proliferation of myeloid precursors. The hallmark of CML is the  desase, there is no correlation between the 
P53  expression and  presence of Philadelphia (Ph1) chromosome that results from  16bp duplication polymorphism.. Although intron 3 16bp duplication  balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and  polymorphism on p53 gene was observed with high frequency in  22 leading to the formation of bcr/abl fusion gene. Similarly, the  Turkish population, this polymorphism was not a risk factor for breast  presence of certain cytogenetic anomalies marks different subtypes  cancer. of AML, the most speciÜc being t(15;17) in Acute Promyelocytic  Leukemia (APML). The cytogenetic and molecular response in CML Cancer genetics 188 patients (on IFN-ŋ 2b therapy and after allogeneic bone marrow  
P0488 . Application of DHPLC in the molecular diagnostics of  transplantation.) and in APML patients (on ATRA therapy and/or  FAP chemotherapy) was evaluated. Sequential cytogenetic analysis  A. Plawski1, W. Heinritz2, U. Froster2, R. Slomski1;  was done using standard methods in bone marrow samples from  1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland,  patients with myeloid leukemias. Further dual colour Fluorescence  2Institute of Human Genetics University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) analysis was done to assess molecular  Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is inherited in autosomal  response using bcr/abl and PML/RARŋ probes in CML and APML  dominant manner predisposition to develop numerous polyps in colon  patients respectively. The results of present study show that IFN-ŋ  and rectum. FAP is caused by germ line mutations in APC gene.  and ATRA therapy induce both cytogenetic and molecular response  Described in 1991 the APC gene consists of 8,538 bp open reading  in a signiÜcant proportion of CML and APML patients respectively  frame and is predicted to encode 2,843 amino acids polypeptide.  thereby improving their prognosis and survival. The importance  The APC gene mutations in most cases are small deletions or  of using FISH analysis on interphase nuclei and poor-spread  insertions. Single base substitution constitutes for 26-38% of the all  metaphases that cannot be analyzed using conventional cytogenetics  detected mutations. Mutations screening is the Ürst step of molecular  was also highlighted. Further gene rearrangements could be  diagnostics in carriersÓ recognition. Currently few methods can be  identiÜed in some CML and AML patients without any cytogenetic  applied for mutations screening and here we present denaturing high  evidence of the translocation. Thus the present study stresses on the  performance liquid chromatography for APC gene mutations analysis.  need for sequential cytogenetic and molecular analysis in diagnosis  120 Polish FAP families were screened for mutations in coding APC  and disease management of myeloid leukemias. gene sequence using DHPLC. In 33 FAP families 26 mutations  types were detected and among them 17 mutations have not been  
P0486 . Lack of 9q34 microdeletions in relapsed Ph-positive adult  described previously. acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients J. Bradtke1, B. Durak2, O. G. Ottmann3, H. Rieder1;  
P0489 . Implication of ETV6 and AM
L1  genes in the development  1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Marburg, Germany, 2Tibbi Genetic Bilim Dali,  of childhood B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in Tunisia  Ozmangazi \x85niversitesi, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Medical Clinic III, Hospital of the  : molecular cytogenetic study. University, Frankfurt, Germany. A. Gmidene, H. Elghezal, W. Brahim, H. Sennana, A. Saad;  In adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) the t(9;22) has an  Hopital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia. incidence of up to 30% and is well described as the aberration  ETV6/AM
L1  fusion gene do to the translocation t(12;21) is seen in  with the worst prognosis. Microdeletions of 9p21 are frequently  at least 20% of cases of childhood B-lineage acute lymphoblastic  found in childhood ALL and are also described as an additional  leukaemia. This translocation is, however, undetectable by classical  alteration in adult Ph-positive ALL. The target of these deletions is  cytogenetic study. p16 (CDKN2A). Microdeletion of 9q34 as a secondary effect of the  36 Tunisian cases of B-ALL, without detectable recurrent abnormality  t(9;22) with the M-bcr breakpoint is frequent in CML and less frequent  (i.e. translocations t(1;19), t(4;11), t(9;22) and hyperdiploidy), were  in adult Ph-positive ALL. In CML this deletion is associated with  studied by FISH using ETV6 and AM
L1  probes to identify the  a poor prognosis and it has been suggested 9q34 microdeletions  implication of these genes . may worsen the unfavourable prognosis of Ph-positive ALL. Using  In 12 cases, karyotype from banding analysis showed a  FISH, we investigated 32 relapsed adult Ph-positive ALL patients  rearrangement of the 12p13 region. Among them, we detect in 2  for the presence of 9q34 and/or 9p21 microdeletions at primary  cases ETV6/AM
L1  fusion do to the translocation t(12;21), in 1 case  diagnosis of the disease. Eleven patients (34,4%) showed deletions  a fusion of ETV6 and MN1 do to the translocation t(12;22) and in 1  of 9p21. A hemicygous deletion 9q21 was found in ten patients; Üve  case a complex translocation t(5;11;12) with a fusion of ETV6 with  patients had also a clone with a homocygous deletion of 9p21. In  an unknown partner located in 11q22. In 6 cases, we donÓt detect a  one patient combined hemicygous loss of 9p21 and 9q34 was due  fusion, but one copy of ETV6 gene was deleted. to a monosomy 9. No other patient with a microdeletion of 9q34 was  In the other 24 cases, we detect the ETV6/AM
L1  fusion in 8 cases.  found. We conclude, that 9q34 microdeletions do not contribute to the  We detect also, in 1 case, the implication of ETV6 gene in a  relaps risk in Ph-positive ALL. translocation t(3;12)(q27;p13). Supported in part by the Deutsche Krebshilfe We conclude that, ETV6/AM
L1  fusion was implicated in 10 cases  within 36 (27.8%). 
P0487 . Evidence for the interaction of two gene loci (NQO1 and  ETV6 deletion was detected in 6 cases (16.7%), this deletion was,  p53) regarding risk for spontaneous breast cancer however detected in 50% of cases with cytogenetically detectable  H. Menzel1, J. Sarmanova2, P. Soucek2, R. Berberich1, K. Gr\x9enewald3, M.  12p13 rearrangement.In 2 cases, probable new partner genes of  Haun3, H. Kraft1;  ETV6 were localised in the regions 3q27 and 11q22. 1Institute for medical Biology and human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2National  Institute of Public Health, Praha, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Internal Medicine,  
P0490 . Complex variant Ph1 translocations in chronic myeloid  Innsbruck, Austria. leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Eight different SNPÓs in six different genes were investigated for  D. Costa1, A. Carri\x961, I. Madrigal2, A. Arias1, D. Colomer3, J. Aguilar3, M.  possible association with breast cancer. We used a case-control  Cam\x96s4, F. Cervantes4, E. Campo3;  study design in two Caucasian populations, one from Tyrol, Austria,  1Hematopathology Unit. Genetics Service.Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona.  and the other from Prague, Czech Republic. Two SNPÓs showed an  Catalonia, Spain, 2Genetics Service.Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona. Catalonia,  association with breast cancer: R72P inT
P53  and 
P187 S in NQO1.  Spain, 3Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain,  Six SNPÓs, Q356R and 
P871 L in BRCA1, N372H in BRCA2, 
C112 R  4Hematology Deparment.Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain. (
E4 ) and R158C (
E2 ) in ApoE and 
C825 T in GNB3, did not show  Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is cytogenetically characterized by  any sign of association. The 
P187 S polymorphism in NQO1 was  the Ünding of the reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11), causing  associated with breast cancer in both populations from Tyrol and  the formation of the Ph1 chromosome. In 2-10% of the cases, the Ph1  Prague with a higher risk for carriers of the 187S allele. Combining  chromosome is generated by variant rearrangements, involving 9q34,  the results of the two populations we observed a highly signiÜcant  22q11, and one or more genomic regions. difference (p=0.0004) of genotype and allele frequencies (OR=1.46;  We report seven cases of complex variant Ph1 translocations  95% CI 1.16-1.85; p=0.001) and of the homozygote ratio (OR=3.8;  diagnosed in six patients affected of LMC and one patient affected  95% CI 1.73-8.34; p=0.0001). Combining the two ÐcandidateÑ SNPÓs  of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Cytogenetic and FISH  (
P187 S and R72P) revealed an increased risk for breast cancer  analysis with the use of WCP, CEP and LSI probes were carried  of double heterozygotes (
P187 S/R72P) of the NQO1 and T
P53   out in bone marrow samples. The third chromosome involved in the  genes (OR=1.88; 95% CI 1.13-3.15; p=0.011) suggesting a possible  seven complex variant translocations was the chromosome 1 (n=3),  interaction of these two loci. 5 (n=1), 11 (n=2), and 12 (n=1). FISH studies using the LSI BCR/Cancer genetics 189 ABL.ES probe allowed the detection of the fusion gene bcr/abl on  
P0493 . The association between mutator phenotype and the  chromosome Ph1 in all the cases, and loss of the ASS gene in two  defects of MMR genes in AML and MDS patients. cases. WCP and CEP probes conÜrmed the complex translocations  M. H. Sheikhha1, K. Tobal2, J. A. Liu Yin2;  diagnosed by cytogenetics in 5 cases. In the remaining two cases  1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility, Yazd, Iran (Islamic Republic  a new cryptic reorganization was established. At diagnosis, all the  of), 2University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal InÜrmary,  chromosomally abnormal cells showed the complex variant t(9;22;V),  Manchester, United Kingdom. suggesting that it was originated in stem cells. As far as we know,  Recent advances in molecular genetic have allowed the analysis  a new region, 12q13, found in one case, has not been previously  of many of the molecular mechanisms of cancer. One of these  described in complex variant translocations. All the breakpoints  mechanisms is DNA repair, which controls the genetic stability of  include genes already known to be related to neoplastic process. cells. Mismatch repair (MMR) gene defect is related to microsatellite  This work has been partially supported by a grant (V-2003-Red-07-0)  instability (MSI) and it has been recognised as a common  from theÐInstituto de Salud Carlos IIIÐ characteristic of several different types of human cancers. However,  in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndromes  
P0491 . Absence of ras-gene hotspot mutations in canine  (MDS) there were few studies of the association between MSI and  Übrosarcomas and melanomas the defects of MMR genes. H. Murua Escobar1,2, K. G\x9enther2, A. Richter2, J. T. Soller1, S. Winkler2, I. Nol- In this study, the protein expression of three MMR genes (hMSH2,  te1, J. Bullerdiek2;  hMLH1 and hPM
S2 ) was examined by western blotting analysis  1Small Animal Clinic, Hanover, Germany, 2Center for Human Genetics, Bremen,  in 35 patients (28 AML and 7 MDS) using three antibodies (anti- Germany. MSH2, anti-MLH1 and anti-PM
S2 ). These patients were chosen  Point mutations within ras proto-oncogenes, particularly within the  from our previous published study. The mutator phenotype (RER+)  mutational hot-spot codons 12, 13, and 61, are frequently detected in  was detected in 16 patients while 19 patients were in RER- group  human malignancies and in different types of experimentally induced  (sheikhha et al, 2002). Lack of expression of at least one protein was  tumours in animals. So far little is known about ras mutations in  detected in 39.3% of the AML cases (11/28) and in 28.6% of the MDS  naturally occurring canine Übrosarcomas as well as K-ras mutations  cases (2/7). This rate was signiÜcantly higher (61.5%) in the RER+  in canine melanomas. To elucidate if ras mutations exist in these  AML patients (8/13) than the rate (20%) in the RER- AML patients  naturally occurring tumours in dogs, in the present study we screened  (3/15). Lack of expression of hPM
S2  protein alone was detected in  13 canine Übrosarcomas, 2 feline Übrosarcomas and 11 canine  only one patient. These results conÜrm that RER+ in AML and MDS  melanomas for point mutations, particularly within the mutational  is strongly associated with lack of expression of either hMLH1 or  hot-spots, making this the Ürst study investigating a larger number  hMSH2 and, in few patients, hPM
S2  proteins, whereas most of the  of canine Übrosarcomas. None of the samples showed a K- or N-ras  RER- patients showed expression of all three proteins by western  hot spot mutation. Thus, our data strongly suggest that ras mutations  blotting analysis. at the hot-spot loci are very rare and do not play a major role in  the pathogenesis of the spontaneously occurring canine tumours  
P0494 . Reduced colorectal cancer risk in woman with SULT1A1  investigated. Arg213His variant Z. Sterjev1, T. Josifovski2, M. Panovski2, D. Jasar3, G. Zografski3, L.  
P0492 . Evaluation of Telomerase mRNA (hTERT) in Childhood  Simjanovska4, L. Suturkova1, A. J. Dimovski1;  Acute Leukemia 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Skopje, The  O. Cogulu1, B. Kosova1, E. Karaca1, C. Gunduz1, F. Ozkinay1, S. Aksoylar1, H.  former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Department  Gulen2, M. Kantar1, H. Oniz3;  of Abdominal Surgery, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,  1Ege University, Bornova-Izmir, Turkey, 2Behcet Uz Cocuk Hastanesi, Alsancak- 3Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Oncology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav  Izmir, Turkey, 3SSK Tepecik Hospital, Yenisehir-Izmir, Turkey. Republic of Macedonia, 4RCGEB, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts,  Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is the catalytic  Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. component of telomerase enzyme and has been shown to be  Sulfotransferases are a superfamily of enzymes involved in both  associated with telomerase activity (TA). Although many studies in  detoxiÜcation and bioactivation of endogenous and exogenous  adult leukemia have been established to reveal the importance of  compounds. A genetic polymorphism in the coding region of the  TA, very few have been reported in the children. In this study hTERT  SULT1A1 gene (Arg213His, CGC-CAC) has been associated with  levels in childhood leukemia was evaluated and compared with the  modular phenotype, where individuals, particularly women,with His  prognostic factors described before. allele have a substantially lower enzyme activity. Several studies  The LightCycler instrument was used (online real-time PCR) for the  investigated the inÝuence of this variant on susceptibility of colorectal  quantiÜcation of hTERT in peripheral blood and bone marrow in 23  cancer (CRC), but no deÜnitive conclusion has been obtained.  cases with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and in 8 cases with  We determined the allele frequency and genotype distributions  acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML). Ten cases with normal peripheral  of SULT1A1 Arg213His variant in 100 sporadic colorectal cancer  blood and bone marrow were selected as control group. Cytogenetic  patients and 146 normal controls from the Republic of Macedonia.  analyses were available in 21 patients with leukemia. The Arg/His and His/His genotypes were more common in controls  In all cases with acute leukemia and in control group, peripheral  than cases (64% vs. 50%, respectively, p=0.059, OR 1.74;95%CI  blood hTERT levels correlated signiÜcantly with bone marrow hTERT  0.99-3.10), resulting in a His213 allele frequency of 40.0% in controls  levels. Before treatment, patients with ALL had signiÜcantly higher  and 27.0% in cases (p=0.039). When we examined the data by  hTERT levels than that of AML patients and control cases. Among  age and gender, there was a statistically signiÜcant reduced risk  patients with ALL, higher hTERT levels were observed in patients  of colon cancer only in women with the His213 genotypes and  with pre-B leukemia, followed by B cell and T cell leukemia patients.  >60 years of age (OR 0.31;95%CI 0.12<O.R.<0.84, p= 0.0167)  Initially increased hTERT levels decreased to the nearly normal levels  but not in woman of <60 year of age and in men (p>0.05 in all  during remission in cases with ALL. No correlation was observed  instances). No association was found in allelic frequency and  between the initial hTERT levels and the known prognostic factors  genotype distribution of this variant when patients were grouped  except cytogenetic Ündings. Higher hTERT levels were detected  by other clinicopathological parameters (family history, localization,  in patients having karyotypic abnormalities which indicate poor  pTNM stage, MSI status). Our data indicate that the SULT1A1  prognosis. hTERT levels might be useful in monitorization of the  Arg213His polymorphism has a protective role for the development  disease in leukemic children. of CRC in women >60 of age, most probably due to decreased  biotransformation of procancerogenic compounds present in the diet  in our population.Cancer genetics 190 
P0495 . The canine HMGA1 genomic DNA. By use of MSRF we have identiÜed four abnormally  J. T. Soller1,2, H. Murua Escobar1,2, A. Richter2, B. Meyer2, S. Winkler2, A. M.  methylated CpG islands in DNA samples from breast cancer  Flohr2, I. Nolte1, J. Bullerdiek2;  patients and ascribed two of them to 5Ó untranslated regions of  laminin ȳ3 chain (LAM
C3 ) and transforming growth factor beta  1Small Animal Clinic, Hanover, Germany, 2Center for Human Genetics, Bremen,  receptor 1 (TGFBR1) genes. Laminin ȳ3 chain belongs to a recently  Germany. characterized laminin 12 with detectable expression in most human  Due to the emerging advantages of numerous canine diseases as  tissues and organs including breast and lung. By methylation- a genetic model for their human orthologs, the dog could join the  sensitive PCR with speciÜc primers we detected no methylation  mouse as the species of choice to unravel genetic mechanisms  of LAM
C3  5Ó-CpG island in control peripheral blood lymphocytes  e.g. of cancer predisposition, development, and progression.  and apparently intact breast tissues. In breast and lung cancer  However, precondition for such studies is the characterisation of the  samples methylation was shown in 13/40 (32,5%) and 5/40 (12,5%)  corresponding canine genes. respectively. Laminins are major glycoproteins of the basal laminae.  Human and murine HMGA1 non-histone proteins participate in a wide  In addition to an RGD sequence mediating cell adhesion, laminins  variety of cellular processes including regulation of inducible gene  contain motifs providing cell growth and differentiation via selective  transcription, integration of retroviruses into chromosomes, and the  activation of signaling pathways dependent on protein kinase C. We  induction of neoplastic transformation and promotion of metastatic  presume that LAM
C3  gene abnormal methylation in cancer samples  progression of cancer cells. may result in disruption of cellular-lamina contacts resulting in cell  Chromosomal aberrations affecting the human HMGA1 gene at  cycling disbalance and metastatic spreading. 6p21 were described in several tumours like pulmonary chondroid  TGFBR1 take part in transforming growth factor Ȳ (TGF-Ȳ) signaling,  hamartomas, uterine leiomyomas, follicular thyroid adenomas, and  mainly resulting in inhibition of cell proliferation. We have detected  others. Over-expression of the proteins of HMGA1 is characteristic  abnormal methylation of TGFBR1 CpG island in 14/40 (35%) of  for various malignant tumours suggesting a relation between high  breast cancer samples in the absence of methylation in control  titer of the protein and the neoplastic phenotype.In this study we  lymphocytes and breast tissue. TGFBR1 null methylation was also  characterised the molecular structure of the canine HMGA1 cDNA,  found in 40 lung cancer samples. Characterization of LAM
C3  and  its splice variants and predicted proteins HMGA1a and HMGA1b.  TGFBR1 expression in cancer samples as well as phenotype- Furthermore, we compared the CDS of both splice variants for twelve  genotype correlations are underway. different breeds, screened them for SNPs, and characterised a basic  expression pattern. 
P0498 . Determination of Her-2/neu gene ampliÜcation in breast  carcinoma by Ýuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) 
P0496 . Prostate Cancer and CEACAM1 Genetic Variants: An  F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, M. C. Yagmurdur2, B. F. Atac1, H. B. Ozdemir3, H.  Association Study Karakayali2, B. Demirhan3, M. Haberal2;  P. Pal1, C. H. Jin2, R. Kaushal1, G. Sun1, L. Jin1, B. Suarez2, R. Deka1, W. J.  Catalona3;  1Baskent University,Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and  Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University,Faculty of Medicine Department  1University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 2Washington University,  of Surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Baskent University,Faculty of Medicine Department  St. Louis, MO, United States, 3Northwestern University Feinberg School of  of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey. Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States. The study group was derived from the archive materials of 13,445  Prostate cancer (PC) is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy  breast cancer patients examined by Prof. Dr. H\x9esn\x9e G\x99ksel between  among men in the western world. There is strong evidence  1960 and 2000. Preliminary results of the parafÜn block samples of  that genetics plays an important role in cancer initiation and  the Ürst 48 cases to whom partial mastectomy was performed are  progression. Genes implicated in cell growth, proliferation and  presented here. In order to detect Her-2/neu status, FISH protocol  differentiation are important candidates in carcinogenesis. CEACAM1  was performed using Her-2/neu locus speciÜc probe. Signals were  (carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 1) is a  counted and patients were classiÜed in three groups according to  putative tumor-suppressor gene, located at 19q2, a region that has  signal numbers. Two signals were regarded as group I (n=31), 2-9  been linked with an aggressive phenotype of PC. Down regulation  signals were regarded as group II (n=11) and 10 or more signals  of CEACAM1 protein in cancer cells and its inhibitory role in tumor  were regarded as group III (n=6). angiogenesis renders CEACAM1 a plausible candidate for PC. We  Axillar metastasis ratios were 16%, 27% and 83% in groups I, II and  conducted a case-control association study of PC with six validated  III respectively (p=0.003). Axillary metastatic lymph node numbers  single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CEACAM1 from the  and gross metastatic lymph node ratios were highest in group III  NCBI database. The study sample consists of 577 histologically  (p=0.001 and p=0.01 respectively). Regarding local relapse and  conÜrmed PC cases from 299 multiplex sibships and 576 unrelated  remote metastasis in 5 year follow up period, no signiÜcant difference  controls, all of whom are of Caucasian ancestry. Of the studied  was observed between the three groups. SNPs, three located in exon 3 cause non-synonymous changes,  Signal numbers decreased with ER expression (p=0.03).  two are intronic and one is located in the 3` untranslated region.  Histopathologically, irregular pattern of the tumor was observed in  One of the exonic SNPs, rs8111171, showed signiÜcant association  100% of the patients in group III and 54% and 60% in groups I and II  (p = 0.032) with PC. Haplotypes constructed (Phase 2.0.2) with the  respectively (p=0.04). Hipercellularity of the tumor was signiÜcantly  three non-synonymous SNPs using one-sib case and the control  higher in group III (p=0.01). Extensive intraductal component ratio  group revealed a signiÜcant difference at one minor haplotype (p =  was signiÜcantly high in group III (p=0.04). The level of desmoplastic  0.02). This is the Ürst association study investigating CEACAM1 in  reaction and lymphocyte inÜltration did not show signiÜcant difference  PC, and our results suggest that it has a possible role in prostate  between the groups. tumorigenesis. In this ongoing study, preliminary results show that Her-2/neu signal  numbers increase with worsening of clinical and histopathological  
P0497 . Differential methylation of LAM
C3  and TGFBR1 CpG  malignancy criteria. islands in non-small cell lung and breast cancer identiÜed by  methylation-sensitive restriction Üngerprinting (MSRF). 
P0499 . Matching patterns of genomic imbalances of hereditary  E. Kuznetsova1, D. Michaylenko2, L. Lyubchenko3, I. Zborovskaya4, V.  and of non-hereditary retinoblastomas with biallelic RB1  Strelnikov1, D. Zaletayev1;  inactivation point to common pathways of disease progression 1Institute of Molecular Medicine at Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow,  S. Schneider1, D. Lohmann2, L. Hehn1, E. Lieth1, S. Herzog1, H. Rieder1;  Russian Federation, 2Research Center for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy  1Institut fuer klinische Genetik; Philipps Universitaet Marburg, Marburg, Germa- of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for  ny, 2Institut fuer Humangenetik; Universitaetsklinikum, Essen, Germany. Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Carcinogenesis, Russian  Genomic imbalances have been demostrated in 65-95% of  Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. Retinoblastomas (Rb) and are more frequent in Rb of older than in  MSRF is designed to screen for altered methylation patterns in  those of younger patients. Because patients with hereditary Rb are Cancer genetics 191 younger than patients with non-hereditary Rb, we investigated if both  p15INK4b, p14ARF, Rb1, HI
C1 , MGMT, N33, CDH1, ERŋ and CALCA  groups differ from each other by the patterns copy number changes  genes in different cancers, such as breast cancer (BC), non-small  (CNC) as revealed by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH).  cell lung cancer (NSCL), retinoblastoma (RB) and acute leukemia  Tumors of 60 patients with unilateral isolated non-hereditary Rb  (AL). The methylation status of investigated genes was determined  (nhRb) and of 61 patients with bilateral hereditary Rb (hRb), all with  by the method of restriction enzyme-related PCR (REP), methylation- biallelic RB1 inactivation, were studied. Both tumor groups showed  speciÜc PCR (MSP) and bisulÜte genomic sequencing (BGS). an increase of genomic imbalances with age which started at about  We determined that the investigated genes were differentially  18 months. The fraction of abnormal tumors in patients <=18 and >18  methylated in various cancers. HI
C1  and CDH1 genes were more  months were nearly equal in hereditary and non-hereditary tumors  often methylated in BC, NSCL and RB samples, than in AL. Level  (<=18 months: hRb 41.2%, nhRb 48.6%; >18 months: hRb 90%,  of the Rb1 gene methylation was approximately equal in all tumors  nhRb 96% ). There were no signiÜcant differences with respect to  samples. MGMT, ER and N33 genes were low methylated in all  type and frequency of the chromosome regions involved in genomic  tumors samples. imbalances between hRb and nhRb. The most frequent imbalances  We also analysed a loss of IGF2 gene imprinting in samples NSCL,  were gains of 6p (54.8% nhRb; 48.5% hRb) and 1q (42.9% nhRb;  BC, BR and AL. We investigated the demethylation of IGF2 gene  27.3% hRb) and losses of 16q (38.1% nhRb; 21.2% hRb). We  promoter by the REP. We determined that the loss of IGF2 gene  conclude that the matching patterns of genomic imbalances point  imprinting was characteristic of chosen tumors types. to common pathways of disease progression in hereditary and non- p16/ p15/ hereditary retinoblastomas with biallelic RB1 inactivation. RB1 CDKN2aCDKN2bp14/ARF CDH1 HI
C1  MGMT N33 ER CALCA 16% 24% 4% 26% 53% 65% 5% 4% 9% 17% BC 
P0500 . Genetic Imbalances In Endometrial Hyperplasia And  (14/85) (20/85) (3/85) (22/85) (45/85)(55/85) (4/85) (3/85)(8/85) (15/85) Carcinoma Detected By Comparative Genomic Hybridization 20% 43% 1,8% 35% 74% 81% 0% 15% 7% 20% NSCL M. Ozdemir, \x85. \x84ner, S. \x84zalp, M. Acikalin, O. T. Yalcin, M. H. M\x9esl\x9emanoglu,  (11/54) (23/54) (1/54) (19/54) (40/54)(44/54) (0/54) (8/54)(4/54) (11/54) S. Artan;  17% 6% 1% 2% 14% 11% 0% 1% 0% 1% AL (14/90) (5/90) (1/90) (2/90) (14/90)(10/90) (0/90) (1/90)(0/90) (1/90) Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey. 25% 15% 0% 22% 60% 47% 2% 0% 7% 3% To evaluate the sequential genetic events related to the development  RB (15/60) (9/60) (0/60) (13/60) (36/60)(28/60) (1/60) (0/60)(4/60) (2/60) of precursor lesions and endometrial carcinoma, and its association  with cellular atypia. 
P0502 . IdentiÜcation of chromosomal abnormalities using M- ParafÜn embedded tissue specimens of 20 endometrial hyperplasia,  FISH in haematological malignancies 20 endometrial adenocarcinoma and 20 normal endometrial  S. Berker Karauzum1, Z. Cetin1, A. Ugur2, I. Karadogan2, A. Kupesiz3, G.  tissue were retrospectively evaluated by Comparative Genomic  Tezcan3, G. Luleci1;  Hybridization technique. The average number of copy alterations  1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Antalya,  (ANCA) index was used to deÜne the incidence of genomic  Turkey, 2Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Akdeniz University,  imbalances in each tissue group. IdentiÜed sequential genetic  Antalya, Turkey, 3Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology,  abnormalities were compared to the Ünal histopathological diagnosis  Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey. and the cellular atypia. Recently, novel molecular cytogenetic technique, termed multicolor  Seven hyperplasia and 14 carcinoma specimens had detectable  Ýuorescence in situ hybridization (m-FISH), has been used to  and consistent chromosomal imbalances. The ANCA value was  deÜne complex chromosomal abnormalities, cryptic translocations  signiÜcantly correlated to the degree of cellular atypia and the  and marker chromosomes in hematological malignancies and solid  grade of the tumors. Although 1p36-pter, 20q deletions and 4q  tumors. overrepresentations were the most prevalent imbalances detected  We performed m-FISH analysis of ten bone marrow samples from  in both complex and complex atypical hyperplasias, 17q22-qter  three pediatric (ALL, AML, NHL) and 7 adult patients (4 AML, 2ALL,  deletion and ampliÜcation of 2p34 were only seen in hyperplasias  1 CML). with atypical cells. Chromosomes 8q, 1q and 3q overrepresentations,  In two AML and one CML patients, three speciÜc complex  the most frequent aberrations in endometrial carcinomas, were not  translocation variants have been found as : t(1;7;22), t(8;16;21) and  detected in the precursor lesions. Chromosomes 1p36-pter and 10q  t(1;6;9;22). In other three cases, we have described the origins of  underrepresentations were the other commonly seen aberrations  the derivative chromosomes and complex karyotypes. And also we  in carcinomas, the latter being more frequent in well-differentiated  demonstrated three novel cryptic translocations for the Ürst time in  lesions. literature. The pattern of chromosomal aberrations in precursor lesions were  Our data suggest that cytogenetic results, which are important  different from that observed in endometrial carcinomas, except  criterias in diagnosis, treatment and prognosis, should be appraised  the loss of 1p34-pter. Presence of 1p deletion in both endometrial  together with m-FISH, applied on the patientÓs undissolved  hyperplasia and cancer specimens suggested that it is early event  karyotypes. So that more reliable results can be obtained for  in development of carcinoma. These results supported a stepwise  routine diagnosis and in research, m-FISH technique would help  mode of tumorigenesis with the accumulation of a series of genetic  identiÜcation of localization of the novel candidate oncogenes. aberrations in endometrial carcinogenesis. 
P0503 . Conventional and molecular cytogenetic Ündings of  
P0501 . Methylation of a number of tumor suppressor genes in  myelodysplastic syndrome patients various cancers. Z. Yilmaz1, F. I. Sahin1, E. Kizilkilic2, S. Karakus3, C. BoĔa2, H. \x84zdogu2;  V. Zemlyakova1, O. Babenko1, I. Zborovskaya2, M. Yakubovskaya2, L.  Lyubchenko2, O. Maiorova3, V. Strelnikov4, M. Nemtsova1;  1Baskent University, Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and  Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University, Faculty of Medicine Department  1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical  of Adult Hematology, Adana, Turkey, 3Baskent University, Faculty of Medicine  Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Center for Oncology,  Department of Adult Hematology, Ankara, Turkey. Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Child Hematology Research Institute, Russian  Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Molecular  Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) involves myeloid cells of the bone  marrow which is important in progressive bone marrow insufÜciency.  Medicine at Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. The cells may transform to cause acute myeloid leukemia and these  Aberrant methylation of normally unmethlated CpG-rich areas, also  two diseases share clinical and cytogenetic features in common.  known as CpG islands, which are located in or near the promotor  40 to 50% of all MDS patients have at least one chromosomal  regions of many genes, has been associated with transcriptional  rearrangement. Loss of speciÜc chromosomal regions like 5q- and  inactivation of deÜned tumor suppressor genes in human cancer.  7q- are usually the secondary cytogenetic abnormalities associated  Thus, abnormal methylation serves as an alternative to the genetic  with MDS. loss of a tumor suppressor gene function by deletion or mutation. In order to detect chromosome abnormalities associated with MDS,  We investigated the frequency of aberrant methylation of p16INK4a, Cancer genetics 192 bone marrow samples from 20 patients diagnosed as MDS were  
P0506 . Prognostic SigniÜcance Of Cytogenetic Analysis In  obtained prior to chemotherapy. Both conventional cytogenetic  Children With Non-hodgkin Lymphoma analyses and FISH methods were performed and locus speciÜc  S. S. Cirkovic1, A. Krstic1, M. Guc-Scekic1,2, D. Micic1, D. Vujic1,3, D. Djokic1, N.  probes for 5q, 7q, and inv(16) were used. Results obtained were  Lakic1;  compared. In one patient, the karyotype revealed del(20)(q11-qter),  1Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and  in another patient we observed 47 chromosome number with an extra  Montenegro, 2Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia and  marker chromosome, whereas another patient had del(5q15-qter)  Montenegro, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia and  in 30% of his metaphases. Three patients with normal karyotypes  Montenegro. revealed del(5q), two patients had del(7q) and two patients had  Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a subgroup of malignant  inv(16). A total of 11 of 20 patients had chromosome changes  lymphomas caused by neoplastic proliferation of lymphatic cells. A  visualized by either conventional or molecular cytogenetics (55%). signiÜcant number of patients with NHL have clones with aberrant  Our results show that both methods are important in diagnosis and  karyotypes in the bone marrow. The most frequent chromosome  follow up of MDS patients, since they play different roles in detecting  rearrangements are: t(10;14)(q24;q11), t(11;14)(q13;q32),  chromosome abnormalities. t(14;18)(q32;q21), del (11q), del (6q), del (7q), dic (9;12) (p13;p13),  inv (2) (p23;q35). 
P0504 . Detection of BCR-ABL and PML-RARŋ transcripts by RT- In this retrospective study we present the results of cytogenetic  PCR in Iranian Leukaemic patients analysis of 21 children with NHL, diagnosed at the Mother and Child  M. Karimipour, M. T. Akbari, E. Tafsiri, Z. Ataee;  Health Institute ÐDr Vukan CupicÑ in Belgrade, between January  Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). 1998 and December 2003. Cytogenetic analysis was performed on  The diagnosis of patients with CML may be carried out by a variety  bone marrow cells, after 24h of cultivation and chromosomes were  of techniques such as cytogenetic procedures, RT-PCR or FISH  identiÜed by standard banding techniques. Normal karyotype was  depending on disease status and course of treatments. The RT-PCR  found in 15 (71,4%) children. Chromosome abnormalities were seen  approach is most suitable in cases with Philadelphia chromosome  in 6 (28,6%) children. Three patients had numerical chromosome  negative results and minimal residual disease( MRD), monitoring  aberrations: tetraploidy (92) in mosaic (2 cases) and near-diploidy  progression or regression of the disease following treatments. RNA  (46° ) in mosaic (1 case). In three patients structural chromosome  extraction and cDNA synthesis were performed according to the  abnormalities were found: deletion 5q33 in mosaic and complex  standard procedures. PCR ampliÜcation was carried out in either/and  structural rearrangments with t(1;14) and t(11;14) clones included (2  multiplex and nested formats for different possible translocations,  cases). and PCR products were electrophoresed and visualized on agarose  The results are compared with those reported in the literature. gel. In this study 73 patients were examined for bcr-abl fusion  This work was partially supported by Grant 1541 from the Ministry of  gene by qualitative RT/PCR. Forty six of the patients were CML  Science and Technology, Belgrade, Yugoslavia. cases at different stages of the disease, and the rest were either  ALL, AML or other cases. The mean age of the CML group was  
P0507 . 
P53  Gene Mutations In Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma 45 years. Among our CML cases 7 patients were negative and 39  B. Popovic1, J. Milasin1, B. Jekic2, T. Damnjanovic2, I. Novakovic2;  patients were positive for the fusion gene( 84.7%): 20 belonged to  1Institute of Biology, Faculty of Stomatology, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro,  major variant, 14 belonged to the minor variant and 5 cases were  2Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Belgrade,  positive for both major and minor fusions. In the twenty Üve non-CML  Serbia and Montenegro. cases 12 patients were positive(48%): 8 for major and 4 for minor  Loss or mutation of the p53 gene is probably the most common single  fusion genes. We also compared some RT-PCR Ündings with the  genetic change in cancer. p53 gene inactivation alters the protein  cytogenetic results, among 38 cases 32(75%) had the same result.  structure, disabling its function as transcription factor in different  6 were positive in RT-PCR but negative in cytogenetics. Three  pathways. Normal p53 protein arrests the cell cycle when DNA is  patients with AML-M3 phenotype were also examined for PML-RARŋ  damaged, until the damage is repaired. Tumour cells with mutant  translocations. Two were positive for s form of this fusion gene. forms of p53 do not arrest in G1. Cells lacking normal p53 do not  undergo apoptosis neither. 
P0505 . Mutation screening of SIAH1, a candidate tumor  Recent studies show that one half of the cases of oral squamous  suppressor gene in colorectal cancer cell carcinoma (OSCC) have mutations in the p53 gene. We have  J. Skoglund, A. Lindblom;  analyzed a large series of formalin Üxed, parafÜn-embedded samples  Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. of OSCC for the presence of the most common mutations in the p53  About 3% of all colorectal cancer cases are hereditary and less than half of  gene, distributed within exons 5-8. Mutation screening was done  these can be related to the already known syndromes: FAP and HNPCC.  using PCR ampliÜcation followed by single-strand conformation  The remaining families segregate as yet unknown disease causing genes.  polymorphism-SSCP. 38 out of 70 tumour samples harboured  Patients in these families frequently have multiple adenomas and tumors  mutations (54%). The mutation distribution was as follows: 9 in exon  are MSI negative. 5 (13%), 8 in exon 6 (11%), 7 in exon 7 (10%) and 17 in exon 8  SIAH1, the human homolog of the Drosophila seven in absentia gene,  (24%) . Interestingly, three tumours had more than one mutation as  may be a candidate gene in these families. SIAH1 has been proposed to  shown by SSCP. There was no speciÜc correlation between histologic  act as a downstream effector of p53 and overexpression of SIAH1 can  grade or clinical stage and the presence of mutations. Namely,  mimic the effects of p53 activation and inhibit cell proliferation, promote  mutations were found in tumours of all grades and stages, with and  apoptosis and suppress tumor formation. SIAH1 functions as a component  without recurrences suggesting that p53 changes occur early in  of a complex which is proposed to target Ȳ-catenin for ubiquitin-mediated  the development of OSCC. The mutations need to be conÜrmed by  degradation in response to p53 activation. SIAH1 maps to chromosome  sequencing. 16q12-q13, a region frequently deleted in a large variety of tumors. All  these observations suggest that SIAH1 may be a tumor suppressor gene. 
P0508 . Epidermal growth factors receptor gene ampliÜcation in  Eighteen families with hereditary colorectal cancer were included in a  disseminated pediatric low grade gliomas linkage study where eight families showed suggestive linkage, with a  S. Rienstein1, U. Tabori1,2, Y. Dromi1, N. Amariglio1, O. Israeli1, S. Constantini3,  highest individual LOD score of 1.1, to chr 16q12-q13 (D16
S3136  and  G. Rechavi1, A. G. Aviram1;  D16
S415 ). A mutation screening of the coding sequence of SIAH1 was  1Sheba medical center, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 2Dana Children hospital, Tel Aviv,  performed in these families. Israel, 3Dana Children hospital, Tel-Aviv, Israel. One sequence variant in codon 153, AAG to GAG causing an amino acid  Background: Disseminated low grade gliomas (LGGs) represent  change from Lysine to Glutamine was found in all samples including the  5-10% of pediatric LGGs. The genetic and biological nature of these  control samples, suggesting it to be a common polymorphism. Thus, in this  tumors is poorly understood. Epidermal growth factor receptor  study we did not Ünd evidence for SIAH1 to be the disease causing gene  (EGFR) gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 7.  in these families.Cancer genetics 193 AmpliÜcation of the EGFR gene is a common Ünding in malignant  groups, or in compared subgroups in relation to sex, ethnic origin,  gliomas. We looked for certain molecular abnormalities which may  age, age at onset, or type of oral cancer. However, there were  differentiate disseminated from the other LGGs. signiÜcantly more MTHFR heterozygotes, and as a consequence,  Methods: Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was applied to  a signiÜcant increase in the 
C677 T mutant alleles in the subgroup  6 cases with disseminated LGGs and compared to 12 LGG controls.  without family history of cancer (p<0.05). In addition, the subgroup  FISH analysis and immunohistochemistry were used to further  of patients with a positive family history for thrombophilia had a  highlight speciÜc genetic targets. signiÜcant increase of heterozygotes (p<0.01). Combined, these  Results: CGH revealed multiple chromosomal abnormalities in 5 of 6  results may suggest that the MTHFR mutation is certainly not a major  disseminated cases and in 5 of 12 controls. There was a correlation  contributing factor in oncogenesis in the oral region, but may be still a  between the amount of chromosomal abnormalities and clinical  minor one, in conjuction with decreased dietary uptake of folate. course. AmpliÜcation of chromosome 7 was noted in 4/6 cases as  opposed to 2/12 controls (P=0.078). FISH analysis revealed EGFR  
P0511 . Expression analysis of oncogens included in 11q13.5  ampliÜcation in two cases that were negative for ampliÜcation of  amplicon co-ampliÜed with the MLL gene in AML/MDS patients chromosome 7 by CGH. Approximately 7.5% of the cells in these two  A. Zatkova1, C. Schoch2, S. Schnittger2, C. Fonatsch1, K. Wimmer1;  cases exhibited high grade of ampliÜcation of the EGFR gene (more  1Institut f\x9er Medizinische Biologie, Wien, Austria, 2Klinikum Grosshadern, Medi- than 20 copies per cell) Immunohistochemistry for EGFR was positive  zinische Klinik III, M\x9enchen, Germany. in 6/6 cases and in 2/9 controls (P=0.08). AmpliÜcation within chromosome arm 11q involving the mixed lineage  At a mean follow-up of 7.2 years all patients are alive with variable  leukemia gene (MLL) locus is a rare but recurrent aberration in  but slow disease progression. acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (AML/MDS).  Conclusions: High rate of EGFR ampliÜcation in disseminated  Recently, we used microarray-CGH and FISH for characterization of  pediatric LGGs may have implications on understanding of its role  ampliÜed regions in a series of 13 AML/MDS patients with multiple  in gliomagenesis. Targeted therapies may be possible for these  copies of MLL gene. We have shown that in addition to the core  children. Larger scale studies are needed to further establish these  MLL amplicon, independent sequences in 11q23-24 and/or 11q13.5  Ündings. were co-ampliÜed within the same cytogenetic markers. The Ürst  region, represented by clone bA90A13, was co-ampliÜed in 83.3%,  
P0509 . A Report of Cytogenetic Study in 415 Iranian Leukaemic  the second region represented by clone bA7H7 in 60% of AML/ Patients MDS cases. Both regions harbor a number of genes with possible  M. Khaleghian, M. T. Akbari, T. Tavakolzadeh, I. Salahshourifar;  oncogenic potential. In the present study we further delineate the  Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). ampliÜed region in 11q13.5. The minimal ampliÜed region of overlap  This study was carried out on bone marrow and peripheral blood  around the core clone bA7H7 has been roughly estimated to 2.4 Mb,  samples of 415 Iranian patients suspected of various types of  bordered by clones bA30J7 and bA153F6. Using semi-quantitative  leukemia between 1999 and 2003. The samples were referred  PCR we showed that in nine AML/MDS patients the minimal amplicon  from major hematology-oncology centers at Tehran. Cell culturing  involves oncogenes GRB2-associated binding protein 2 (GAB2)  and banding ( GTG & high resolution) were carried out according  and thyroid hormone responsive (THRSP), but not p21/Cdc42/ to the standard protocols. Chromosome analysis was performed  Rac1-activated kinase 1 (PAK1). Results of a real-time RT-PCR  following ISCN (1995) guidelines. The patients belonged to various  based expression study of these genes in the patients with 11q13.5  leukemic categories, the major ones being: CML, AML, ALL, MDS  ampliÜcation will be presented. and lymphoma. There were more male patients than females,  approximately1.35:1 ratio. In terms of sample type, most cases had  
P0512 . Lactase persistence and its relation to ovarian cancer  bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was utilized only in  risk in Poland 44 cases. The common typical chromosomal abnormalities as well as  M. Kuokkanen1, H. Rasinper\x892, J. Lubinski3, I. J\x89rvel\x894;  rare and combined forms were observed. The overall chromosomal  1National public Health Institute/University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,  abnormality rate obtained was about 40%. The breakdown Ügures for  2University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Genetics and  different categories were roughly as follows: 65% in CML, 37.5% in  Pathology, Hereditary Cancer Center, Szczecin, Poland, 4Laboratory of  AML, 28% in ALL, 22.2% in MDS and 19% in other types. Compared  Molecular Genetics, HUCH-Laboratory Diagnostics, Helsinki, Finland. to published data, the observed chromosomal abnormality rate in the  The pathogenesis of ovarian cancer is not fully understood.  present study is considered low to average. Galactose, hydrolysing product of milk sugar lactose, has  been hypothesized to be toxic to ovarian epithelial cells. Thus,  
P0510 . Prevalence of thrombophilic gene mutations in patients  consumption of dairy products and lactase persistence has been  with oral cancer suggested to be a risk factor for development of ovarian cancer.  C. Yapijakis1,2, E. Vairaktaris3, J. Wiltfang4, J. Ries4, A. Vylliotis3,2, F. W. Neu- Lactase gene expression and its activity is shown to be dependent on  kam4;  a variant C/T  at the 5Ó end of the lactase (LCT, LPH) coding gene.  -13910 1Department of Neurology, University of Athens Medical School, Athens,  In this study we determined lactase persistence/non-persistence  Greece, 2Department of Genetics, Bioerevna Diagnostic Center, Athens,  status and its relation to Polish women with ovarian cancer. Greece, 3Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Athens Medical  The C/T  variant was deÜned by solid phase minisequencing from  -13910 School, Athens, Greece, 4Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of  310 patients with ovarian cancer and 296 healthy controls. Erlangen, Nurnberg, Germany. The prevalence of lactose malabsorption was observed to be 33.1%  Growth and metastatic spread of tumors may be improved by  among control samples versus 35.2% among ovarian cancer cases.  utilization of the coagulation system. Nevertheless, the implication  Lactase persistence was not signiÜcantly associated with the ovarian  of thrombophilic gene mutations in cancer pathogenesis is still  cancer risk in Poland (OR = 0.91, CI 95% 0.65-1.28). unclear. In order to investigate the possible contribution of the most  Based on our results lactase persistence does not increase the risk of  common prothrombotic mutations in oral cancer, we studied blood  ovarian cancer among women in Poland. DNA samples of 110 patients and 120 healthy controls of matched  sex, age and ethnic origin (Greeks and Germans). For each patient,  
P0513 . Gene expression study in neurospheres of  pathological diagnosis of tumor was based on biopsy examination,  glioblastoma origin and in differentiated neural cells using  and a detailed family history of cancer or thrombophilia was collected.  immunocytochemistry The prevalence of the factor V Leiden mutation, of the prothrombin  A. Mikelsaar1,2, A. Piirsoo1, A. K\x9aiveer1, M. Pauklin1, V. Palmiste1, R. Kitus1;  G20210A mutation and of homozygosity for the methylenetetrahyd 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, Tartu, Estonia, 2LabAs Ltd.,  rofolate reductase (MTHFR) 
C677 T substitution were analysed in  Tartu, Estonia. the groups of patients and controls by PCR and restriction fragment  The aims of the study were : (1) to check the validity of the hypothesis  length polymorphism methodology. The frequencies of most alleles  according to which the glioblastomas are arising from brain stem  and genotypes found were not statistically different among the two Cancer genetics 194 cells, the cells of glioblastoma biopsies were cultivated in the same  
P0516 . Retinoblastoma gene expression is frequently altered in  medium as normal fetal brain neurospheres , and investigated the  chronic lymphocytic leukemia ability of these cells to form neurospheres and differentiate into the  B. D. Marzec, J. Kotarski, T. Kubiatowski, M. Gawlowicz, A. Filip, J.  neurons and glial cells . And (2) to compare the expression of some  Wojcierowski;  transcription and other factors in neurosphere and differentiated from  University School of Medicine, Lublin, Poland. them cells. We were able relatively easy to isolate from glioblastoma  B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most frequent form  biopsies ( in 8 of 10 cases) the cells growing like neurospheres, and  of leukemia in Western countries. The pathogeny of B-CLL involves  clone them; and show that both the original neurosphere cells and  both deregulated proliferation and inhibition of cell death. A particular  their clones can be differentiated into the cells expressing neuronal  role in the regulation of these phenomena is played by proteins  and glial markers. The comparison of the expression patterns of  involved in early G1 phase regulation among other by pRb gene. different factors in the cells of neurospheres , and in the differentiated  We have investigated cell cycle genes expression (pRb, p16)  from them cells shows that this system could be well used in the  on the level of its mRNAs and proteins in non-stimulated and  studies of neural differentiation in malignant gliomas. And having the  stimulated cultured B-CLL lymphocytes. For estimations of mRNA  knowledge that both the neurospheres and cloned cells are able to  we have used RN-ase Protection Assay (h-C
C2  multiprobe  differentiate into the cells expressing neuronal and glial markers, and  template set), the protein level was studied by Western blotting and  taking into consideration the great cellular heteromorphism found by  immunocytochemically. us both in neurospheres and cloned cells, we propose that it could be  We observed variable level of pRb mRNA in 24 studied B-CLL  truly quite possible, that the glioblastomas are arising from the brain  patients. 10 out of 24 patients were characterized by undetectable  (genetically changed) stem cells. The study is supported by Estonian  or very low level of pRb expression (8 patients with now expression  SF grant nr. 5250 and grant TARMPO421. of pRb) or by medium/high transcriptional activity of that gene. pRb  protein had nuclear localization. After stimulation pRb mRNA level  
P0514 . A Report of Cytogenetic Study in 415 Iranian Leukaemic  increased signiÜcantly only in 50% of the studied B-CLL but remained  Patients unaltered in the rest of cultured B-CLL. The level of pRb was in  M. Khaleghian, M. T. Akbari, T. Tavakolzadeh, I. Salahshourifar;  reverse correlation to expression of p16 gene. Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). Given the essential role of pRb gene in cell cycle we have concluded  This study was carried out on bone marrow and peripheral blood  that differences in pRb gene expression among patients suffering  samples of 415 Iranian patients suspected of various types of  from B-CLL may contribute to heterogeneity of that neoplasia and  leukemia between 1999 and 2003. The samples were referred  might have an impact on its progression. Intrinsic or regulatory  from major hematology-oncology centers at Tehran. Cell culturing  abnormalities of the RB gene may be responsible for no response  and banding ( GTG & high resolution) were carried out according  in expression level after stimulation by mitogens in part of B-CLL  to the standard protocols. Chromosome analysis was performed  patients. following ISCN (1995) guidelines. The patients belonged to various  leukemic categories, the major ones being: CML, AML, ALL, MDS  
P0517 . Mutational Load Distribution Analysis. A Novel Non- and lymphoma. There were more male patients than females,  Invasive Tool For Pancreatic Cancer Risk Assessment approximately1.35:1 ratio. In terms of sample type, most cases had  G. Tarafa1, D. Tuck2, D. Ladner2, M. Topazian2, R. Brandt2, C. Deters2, I.  bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was utilized only in  Blanco1, V. Moreno1, G. Capella1, H. Lynch2, P. Lizardi2, J. Costa2;  44 cases. The common typical chromosomal abnormalities as well as  1Translational research Laboratory, Institut Catal\x87 dÓOncologia, LÓHospitalet.  rare and combined forms were observed. The overall chromosomal  Barcelona, Spain, 2Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, New Haven, CT,  abnormality rate obtained was about 40%. The breakdown Ügures for  United States. different categories were roughly as follows: 65% in CML, 37.5% in  The sequential analysis of the mutational spectra at loci involved  AML, 28% in ALL, 22.2% in MDS and 19% in other types. Compared  in the pathogenesis of pancreatic tumors may reÝect cumulative  to published data, the observed chromosomal abnormality rate in the  pancreatic cancer risk. We have assessed whether Mutational  present study is considered low to average. Load Distribution Analysis (MLDA) of pancreatic juice may reÝect  the risk of pancreatic cancer before the tumors emerges. Patients  
P0515 . hMLH1 G224D variant is pathogenic in HNPCC and methods. Series 1. Five cases with no evidence of pancreatic  I. Blanco1, S. Gonzalez2, C. Yag\x9ee2, M. Men\x8dndez2, S. Pedrinaci3, G. Llort2, M.  pathology or malignancy after ERCP for biliary disease; 5 chronic  Peris2, G. Capella2;  pancreatitis and 5 carcinomas. Series 2. 8 chronic pancreatitis and 16  1Genetic Counselling Unit, Prevention and Cancer Control Department, Institut  pancreatic carcinomas. Series 3. Sixteen samples from 8 members  Catal\x87 dÓOncologia, LÓHospitalet. Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut Catal\x87 dÓOncologia,  of 3 families carrying a p16 germ line mutation. DNA was extracted  LÓHospitalet. Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain. from pancreatic juice obtained during ERCP. An RCA enhanced zip- Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is frequently  code array that enables the simultaneous detection of 22 mutations  caused by MMR gene mutations. Most hMLH1 missense mutations  at K-ras and p53 genes was used. Results: MLDA separated the  are unlikely to be act as major causative factors in HNPCC (Genuardi  three groups of series 1 based on the total number of mutant alleles  et al, 1999). The hMLH1 G224D variant in exon 9 causing an amino- (mutational load) and on the level of the highest allele (distribution). In  acid change has been reported previously in HNPCC (Pensotty  controls no single allele constituted more than 1.2% of the molecules  et al, 1997). While the variant has been shown to impair protein  examined. An allele constituting more than 3.8% indicated the  function (Scherbakova et al, 1999; Trojan et al, 2002) it remains  presence of carcinoma. In chronic pancreatitis -at risk category- the  as unclassiÜed variant at the ICG-HNPCC registry. We present a  frequency of the predominant allele was 1.2-3.8%. Results of series  Spanish pedigree that fulÜls the Amsterdam criteria for HNPCC  2 validated the initial Ündings. MLDA in p16 mutation carriers showed  carrying a G244D (GGT to GAT) variant at the hMLH1 gene.  an at risk pattern with Ýuctuating values upon time. In conclusion,  27 relatives were available for study. Seven of them have been  MLDA of pancreatic Ýuids yields can be an effective tool for the  diagnosed of HNPCC-related tumours (colorectal, endometrial or  longitudinal assessment of pancreatic cancer risk. glioblastoma) (mean age: 49.8; range: 32-63). All affected patients  carried the G244D variant and corresponding tumors showed  
P0518 . Cytogenetic Ündings in natural killer-cell lymphoma/ microsatelitte instability. In two of these cases loss of MLH1 protein  leukemia. has been detected. At risk versus not at risk analysis: Four of the  A. Carri\x961, D. Costa1, A. Arias1, N. Villamor2, D. Colomer2, M. Rozman2, M.  20 non-affected relatives were non-symptomatic carriers (mean  Torrebadell3, J. Esteve3, E. Campo2;  age: 43.4; range: 29 - 57). The remaining 16 did not carry it (mean  1Hematopathology Unit. Genetics Service. Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona, Spain,  age: 47; range: 20 - 83, 4 of them been older than 60 years). In  2Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hematology  conclusion, our results support that G244D should be considered as  Department. Hospital Cl\x91nic, Barcelona, Spain. a pathogenic mutation in HNPCC. Natural killer (NK)-cell lymphoma/leukemia is a group of rare but Cancer genetics 195 highly aggressive neoplasms. They occur predominantly in the  aberrations appear to be linked to clinical outcome, speciÜc genes  nose/nasopharynx, sometimes in extranasal sites, or rarely as a  have not yet been identiÜed. leukemic form, and are thus categorized into: extranodal NK/T cell  In order to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms causing  lymphoma nasal type, and aggresive NK cell leukemia. NK-cells are  different biological behaviour we performed a parallel analysis of 19  characterised by expression of CD2, cytoplasmic CD3ō and CD56,  ccRCC specimens and patient-matched normal tissue by array-based  and germline T-cell receptor (TCR) genes. The great majority of  comparative genomic hybridization and expression proÜling. The  cases harbour Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in a clonal episomal form.  genomic microarray contained 2300 elements allowing to detect copy  A variety of cytogenetic abnormalities has been described, but so  number changes across the genome with an average resolution of  far no speciÜc chromosomal rearrangement has been identiÜed. In  1.5 Mbp. Expression proÜling was carried out using microarrays of  most of cases, the chromosomal changes involve loss or gain of  3600 nonredundant sequence-validated human cDNAs selected on  genetic materials, the most frequently described are del(6)(q21-q25)  their putative involvement in tumorigenesis. Differentially expressed  and i(7q). Recently, structural rearrangements in 8p22-23 and 12p13  genes were conÜrmed by reverse quantitative PCR. have been also described. We report here the clinical features and  ClassiÜcation of tumors based on their genomic and expression  cytogenetic Ündings in four cases of (NK)-cell lymphoma/leukemia.  proÜle was achieved by cluster analysis. ProÜles were used to  Conventional cytogenetics and FISH studies were carried out in bone  stratify tumors according to clinical behaviour. Congruent changes in  marrow and/or peripheral blood samples. In three cases an abnormal  genomic loci and gene expression were correlated and are the basis  karyotype was detected, standing out two structural chromosomal  for further functional analysis. Candidate Òprogression suppressorÓ  rearrangements with 12p13 and 8p22 breakpoints, and none 6q  genes will be discussed. or 7q abnormalities. The involvement of the genes, located in the  breakpoints, in the pathogenesis of NK-cell lymphoma/leukemia will  
P0521 . Investigation of a region on chromosome 17 in non- be discussed. BRCA1/2 Swedish breast cancer families. This work has been partially supported by a grant (V-2003-Red-07-0)  P. Maguire, K. Holmberg, S. Imreh, L. Skoog, B. Lambert, A. Lindblom;  from the ÐInstituto de Salud Carlos IIIÑ Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women of the  
P0519 . Mutation analysis in breast cancer patients from  Western world. A large proportion of familial breast cancers are  Northwest Germany: A report from Muenster as part of the  caused by known mutations in the breast cancer genes BRCA1 and  national Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer BRCA2. However the frequency of mutations in these genes varies  S. Preisler-Adams, B. Dworniczak, B. Hitschfeld, J. Horst;  greatly between populations and there still remains a signiÜcant  Institute of Human Genetics, UKM, Muenster, Germany. fraction of breast cancer families without attributable mutations in  Inherited mutations in the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 present a  BRCA1/2. Breast cancer families in the Stockholm region of Sweden  lifelong risk for the development of breast and ovarian cancer.  exhibit a very low frequency (<10%) of mutations in either of these  Therefore comprehensive identiÜcation of gene lesions should  two genes and as such it is believed that unknown novel breast  represent state of the art diagnostics. Consequentially in 1996, in  cancer genes are responsible for disease within this population. Muenster, Germany, a centre for counselling, therapy, psychological  A combined approach utilising comparative genomic hybridisation  care and genetic testing was founded in the framework of a nation  (CGH) with previous loss of heterozygosity and linkage analysis  wide network supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe. data was used in an attempt to localise novel regions harbouring  Despite huge efforts using up-to-date technology e.g. DHPLC or  predisposing genes. complete sequencing, a recent review summarizing data obtained  CGH analysis revealed loss of either chromosome 17 or chromosome  all over Germany showed that in less than one third of all patients  6 in high risk breast cancer families. Chromosome 17 was further  deleterious mutations could be identiÜed (Muenster 22%). Because  investigated as these results were in agreement with previous  the vast majority did not show any unambiguous pathogenic  LOH data and available genotyping data. Further Üne mapping of a  mutation, these patients are either linked to still unknown cancer  possible region shared by all families, indicated the smallest possible  predisposing genes or current technology is insufÜcient to identify all  region of interest to lie between markers D17
S1880  and D17
S1293 .  disease causing mutations in these genes. Genes located within this region were screened for germline  To evaluate the proportion of gross genomic rearrangements in  mutations using both dHPLC and direct sequencing. the BRCA1 gene, we therefore analysed 50 breast cancer patients  No truncating mutations were identiÜed, 3 silent polymorphisms were  using the recently developed multiplex ligation dependent probe  identiÜed in 2 genes and shown to be carried by all affected family  ampliÜcation technique (MLPA; MRC Holland) and identiÜed a  members. duplication of exon 13 and a deletion of exon 17 within the BRCA1  gene. Interestingly two cases of exon 18 deletion turned out as false  
P0522 . The role of hMLH3 in a subset of Swedish colorectal  positive due to heterozygous sequence variations in the ligation site  cancer families (c.5214Y and c.5215R). T. Djureinovic, X. Zhou, A. Lindblom;  These preliminary data suggest that although rearrangements within  Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. the BRCA1 gene seem not to be frequent in the German population  Colorectal cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer death in  MLPA turned out to be a sensitive, cost-effective and rapid method for  Western countries. Several syndromes, such as FAP and HNPCC,  the detection of genomic rearrangements. are known to be associated with increased colorectal cancer risk,  and disease causing genes in these syndromes have been identiÜed.  
P0520 . IdentiÜcation of relevant genomic aberrations in  However these syndromes can be found in only small proportion of  renal cell carcinoma by array-based comparative genomic  colorectal cancer families (2-3%). hybridization and complementary expression proÜling To map genetic loci that harbor unknown colorectal cancer  E. Lausch1, B. Fritz2, D. Reutzel1, C. Spangenberg1, P. Lichter2, B. Zabel1;  predisposing genes, we are carrying out a genome-wide linkage  1Johannes Gutenberg-Universit\x89t, Mainz, Germany, 2DKFZ, Heidelberg, Ger- analysis using 18 colorectal cancer families from Sweden. All  many. families were previously tested negative for mutations in the APC,  Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 3% of all malignancies.  MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 genes. Linkage is assessed by multipoint  The clinical manifestation of RCC is highly variable, many patients  parametric linkage analysis. Five families showed suggestive linkage  are affected by metastatic disease. The prognosis of metastatic RCC  for a region on chromosome 14q between markers D14
S276  and  remains dismal as no effective treatment exists. Tumor biology is  D14
S74 , which harbors the hMLH3 gene. Mutations in the hMLH3  partly related to the histopathological subtypes of RCC. The most  gene are involved in a small proportion of atypical HNPCC families.  common subtype, clear cell RCC (ccRCC), is strongly associated with  Considering the fact that evidence of linkage was seen in families  somatic deletions of chromosome 3p. Other common chromosomal  with same phenotype (atypical HNPCC), hMLH3 is a good candidate.  alterations in progressing ccRCC include deletions of 6q, 8p, 9,  To determine the role of hMLH3 gene in families exhibiting linkage  and 14q, and duplication of 5q. Although some of these genomic  to chromosome 14, we have performed mutation screening of this Cancer genetics 196 gene. Both, genomic and cDNAs are tested using DHPLC, direct  1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Facult\x8d de M\x8ddecine Rockefeller,  sequencing and RT-PCR. Results will be presented. Lyon, France, 3Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden. Germline mutations in the BRCA1 gene predispose to breast and/or  
P0523 . Metabolic and DNA repair genetic polymorphisms and  ovarian cancer. Although most of the known mutations to date are  survival from bladder cancer in men. point mutations or small deletions and insertions, an increasing  S. Guarrera1, S. Polidoro1, C. Sacerdote2,3, C. Malaveille4, L. Davico2,3, T.  number of large chromosomal rearrangements has been reported  Martone5, S. Gamberini1,3, F. Saletta1, D. Fontana6, P. Vineis1,3, G. Matullo1,3;  in the last years. A duplication of a 6-kb fragment including exon  13, ins6kbEx13, is considered to be a common founder mutation  1I.S.I. Foundation, Torino, Italy, 2CPO Piemonte, Torino, Italy, 3University  originating from Northern Britain. of Torino, Torino, Italy, 4IARC, Lyon, France, 5IRCC Candiolo, Torino, Italy,  Here, we report the Ünding of this exon 13 duplication in two  6Urology Department, University of Torino, Torino, Italy. apparently unrelated multiple case breast-ovarian cancer families  In industrialized countries bladder cancer is the Üfth most common  from Northern Sweden. Both families had been screened negative  cancer in men. The detoxiÜcation ÐpathwaysÑ and the removal or  for BRCA1 and 2 germline mutations by direct sequencing and PTT.  repair of DNA damage have a key role in protecting the genome of  Linkage analysis showed that both families were linked to the BRCA1  the cell from the insults of cancer-causing agents. Polymorphisms in  locus and shared a common haplotype. In order to test for large  metabolic and DNA repair genes have been identiÜed and extensively  chromosomal rearrangements, multiplex ligation-dependent probe  studied in relation to the modulation of cancer risk, but few  ampliÜcation (MLPA) was carried out. The results indicated a gain  studies have been conducted on the relationship between genetic  of genetic material for BRCA1 exon 13. A PCR-based test for the  polymorphisms and survival from cancer. ins6kbEx13 mutation was performed and conÜrmed the presence of  In the context of a survival study on 322 incident cases of transitional- this mutation in our samples. cell bladder cancer, we investigated the survival status in relation to  To evaluate the frequency of this duplication in Swedish breast  13 polymorphisms in three metabolic genes (GSTM1 P/N, GSTT1 P/ cancer families, we tested patients from 46 breast-ovarian and 142  N, NAT2 R/S, 137 cases) and six DNA repair genes (XRC
C1 -28152A/ breast cancer only families. The mutation was identiÜed in one of the  G, XRC
C1 -26651A/G, XRC
C1 -26304T/C, XPD-35931A/C, XRC
C2 - 188 families (0.53%). We therefore conclude that this mutation is rare  31479G/A, XRC
C3 -18067C/T, XRC
C3 -17893A/G, XRC
C3 -4541C/T,  in the Swedish population; it should however be considered in the  ERC
C4 -30147A/G, PCNA-6084G/C, 231 cases). All subjects are men  diagnostic procedure in cases where phenotype and family history  aged 40-74 followed up for mortality for an average of 48 months  strongly suggest a mutation in the BRCA1 gene, but no mutation can  (range 1-100, median 54 months, SD 30.7): of them, 66 died and  be detected by standard screening methods. 256 were still surviving at the end of follow-up. Mutations in p53 were  determined in bladder tissue of 45 subjects and resulted associated  
P0526 . Clinical genetic analysis of neuroblastoma patients from  with shorter survival (p=0.03). Serbia and Montenegro None of the metabolic or DNA repair polymorphisms showed a  statistically signiÜcant relationship with survival but ERC
C4 -30147A/ M. Guc-Scekic, M. Djurisic, D. Djokic, D. Vujic, I. Milovic, S. Djuricic, D.  G, whose variant allele is nevertheless under-represented in the  Radivojevic, T. Lalic, M. Djuric;  study cohort and needs conÜrmation on a larger sample. Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. Further studies on genetic polymorphisms and bladder cancer are  Neuroblastoma (NB) is one of the most frequent malignant childhood  warranted since metabolic and DNA repair polymorphism might  solid tumor. Recent genetic and biological studies have led to better  inÝuence survival by modulating the response to drugs thus allowing  understanding of this disease. In the present study 47 patients  individualized therapies. with NB were diagnosed at the Mother and Child Health Institute  of Serbia ÐDr Vukan CupicÑ,between January 1997. and June  
P0524 . Detection of T439I mutation of BRAF in sinonasal  2003. Among 47 NB patients 12 children (25,53 %) were under the  malignant melanoma age of 1 year.Cytogenetic analysis was performed on 34 (72,34  W. Emberger1, S. Regauer2, C. Windpassinger1, E. Petek1, S. Sodia1, O.  %) patients.Normal karyotype was found in 22 patients patients  Reich3, R. Pfragner4, H. Zierler1, K. Wagner1;  (64,7%). Abnormal karyotype was found in 12 patients (35,29 %): 2 cases of near diploidy(°46) in mosaic (both at stage IV),2 cases  1Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria,  of near- triploidy (°69) in mosaic (one at stage II and one at stage  2Department of Pathology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Department  IV),4 cases of near-tetraploidy (°92 ) in mosaic (all at stage IV),one  of Gynecology, University Hospital Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Department of Patho- case of tetraploidy (92)(at stage IV),1 case with homogeneously  physiology, Medical University Graz, Austria, Graz, Austria. staining regions (HSRs) and double minute chromosomes (DMs)(at  Oncogenic activation of the BRAF, a critical serine/threonine kinase  stage III),one case with deletion 1p36 (at stage IV), and one case  in the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, has been  with complex karyotype (at stage IV).Chromosome 1p36 analysis  demonstrated to be involved in the pathogenesis of cutaneous  was performed on twenty three patients using FISH (19 cases) and  malignant melanoma (CMM). The pathogenetic mechanism is  PCR (4 cases).MYCN analyses were performed on 27 tumors by  frequently based on activating somatic mutations, for instance a  FISH.Seven of 27 NB tumors (25,92 %)(3 at stage III, 3 at stage IV  V599E amino acid substitution that enhance the kinase activity, which  and one at stage IVs) were with ampliÜed MYCN. has been described in >60% of CMM and premalignant melanocytic  The authors will discusse the prognostic value of genetic results  lesions. The V599E mutation is by far the most common mutation  taking into account potential confounding factors such as stage and  found in CMMs. Activating mutations of BRAF have been described  age. in exon 11 and 15. Whereas a lack of BRAF mutations was found  This work is supported by Grant number 1541 from Ministry of  in uveal malignant melanomas (UMM). Data on mucosa associated  Science and Technology, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. malignant melanoma (MMM) is rare, it seems that the frequency  of BRAF mutations is lower than in CMMs. We describe a T439I  
P0527 . Correlation between the results of genetic screnning  mutation detected in a MMM, a sinonasal melanoma of a 72 year  for BRCA1/2 mutations and immunostainning for the BRCA1/2  old female patient. The mutation involves the second amino acid  proteins. of exon 11 of BRAF. This amino acid represents a known inhibitory  P. Machado1, S. Andre2, C. Laranjeira1, R. Brandao1, I. J. Povoa1, F. H. M. L.  phosphorylation side of BRAF. The activating effect of the loss of  Vaz1;  this phosphorylation side could be demonstrated in vitro. To our  knowledge this is the Ürst detection of this mutation in melanoma. 1Molecular Biology Department of the Portuguese Institute Oncology, Lisboa,  Portugal, 2Pathology Department of the Portuguese Institute Oncology, Lisboa,  
P0525 . The BRCA1 Exon 13 Duplication is present in the  Portugal. Swedish population Due to the complexity of BRCA1/2 genetic screening, it would  B. Kremeyer1, M. Soller1, K. Lagerstedt1, P. Maguire1, S. Mazoyer2, M. Nord- be useful to have additional methods to better select patients in  ling3, A. Lindblom1;  families with uncertain risk and to decide which gene to screen  Ürst. Objective:to study the correlation between the immunostaining Cancer genetics 197 of BRCA1/2 proteins and the results of the genetic screening of  from ALL cells showed variable pattern of telomere length. The  BRCA1/2 mutations.Methods: 1)BRCA1/2 mutation screening:  ALL cell appeared to have both long and short telomere lengths, in  After genetic counselling, 6 high risk patients consented in genetic  contrast to normal lymphocytes producing limited pattern of TRF  screening. Aliquots of whole genomic DNA extrated from peripheral  (short telomeres).The ANLL cells produced predominantly short  blood were ampliÜed by PCR, using primers that covered the whole  telomere pattern despite high telomerase activity and expression.  exonic sequence of BRCA1. PCR produts were analized in a CSGE  Telomerase activity was diminished in patients in remission during  gel and positive samples sequenced automatically. Immunostainning:  chemotherapy. Telomere length in ALL cells was shorter in remission  paraÜne blocks of breast and/or ovarian tumors from the same  as compared to the time of diagnosis. It can be concluded that high  patients were analized using speciÜc monoclonal antibodies for  telomerase activity and expression in leukemic cells do not correlate  BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins. The reaction was either negative if no  with telomere length (TRF pattern). nuclear distinctive labeling was observed (damage of the protein)  The work was sponsored by KBN grants No 4
P05 B 072 17 and  or positive if nuclear labeling observed ( integrity of the protein).  6PO5E 102 20. Results: 2 patients with BRCA1 mutations had immunostaing of their  tumors negative for BRCA1 and 3 patients who are BRCA1 negative  
P0530 . X Chromosome Inactivation and Breast Cancer had immunostainning positive for BRCA1. The 6th patient had an  A. Sevin\x8c1, D. Yannoukakos2, H. Yazòcò3, G. BaĔòėlar1, E. \x84zkaynak1, I.  indeterminate result for BRCA1 screening and immunochemistry  Konstantopoulou2, E. ManguoĔlu4, N. Kocabaė5, B. Bozkurt6, M. Tez6, V.  showed normal function of BRCA1 but was negative for BRCA2.  Gerassimos7, G. Nasioulas7, E. Papadopoulou8, L. Florentin9, E. Kontogianni10,  BRCA2 screening for this patient is underway. Conclusion: These  G. L\x9eleci4, I. Sayek11, I. YuluĔ1, N. Dalay3, T. \x84z\x8celik1;  results suggest a good correlation between the two methods. We  1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara,  will extend this analysis to other patients screened and to BRCA2  Turkey, 2Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, I/R-RP, National Center for ScientiÜc  mutations as well. BRCA1/2 immunochemistry may contribute to the  Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Basic Oncology,  individuals belonging to hereditary breast/ovarian cancer families. Oncology Institute, Capa, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Departments of Medical Biology  and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey,  
P0528 . Frameshift mutations in exon 1 of the RB1 gene can be  5Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Gazi  associated with incomplete penetrance of retinoblastoma University, Ankara, Turkey, 6Department of Surgery, Ankara Numune Research  D. R. Lohmann, A. Schuler, M. Klutz;  and Teaching Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 7Institute of Biology, National Center for  Universit\x89tsklinikum, Essen, Germany. ScientiÜc Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 8Molecular Biology Research  Most RB1 gene mutations result in premature termination codons  Center ÐHYGEIAÑ - ÐAntonis PapayiannisÑ, Athens, Greece, 9Alfalab, Molecular  or loss of regions that code for functionally essential domains of  Biology and Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece, 10IVF & Genetics, Athens,  pRB. Carriers that are heterozygous for mutations of this kind  Greece, 11Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University,  almost invariably develop retinoblastoma. Incomplete penetrance  Ankara, Turkey. of retinoblastoma is seen in some rare families only. These show  Skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) may be equivalent to  distinct mutations including (i) promoter region mutations resulting  a functional loss of heterozygosity for putative X-linked tumor  in deregulated levels of normal protein, (ii) small in-frame alterations  suppressor gene(s), and may represent a new mechanism for  resulting in only partial loss of normal function, and (iii) mutations in  development of hereditary cancers based on the studies in young  introns that possibly result in leaky aberrant splicing. breast and invasive ovarian cancer patients (Kristiansen et al. J.  In the course of routine genetic testing, causative RB1 gene  Med. Genet. 39, 30-33, 2002; Buller et al. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 91,  mutations were identiÜed in 594 index patients (337 with bilateral/ 339-346, 1999). However, the correlation between BRCA status and  familial retinoblastoma, 227 with isolated unilateral retinoblastoma).  XCI in breast cancer was not studied. We investigated the XCI status  Excluding unaffected parents with mutational mosaicism, incomplete  of 248 female breast cancer patients and 220 controls by use of a  penetrance of retinoblastoma was found in relatives of 22 patients.  polymorphic CAG repeat in the androgen-receptor gene. Blood DNA  Mutations in 13 of these families can readily be assigned to one  samples were ampliÜed by PCR directly and after digestion with the  of the functional classes outlined above. However, 4 families  methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme HpaII and densitometric  with incomplete penetrance showed frame-shift mutations in  analysis of the alleles performed. Skewed X-inactivation (>80%  exon 1 (g.2078insC, g.2113del26, g.2126del38, g.2131del7). In  skewing) was observed in 80 of the 190 informative patients  these families there were a total of 8 mutation carriers without  (42.1%), and 10 of the 124 informative controls (8.1%) (P<0.001).  retinoblastoma, two patients with unilateral retinoblastoma, and  >90% inactivation of one allele (extreme skewing) was present in  4 patients with bilateral tumors. RNA from peripheral blood was  42 (22.1%) patients, and in only three controls (P<0.001). Among  available from affected and unaffected mutation carriers from one  BRCA mutation carriers, skewing was observed in three of 16  family. RT-PCR showed that the mutant transcript is expressed in  BRCA1 (18.8%), and four of six BRCA2 (66.7%) carriers. In the  family members with and without retinoblastoma. These results show  group with familial clustering without BRCA mutation, skewing was  that genetic testing is important in parents of patients with frame-shift  observed in seven of 15 (46.7%) patients. Lastly, 66 of 149 (44.3%)  mutations in exon1 because, contrary to expectations, mutations of  sporadic cases were skewed in their XCI patterns. Our results show a  this kind can be associated with incomplete penetrance. statistically signiÜcant association between the occurrence of skewed  XCI and prevalence of breast cancer among BRCA2(+), familial and  
P0529 . Telomere length and telomerase activity and expression  sporadic (P<0.001), but not in BRCA1(+) patients (P=0.116). in acute leukemias in children D. Januszkiewicz1,2, M. Pernak3, M. Zawada2, K. Lewandowski2, J.  
P0531 . On detection of radiosensitivity in breast cancer patients  Rembowska2, K. Nowicka2, J. Wysocki1, J. Nowak2;  by the GoMNT 1Academy of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics,  S. Schuster1, B. Patino Garcia1, D. Varga1, M. H\x99hne1, S. Jainta1, N.  Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Medical Diagnostics, Poznan, Poland. Herroeder2, T. Volm2, W. Vogel1;  The objective of this study was to see whether there is any  1Dept Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Dept Gynaecology,  relationship between telomerase activity and expression and  University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. telomere length in leukemic cells. In addition we would like to  The micronucleus test (MNT) is frequently used for biomonitoring  investigate the possible alternations in telomerase activity and  environmental exposure to mutagens or to assess DNA repair  expression and telomere length in children with acute leukemias  capacity after a mutagen challenge in G0 at the start of the  at the moment of diagnosis and during remission. High telomerase  lymphocyte cultures. This G0 MNT has been used to demonstrate  expression and activity has been found in cells of ALL and ANLL  a higher radiosensitivity in a proportion of breast cancer patients.  as well as in myeloblast cell line K562. Only in some cases of  This proportion varied greatly between different studies. When we  peripheral blood lymphocytes from healthy individuals low telomerase  carried out a large (91 patients, 96 controls) own study we observed  expression and activity has been detected. Chemiluminescent  a high percentage of radiosensitive patients (more than 70%)  detection of terminal restriction fragments (TRF) from DNA isolated  with the difference between patients and controls varying greatly Cancer genetics 198 between different observers (from OR = 1.2 p = 0.8 to OR = 17.7 p <  
P0534 . Could Mycoplasma-Mediated Oncogenesis be  0.0001). Lymphocyte cultures were irradiated with 2 Gy at the start,  Responsible for the Formation of Conventional Renal Cell  treated with Cytochalasin A for the induction of binucleated cells  Carcinoma during the last 24h, and slides prepared as usual. The slides were  S. Pehlivan1, M. Pehlivan2, H. Onay2, G. Itirli1, M. Koyuncuoglu3, F. Ozkinay2,  coded, stained with Giemsa and the micronuclei were counted in  Z. Kirkali3;  at least 500 binucleated cells according to international guidelines.  1Ege University Faculty of Science, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of  It was not surprising that the ability of the observers to discriminate  Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir,  patients and controls had a strong correlation with their cytogenetic  Turkey. experience (from 3 months to 5 years). Repeat counting by the  The aim of this study is to investigate the association between the  same observer demonstrated, however, a very good reproducibility  conventional Renal Cell Carcinoma (cRCC) and Mycoplasma sp.  of the counts (CoefÜcient of Variation between 0.055 and 0.095).  infection. Normal (N), Renal Intratubular Neoplasia (RIN) and tumor  This observation indicates that the power to detect differences in  (T) tissue samples from 33 patients with cRCC and 35 healthy  the number of induced micronuclei between patients and controls  controls were studied. Nested PCR was performed in two steps with  depends on criteria which are not deÜned with sufÜcient precision in  seven primers (4 outer, 3 inner) which can recognize at least 15  the international guidelines. different Mycoplasma sp. DNA was analyzed in the 3% agarose gel.  Mycoplasma sp. DNA was detected in 36%, 67%, 82% of N, RIN, T  
P0532 . Mixed germ cell-sex cord tumors associated with  samples respectively. No Mycoplasma sp. was detected in none of  gonadal dysgenesis in young patients three tissue samples from 6 out of 33 cRCC patients. Mycoplasma  G. Queipo1, R. Y. Pe\x95a2, K. Nieto1, R. Alvarez1, L. Era\x95a2, L. M. Era\x95a2, S.  sp. DNA was detected only in 5 out of 35 (14%) cases of the samples  Kofman-Alfaro1;  taken from the control group. 1Genetics Dept. Hospital General de M\x8dxico-Facultad de Medicina UNAM,  It is the Ürst time that an association between RCC and Mycoplasma  M\x8dxico DF, Mexico, 2Intersex Clinic. Hospital Infantil de Mexico-Federico  has been investigated. SigniÜcantly a higher existence of  Gomez, M\x8dxico DF, Mexico. Mycoplasma sp. DNA was detected in tissues of cRCC patients  Gonadoblastoma is an unusual mixed germ cell-sex cord stromal  compared to that of healthy control group. It can be deduced that  tumor that occurs mostly in individuals with abnormal gonadal  mycoplasma-mediated carcinogenesis may have a role in the  development and karyotype with Y-chromosome or Y-derived  development of cRCC. We propose a novel pathway to explain the  sequences. Half of the gonadoblastomas show germ cells overgrowth  multi-stage oncogenesis mechanism which may be responsible for  leading to a typical dysgerminoma transformation. The age at  the formation of cRCC. diagnosis is variable but they are very rare at early ages. We present  5 patients with different types of gonadal dysgenesis, in 4 of them  
P0535 . Cytogenetic Ündings in pediatric renal cell carcinoma (cases1-4) the tumor was recognized in early childhood while in case  M. Soller, A. Bekassy, C. Kullendorff, J. Alumets, F. Mertens;  5 a disgerminoma was observed at age 15. In these patients we  Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. found different types of tumors: juvenile granulosa cell tumor beside  Adenocarcinomas of the kidney are rare childhood tumors and  a gonadoblastoma, bilateral gonadoblastoma and disgerminoma.  present less than 0,1% of the malignant tumors in children. Less  FISH analyses performed to evaluate the X and Y cell distribution  than 20 cases with chromosomal abnormalities have been reported  between the tumor and the disgenetic gonadal tissue, showed that Y  and neither their karyotypic characteristics nor the molecular  cells were more frequent in the tumor than in the gonad. We discuss  mechanisms behind pathogenesis are clear. We have cytogenetically  these Ündings and the genesis of these tumors in young children and  analysed short-term cultured cells from a highly differentiated  recommend early surgical management of the dysgenetic gonads renal adenocarcinoma in a-8-year-old girl. The girl was brought  to the surgical emergency room upon mild abdominal trauma.  
P0533 . INK4 familiy genes - Expression in human acute leukemia  She complained immediately on heavy left ventral abdominal pain  cells and was in pre shock on admission. Ultrasound disclosed a 10  D. Szczesniak-Stanczyk1, B. Marzec1, J. Kocki1, K. Skorzynska1, M. Cioch2, A.  cm left abdominal tumor with suspected haemorrhage. CAT-scan  Dmoszynska2, J. Wojcierowski1;  examination conÜrmed the Ünding. Preoperative treatment with i.v.  1Department of Human Genetics, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland,  Vincristine and Actinomycin-D was instituted according to the SIOP- 2Department of Hematology, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland. 9301 protocol for Stage III presumed (ruptured) WilmsÓ tumor. Left  INK4 family genes are members of cyclin dependent kinases  nephrectomy was performed four weeks later. Following uneventful  inhibitors(CDI) -class of proteins which inhibit cyclin-dependent  surgery, external beam therapy was given with 15 Gy, 10 fractions,  kinases (CDK) activity during cell-cycle(especially G1 phase) and that  targeting the tumor bed. No further therapy was given and the girl  way control progression through the cell-cycle. INK4 family consists  is completely well almost 5 years later. A near-triploid karyotype  of four genes p16, p15, p18, p19. Their mutation are rare but their  with only numerical aberrations was found in 5 out of 17 analysed  incorrect expression is observed in many cancer and hematological  metaphases: 58-60,XX,-X,-1,+7,-8,-9,-11,-14,-15,+17,-18,-19,- malignancies and often is connected with poor prognosis. The  21,-22 [cp5]/46,XX[12]. Histopathologic examination showed an  alteration of these genes were also found in acute leukemia, but  adenocarcinoma. there are still limited range of studies to establish importance of these  Most common rearrangements in pediatric renal cell carcinomas are  results for prognosis and treatment. translocations involving chromosome X. Only one case with sole  In our research we examined the level of mRNA INK4 family genes in  numerical abnormalities has previously been published. Both the  34 bone marrow samples obtained from patients with acute leukemia  present and published case showed gains of chromosomes 7 and 17. before treatment. In the examined group 19 patients have acute  It has been implied that numerical changes as sole anomalies in  myeloid leukemia(AML) and 15 - acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).  malignant tumors could be consistent with a better prognosis. For analysis mRNA expression we used semiquantitative method:  Multi Probe RNase Protection Assay System(RiboQuant). We also  
P0536 . Genetic counselling and surveillance strategies in  correlated our results with clinical data. individuals at high tumor risk in pancreatic cancer families In majority of examined leukemic cells we observed low level of p16  M. Sina-Frey1, D. Bartsch2, S. Hahn3, H. Rieder1;  and p15 mRNA, only 2 LLA samples and 3 AML samples show high  1Department of Clinical Genetics, Marburg, Germany, 2Department of VTC  level of p16 mRNA. 
P19  mRNA was very low or absent in 68% of  Surgery, Marburg, Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Knappschafts- AML samples and 74% of LLA, and p18 in 47% of AML samples and  Hospital, Bochum, Germany. 60% LLA, but in 3 MLA samples p18 mRNA level was signiÜcantly  Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an aggressive disease with a poor  higher than in other samples.. The comparison of our results with  prognosis. It is estimated that 5-10% of PC cases are familial. An  different clinical data give us possibility to make more different  18-53-fold increased risk has been reported in Ürst degree relatives  observations, which need further research. of PC patients in pancreatic cancer families (FPC). Germline Cancer genetics 199 mutations of the genes BRCA2 or CDKN2A are considered to  lesion represented by Medulloblastoma. It was possible to well  confer an up to 10- or 22-fold increased risk for PC development in  interpretate the clinical manifestations as progression of the primary  mutation carriers, respectively. Up to date, 50 families have been  lesion, and exclude the damage by radiotherapie. The pathology  enrolled in the German national case collection for FPC (FaPaCA)  examination conÜrmed the results of the molecular clonality analysis. after detailed genetic counselling. BRCA2 and CDKN2A mutation  screening was performed after written informed consent. A total of 90  
P0539 . Development of a Rapid Detection Assay for Carcinoma  high risk individuals has been identiÜed among 273 family members  and Adenocarcinomas Patients Using Green Fluorescent Single- including 19 individuals with BRCA2 or CDKN2A germline mutations.  chain Fv SpeciÜc for Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) Results of the mutation screening are disclosed to individuals in  M. Arbabi Ghahroudi, N. Rastgoo, S. Amin, Z. Moqaddassi Jahromi;  an interdisciplinary counselling session with a human geneticist, a  National Research Center for Genetic Engineeing & Biotechnology, Tehran,  surgeon and a psychooncologist. All high risk individuals are offered a  Iran (Islamic Republic of). screening program for early PC detection. Female BRCA2 mutations  Recombinant antibody fragments and their conjugates have  carriers are advised to participate in specialised breast/ovarian  great potential in the Üeld of tumor detection and therapy, and  cancer screening and/or prophylaxis programs. CDKN2A mutation  bypass major limitations related to the applications of conventional  carriers are told to adhere to surveillance for early melanoma  monoclonal antibodies such as poor tumor targeting, inadequate  detection. The ongoing study will help to assess the risk for tumor  tumor penetration and immunogenicity. To develop effective  development in FPC families with or without germline BCRA2/ immunoreagents for diagnostic and therapeutic applications, highly  CDKN2A mutations prospectively, and to identify additional genetic  speciÜc tumor markers are required. CEA is a well-established  markers prediposing for PC. tumor-associated antigen, highly expressed in colorectal carcinoma  Supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe, grants 70-2362-Ba2 and 70- and frequently elevated in adenocarcinomas of the lung, breast and  2828-Ba3 other gasterointestinal organs. Moreover, the sugar-chain structure  of CEA produced by cancer cells is different from those of the normal  
P0537 . Electronic microarray-based KRA
S2  mutation detection  counterparts of CEA family. From a phagemid library of mouse  to evidence colonic tumor DNA in sera. scFv, several high afÜnity CEA-speciÜc binders were obtained after  M. Chiminqgi1, S. Moutereau1, R. Narwa1, P. Pernet2, M. Goossens1,3, S. Loric1;  four rounds of panning. Chimeric molecules were then developed  1Hopital Henri Mondor AP-HP, Creteil, France, 2Hopital Saint-Antoine AP-HP,  containing the Ýuorescent properties of enhanced green Ýuorescent  Paris, France, 3U468, INSERM, Creteil, France. protein (EGFP) and the antigen binding properties of the selected  Among recent technological advances, DNA chip devices,  scFvs. These recombinant molecules were able to recognize cell  which allow automated, high-throughput genotyping, promise to  lines as well as tissue samples from cancer patients expressing CEA.  considerably improve the detection capability of mutations in clinically  These Ýuorescent immunoreagents are very effective for diagnostics,  relevant samples. We took advantage of the Nanochip§ Molecular  and they can complement or even bypass immunological and  Biology Workstation (Nanogen©) and the recently introduced  immuohistological methodologies in cancer detection. microelectronic array technology, to develop a method suitable to  detect KRA
S2  mutations in circulating DNA. Mutated KRA
S2  genes  
P0540 . Evaluation of FAK gene expression in cancer cell lines  were the Ürst tumor-speciÜc gene sequences detected in the blood  using Quantitative Real Time RT-PCR from patients with cancer. KRA
S2  mutations are found frequently  M. Mihaescu1, A. Thchirkov2, P. Vago3, M. Cottier4;  in several types of commonly occurring human cancers, especially  1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy ÒVictor  cancer of the pancreas, colorectum, lung, and thyroid. When mutated  BabesÓ, Timisoara, Romania, 2Centre Jean Perrin, Centre Regional de Lutte  KRA
S2  sequences are detected in blood, they seem to be associated  Contre le Cancer, Departement de Radiotherapie, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand,  quite speciÜcally with cancer. Moreover, KRA
S2  gene mutation  France, 3Service de Cytog\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddicale,Facult\x8d de M\x8ddecine, Universite  is usually at codon 12, and rarely at codon 13, 25 or 61: so the  d`Auvergne, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4Service of Histology and  detection assays can be focused on these positions. After a classical  Cytopathology, CHU, St. Etienne, France. quantitative PCR to evaluate the circulating DNA concentration, we  Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmatic tyrosine kinase,  used the electronic chip technology to Ürst assess the presence of  expressed in most tissues examined so far. FAK is over expressed  KRA
S2  gene mutation and second to evaluate the mutated/normal  in tumors and most of the evidence suggests that overexpression is  DNA ratio in serum. Mutations in circulating non-cell-associated  a marker for invasive and metastatic tumors. Consequently, a role  DNA have been detected in the plasma and serum of colon cancer  has been suggested for FAK in the development of invasive cancers.  patients. It is postulated that this DNA is released directly into the  The origin of this overexpression is unknown. Increased dosage of  circulation from tumor cells undergoing apoptosis, we showed here,  the FAK gene may contribute to the elevated protein expression but  that not all this DNA in serum derived directly from the tumor but  overexpression for this protein may have postgenomic origins. also from normal cells. Finally, the electronic microarray technology  Using molecular techniques (RT-PCR and Real Time Quantitative RT- provides the opportunity to easily detect DNA from colonic tumor in  PCR) the postgenomic level (transcription) has been investigated in  patient serum. seven tumoral cell lines (two derived from solid tumors and Üve from  hematological malignancies and lymphomas), in the Department of  
P0538 . Allelic loss on Chromosome 17p13.1, at p53 region, and  Medical Cytogenetics CHU Clermont-Ferrand. Microsatellite instability (MSI) make clear a diatribe on the origin  Extraction and isolation of total RNA for all tumoral cell lines have  of a ásecond lesionÐ in a child with Medulloblastoma been made according to the laboratory procedures. RT-PCR and  L. Giunti, I. Sardi, G. Bernini, S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, M. Giovannucci Uzielli;  Quantitative RT-PCR (Light Cycler System -Roche Molecular  University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Biochemicals) have been developed according to a standard  Diagnosis of Medulloblastoma was made in a 5-year old child  protocol two tube- two step, using the primers for FAK gene  with severe neurological impairment, by MR. Radio-chemio and a  (references Genebank NM 005607) and for GAPDH gene (control  second successive chemio treatments were carried out during few  and standard curves, Reference Genebank M17851). Analysis of  weks. Six months after the surgery removal of the primary lesion,  ampliÜcation products by RT-PCR showed a band of 147 bp for  the child showed again severe, neurological, symptoms. New MR  FAK and 433 bp for GAPDH. No detectable RT-PCR product was  evaluation revealed new meningeal involvement, interpreted as post- observed for two lines: HL-60 and U937. High level copy number  radiotherapie damage. Rachidocentesis didnÓt reveal the presence of  for cDNA corresponding to FAK gene was observed in K562 cell  neoplastic cells. line, intermediate level for KG1a, A549 and M4Beu and low level for  We decided to perform the molecular analysis of DNA extracted  Jurkat cell line. from the cells smear on slides , and we obtained important results:  we found LOH of two loci (VNTR at the intron 1 of p53 gene, and  D17
S945  from the critical region of p53 gene), identical to the LOH  revealed in the primaryMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 200 
P0541 . Analysis of Tumor Necrosis Factor-a (TNFA) and  Medicine and Austin & Repatriation Medical Center, University of Melbourne,  Lymphotoxin-a (LTA) polymorphisms in children with cystic  Victoria, Australia, 3Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical  Übrosis and chronic airway disease. School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund  G. F. Korytina1, D. G. Yanbaeva1, L. I. Babenkova2, T. V. Victorova1;  University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Medicine, University of  Pittsburgh Medical School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department  Amylin (also designated islet amyloid polypeptide; IAPP) is a  of Pediatrics, Bashkortostan State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. member of the calcitonin family of hormones that is co-secreted  Cystic Übrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive lethal disease  with insulin by the pancreatic beta-cells. Cell culture assays have  characterized by progressive obstructive lung disease and pancreatic  suggested that amylin could affect bone formation and bone  dysfunction. The severity of airway disease in CF modiÜed by  resorption, this latter function following its binding to the calcitonin  secondary genetic factors. Chronic airway disease (CAD) is the  receptor (CTR). The present study shows that Amylin-deÜcient mice  common disease of childhood after asthma. display an osteoporosis-like phenotype (approximately 50 % bone  InÝammation of the airway wall is a principal feature of the airway  mass reduction) that is due to an increase in bone resorption while  disease and it may therefore be of interest to identify factors that  bone formation is unaffected. In vitro, amylin is shown to inhibit  could directly inÝuence the intensity of airway inÝammation. TNF is  fusion of mononucleated osteoclast precursors into multinucleated  an inÝammatory cytokine that found in increased concentrations in  osteoclasts in an ERK1/2-dependent manner. While Amylin +/- mice  chronic respiratory patients airways. Probably, polymorphisms in the  displayed a low bone mass phenotype and increased bone resorption  TNF and LTA genes are in relation to airway inÝammatory diseases. parameters, Ctr +/- mice display a high bone mass due to an increase  In order to investigate the possible roles of gene polymorphisms in  in bone formation parameters. Moreover, compound heterozygote  the development and progression of CF and CAD we genotyped 62  mice for Ctr and Amylin inactivation displayed bone abnormalities  patients with CF, 181 children with severe non asthmatic CAD and  observed in both Ctr +/- and Amylin +/- mice thus ruling out that  216 control subjects for both TNFA and LTA polymorphisms. amylin uses CTR as its main receptor to inhibit osteoclastogenesis  The frequency of GG genotype of TNFA gene was signiÜcantly higher  in vivo. Thus amylin is a physiological regulator of bone resorption  in patients with CAD (81.8%) compared to control (65.1%) (Ɂ2=12.53,  that acts through an unidentiÜed receptor and whose deÜciency may  p<0.001; OR= 2.39). contribute to the osteopenia of type I diabetes patients. The rare LTA GG genotype was found in 10.2% of CF subjects  (Ɂ2=4.42, p<0.03; 
P0544 . New CARD15 mutation in an Italian family affected with  OR= 3.96). Blau Syndrome We observed association of CF with TNFA-LTA (GG-AG) combination  M. M. van Duist1, D. Giachino1, M. De Marchi1, M. Podswiadek2, L. Punzi2;  (36.6% versus 22.4% in control; OR= 2.00 CI 1.00-3.91). SigniÜcant association were found between CAD and TNFA-LTA (GG- 1Dep of Clinical and Biological Science, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy,  AG and GG-AA) combinations (79.0% versus 65.0% in control; OR=  2Dep of Rheumatology, University of Padova, Policlinic, Padova, Italy. 2.06 CI 1.20-3.37) Blau syndrome (BS) is a rare chronic granulomatous syndrome  Our results suggest that TNFA and LTA levels may be important in characterised by arthritis, uveitis, skin rash, captodactyly and  the pathogenesis of severe lung disease at CF and CAD patients. autosomal dominant inheritance. Its responsible gene has been  mapped to the 16q21.1 region and recently identiÜed as the CARD15  
P0542 . Rapid Genetic Screening Assays for Alpha1-Antitrypsin  gene, encoding a bacterial product receptor involved in natural  DeÜciency immunity which is also involved in susceptibility to Crohn disease  A. Yakir, D. Cohen, N. Navot;  (CD). While its CD-associated CARD15 variants (R702, G908R, 
L1007 fs)  Pronto Diagnostics, Rehovot, Israel. affect the C-terminal Leucine Rich Repeat Domain, and result in  Alpha1-antitrypsin (AAT) deÜciency is one of the most common  loss of the NF-kB activating function, BS has been associated with  lethal genetic diseases worldwide. It leads to jaundice in infants,  missense changes in the Nucleotide Binding Domain (NBD); R334Q/ liver disease in children and adults, and pulmonary emphysema in  W and 
L469 F which are not found in healthy subjects and result in  adults. Mutations in the PI gene, located on chromosome 14, are  increased NF-kB activation. associated with AAT deÜciency. The most common risk alleles are  In the only known Italian BS family, followed for many years in  PiS (1/9-1/12 carrier frequency in Caucasians) and PiZ (1/30 to 1/40  Padova we identiÜed by Direct sequencing in both affected mother  in Caucasians). and daughter a new mutation in the NBD, a heterozygous G1147A  We have developed two simple and rapid detection methods for the  nucleotide substitution predicted to cause 
E383 K. DHPLC analysis  PiZ and PiS mutations, based on a single nucleotide primer extension  of exon 4 encoding the NBD (AA 273-577), using the Wave system  reaction, followed by ELISA in a kit format. The ProntoPlex© AAT  (Transgenomic), excluded its presence in seven healthy relatives  assay consists of a multiplex primer extension reaction of the Z  and 100 controls. The affected subjects do not carry other mutation  or S allele in a high throughput screening format. Both mutations  known to be associated with BS or CD, nor any variant of probable  are tested simultaneously in one well, while another well tests  pathogenic signiÜcance. for the normal allele in the Z mutation site. This format allows the  The 
E383 K mutation affects a highly conserved Glu residue which is  identiÜcation of homozygotes for the PiZ allele, which is the most  changes into a positively charged Lys. This change could inÝuence  common deÜciency variant. Positive samples can be veriÜed using  the function of the Walker B motif as a Mg2+-binding site. Further  a full genotyping assay on the Pronto§ AAT VeriÜcation Strip, where  functional and structural studies should be done to fully understand  each mutation is tested in two wells (mut and wt). The combination  the pathogenisity of this new mutation. of a general screening kit with the VeriÜcation Strip© provides a  complete and inexpensive tool to Ünd AAT mutation carriers. 
P0545 . X-inactivation patterns in female Beckwith-Wiedemann  Pronto§ AAT, the alternative kit, is a full genotyping assay, in which  patients each mutation is tested in two wells. This format has the added  beneÜt of a positive internal control for each tested sample. P. Hargreaves, A. Schinzel, A. Baumer;  Molecular diagnosis of AAT deÜciency would allow timely and  University of Z\x9erich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. effective treatment. Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a congenital overgrowth  condition caused by several multigenetic factors. BWS occurs at a  
P0543 . Amylin inhibits bone resorption while the calcitonin  much higher frequency than is expected in Monozygotic (MZ) twins,  receptor controls bone formation in vivo with these twins most often being discordant for the BWS phenotype.  R. Dacquin1, R. Davey2, C. Laplace3, R. Levasseur1, S. Goldring3, S. Gebre- Indeed, a recent study reports the incidence of BWS among both  Medhin4, D. Galson5, J. Zajac2, G. Karsenty1;  male and female MZ twins as being 8%, compared with a general  population incidence of 0.3-0.4%. In addition, female BWS MZ twins  1Department of Molecular and Human Genetics and Bone Disease Program of  made up 6.4% of the reported 8% MZ twinning frequency. These  Texas, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Department of  Ündings are also in accordance with numerous other studies. The Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 201 high proportion of BWS discordant MZ twins has led researchers  homozygous and 2 were heterozygous for the 550delA mutation. to believe that the process of X-inactivation may be involved in this  We screened 58 DMD/BMD sporadic cases without mutation in the  discordance. In this study we focus on the X-inactivation pattern  dystrophin gene and 550delA mutation was found in 4 cases (7%):  among singleton females with varying multigenetic causes of the  2 homozygous patients, 1 heterozygous and in 1 case the 550delA  BWS phenotype. We also investigate the parental origin of the X  mutation was combined with large deletion including the whole exon  chromosomes in subjects displaying a skewed X-inactivation pattern.  4 of the gene. The X-inactivation pattern among all subjects was investigated by  We screened 51 SMA type III patients with genetically unclear  analysis of the highly polymorphic (CAG)n repeat of the androgen  diagnose and LGMD2A was conÜrmed in 2 cases (4%): 1  receptor (AR) gene. The enzyme Hpa II was used to speciÜcally  heterozygous patient and 1 with 550delA mutation combined with  digest gemonic DNA containing the nonmethlyated (CAG)n repeat  large deletion. and the resulting polymerase chain reaction (PCR) yielded only the  Our results demonstrate that the 550delA mutation in the CAPN3  inactive, methylated X chromosome. Results will be shown. gene seems to be very frequent in the Bulgarian LGMD2A patients,  too. 
P0546 . A novel mutation in FGD1 gene (Aarskog syndrome) LGMD2A could be also considered in doubtful and genetically not  C. Bayerl1, S. Kleinle1, M. Leiseder1, J. M\x9ecke2, C. Nevinny-Stickel1;  conÜrmed DMD/BMD and SMA III cases because of the common  clinical Ündings in these neuromuscular disorders. 1Humangenetisches Labor, M\x9enchen, Germany, 2Praxis f\x9er Kinder- und Ju- Acknowledgements: Supported in part by grant N\xa0 7D/2003, SoÜa  gendmedizin, St. Ingbert, Germany. Medical University. Faciogenital dysplasia (FGDY), also known as Aarskog-Scott  syndrome, is an X-linked developmental disorder characterized by  
P0549 . Mutation and polymorphism analysis in the human  disproportionately short stature, macrocephaly and by facial, genital  EPM2B gene in Lafora disease patients and skeletal anomalies. The FGD1 gene, responsible for faciogenital  C. Gomez-Abad, P. Gomez-Garre, E. Gutierrez-Delicado, J. M. Serratosa;  dysplasia, was mapped to the Xp11.21 region. It is composed of  18 exons that span over 51kb of genomic DNA. The FGD1 cDNA  Fundaci\x96n Jim\x8dnez D\x91az, Madrid, Spain. encodes a 961 amino acid protein that acts as a guanine nucleotide  Progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the Lafora type or Lafora disease  exchange factor (GEF) and speciÜcally activates the p21 GTPase  is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by epilepsy,  Cdc42, a member of the Rho family of GTPase proteins. Rho  myoclonus, dementia and Periodic acid-Schiff-positive intracellular  GTPases play a critical role in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton  inclusion bodies. Two genes have been described as responsible  in a wide variety of eukaryotic cells. of Lafora disease: EPM2A and EPM2B. EM
P2 A, located on  To date only very few mutations (3 point mutations and a deletion of  chromosome 6q24, encodes for a putative tyrosine phosphatase  3 exons) in the FGD1 gene have been described in affected families.  called Laforin. EPM2B (denoted as NHLR
C1 ) is located on 6p22  We now report the Ünding of a novel FGD1 mutation, a stop mutation  and encodes for a putative 
E3  ubiquitin ligase called Malin. We now  in exon 2 (
E128 X) in a sporadic case from Germany. report haplotype and mutational analysis of the EPM2B gene in 32  chromosomes from 16 affected individuals. Eight novel mutations  
P0547 . New aspects of the moelcular basis of tuberous sclerosis were found: two nonsense mutations (W219stop and 
E67 stop), one  M. Hengstschl\x89ger;  6bp microdeletion (c880-885del6), one 4bp insertion (c1017insATCT)  and four missense mutations (
C68 Y, 
E67 Q, 
P264 H and D233A).  Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. To date a total of 13 mutations in EPM2B have been found in our  Tuberous sclerosis is an autosomal dominant tumor suppressor  family set, including previously reported mutations. We also have  gene syndrome. The genes TS
C1 , encoding hamartin, and TS
C2 ,  characterized two simple nucleotide polymorphisms (332C-T  encoding tuberin, are responsible for this disease. TSC genes have  and 18C-G). Haplotypes were constructed in order to determine  been shown to affect cell size control. Our group has shown that  haplotypic associations between EPM2B polymorphisms and EM
P2 B  TSC genes function as potent cell cycle regulators at the transition  mutations. 
P69 A is the predominant mutation and was found in 10  from the G1 phase to S phase by affecting the stability of the cyclin  chromosomes. The variability of the haplotypes associated with the  dependent kinase inhibitor p27 (JBC, 1997, 272:29301; PNAS,  
P69 A mutation supports the idea that 
P69 A is a recurrent mutation  1998, 95: 15653; Hum. Mol. Genet., 2000, 9:1721; Oncogene, 2001,  with several phylogenetics origins. All other mutations were found  20:4904; Oncogene, 2003, 22: 4786). Until now, the molecular  only in one or two chromosomes. We conclude that a remarkable  mechanism how TSC genes affect p27 stability remained elusive. We  genetic allelic heterogeneity is present in Lafora disease associated  now found that tuberin directly binds to p27 in vivo. This interaction  to mutations in EPM2B, and even the most common EPM2B  regulates p27 activity via affecting its SK
P2 -mediated proteolysis,  mutations have several phylogenetic origins. In our study, 73% of  its localization and its binding to 14-3-3 proteins. This is the Ürst  patients presented mutations in EPM2A and 27% in EPM2B. demonstration of the direct interaction of a tumor suppressor involved  in a genetic disease with the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p27. 
P0550 . Transciptional proÜling in SURF1 deÜcient Leigh  Syndrome 
P0548 . LGMD2A in Bulgarian patients caused by the 550delA  D. Deng;  CAPN3 gene mutation B. G. Georgieva1,2, A. P. Todorova1, I. L. Tournev3, V. I. Mitev2, I. M.  Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. Kremensky1;  Leigh syndrome (LS) is a phenotypic manifestation of a variety of  disorders of energy metabolism, most commonly COX deÜciency.  1SoÜa Medical University, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laboratory of  Because of locus heterogeneity associated with the clinical  Molecular Pathology, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 2SoÜa Medical University, Department of  phenotype, identifying the molecular basis for this disease and  Chemistry and Biochemistry, SoÜa, Bulgaria, 3SoÜa Medical University, Clinic of  other mitochondrial disorders remains difÜcult. We are interested  Neurology, Alexandrovska Hospital, SoÜa, Bulgaria. in designing alternative diagnostic strategies such as microarray  Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is caused by  analysis. Total RNA samples extracted from the cultured human  mutations in the muscle speciÜc calcium-activated neutral protease 3  Übroblasts were assayed by microarray analysis using the 18K  (CAPN3) gene, resulting in a calpain 3 protein. Most of the detected  Affymetrix chip. Data analysis was performed using both public  mutations (single nucleotide substitutions, small deletions/insertions)  domain (dChip) and commercial software (GeneSpring and Rosetta).  are private and scattered along the whole gene. Considering that the  We found that a candidate gene for LS, the COX assembly factor  550delA mutaion in exon 4 was reported as very frequent in patients  Surf1, was down-regulated approximately 4 fold, whereas other  from Russia, Ukraina and Turkey, we expected that this mutation  known assembly factors such as SCO2, Cu Chaperone, COX11,  would be also found in Bulgarian patents. COX10 and COX15 were unchanged. The sequence analysis to  We used SSCP method to detect the 550delA mutation. the Surf1 gene of this patient revealed one 10bp truncation followed  We analyzed 33 patients clinically diagnosed as LGMD of unknown  by a 2bp insertion within exon 4 on one allele, and a mutation from  type and LGMD2A was conÜrmed in 6 patients (18%): 4 were  Q196 to stop codon on the other allele, resulting in two null alleles. Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 202 Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showed that other genes  
P0553 . Molecular analysis of 66 cystic Übrosis carriers in Iranian  involved in the OXPHOS pathway were up-regulated, including  population. UCP-2. Furthermore, the expression of genes involved in energy  T. Hamzehloei;  metabolism down stream of the OXPHOS pathway was also  Pasteur institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). altered. For example, HIF was up-regulated 4.7 fold, and iNOS  Abstract was up-regulated 2.7 fold, while VEGFB was down-regulated  IdentiÜcation of mutations causing cystic Übrosis in the Iranian  approximately 5 times. Thus, transcriptional proÜling potentially offers  population is essential for assessment of the molecular basis of CF  an alternative approach, additional to the established diagnostic tests  in Iran and the development of strategies for prenatal diagnosis and  for clinical cases where molecular basis of disease exhibits genetic  genetic counseling. In this study, we report the mutations found in the  heterogeneity. 66 Iranian CF carriers with Heteroduplex analysis on MDE gel in 10  exons of CFTR gene. This study revealed a total of 36% mutations.  
P0551 . Chimeric CY
P21 P/CY
P21  and TNXA/TNXB genes in the  DelF508 was less frequent in Iranian population than in the European  RCCX module one. The Iranian CF mutations are compatible with the Mediterranean  H. H. Lee1, C. H. Huang2;  mutation panels. 1King Car Food Industrial Co., Ltd. Yuan-Shan Research Institute, Ilan, Taiwan  Republic of China, 2Department of Gyn/Obs. Taipei Municipal Ho-Ping Hospital,  
P0554 . GJB2 Mutations and the Ș (GJB6-D13
S1830 ) Deletion as  Taipei 106, Taiwan Republic of China. a Cause of ARNSD in the Kurdish Population In the RCCX module in chromosome 6p21.3 two types of chimeric  N. Mahdieh1, K. Ali-Madadi2, C. Nishimura3, H. Yazdan2, Y. Riazalhosseini1, S.  gene are described, CY
P21 P/CY
P21  and TNXA/TNXB. To date,  Kazemi2, R. J. H. Smith4, H. Najmabadi1;  four chimeric CY
P21 P/CY
P21  genes have been found as the  1University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Welfare & Rehabilitation  defective CY
P21  genes in congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).  Organization, Kermanshah, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Molecular  These molecules are composed of a 5Ó CY
P21 P-speciÜc sequence  Otolaryngology, Iowa, IA, United States, 4Molecular Otolaryngology Research  in common, but differ in the 3Ó- CY
P21 -speciÜc sequence. Among  Laboratories, Iowa, IA, United States. them, only one retained minor enzyme activity of the 21-hydroxylase.  Hearing impairment affects approximately 1 in 1000 neonates. In  The other three chimeras had no functional activity. As a result, the  half of these cases, the deafness is inherited, with mutations in  organization of the gene array is -
C4 A-CY
P21 P/CY
P21 -TNXB- in  GJB2 making up the largest fractional contribution in many world  the RCCX module. However, the chimeric TNXA/TNXB gene is  populations. GJB2 encodes Connexin 26 (Cx26), a gap junction  caused by CY
P21  deletion leading to a partial TNXB replaced by  protein expressed in non-sensory epithelial cells and the connective  TNXA sequence to produce the array -
C4 A-CY
P21 P-TNXA/TNXB- tissue cell gap junction system in the inner ear. The putative role of  . From recent studies, two such molecules have been found. The  Cx26 connexons is in maintaining the potassium concentration in the  two structures differed in the interchange region of the TNXA/TNXB  scala media. We studied 86 Kurdish families segregating severe-to- hybrid, which in one case was located between IVS 44 and exon 44  profound autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) to  of the TNXB gene and in the other extended to 120-bp beyond exon  determine the frequency of GJB2 and Ș(GJB6-D13
S1830 ) mutations  36 of the TNXB gene. Both chimeric CY
P21 P/CY
P21  and chimeric  in this population. Mutation screening was performed by allele- TNXA/TNXB produce a 3.2-kb fragment on TaqI digestion. Therefore,  speciÜc PCR, followed by DHPLC analysis of all samples excluding  we conclude that these two chimeric genes are two distinct molecules  35delG homozygotes. Direct sequencing was completed on samples  and the chimera TNXA/TNXB is involved in recessive Ehlers-Danlos  with abnormal elution proÜles. The Ș(GJB6-D13
S1830 ) mutation was  syndrome as well as 21-hydroxylase deÜciency. identiÜed by PCR-based ampliÜcation across the breakpoint region.  We identiÜed 6 mutations in exon 2 (35delG, R32H, del
E120 , R184P,  
P0552 . Alpha-globin gene deletion and point mutation analysis  R127H, and V153I) and one mutation in exon 1 (IV
S1 +1G>A). No  among in Iranian patients with microcytic hypochromic anemia. person carried the Ș(GJB6-D13
S1830 ) mutation. Fourteen individuals  M. Garshasbi1,2, S. Dadgar2, H. Y. Law3, M. Neishaboury2, C. Oberkanins4, W.  carried the 35delG allele (7 35delG homozygotes, 7 35delG  Krugluger5, H. Najmabadi1,2;  heterozygotes), which accounted for 62.5% of mutant alleles. In  1Kariminejad/Najmabadi Genetic and Pathology Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  decreasing order of frequency, other mutations like R32H, del
E120   Republic of), 2Genetics Research Center,The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation  and IV
S1 +1G>A have a causal role in deafness in this population,  Sciences University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Genetics Service,  with frequencies of 12.5%, 9.4% and 9.4%, respectively. The  KK WomenÓs and ChildrenÓs Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 4ViennaLab  IV
S1 +1G>A mutation is relatively uncommon in other populations and  Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 5Institute of Clinical Chemistry,  has not been previously identiÜed in Iran. Based on these data, GJB2  Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria. mutations account for approximately 22% of severe-to-profound  ABSTRACT: congenital deafness in the Kurdish population in Iran. Alpha-thalassemia (ŋ-thal) is one of the most common single-gene  diseases in the world. It is caused by a variety of deletional and non- 
P0555 . A novel 9 bp-deletion in the Ülamin A gene results in an  deletional ŋ-globin mutations, leading to a reduction or complete  OPD-spectrum disorder with a highly variable phenotype absence of gene expression. The genetic icidence for this disease  M. Stefanova1, P. Meinecke2, A. Gal3, H. Bolz3,4;  varies between 1% and 98% throughout the tropics and subtropics. 1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Altona Chidrens Hospital, Hamburg,  In this study we have tested 235 Iranian individuals, randomly chosen  Germany, 3University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4(Present  from a pool of patients with low MCV, low MCH, normal or slightly  address of HJB: University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. reduced Hb levels and normal HbA. Two single-gene deletions (- 2 Frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD; MIM#305620) is an X-linked  ŋ3.7, -ŋ4.2), Üve double gene deletions (--SEA, --MED, --THAI, --FIL, -(ŋ)20.5),  dominant osteochondrodysplasia characterized by prominent  and Üve point mutations (Hb Constant Spring, Hb Quong Sze, Hb  supraorbital ridges, defective dentition, micrognathia, hearing loss,  Pakse, Hb Adana, cd 30 delGAG,) were analyzed by PCR and  joint contractures, and undermodeled metaphyses of long bones.  reverse dot-blot methods, and ŋ-thal mutations were identiÜed in 150  Phenotypic similarities between FMD, the otopalatodigital syndromes  cases (63.8%). The following genotypes were observed: -ŋ3.7/ŋŋ (91  types 1 and 2 (OPD1 and OPD2), and Melnick-Needles syndrome  subjects), -a3.7/-a3.7 (24), --MED/aa (9), -a3.7/-a4.2 (3), -a3.7/--MED (1), -a4.2/- (MNS) have prompted speculations that these conditions might be  -MED (1), -a4.2/aa (9), -(a)20.5/aa (2), aCSa/aa (8), aCSa/aCSa (1) and -a3.7/ allelic. Recently, it has been shown that in-frame rearrangements  aCSa (1). In 85 individuals none of these mutations was found. in the Ülamin A gene (FLNA), encoding a protein involved in actin  Our study shows that the -ŋ3.7 single gene deletion is a very frequent  reorganization, are responsible for the four phenotypes, now called  cause of microcytic, hypochromic anemia in Iran, but other mutations  collectively ÐOPD-spectrum disordersÑ. The mutations identiÜed so far  such as Hb Constant Spring, --MED, -ŋ4.2 and -(ŋ)20 also seem to have  are clustered in Üve exons, encoding the actin-binding domain and  acceptable frequencies. rod domain repeats 3, 10, and 14/15. To date three FMD mutations  have been reported in exons 22 and 29 (rod domain repeats 10 and Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 203 14, respectively). Here we report the largest pedigree described to  
P0558 . SNP genotyping and association analysis of several  date that consists of 6 affected females and two affected males in  candidate genes of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  four generations. While females show FMD-typical symptoms of  identiÜed by expression proÜling variable expression, affected males die soon after birth or during  C. Vollmert1, W. Xiang2, O. Windl2, A. Rosenberger3, I. M. Westner4, I. Zerr4, H.  the Ürst years of life and present with a phenotype that overlaps  E. Wichmann1, H. Bickeb\x99ller3, S. Poser4, T. Illig1, H. Kretzschmar2;  with severe OPD2 and MNS (including kidney and urinary tract  1Institute of Epidemiology, GSF National Research Center for Environment and  anomalies). In the family reported here, the disease is caused by  Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Institute of Neuropathology, Ludwig-Maximili- a novel in-frame deletion of 9 base pairs predicting the exclusion  ans-University Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Genetic Epidemio- of three amino acids in the rod domain repeat 14 that conÜrms the  logy, University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany, 4Department of Neurology,  assumption that this part of the FLNA gene determines Ðsusceptibility  University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany. to FMDÑ. The aetiology of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), the most  common form of the human prion disease, remains obscure. The sole  
P0556 . Ș (GJB6-D13
S1830 ) is not a common cause of deafness  described genetic factor inÝuencing the susceptibility for this disease  in Iran. is a common polymorphism in the coding region of the PRNP gene  Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, C. Nishimura3, K. Kahrizi1, A. Daneshi4, S. Arzhangi1, M.  at codon 129. However, further major genetic predisposing factors  Mohseni1, N. Mahdieh1, M. Avenarius3, M. Joghataie1, K. Jalalvand1, R. J. H.  for sCJD are still unknown. Therefore, the aim of this study was the  Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  identiÜcation of informative polymorphisms additional to PRNP_129  1Genetics Research Center, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences  in candidate genes using an association study in the largest case- University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Khatam University, Tehran,  control study of sCJD. Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories,  We identiÜed several candidate genes which were differentially  Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States,  expressed in sCJD cases performing expression proÜling in humans  4Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran  and mice. These candidate genes included intracellular proteases,  (Islamic Republic of). metal/free radical chelating proteins, calcium binding proteins,  Mutations in the gene that encodes the gap-junction protein connexin  growth factors and high density lipoproteins. Thus their physiological  26 (GJB2) at the DFNB1 locus on chromosome 13q12 are the  involvement in prion diseases was highly probable. major cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural  By means of MALDI-TOF MS technique (MassArray, Sequenom, San  deafness (ARNSD) in many different populations. A fraction of  Diego) we genotyped 30 SNPs in eight candidate genes. Genotyping  patients with GJB2 mutations have only one mutant allele, and in  was performed in 584 sCJD cases and 749 healthy controls matched  some familial cases with linkage to the DFNB1 locus no mutations  for age and gender which were taken from a population based study  in GJB2 are reported. Recently, a large deletion involving the GJB6  performed in the city and region of Augsburg, Germany (KORA  gene encoding connexin 30 which is also located at the DFNB1  Survey 2000). The role of these SNPs as possible risk factors was  locus (Ș (GJB6-D13
S1830 )) has been reported to cause ARNSD  evaluated. Using this unique patient sample, we could evaluate  in homozygotes for this mutation and in compound heterozygotes  published data in PRNP and other genes which were derived from  carrying deafness-causing allele variants of GJB2 on the opposite  much smaller cohorts and produced conÝicting data. allele. To evaluate the importance of Ș (GJB6-D13
S1830 ) in the  Iranian population, we screened 127 deaf probands with ARNSD  
P0559 . A novel 12 base deletion in the cartilage  from various regions of the country. In 115 probands the GJB2 alleles  oligomatrix protein gene (COMP) seems to be causative in  were normal, the remaining 12 were heterozygote for only one GJB2  pseudoachondroplasia: molecular, radiologic and clinical  mutation. Screening for Ș (GJB6-D13
S1830 ) was completed using  Ündings in a 5 y old girl PCR primers that ampliÜed the breakpoint junction of this deletion (  O. Rittinger1, J. Kennedy2;  NEJM 2002; 346: 243-9). Ș (GJB6-D13
S1830 ) was not detected in  1Paracelsus Medizinische Privatuniversit\x89t Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria,  our subjects, suggesting that this mutation is not a common cause of  2National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom. non-syndromic deafness in Iran. Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH) is a dominantly inherited  osteochondrodysplasia characterised by short limb dwarÜsm and joint  
P0557 . Detection of rare and novel ¦-tathalassemia mutations in  hypermobility with normal face and intelligence. Growth retardation  the Iranian population is rarely recognized before the second year of life. To date, all cases  M. Habibi Roudkenar1, H. Najm Abadi2, D. Farhud3, P. Derakhshandeh4;  of PSACH have been ascribed to mutations in a particular region of  1pasteur institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Welfar and  the COMP gene. We report on a 5 y old girl, who was macrosomic at  rehabilitation university, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Tehran medical  birth due to maternal diabetes mellitus. Heigth was still on average  university, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 4Medical university of Tehran,  aged 1 year, later on growth velocity declined to the 3rd percentile  Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). associated with increasing dysproportionate aspect, accentuated  Beta-thalassemia, by its high freguency and hetrogeneity, constitues  lumbar lordosis, unusual plump and short hands and hyperextensible  a major health problem in Iran. It is the Ürst priority for the Health  joints. Diagnosis of PSACH was clinically suggested and further  Ministry among genetic disorders. Prevention of ¦-thalassemia  supported by X-ray Ündings. A very consistent radiologic sign was  requires knowledge of the molecular spectrum occuring in the  an anterior protrusion of the central aspects of the vertebral bodies  population at risk. This knowledge is necessary when a prevention  called ÐtonguingÑ. Molecular analysis of the most likely affected exons  protocol is applied to a multiethnic population. Thus the detection of  8-19 of the COMP gene revealed apart from two clinically irrelevant  all mutations of ¦-thalassemia in each population is the major goal in  polymorphism an novel 12 base deletion del nt 1528-1539 (Ș Ala  prevention, and is especially helpful for prenatal diagnosis. Up to now  Asp Lys Val) as an apparently de novo heterozygous mutation,  more than 200 different mutations in the ¦-globin gene have been  which was neither found in the parents nor in her healthy brother  reported. About 13 mutations encompass 70 to 90 percent of the  therefore being highly likely causative for PSACH. Recurrence  mutational spectrum in Iran.These mutations are called the common  risk, although low, could not be completely excluded because of  ¦-globin mutations in Iran. The other 10-30% are rare or unkown.  the possibility of germline mosaic, which seems to be the probable  In this study six mutations of the codon IVSI-130(G>C), Fr16(-C),  genetic background for the recurrence in sibs of unaffected parents. It  codon35(-C), fr23/24(-G), codon8(+G) and codon 20(GTG>GAG)  is worthwhile to mention that also some cases of multiple epiphyseal  are recognized and added to the spectrum of ¦-globin mutations in  dysplasia are caused by COMP mutations suggesting a continuous  Iran, using ARMS/PCR and DNA sequencing. The latter 3 cases are  phenotypic spectrum with both conditions enclosed. reported for the Ürst time in the world.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 204 
P0560 . Molecular basis of oculo-cutaneous albinism type 1  genes linked to SMA: the survival motor neuron (SMN) and neuronal  (OCA1)in Lebanon apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP). The objective of this study is  L. F. Zahed1, H. Zahreddine1, N. Shakar2, B. Noureddine1, N. Rebeiz1, P.  the molecular diagnosis of these genes in 26 SMA patients, 11  Zalloua2, F. Haddad1;  parents and 2 asymptomatic brothers from the Pediatrics Institute  of Rio de Janeiro; 40 non-related blood donors from the University  1American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Chronic Care  Hospital (control sample) and 40 myotonic distrophy patients from the  Center, Beirut, Lebanon. Neurology Institute. Nested PCR was used for both exons 7 and 8 of  Oculocunatenous albinism type 1 (OCA1) results from mutations  SMN gene, frequently deleted in SMA patients, followed by digestion  in the tyrosinase gene which lead to partial or complete loss of  and 12% poliacrilamide gel electrophoresis. For exons 5 and 6 of  enzymatic activity. A large number of mutations have been identiÜed  NAIP gene, PCR was performed followed by 2% agarose gel. In  worldwide, providing insight into the pathogenesis of the disorder. We  all groups but SMA patients, no deletions were observed neither in  performed ophthalmic and dermatological exams on 30 Lebanese  exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene, nor in exons 5 and 6 of NAIP gene. This  subjects with oculocutaneous albinism, then screened for mutations  study showed a high frequency of deletions in SMA patients (88%),  in the tyrosinase gene in an effort to establish the molecular basis of  and 32% in NAIP gene. It was not possible to avoid SMA diagnosis,  the disorder in our population and compare phenotypic Ündings. The  even in those patients without deletions. DNA study represents  5 exons of the gene together with the exon-intron boundaries and  an efÜcient conÜrmatory test for SMA patients, demanding a non- part of the promoter region were sequenced. Mutations were found in  invasive sample. a total of 13 patients (43%), while no mutations were identiÜed in the  sequenced regions in 57% of patients. Fourteen different mutations  
P0563 . Mutations in the First 90 Residues of the Alpha1(I)  were identiÜed, of which 8 were novel, while 6 had been previously  Collagen Chain Cause Combined Ehlers-Danlos and OI by  reported. Mutations were mainly seen in patients with clinical Ündings  Interference with N-propeptide Processing suggestive of OCA1A, therefore the absence of mutations in at least  W. A. Cabral1, E. Makareeva2, S. Leikin2, A. Colige3, A. D. Letocha1, J. Ty1, H.  some of the other patients may indicate the involvement of other  H. Yeowell4, G. Pals5, J. C. Marini1;  genes 1Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United  
P0561 . InÝammatory genes expression in focal myositis and  States, 2Section on Physical Biochemistry, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United  polymyositis using human microarrays States, 3University of Liege, Liege, Belgium, 4Duke University Medical Center,  Durham, NC, United States, 5VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. M. Aguennouz, C. Rodolico, C. Buemi, A. Toscano, A. Ciranni, C. Messina, G.  Vita;  Patients with OI/EDS form a distinct subset of osteogenesis  imperfecta patients. In addition to skeletal fragility, they have  Depart. of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology, University of  symptoms of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome. We identiÜed 7 children with  Messina, Italy. OI/EDS and investigated the mechanism of the combined disorder.  Objective: The purpose was to identify genes that are differentially  The probands have OI types III or IV, plus severe large and small joint  expressed in skeletal muscle of patients with focal myositis (FM) and  laxity and early progressive scoliosis without vertebral compression.  polymyositis (PM), searching for a molecular hallmark responsible of  In all probands, we delineated mutations in the Ürst 90 residues of the  the restricted inÝammatory phenomenon in FM. ŋ1(I) collagen chain. Methods: Microarray experiments were performed using ampliÜed  Processing of proband procollagen by N-proteinase is impaired.  RNA isolated in muscle specimens from Üve patients each with FM  Only 25% of proŋ1(I) with exon 7 mutations and 65-85% with  and PM, and Üve normal controls. A GeneChip microarrays panel of  exons 8-11 mutations was cleaved in vitro, despite an intact N- 160 human inÝammatory genes was used. proteinase cleavage site. Pericellular procollagen processing was  Results: 58 genes showed signiÜcantly increased expression in both  also delayed. The resulting pN-collagen incorporated efÜciently into  FM and PM. They included genes involved in immune response,  matrix deposited in culture by osteoblasts and Übroblasts. pN-ŋ1(I)  T-cell cytotoxicity, extracellular matrix breakdown, propagation  is especially prominent in newly incorporated and immaturely cross- of the inÝammatory process. We found higher activation of  linked fractions of osteoblast matrix. Dermal collagen Übrils of all  metalloproteinases (MMP) 9,12,13 in PM versus FM, and interpheron  probands have signiÜcantly reduced cross-sectional diameters, as  gamma (IFN-gamma) in FM versus PM. Adhesion molecule ICAM- in EDS VII. In differential scanning calorimetry, collagen containing  1 resulted abundantly expressed only in PM. Mn super-oxide- these mutations has a lower Tm than the corresponding procollagen,  dismutase, inducible nitric oxid synthase and interleukin-1-beta (IL-1  which is anchored by the N-propeptide. This implies that the  beta) were overexpressed only in FM. mutations interfere with pN-cleavage by disrupting a high-stability  Discussion: Microarray analysis is an effective tool for identifying  region at the N-terminus of the helix and unfolding the secondary  genes differently involved in the inÝammatory/immune response  structure of the adjacent N-proteinase cleavage site. Thus, the  of skeletal muscle during FM and PM. Exaggerated expression of  OI/EDS combined phenotype results from mutations in ŋ1(I) which  MMP-9, 12,13, and ICAM-1, facilitating lymphocyte adhesion and  directly cause bone dysplasia and indirectly cause EDS. The EDS  enhancing T-cell mediated cytotoxicity by degrading extracellular  component results from incorporation of collagen molecules with  matrix proteins, could contribute to extend inÝammatory process in  retained N-propeptide into matrix in culture and in vivo, as in EDS  PM. Conversely, selective upregulation of some genes seems to  VIIA. characterise FM. These Ündings may have practical implications  in considering therapeutic different approaches in inÝammatory  
P0564 . Screening of families with autosomal recessive non- myopathies. syndromic hearing impairment (ARNSHI) for mutations in GJB2  gene in Iranian Persian population. 
P0562 . Analysis of the SMN and NAIP genes in Brazilian Spinal  M. Mohseni1, S. Arzhangi1, C. Nishimura2, Y. Riazalhosseini1, M. Malekpour1,  Muscular Atrophy Patients. N. Bazazzadegan1, S. Mosayyebi1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, K. Kahrizi1, K.  V. G. Ramos1, P. H. A. Cabello1, A. P. Q. C. Ara\x9bjo2;  Jalalvand1, Y. Shafeghati1, R. J. H. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1;  1Oswaldo Cruz Institute - IOC (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Martag\x8ao  1The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, Iran  Gesteira Pediatrics Institute Rio de Janeiro University (IPPMG-UFRJ), Rio de  (Islamic Republic of), 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories,  Janeiro, Brazil. Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa,  Spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are the second most common  Iowa, IA, United States, 3Department of Otolaryngology, Rasoul Akram  neuromuscular disorders in childhood, with an incidence of 1/10.000  Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). births. SMAs are inherited motor neuron degenerative disorders  Mutations in the connexin 26 (Cx26) gene (GJB2) are a common  that cause progressive muscular weakness, with high mortality.  cause of hereditary hearing impairment. The GJB2 mutant allele,  Three types of SMA studied type I, which is the most severe form,  35delG, has been found to have a high prevalence in most ethnic  type II or intermediate form, and type III. They can be distinguished  groups. We analyzed 245 Persian families from different provinces  according severity, affected muscles or age at onset. There are two  in Iran with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment. Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 205 One proband from each family was initially screened for 35delG  Over 15 SCAs types are known, the most common are SCA 1, 2, 3,  mutation using allele-speciÜc PCR primers. The smaples that  however their geographical localization is diversed, depending on  were heterozygous or negative for 35delG mutation were analized  ethnical origin and founder effect. by DHPLC and direct sequencing. Only 34 patients (13.9%) had  Molecular diagnostics of SCAs due to dynamic mutations has been  GJB2-related deafness. Overall, in descending order of frequency,  carried on in the Department of Genetics in the Institute of Psychiatry  mutations found in the patients studied were as follows: 35delG,  and Neurology since 1998, and now molecular tests are available  V153I, R127H, W24X, del
E120 , -3170G>A, R184P, 310del14,  for 7 types of SCAs: SCA 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 12 and 17. During 5 years  314del14, V27I, V27I+
E114 G, 167delT, 329delA, I69I. The V153I and  we have detected 3 types of autosomal dominant ataxias: SCA 1, 2  V27I variations are polymorphisms, 329delA and I69I are unknown  and 17. Genetic analyses, both symptomatic and predictive testing  mutations. The low frequency of GJB2 mutations in the Persian deaf  embraced over 711 individuals. population is not in agreement with most of the studies reported  In 202 pathogenic expansions of CAG repeats were detected in loci  from other contries, which implies the contribution of other loci in the  speciÜc of different types of SCA. Among those 149 were manifesting  Iranian Persian deaf population. symptoms of ataxia and 52 were in preclinical stage of the disease; in  one case prenatal test was performed. Affected subjects are grouped  
P0565 . InÝuence of marriage distance on Pregnancy Loss in 83 pedigrees: 68 SCA1, 14 SCA2 and 1 SCA17 (overall group  A. Petrin1, B. Ginzburg2, E. Ginzburg3;  comprises all cases recorded in Poland). Moreover, in 5 pedigrees, we came across an increased CTG repeats  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Regio- number within SCA8 gene. nal Hospital of Kaluga, Kaluga, Russian Federation, 3Kaluga Regional Hospital,  Kaluga, Russian Federation. 
P0567 . Analysis of exonic polymorphisms leading to exon  The aim of work was to study the inÝuence of marriage distances in  skipping in the cystinuria gene SL
C7 A9 Kaluga Region on pregnancy loss. C. Schmidt, K. Zerres, T. Eggermann;  Six types of marriages were revealed: evident blood relationship;  sympatric marriages-married couple of one nationality originated  University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany. from one or from neighboring villages (no more than 10 km.);  Cystinuria is a common inherited disorder of renal reabsorption of  intraprovincial marriages-married couple of one nationality from  cystine and dibasic amino acids that results in cystine urolithiasis.  not neighboring villages (more than 10 km) of one rural region;  The disease is caused by defects in the heterodimeric amino acid  interprovicial marriages-married couple of one nationality from  transporter rBAT/b0,+AT localized in the luminal membrane of renal  different provinces of one region; interregional marriages-married  tubules and intestine. While mutations in the SL
C3 A1 gene cause  couple of one nationality from different regions and international  cystinuria type A, patients with cystinuria type B carry mutations in  marriages. the SL
C7 A9 gene. However, the role of further genes and modifying  Selection of families with Pregnancy Loss is presented in that way:  factors in the aetiology and clinical manifestation of cystinuria has  families with one miscarriage - Pregnancy loss (PL) mode up 391  been postulated. We recently demonstrated that the allelic distribution  families, with two and more miscarriages Usual pregnancy loss (UPL)  of speciÜc variants in the SL
C7 A9 gene is statistically signiÜcant  - 471. Control -272 families. different between cystinuria patients and controls. Based on this  The comparison of miscarriage types in the families with PL and UPL  observation we designed minigene approaches to determine the  according to He-Test, showed that the selections statistically donÓt  role of the variants in exons 5 and 6 of SL
C7 A9 in slicing processes.  differ (p < 0,002). This fact allows to combine the studied groups and  CO
S7  cells were transfected with expression constructs containing  to analyze them in comparison with control jointly. different haplotypes, cDNAs derived from the resulting mRNAs were  analyzed. Thereby we could demonstrate that the different alleles  Types of marriages PL + UPL (n=862) Control (n=272) cause alternative splicing by exon skipping. Two of the analyzed  n % n % variants are located within exonic splicing enhancers. We therefore  1. 5 0,58 - - hypothesise that the SL
C7 A9 polymorphisms in exons 5 and 6  evident blood inÝuence the gene expression level of SL
C7 A9 and may therefore  2. account for the variable penetrance of mutations in this gene. 23 2,67 5 1,84 sympatric 3. 
P0568 . Molecular detection of SMNt deletion in SMA patients in  83 9,63 31 11,40 intraprovincial Iranian population over a six-year period 4. K. Kahrizi1, R. Kariminejad2, A. Ghamari1, Z. Golkar2, Y. Shafeghati1, N.  304 35,27 95 34,93 interprovicial Almadani2, F. Afrozan2, M. H. Kariminejad2, H. Najmabadi2;  5. 1The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Genetics Research  355 41,18 118 43,38 interregional Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Kariminejad ÎNajmabadi Path. &  6. Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). 92 10,67 28 10,29 international Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive  He-Test 0,978 neuromuscular disorder. One of the candidate genes for this disease  SufÜciently high comparison of family marriage structure with PL  is survival motor neuron gene (SMN) that exists in two nearly  and the control enables us to assume that marriage distances in  identical copies, telomeric SMN (SMNt) and centromeric SMN  population being studied is not an essential factor inÝuencing on PL  (SMNc). The two genes differ in their exons by only two base pairs,  frequency. one in exon 7 and one in exon 8 that allow them to be distinguished  by restriction site assay. 
P0566 . Molecular testing for spinocerebellar ataxias in Poland:  DNA extracted from blood samples was ampliÜed by PCR. The  Üve years of experience. PCR products were digested by restriction enzymes, DraI and DdeI,  and subsequently analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  W. Krysa, A. Sulek, D. Hoffman-Zacharska, E. Zdzienicka, E. Fidzianska, J.  followed by silver staining. The ratios of band intensities (SMNt/ Zaremba;  SMNc) were indicative of carrier (heterozygous deletion of SMNt) or  Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. affected (homozygous deletion of SMNt) status of the samples. The hereditary, late onset, spinocerebellar ataxias are clinically and  Over a six-year period, we have studied 128 clinically diagnosed  genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders, all  SMA families for exon 7 and exon 8 deletions in SMNt gene. All of  characterized by variety of symptoms, including progressive ataxia  these families were referred for carrier detection and 47 families  and dysarthria resulting from degeneration of the cerebellum, brain  were also referred for prenatal diagnosis. We have been able to  stem and spinocerebellar pathways. These disorders exhibit also the  determine the carrier status of 112 families of 128 families referred  anticipation phenomenon: an increase of severity and earlier onset of  for carrier detection. In 14 families we could conÜrm the carrier status  the disease in successive generations. only in one of the individuals. A total of 47 prenatal diagnoses were Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 206 carried out, of which, 28, 7 and 9 were carrier, affected, and normal  
P0571 . A Novel AT
P2 A2 mutation in a Jewish family with DarierÒs  respectively. In 3 cases we could not determine whether the fetuses  disease were trait or normal, and they were reported as Trait/normal. L. Peleg1, M. Karpati1, B. Goldman1, B. Amichai2;  1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 2Department  
P0569 . A novel mutation (R334X) in SMARCA
L1  gene in a patient  of Dermatology, Huzot Clinic of Clalit health Servises, Ashkelon, Israel. with Schimke Immuno-osseus Dysplasia (SIOD) DarierÓs disease (DD) is an autosomal dominant skin disorder  S. Reif1, G. Horneff2, C. F. Boerkoel3, H. Thiele1, I. Hansmann1, D. Wand1;  characterized by loss of adhesion between epidermal cells and  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle/Saale, Germany,  abnormal keratinization. The disease has a world wide distribution  2Universit\x89tskinderklinik, Halle/Saale, Germany, 3Department of Molecular and  with a varied prevalence. Defects in the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum  Human Genetics, Baylor College, Houston, TX, United States. Ca2+ ATPase type 2 underlie DD. The encoding gene AT
P2 A2 is  SIOD (OMIM # 242900) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder  positioned on chromosome 12q23-24 and has 21 exons. To date 140  characterized by the combination of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, a  mutations had been identiÜed in familial and sporadic cases of DD. peculiar clinical phenotype, numerous lentigines, slowly progressive  The aim of this study was to identify the genetic defect in a Jewish  immune defect and an immune-complex nephritis. SIOD is  family with DD: affected mother and healthy twins (3 months).  characterized by a marked variation in severity, ranging from in  Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and PCR was  utero onset of growth retardation and death early in childhood to  carried out to amplify the exons of the AT
P2 A2 gene, including the  a milder course with onset late in the Ürst decade or early second  Ýanking intron regions. PCR products were subjected to automated  decade of life (juvenile type). In approx. seventy percent of SIOD  sequencing (ABI 3100 Avant Genetic analyzer). Taq I restriction  patients mutations within the SMARCA
L1  gene (SWI/SNF2-related,  analysis was carried out on 3% agarose gel. matrix associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily  A change of C to T at position 391, altering amino acid Arginine 131  a-like 1) have been found (Boerkhoel CF et al., Nat. Genet. 30: to stop codon (R131X) in exon 5 was identiÜed in the mother and the  215-220, 2002). We report about a 6 year old boy, the Ürst child  pre-symptomatic twins. The change caused an elimination of Taq I  of non-consanguineous parents, with disproportionate dwarÜsm,  restriction site. The mutation was not present in 50 healthy individuals  nephrotic syndrome, neutropenia, a T-cell-immunodeÜciency,  of the same ethnic origin. lentigines and an atrial septal defect. Intrauterine growth retardation  A novel mutation in three members of a family was identiÜed. This  was diagnosed sonographically. He was born per caesarian section  is the third mutation found in codon 131. The Ürst: G392A in three  at week 36 of gestation with a weight of 1390g, a length of 43cm  patients, two of the same family and G392T was a sporadic case.  and a head circumference of 27,5cm. The karyotype was 46,XY.  This codon is located in a highly conserved domain in the cytoplasmic  According to clinical Ündings the diagnosis of SIOD was considered.  ¦Îstrand domain. Direct sequencing of both sense and antisense strands of the 2  noncoding and 16 coding exons of SMARCA
L1  showed compound  
P0572 . àUsherin mutations in autosomal recessive Retinitis  heterozygosity for mutations in exon 3 and 4. The mutation in exon  Pigmentosa Spanish familiesÒ 3 causes a missense error (F279S) and has been found already in  S. Bernal1, M. Calaf1, E. del Rio1, B. Garcia-Sandoval2, C. Ayuso2, M. Baiget1;  other SIOD patients. The mutation in exon 4 causes a premature  1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundaci\x96n Jim\x8dnez D\x91az, Madrid,  termination (R334X) and is a novel mutation among patients with  Spain. SIOD. The USH2A gene has been shown to be associated with Usher type  II and recent data indicate that non-syndromic autosomal recessive  
P0570 . INNO-LiPA MB
L2 : a validated genotyping assay for  Retinitis Pigmentosa (ARRP) could also be caused by mutations in  mannose-binding lectin (MB
L2 ) this gene. M. Duhamel1, M. Van Thielen1, K. De Vreese1, M. Bl\x89ser1, F. Hulstaert1, R.  In an earlier work, we identiÜed the 
C759 F mutation in 6 out of 196  Steffensen2, K. Varming2, L. Nuytinck1;  ARRP families. The mutational analysis of these cases was extended  1Innogenetics NV, Gent, Belgium, 2Regional Centre for Blood Transfusion and  to the complete coding region of the USH2A gene. Missense,  Clinical Immunology, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark. nonsense, frameshift and splice mutations were found in these  There is a growing interest in mannose-binding lectin (MB
L2 ) due to  families (1). its role in innate immunity. MB
L2  is a pattern recognition molecule  We studied 85 unrelated non-syndromic ARRP patients without the  capable of binding to the surface of a broad range of microorganisms.  
C759 F mutation allele. MB
L2  activates the complement system through the action of MBL- All the 21 coding exons of the USH2A gene were ampliÜed from  associated serine proteases (MASPs) leading to opsonization.  the leukocyte DNA. AmpliÜed fragments were scanned using SSCP  Several DNA polymorphisms have been characterized, six of which  and direct sequencing. We identiÜed three different mutations in the  are known to result in considerable variations in the quantity [- USH2A gene: 544_6delAA; 2299delG and G713R. 550G>C, -221G>C, +4C>T in promoter and 5ÓUTR] and functionality  These mutations in USH2A gene were identiÜed, in heterozygous  [R52C, G54D, G57E in exon 1] of MB
L2  in serum. A deÜciency of  state in 4 patients. In neither of these patients was a change in the  soluble MB
L2  increases susceptibility to infection and may constitute  other allele found. Segregation analysis conÜrm the pathogenecity of  a signiÜcant risk factor when immunity is additionally compromised  these variations. by another primary defect or by secondary immune deÜciency. For  Based on these data, USH2A mutations were found in 4,7% of cases  example, MB
L2  can affect the course of cystic Übrosis (CF) where it  with autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa. has been demonstrated that mutations in MB
L2  reduce survival of CF  The wide range of phenotypes associated with Usherin mutations  patients. highlights the increasing complexity of the relationship between  A rapid assay was developed to genotype these 6 variations. The  pathogenetic mutations and disease phenotype. INNO-LiPA MB
L2  test comprises one multiplex ampliÜcation followed  This work was supported by grant FIS (02/0052; EsResNet) and the  by reverse hybridization on a strip with 12 speciÜc probes. The assay  ONCE. was validated internally on blood and buccal cell samples. Allele  and haplotype frequencies in a healthy, Caucasian population were  
P0573 . FKRP (826C>A) frequently causes limb girdle muscular  calculated, also in-house. An external validation study on sixty blood  dystrophy in German patients samples with well-characterized MB
L2  genotypes (PCR-SSP/real- M. C. Walter1, J. A. Petersen1, R. Stucka1, D. Fischer2, R. Schr\x99der2, M. Vor- time PCR) including the 7 commonly found MB
L2  haplotypes, was  gerd3, A. Schroers3, H. Schreiber4, C. O. Hanemann4, U. Knirsch4, A. Rosen- performed. Full agreement with the reference results was obtained. bohm4, A. Huebner5, N. Barisic6, R. Horvath7, S. Komoly7, P. Reilich1, W. M\x9eller- This novel assay which is easy and accurate, will allow MB
L2   Felber1, D. Pongratz1, J. S. M\x9eller1, E. A. Auerswald1, H. Lochm\x9eller1;  genotyping/haplotyping of large patient cohorts in any molecular lab. 1Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Genzentrum and Dept. of Neurology, Munich, Germany,  2Dept. of Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Dept. of Neurology,  Ruhr University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 4Dept. of Neurology, University Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 207 of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 5Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Dresden, Dresden,  microsatellite markers for DNA linkage analysis. Presymptomatic  Germany, 6Dept. of Pediatrics, Zagreb Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia, 7Dept.  DNA diagnosis was performed in 212 unrelated ADPKD families of Neurology, Jahn Ferenc Teaching Hospital, Budapest, Hungary. The direct detection of PKD2 mutation was performed in 121  A novel gene (FKRP) was found to be responsible for both a form of  nonrelated individuals. We detected twenty Üve mutations ; 10  congenital muscular dystrophy (MD
C1 C) and a form of limb girdle  mutations unique for Czech population. We identiÜed the nonsense  muscular dystrophy (LGMD2I). Our work aimed to investigate the  mutations in 9 patients (36%), the frameshifting mutations in 13  frequency of FKRP (826C>A) in a large cohort of LGMD patients and  patients (52%) and 3 missense mutations (12%). The mean age of  to correlate these Ündings with the clinical phenotype. ESRF of PKD2 patients in Czech population was 68 years (from 64  We present clinical and genetic data of 20 LGMD2I patients from  years to 80 years). 19 unrelated families. Neurological examination, diagnostic muscle  The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the  biopsies including immunohistochemistry and sequence analysis of  PKD1 gene was performed in 12 families with linkage to PKD1 gene.  FKRP were performed in this cohort. We detected two mutations in one family- the insertion of three bases  Interestingly, one single point mutation (826C>A) leading to an  in intron 41 (NT: 11534+2insGGG; AA: IV
S41 +2insGGG; Gene Bank:  amino acid exchange (Leu276Ile) was associated with a relatively  
L33243 ) described by Perrichot and new large deletion of 34 bases  benign clinical phenotype. We identiÜed the previously described  in intron 42 (NT: 11710-28del34 ; AA: IV
S42 -28del34; Gene Bank:  FKRP mutation (826C>A) in 20 patients. Thirteen patients  
L33243 ). The described mutation did not segregate with the disease  were homozygous for the mutation and seven were compound  in the family. heterozygous. In all patients heterozygous for the 826C>A mutation,  Establishment of localisation and type of mutations and their  a second heteroallelic mutation was detected; two mutations had  genotype - phenotype correlation in ADPKD families will improve DNA  been described before, four mutations are novel. Interestingly, muscle  diagnosis and could help to assess the clinical prognosis of ADPKD  pain and myoglobinuria were the earliest presenting symptoms in  patients most patients. Supported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NE/7633-3 In summary, LGMD2I is frequently caused by a single missense  mutation of the FKRP gene, namely 826C>A (Leu276Ile). This may  
P0576 . Do genomic variants in IGF2 and CDKN1C contribute to  simplify the diagnostic workup for LGMD patients of European origin. the etiology of Silver-Russell syndrome? T. Eggermann1, C. Obermann1, E. Meyer1, S. Prager1, J. Tomiuk2, H. A. Woll- 
P0574 . DAZ gene diversity and genomic plasticity in AZFc:  mann3;  Structural artwork functional for human spermatogenesis 1Institute of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute of Anthropology and  P. H. Vogt1, S. Fernandes1, S. Paracchini2, C. Tyler-Smith3;  Human Genetics, T\x9ebingen, Germany, 3University Childrenªs Hospital, T\x9ebin- 1Section Molecular Genetics & Infertility; Women Hospital, University of  gen, Germany. Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Wellcome Trust Center for Human  Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a heterogeneous syndrome with  Genetics, Univesrity of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Wellocme Trust  evidence for a substantial role of genetic factors in its etiology.  Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Apart from other clinical key features, severe intrauterine and  Today, AZFc deletions in Yq11 are known as the most frequent  postnatal growth retardation are the dominant characteristics of  worldwide genetic lesion causing male infertility. They are a  SRS. Therefore, studies on the genetic basis of the disease aimed  genomic disorder produced by intrachromosomal recombinations  on genes involved in growth and its regulation. Another key for  between large repetitive sequence blocks called amplicons.  the identiÜcation of (a) SRS gene(s) is the Ünding of chromosomal  Different amplicons organised in large palindromic structures  disturbances in SRS patients: recently, four growth retarded  form the entire AZFc sequence (4.5 Mb). Therefore, it can be  patients carrying maternally inherited duplication in 11p15 have  predicted that this Y region has a high genomic plasticity with  been described, two of these cases presented SRS-like features.  multiple genomic rearrangements and its gene content is probably  The same region includes the genes IGF2 and CDKN1C and is  functionally redundant. We addressed this question with respect  well known to harbour genomic alterations in patients suffering  to the multi-copy DAZ gene family in AZFc, analysing its putative  from Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, one of the established  functional redundancy by studying its diversity in men with normal  imprinting syndromes. Considering these different observations, a  fertility and with infertility. For this purpose we established single  growth retardation syndrome in 11p15 as the opposite phenotype to  nucleotide variant (SNV) markers spanning 3 Mb of the genomic  overgrowth is conceivable. AZFc sequence, especially around the 4 DAZ gene copies. In  We therefore decided to perform an extensive search of the IGF2  fertile men we identiÜed 17 AZFc haplotypes and linked them to  and CDKN1C genes mutations which cause growth disturbances.  speciÜc Y chromosomal lineages (Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74:180-187,  More than 40 SRS patients were screened for mutations by different  2004). Genetic redundancy was found for DAZ3 and DAZ4 genes,  detection strategies, allele frequencies of the identiÜed variants were  which were both deleted in all men belonging to Y haplogroup N.  compared between patients and controls. Our results suggest that in humans, the DAZ genes are functional  In case of IGF2, slight differences in the allelic distribution of speciÜc  redundant and the AZFc sequence now published in GenBank has  polymorphisms between SRS patients and controls were observed,  multiple genomic variations. Since the most recent ancestor of the N  now analysis of larger cohorts of patients are needed to validate this  haplogroup lived ~10,000 years ago, it is an ancient and successful  observation. In CDKN1C, several variants could be detected in both  Y lineage, common throughout northern Europe and Asia. Great  cohorts, but only one patient showed a so far unknown maternally  care must therefore be taken when partial AZFc-Y deletions are  inherited variant; its putatively regulatory function makes further  discovered in infertile men and their phenotypic consequences for the  investigations necessary. patientªs fertility need to be predicted. 
P0577 . Candidate gene testing for Emery-Dreifuss muscular  
P0575 . DNA analysis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney  dystrophy disease in Czech families C. Bethmann, C. Wasner, M. Wehnert;  J. Stekrova1, J. Reiterova1, M. Merta1, J. Zidovska1, V. Kebrdlova1, R.  Institute of Human Genetics, Greifswald, Germany. Gaillyova2, M. Kohoutova1;  Until now two genes, STA and LMNA, have been associated to  1General Teaching Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University in  Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). Scanning 93 patients  Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Hospital in Brno, Brno, Czech  suffering EDMD or associated phenotypes at the Institute of Human  Republic. Genetics Greifswald revealed that mutations in STA and LMNA  Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the  together account only for 36 % of the cases. Obviously, further  most common hereditary renal disease. The disease is caused by  genes are likely to be involved in EDMD. Forced by the lack of  mutations of PKD1 (affecting roughly 85 % of ADPKD patients)  families suitable for a classic positional cloning approach we started  and PKD2 (14 % of ADPKD patients) genes.DNA presymptomatic  a functional candidate gene approach.So far we considered such  diagnosis is performed in our laboratory, using highly polymorphic  genes as candidates for EDMD that encode (1) functionally related Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 208 proteins to emerin and lamin A/C including LMNB1, LMNB2, LBR,  with consensus sequences in order to detect the presence of any  LA
P1 , LA
P2 , NRM and MAN1 or (2) proteins interacting with emerin  change. and/or lamin A/C including Narf, Zmpste24, BAF, DDX16, PSM
E3 ,  Results: A novel missense mutation in Clarin-1 gene, 
C40 G,  SREBF1, YT521B. Additionally, a third group of candidates were  was homozygously identiÜed in one patient suffering from Usher  those, which are expressed speciÜcally in heart and skeletal muscle  syndrome type III. Î the preferentially affected tissues in EDMD (FLNC, SMPX, POP 1- Four different changes, not previously described, were  3, AKAP 7, Nesprin1 and Nesprin2). Until now we have studied 22  heterozygously detected in SANS gene: G338R was found in 2  genes in 95 patients from germany. BAF, LA
P1 , LMNB2 and SMPX  patients; 176C>T, 
P28 L and R346W were identiÜed in other 3  were proven to be monomorphic. We identiÜed two unique variations  affected individuals respectively. The pathogenic implications of these  in DDX16 (R125Q, T810M), four in Nesprin1ŋ (29A>G, N323H,  changes are already not clear. V572L, 
E646 K), one in SrebF1 (R812Q), one in LA
P2  (
E384 K),  Conclusions: The genes Clar\x91n-1 and SANS are involved in a very  one in NRM (715C>A) and one in FLNC (6508C>T), which were not  low percentage of Usher syndrome cases in Spain. detectable in the reference population. None of the DNA variants  have so far been associated to EDMD. To validate these unique  
P0580 . Implications of del35G/GJB2 mutation analysis in  variations, in vitro mutagenesis and transfection experiments are  evaluation of hearing impairment required to Ünd evidence for a pathogenic effect. I. Medica1, G. Rudolf2, M. Balaban1, I. Prpic3, M. Stanojevic4, B. Peterlin2;  1Outpatient Pediatric Clinic, Pula, Croatia, 2Division of Medical Genetics,  
P0578 . High mutation frequency in clinically and genetically  Gynecology Clinic, University Hospital Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Division of  characterized families with autosomal dominant dopa- Neonatology, Gynecology Clinic, University Hospital Centre, Rijeka, Croatia,  responsive dystonia (DYT5a) 4Division of Neonatology, Gynecology Dept, Sv Duh General Hospital, Zagreb,  K. Hedrich1, J. Hagenah1, K. Kabakci1, K. Habermann2, K. Mohrmann1, D.  Croatia. Raymond2, K. Wiegers1, T. G. Nygaard2, L. J. Ozelius3, E. Schwinger1, S. B.  Congenital hearing loss affects 1/500 children, 4% of people  Bressman2, R. Saunders-Pullman2, C. Klein1;  younger than 45 years have hearing loss problem, mutation del35G/ 1University of L\x9ebeck, L\x9ebeck, Germany, 2Beth Israel Medical Center, New  GJB2 gene being the most common cause of heritable deafness.  York, NY, United States, 3Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, Uni- Considering also the need of early intervention and precise genetic  ted States. counselling, early detection and exact etiology has become a public  Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a childhood-onset movement  health problem. In our study 87 subjects (including 11 newborns  disorder characterized by excellent sustained response to low- diagnosed after neonatal screening) prelingually-deafened and  dose levodopa. Most DRD is autosomal dominantly inherited with  nonsyndromic were analyzed for the presence of del35G/GJB2  reduced penetrance. In about 50-60% of cases, mutations in the  mutation, by allele-speciÜc PCR. In 31 cases del35G mutation was  GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCHI) gene have been detected by SSCP/ found in homozygous status and in 6 cases the mutation was found in  sequence analysis including many different sequence alterations.  heterozygous state. These positive results enable for speciÜc patients  Recently, a heterozygous exon deletion has been identiÜed by  the etiologic diagnosis and provide genetic information, but they have  Southern Blot analysis in a single family. To test for the signiÜcance  also therapeutic implications, the patients with the deletion having  of large heterozygous large deletions/multiplications, we developed a  the best performance in rehabilitation after cochlear implantation.  quantitative duplex PCR assay using the LightCycler. We report here  Molecular analysis has become a routine procedure in diagnosis,  the results of a systematical mutational screen on 79 samples from  differential diagnosis and genetic evaluation of patients with hearing  26 typical DRD families using sequence analysis and quantitative  loss. Molecular screening for del35G in GJB2 gene was introduced  duplex PCR (gene dosage studies). as component of neonatal screening program for hearing impairment. We included 39 patients with clinically typical DRD and 40 unaffected  family members from 26 multiethnic families. Index patients had  
P0581 . Frequency of EXT1 and EXT2 deletions in hereditary  a mean age at onset of 6.9°3.5 years (range: 1-12 years). We  multiple exostoses. detected mutations, including two large exonic deletions, in 81%  W. Wuyts1, R. Radersma1, J. Hecht2, L. Vits1, S. Scheers1, M. Breuning3, S.  of the families (21/26). Thirty-three affected and eleven unaffected  White3;  family members carried mutations, conÜrming reduced penetrance.  1Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University of Texas  Sixteen alterations represent novel mutations and further expand  Houston Medical Center, Houston, TX, United States, 3Center for Human and  the mutational spectrum in GCHI. We found a higher frequency of  Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. mutations in GCHI compared to previous studies, probably due to  Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is an autosomal dominant  rigorous inclusion criteria and a more comprehensive mutational  bone disorder characterized by the presence of bony outgrowths  analysis. Exon deletions account for about 10% of mutations in GCHI,  (exostoses) on the long bones. HME is a genetically heterogeneous  underlining the importance of gene dosage studies. Interestingly,  condition with at present two causal genes identiÜed: EXT1 on  one family exhibited a deletion of all six GCHI exons that would be  chromosome 8q23-q24 and EXT2 on chromosome 11p11.2. Previous  undetectable by Southern Blot analysis. studies have shown that screening of the coding region of both  genes in HME patients by standard screening methods such as  
P0579 . Mutation screening of Clarin-1 and SANS genes in  direct sequencing of PCR products, SSCP or DHPLC results in the  Spanish patients with Usher syndrome identiÜcation of a disease causing mutation in approximately 80% of  E. Aller1,2, T. Jaijo1, S. Oltra1, C. N\x86jera2, M. Beneyto1, J. M. Mill\x86n1;  the cases. To increase the sensitivity of HME mutation analysis we  1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Universidad de Valencia, Valen- optimized the mutation screening protocol for both EXT1 and EXT2. cia, Spain. For all coding exons DHPLC conditions were optimized and validated  Instroduction: The Usher syndrome is a recessive hereditary disorder  in a large set of 50 HME patients with a known EXT1 or EXT2  characterized by the association of retinitis pigmentosa, sensorineural  mutation. All mutations could be detected under at least 1 DHPLC  hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction. condition, providing a robust and sensitive alternative for labor  Clarin-1 and SANS are 2 of the 8 different genes found to be  extensive and more expensive sequencing analysis. associated to this syndrome to date. A set of 20 patients showing no mutation after extended sequence  Objective: Mutational screening of Clarin-1 and SANS genes in  analysis was further analyzed by FISH, MLPA and RNA analysis.  order to detect the mutations responsible for the disease in Spanish  Deletions involving the EXT1 gene were detected in 5 patients while  patients with Usher syndrome. part of EXT2 was deleted in 1 patient. One patient showed loss of  Material and Methods: Genomic DNA of 119 unrelated patients  one EXT1 allele on the RNA level but the underlying cause is still  clinically diagnosed of Usher syndrome type I, II or III was extracted  under investigation. These results show that a signiÜcant portion of  from peripheral blood samples. HME patients show large deleterious mutations which are missed by  Clarin-1 and SANS exons and intron/exon boundaries were ampliÜed  conventional PCR and directly sequenced. The sequences obtained were compared Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 209 
P0582 . Germline BRCA1 5382insC mutation in a couple with  molecular basis for liver involvement is unknown. To assess the  breast cancer genotype/ phenotype correlations concerning liver involvement in  G. Cecener1, U. Egeli1, O. Vatan2, B. Tunca1, I. Tasdelen3;  HHT, we screened the two known HHT disease loci, the ACVR
L1  and  ENG genes, for mutations in a clinically well- characterized group of  1Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and  HHT patients with or without liver involvement. Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 2Uludag University, Faculty of Science, Department of  We identiÜed mutations in the ACVR
L1  gene in eight out of 10 HHT  Biology, Bursa, Turkey, 3Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of  patients with hepatic manifestation. No mutations could be identiÜed  General Surgery, Bursa, Turkey. in the remaining two HHT patients with liver involvement. Among nine  Breast cancer is the most common feminine malignancy worldwide  HHT patients without liver involvement, four had mutations in the  but type of this cancer in couples is rare clinical feature. There are  ACVR
L1 , and three in the ENG gene. In this study, we have identiÜed  a few study in this issue in the literature. Hereditary breast cancer  six novel ACVR
L1  and two ENG disease-causing mutations. We  syndromes can be caused by loss-of-function germline mutations  conclude that hepatic manifestation in HHT patients is associated  in one of the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. The  with mutations in the ACVR
L1  gene, but rarely caused through ENG  frequency of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers in women with  mutations. breast cancer depend on the study population. The most notable  example of founder mutations in these genes is the Ashkenazi  
P0585 . Twenty novel mutations revealed by DHPLC analysis of  Jews, where they have three predominant mutations: 185delAG and  the neuroÜbromatosis type 1(NF1) gene in southern Italian NF1  5382insC (in BRCA1) and 6174delT (in BRCA2) seem to account for  patients. a substantial proportion of high-risk families. The study of cancer in  A. L. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2,3, G. Peluso1, T. Sprovieri1, A. Patitucci1, A.  couples may play important role in the assessment of cancer etiology.  Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, S. Genovese4, E. Ciancio4,  Therefore, in the recent study, we examined three predominant  M. Muglia1, A. Quattrone1,5;  mutations of in a couple with breast cancer (wife bilateral, husband  unilateral breast cancer) synchronously, their two sons and a sister  1ISN-CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2ISN - CNR, Catania, Italy, 3Department of  of husband by allele speciÜc oligonucleotide (ASO)-PCR technique.  Paediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 4ISN-CNR, Catania, Italy,  We detected 5382insC mutation in the couple. However, their sons  5Institute of Neurology, University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. and sister of husband were not carried any mutation. It has been not  The identiÜcation of mutations in the neuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1)  reported that a couple with breast cancer is a carrier of 5382insC  gene has presented a considerable challenge because of the large  mutation in BRCA1 gene in the literature, until now. size of the gene, the lack of signiÜcant mutational clustering, the  diversity of the underlying pathological lesions and the presence of  
P0583 . 9-base insertion in the MEFV gene in a patient with  NF1 pseudogenes. Recently, denaturing high performance liquid  Familial Mediterranean fever chromatography (DHPLC) has been successfully applied to the  M. Pomponi1, G. M. E. Marino1, R. Pietrobono1, A. Terracciano1, E. Tabolacci1,  mutational screening of NF1 yielding mutation detection rates of  M. La Regina2, G. Nucera2, R. Manna2, G. Gasbarrini2, G. Neri1;  between 68% and 72.5%. To further testing its suitability in a routine  diagnostic setting we evaluated prospectively, by means of DHPLC  1Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of  and DNA sequencing, all 60 exons and splice junction of the NF1  Internal Medicine, Catholic University, Rome, Italy. gene in a panel of 85 consecutive, genetically uncharacterized, NF1  Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF; OMIM #249100) is an autosomal  patients (43 familial and 42 sporadic cases) from Sicily and Calabria  recessive disorder, affecting mainly Mediterranean populations and  (southern Italy). Germ-line mutations were identiÜed in 64 subjects:  characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis. After cloning  twenty of these alterations were novel including two stop codons:  of the MEFV gene, 43 mutations, including three 3-base deletions  c.3574G>T (
E1192 X) and c.4078C>T (Q1360X); Üve nucleotide  and one 1-base insertion, have been associated with clinical  substitutions: c.3327A>C (
L1109 F), c.3577T>A (F1193I), c.4180A>G  phenotypes. (N1394D), c.4193T>A (V1398D), c.6364G>C (
E2122 Q); Üve small  We describe a patient with FMF phenotype and a 9-base insertion  insertions: c.310_1insTAGCATAAACGATGCTGGTCCAGCA, c.1074_ within exon 2 in one allele and a polymorphysm in the other allele. 5insGAACCTGCTTTTT, c.4511_2insA, c.6488_9insA, c.6792_3insC ;  Male, 42 y.o., originating from central Italy, reported a 25-year history  six small deletions: c.4508delG, c.4625delA, c.5524delA, c.7017delT,  of short attacks of fever, arthralgias, headache and diarrhoea,  c.7084_9delAACTCT, c.7365delT and two splice site mutations  associated with increased acute phase reactants and leucocytosis. c.4269+1G>A, c.7806+1G>A. The complete sequencing of MEFV (Gene Bank Access number  None of the novel mutations was detected in 100 control  XM_007971) showed a frameshift in exon 2 in the propositus and his  chromosomes from a group of healthy individuals from Sicily and  mother and a G>A substition at codon 605 (R202Q) in the propositus  Calabria. These novel mutations contribute to the deÜnition of the  and his father. Both parents, however, are asymptomatic. germ-line mutational spectrum of NF1. DHPLC conÜrms to be a rapid,  Gene cloning from nucleotide position 92 to 270 was performed by  efÜcient and accurate tool for NF1 mutational analysis. Topo-TA cloning kit. Subsequent sequencing showed the insertion  to consist of 9 bases (GAGGGGAAC) from codon 390. The 9-base  
P0586 . Transcriptional and Translational Regulation of the L\x8dri- insertion causes the insertion of 3 amino-acids (glutamic acid, glycine  Weill and Turner Syndrome Homeobox Gene SHOX and asparagine) in position 131, 132 and 133, respectively, of the  R. J. Blaschke, C. T\x99pfer, A. Marchini, H. Steinbeisser, J. W. G. Janssen, G.  protein product (pyrin). A. Rappold;  Based on this molecular evidence and after the exclusion of other  causes, we started colchicine (1,5 mg/die) with success. University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Our hypothesis is that the insertion can cause either a reduced level  Regulation of gene expression is particularly important for gene  of transcript or else interfere with the biological activity of pyrin. The  dosage dependent diseases and the phenomenon of clinical  R202Q could act as facilitator of these effects. Expression studies are  heterogeneity frequently associated with these phenotypes. We here  underway. report on the combined transcriptional and translational regulatory  mechanisms controlling the expression of the L\x8dri-Weill and Turner  
P0584 . Hepatic involvement in hereditary hemorrhagic  syndrome gene SHOX. We deÜne an alternative promoter within  telangiectasia (HHT, M.Osler) is associated with mutations in the  exon 2 of the SHOX gene by transient transfections of mono-  ACVR
L1  gene and bicistronic reporter constructs and demonstrate substantial  M. Stuhrmann1, H. Kuehl1, M. Caselitz1,2, S. Hasenkamp1, E. El Harith1, S.  differences in the translation efÜciency of the mRNAs transcribed  Wagner1,2;  from these alternative promoters by in vitro translation assays and  direct mRNA transfections into different cell lines. While transcripts  1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Medical Clinic, Deggendorf, Germany. Morbus Osler, or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), is a  generated from the intragenic promoter (P) are translated with  heterogeneous inherited disorder characterized by multi-systemic  2 high efÜciencies, mRNA originating from the upstream promoter  vascular dysplasia and wide variation in its phenotypic expression.  (P) exhibit signiÜcant translation inhibitory effects due to seven  Hepatic manifestation is seen in about 8 - 30 % of the patients. The  1 AUG codons upstream of the main open reading frame (uAUGs). Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 210 Site directed mutagenesis of these uAUGs confers full translation  microsatellites spanning a 205.5cM chromosome 1 segment between  efÜciency to reporter mRNAs in different cell lines and after injection  D1
S228  (1p36.21) and D1
S439  (1q42.12) uncovered lack of maternal  of Xenopus embryos. In conclusion, our data support a model where  alleles and the presence of only one paternal allele for all 1p loci  functional SHOX protein levels are regulated by a combination of  distal to D1
S2753  (1p21.3, 120cM) but heterozygosity and biparental  transcriptional and translational control mechanisms. inheritance for all 1q and 1p21markers. Karyotyping at 450 G-band  level and FISH using probe for 1p36 did not reveal any evidence for a  
P0587 . The molecular basis of medium-chain acyl-CoA  deletion. It is concluded that the fetus is homozygous for the paternal  dehydrogenase deÜciency in a Belgian population G403S mutation due to paternal isodisomy for an at least 32.7Mb  W. Lissens1, P. Goyens2, C. De Laet2, H. Van Thi3, M. De Rademaeker1, J.  1p-segment. Jaeken4, E. Gerlo5, L. De Meirleir6, V. Dupont2, P. Bourdoux3, S. Seneca1, I.  Liebaers1;  
P0589 . Primary congenital glaucoma; molecular study in a  sample of Mexican patients 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit Brussel,  Brussels, Belgium, 2Metabolic Unit, University ChildrenÓs Hospital Queen Fa- S. A. Cuevas, L. M. Gonzalez, C. Chima, M. R. Rivera, S. Kofman, I. Babayan,  biola, Brussels, Belgium, 3Laboratory of Pediatrics, ULB, Brussels, Belgium,  O. Messina;  4Center for Metabolic Disease, University Hospital, KUL, Leuven, Belgium,  Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico. 5Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,  Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), an autosomal recessive  Belgium, 6Paediatric Neurology, University Hospital Vrije Universiteit Brussel,  disorder due to abnormal development of the anterior eye portion,  Brussels, Belgium. is an important cause of childhood blindness. CY
P1 B1 enzyme  Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deÜciency is the  is able to metabolize steroid hormones and participates in tissue  most frequent defect of fatty acid Ȳ-oxidation. MCAD deÜciency  development. In the present study, we analyze the CY
P1 B1 gene  is caused by mutations in the ACADM gene and is inherited as  of 14 non-related and sporadic patients with PCG. Onset of clinical  an autosomal recessive disorder. The prevalence of the disease  symptoms ranged from birth to 12 months (mean 4.5 months), the  is estimated to be between 1/10000 and 1/20000. One mutation,  male:female ratio was 10:4 while ocular Ündings were similar in all  K329E, is common in most populations. patients except for two cases of difÜcult control. Consanguinity was  The aim of this study was (1) to determine the prevalence of the  observed in 3 families. DNA sequencing analysis of the CY
P1 B1  K329E mutation in the general population in Belgium and (2) to  gene showed no missense or nonsense mutations, only polymorphic  identify mutations in patients diagnosed as having MCAD deÜciency  changes similar to those observed in normal controls were found  by analysis of acylcarnitine proÜles in newborn screening. to be present. These data allow to conclude that sporadic cases  The mutation K329E was found Üve times in a total of 341 DNA  with PCG are not consequence of mutations in the CY
P1 B1 in our  samples of unrelated individuals (carrier frequency 1/68; prevalence  population, at least in the analyzed sample. This is the Ürst study  of homozygotes 1/18500). Twelve unrelated patients with MCAD  of the CY
P1 B1 gene in Mexican patients with PCG, this analysis is  deÜciency were Ürst studied for the presence of the K329E mutation,  very important in diagnosis and genetic counseling of PCG in this  and when this mutation was absent or present in only one allele, then  population. the whole gene was sequenced. Seven patients were homozygous  for the K329E mutation; four were compound heterozygote K329E  
P0590 . Real-time PCR SNP analysis in molecular diagnostics of  and 1102-1105del (2 patients), Y76H or G249R (1 patient each).  neuroÜbromatosis type 1 One patient was homozygous for the 244insT mutation. These  S. Kapitanovic, T. Cacev, H. Kapitanovic Vidak, K. Pavelic;  mutations, except G249R, have been previously described. In this  Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. study the K329E mutation was present in 18/24 (75%) of the alleles.  NeuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common human  Therefore, the estimated carrier frequency and prevalence are 1/51  autosomal dominant disorders. NF1 has been expressed with various  and 1/10404. One couple requested prenatal diagnosis (PD), another  and heterogenous clinical manifestations and serious complications.  couple preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). One homozygous  The gene for neuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1) was mapped to  normal (PD) and a healthy twin (a homozygous normal and a K329E  chromosome 17 by positional cloning and has been found to contain  carrier child) was born after PGD. mutations in NF1 patients. It exhibits full penetrance and a high  mutation rate. Thirty to 50% of NF1 patients represent new sporadic  
P0588 . Segmental paternal isodisomy for chromosome  cases and usually new mutations. Molecular analysis and genetic  1p: hypophosphatasia due to homozygosity for a paternal  counseling is limited to the identiÜcation of the speciÜc mutation in  heterozygous G403S TNSALP mutation. each patient or family or to the use of DNA polymorphisms in linkage  C. Gl\x89ser1, H. Thiele1, I. Health-Brun2, R. Kottke1, A. Musil3, A. Herrmann4, D.  analysis and detection of large de novo deletions. We analyzed 50  Wand1, I. Hansmann1, E. Mornet2;  families with neuroÜbromatosis type 1. NF1 was diagnosed clinically  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, Halle/Saale, Germany,  according to the NIH criteria. DNA was obtained from peripheral  2Centre dªEtudes de Biologie Prenatale, SESEP, Versailles, France, 3Institut  blood of patients and related individuals. We used real-time PCR  f\x9er Pathologie, Halle/Saale, Germany, 4Klinik und Poliklinik f\x9er Geburtshilfe und  SNP analysis for linkage analysis and detection of large de novo  Reproduktionsmedizin, Halle/Saale, Germany. deletions in the affected families and individuals. Fifthy families in  Hypophosphatasia is an inherited disorder characterised by defective  the Croatian population were studied using three SNP intragenic  bone and teeth mineralization and deÜciency of serum and bone  NF1 markers. The informativities of these three markers were:  alkaline phosphatase activity. Symptoms are highly variable;  C_2557613_10 (rs2953014), C_2533294_1 (rs2070733) and C_ severe perinatal and infantile forms (HOPS, OMIM # 241500) are  16032374_10. (rs2107359) 43.3%. The large de novo deletions were  transmitted as an autosomal recessive form while milder forms  found in 3 families with the sporadic NF1. follow both autosomal recessive and dominant mode of inheritance.  A wide spectrum of mutations within the TNSALP gene at 1p36.1  
P0591 . Phenotype-Genotype relationships in Usher Syndrome  have been described in severe and in mild forms. Compound  type IIA heterozygous missense mutations account for most of the severe  C. Meda1, S. Bernal1, C. Ayuso2, D. Valverde3, M. Calaf1, M. Baiget1;  cases. We report about a severe form detected sonographically  1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid,  at week 19. After termination the male fetus showed skeletal  Spain, 3Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain. anomalies of a metaphyseal type of chondrodysplasia compatible  Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised  with hypophosphatasia. Direct sequencing of the TNSALP coding  by hearing impairment and retinitis pigmentosa. This syndrome  sequence including exon-intron borders and untranslated exons  is clinically heterogeneous and three clinical forms have been  using chorionic villus DNA identiÜed a 1258G>A mutation (G403S).  described: USH types I, II and III. Three genetic subtypes (A, B and  Sequencing exon 11 revealed heterozygosity for G403S in the  C) of USH2 are known, being the USH2A the most frequent. father with hypomineralisation of teeth but no mutation in the  Mutations in the extracellular matrix protein Usherin underlie the  clinically normal mother. Genotyping both parents and fetus for 20 Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 211 Usher type IIA subtype. To better understand the contribution of  promoter. Sequence of the DHII enhancer revealed a strong  Usherin mutations in the spectrum of Usher IIA phenotypes, DNA  conservation and showed no change occurrence. Nevertheless the  from 27 patients with a referring diagnosis of Usher II were subjected  DHIII enhancer possess a much higher diversity and could at least to  to the mutational analysis of all coding regions of the USH2A gene.  some extent explain the wide range of Lp(a) levels. Our conclusion is  A thorough clinical and audiological analysis was performed in all  there will be another loci with some effect on apo(a) transcription rate.  cases. Thus the phenotype is determined by a great number of haplotypes  Ten different disease-causing mutations were identiÜed: frameshift  with slightly different impact on apo(a) expression. (c.947_54dup; c.1214del; c.2135del; c.2299del; c.2431_2432del  Study was supported by grant IGAMZCR NB-7392-3 and by  and a large deletion encompassing exons 9-14); nonsense (p.R34X;  VZMSMTCR J1/98:111100003-1. p.Y506X) and missense (p.
E478 D; p.
C759 F). Disease-alleles were  identiÜed in 12 out of the 27 families tested (44%). 
P0594 . A new Na+/K+-ATPase mutation causes Familial  The absence of vestibular disfunction was observed in all cases. The  Hemiplegic Migraine type 2 with cerebellar signs degree of the congenital and bilateral hearing impairement ranges  L. Veneziano1, S. Ursu2, F. Lehmann-Horn2, M. Spadaro3, P. Giunti4, E.  from moderate to severe. A progressive pattern was observed in  Mantuano1, M. Frontali1, K. Jurkat-Rott2;  some cases in which a profound deafness is observed at the third  1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine. National Council of  decade The data presented conÜrm the observation that mutations in  Research, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Applied Physiology, Ulm University, Ulm,  Usherin cause a clinical presentation of hearing loss that is variable  Germany, 3Dept of Neurological Science 1\xa0 Medical School, La Sapienza  among Usher II syndrome patients. University, Rome, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, University College, London,  This work was supported by grant FIS (02/0052; EsResNet) and the  London, United Kingdom. ONCE. Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is an autosomal dominant  subtype of migraine with hemiparesis during the aura. In over 50% of  
P0592 . Molecular analysis of p28 dynein light chain the cases, the causative gene is CACNA1A (FHM1) which produces  S. Rashid, M. Hupe, J. Neesen;  a phenotype with cerebellar signs including ataxia and nystagmus.  Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany. Recently, mutations in AT
P1 A2 on chromosome 1q23 encoding a  Primary Ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) or Immotile Cilia Syndrome (ICS)  Na+/K+-ATPase subunit were identiÜed in four families (FHM2). We  is characterized by recurrent infections of the respiratiory system,  now describe an FHM2 pedigree with a Üfth AT
P1 A2 mutation. The  bronchiectasis and sperm immotility. Moreover, electron microscopy  phenotype was particularly severe and included hemiplegic migraine,  revealed axonemal defects in PCD patients, e.g. the absence of  seizure, prolonged coma, elevated temperature, sensory deÜcit, and  inner and outer dynein arms. This indicates that mutations in dynein  transient or permanent cerebellar signs, such as ataxia, nystagmus,  genes could be a reason for the disease. To prove this hypothesis,  and dysarthria. A mild crossed cerebellar diaschisis during an attack  we have started to analyse a gene encoding a dynein light chain  further supported the clinical evidence of a cerebellar deÜcit. This  (mp28). The murine p28 gene consists of six exons and the genomic  is the Ürst report suggestive of cerebellar involvement in FHM2. A  range extends about 8 kb. Using RT-PCR approach mp28 expression  possible role of CACNA1A in producing the phenotype in this family  was detected in several tissues containing cilia or Ýagella. Moreover,  was excluded by linkage studies to the FHM1 locus. The study of this  Northern blot analysis demonstrated strong expression of mp28 in  family suggests that absence of cerebellar signs may not be a reliable  male germ cells, starting from postnatal day 15. indicator to clinically differentiate FHM2 from FHM1. Antibody was generated against the mp28 protein to elucidate its  Supported by grants FIRB2001 RBN
E01 XM
P4 -008, FISR2000  location. Our data conÜrm that murine p28 protein is localized along  àNeurotroÜne e meccanismi relativi a malattie neurodegenerativeÒ. the entire axoneme of the Ýagella, indicating its critical role in sperm  motility. We therefore hypothesized that the human homologue (hp28)  
P0595 . A Splice-Junction Mutation In Sbf2 Gene Causes  of the mp28 gene would be an attractive candidate gene mutated  Autosomal Recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (cmt4b2) In  in patients with ICS or immotile sperm. To strengthen our idea, we  A Family from southern italy designed primers to amplify the exons and Ýanking regions of the  F. L. Conforti1, M. Muglia1, R. Mazzei1, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, P.  hp28 gene. We analysed 20 patients with immotile sperms using the  Valentino2, F. Bono2, T. Sprovieri1, J. Senderek3, C. Bergmann3, R. Nistic\x972, A.  WAVE technology and identiÜed different polymorphisms within the  L. Gabriele1, G. Peluso1, C. Ungaro1, A. Quattrone1,2;  hp28 gene, some of which resulted in the exchange of amino acids. 1Institutes of Neurological Sciences CNR, Mangone, Italy, 2Institute of  Furthermore, to analyse the function of this dynein light chain within  Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Department of Human  the axonemal complex, we have started to generate mp28-deÜcient  Genetics, Aachen University of Technology, Aachen, Germany. mice. Autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4 (CMT4)  comprises a group of clinically and genetically heterogeneous  
P0593 . Detection of variability in apo(a) gene control regions. disorders of the peripheral nervous system. Seven genes responsible  K. Z\x91dkov\x86, V. Kebrdlov\x86, R. ĚeĀka, L. Zlatohl\x86vek;  for autosomal recessive demyelinating CMT have been identiÜed so  General Teaching Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University in  far. Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic. In this study, we report a small pedigree with a recessive form of CMT  High lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] level is an independent risk factor for  (CMT4B) from Southern Italy in which the linkage to chromosome  development of premature atherosclerosis. Despite nearly exclusive  11q23 was excluded. genetic determination to a unique locus, a gene for apolipoprotein(a)  The family originated in a small village in southern Italy. There were  [apo(a)], are Lp(a) levels highly variable among individuals. There  seven individuals in two generations with two affected subjects. We  is a gene size heterogeneity expressing 40-60% of plasma Lp(a)  performed haplotype analysis using highly polymorphic microsatellite  concentrations. The rest is hypothesized to be determined by  markers located on chromosome 11p15. Subsequently, direct  differences in apo(a) transcription efÜciency. The aim of our study  sequencing of the SBF2 gene showed a GŗC exon 32/intron 32  was to determine the rate of polymorphisms occurrence in known  splice-junction mutation. apo(a) control regions. In the current study we identify a splicing mutation in SBF2 gene in  We pooled a sample of individuals with Lp(a) levels over 85 mg/dl  a small family with CMT4B linked to chromosome 11p15. Mutational  and a sample with Lp(a) levels below 5 mg/dl. To Ünd unknown  screening of SBF2 revealed a homozygous mutation in the splice- changes in relevant control elements we used DGGE analysis  junction site of exon 32 (+1GŗC) in the affected patients. The  of speciÜcally ampliÜed fragments of proximal promotor and two  variation was also conÜrmed by digestion with restriction enzyme Alu  previously identiÜed enhancers DHII and DHIII. We genotyped STR  I, which cleaved the wild-type PCR product of 370 bp into 210 bp and  at a distal promotor to get the whole pattern of sequence variance  twice 80 bp digestion fragments. The corresponding region of the  within sites with described inÝuence on apo(a) transcription. SBF2 gene in our affected patients was cleaved into 210 bp, 80 bp,  Beside the two already described changes (+93 C>T; +121G>A)  68 bp and 12 bp digestion fragments. This mutation was absent in  we did not Ünd other common polymorphism within the proximal  100 control chromosomes examined.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 212 This is the Ürst Ünding of a mutation in the SBF2 gene that alters the  
P0598 . Truncating and non truncating mutations of P/Q Ca2+  correct splicing of the gene. Furthermore, these data conÜrm that  channel subunit Cav2.1 causing Episodic Ataxia 2 in a large  mutations in the SBF2 gene are causative of CMT4B2. sample of patients E. Mantuano1, L. Veneziano1, R. Penci1, M. Spadaro2, S. Guida1, C. Jodice3, M.  
P0596 . A new missense mutation in the CYS 2 regulatory domain  Frontali1;  of PRKCG gene causing Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 14 in an  1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine CNR, Rome, Italy,  italian family 2Department of Neurological Science, La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy,  M. Frontali1, M. Spadaro2, E. Mantuano1, R. Penci1, S. Guida1, L. Veneziano1;  3Dept of Biology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. 1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine CNR, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of  Episodic Ataxia type 2 (EA2) is mostly due to loss of function  Neurological Sciences 1 Medical School, La Sapienza University Rome, Italy. mutations truncating or severely disrupting of the pore-forming  SCA14 is due to point mutations in PRKCG gene, coding for the  (Cav2.1) subunit of P/Q type Ca2+ channels, coded by CACNA1A  Protein Kinase C gamma, an isoform of protein kinase C, a family of  gene. Gain of function missense mutations of the same gene,  serine/threonine kinases predominantly expressed in central nervous  instead, are responsible for Familial Hemiplegic Migraine. In a few  system. To date four different point mutations have been described  cases EA2 is due to missense or other mutations non-truncating/ causing a dominant non-episodic pure cerebellar ataxia. All of these  disrupting the Cav2.1 subunit. Thirthy-four patients with typical  four mutations were located in the Cys2 regulatory protein domain,  EA2, and 8 with cerebellar ataxia of no known genetic type, are  whereas mutations in the catalytic domain have been described  screened for CACNA1A gene mutations. Six new Cav2.1 missense  segregating with a form of retinitis pigmentosa. In order to investigate  or non-truncating/disrupting mutations have been so far detected  the frequency of SCA14 among Italian ataxic patients, a screening  and 1 truncating mutation. From almost doubling the number of non- for mutations of PRKCG gene was performed in a sample of 85  truncating mutations previously known, it becomes clear that they  unrelated patients in which repeat expansions in known SCA genes  tend to have preferential location in speciÜc protein regions, namely  were previously excluded. A family was found carrying a missense  
S5 -
S6  linkers and their borders. Their associated clinical phenotype  mutation of one of the most evolutionarily conserved elements of  is comparable to that reported for carriers of truncating/disrupting  the Cys2 domain, segregating with the disease. The phenotype  mutations, but data suggest a possible difference in age at onset  included, beyond the slowly progressing cerebellar symptoms,  and frequency of mental retardation. These results show that EA2  also extrapyramidal signs and cranial nerve deÜcits. In addition in  mutations non-truncating/disrupting Cav2.1 subunit are not rare as  some cases the disease was characterized by ataxic episodes as in  previously thought. Their associated phenotype might be less severe  Episodic Ataxia type 2, although mutations of CACNA1A gene were  than that of truncating/disrupting mutations. They are clustering  excluded. The present results conÜrm the clustering of the SCA14  in highly conserved protein regions which must be particularly  causing mutations in the DAG binding site of Protein Kinase C, and  vulnerable to aminoacid changes and likely to have a critical role in  widens the spectrum of the associated highly variable phenotypes. the channel activity. Supported by grants FIRB2001 RBN
E01 XM
P4 -008, FISR2000  Supported by grants FIRB2001 RBN
E01 XM
P4 -008, FISR2000  àNeurotroÜne e meccanismi relativi a malattie neurodegenerativeÒ. àNeurotroÜne e meccanismi relativi a malattie neurodegenerativeÒ. 
P0597 . Atlastin1 mutations are frequent in young  
P0599 . Overview of the molecular diagnosis of  onsetautosomal dominant spastic paraplegia facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) in Hungarian  A. D\x9err1, A. Camuzat1, E. Colin1, C. M. E. Tallaksen1, D. Hannequin2, P.  patients Coutinho3, B. Fontaine1, A. Rossi2, R. Gil4, C. Rousselle5, M. Ruberg1, G.  J. Balog1, H. Pik\x961, å. Herczegfalvi2, P. Mayer3, Z. B\x86n4, V. Karcagi1;  Stevanin1, A. Brice1;  1National Center for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 2Bethesda ChildrenÓs  1Piti\x8d-Salp\x8ftri\x8ere Hospital, Paris, France, 2CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France,  Hospital, Dept. of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, 3Elisabeth Hospital, Dept. of  3Hospital San Sebastiao, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal, 4CHU La Miletrie,  Neurology, H\x96dmezĵv\x86s\x86rhely, Hungary, 4Semmelweis Medical University, 1st  Poitiers, France, 5Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Lyon, France. Clinical of Obsterics and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. The atlastin1 gene has recently been implicated in SPG3A, a form  FSHD is the third most common inherited neuromuscular disorder  of autosomal dominant pure spastic paraplegia in 8 families so  and is inherited in an autosomal dominant way. The clinical symptoms  far. To determine the relative frequency, phenotype and mutation  are highly variable; the age of onset and the clinical severity differ  spectrum of SPG3A in patients with pure autosomal dominant  even within the same family. The locus responsible for the disease  spastic paraplegia and onset before age 20, we sequenced the  was mapped to 4q35. Patients diagnosed with FSHD have a smaller,  atlastin1 gene in 31 families in which mutations in the spastin gene  BlnI resistant EcoRI fragment (±38kb) in the 4q35 region detected by  (SPG4 locus), had previously been excluded. We identiÜed 12  probe p13E-11 and Southern blot analysis than healthy individuals.  families (39%, n=34 patients) with 9 different missense atlastin1  Extensive mapping and sequencing work revealed that copies  mutations, seven of which are newly described. The main clinical  of D4Z4 repeats at the 4q35 locus are between 1-10 in patients  characteristic of these SPG3A patients was pure spasticity with  whereas unaffected individuals have 11-100 copies. The gene  very young onset (4.6 °3.9 years) and slow progression. However,  responsible for the FSHD phenotype has not been found yet. additional signs such as decreased vibration sense and wasting in  Analyses of 52 individuals diagnosed as FSHD and three prenatal  lower limbs, sphincter disturbances and scoliosis were found in a  cases were completed during the last three years. Out of the clinical  minority of patients. In addition, several gene carriers were clinically  assumptions 44 were conÜrmed by the Southern blot analysis. In  affected but still asymptomatic (n=5) or had no clinical signs (n=2),  eight cases the diagnostic fragments were not detected. In addition,  indicating incomplete penetrance. Compared to patients from 43  16 asymptomatic family members of the FSHD patients were  patients meeting the same diagnostic criteria and 126 patients with  included into the study where in one case pathological fragments  SPG4, the major form of autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia,  were detected. In cases where deletion of the p13 region or  SPG3A patients had earlier onset, less frequently increased reÝexes  interchromosomal translocations was suspected, dosage test of 4q35  in the upper limbs, decreased vibration sense in the lower limbs or  and 10q26 was performed. Comparison of severity of symptoms with  sphincter disturbances, but more frequently observed wasting in  the fragment sizes revealed correlations similar to data published by  the lower limbs and scoliosis. This study enables us to estimate the  other laboratories. frequency of the SPG3A mutations in France at 39% in families with  Additionally, a case history of a de novo mutation resulting in an  young onset autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia after exclusion  8.5 kb fragment found in monozygotic twins and the results of the  of SPG4 cases. So far, most mutations have been private. prenatal diagnoses will be presented.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 213 
P0600 . Familial hypoparathyroidismlinked to a GCMB gene  and the respective ARCI phenotype did not lead to a clear correlation.  mutation Since the function of the epoxyalcohols is still unclear, further  C. Thom\x8de1,2, S. W. Schubert3, J. Parma4,5, P. Q. Le1,2, S. Hashemolhosseini3,  biochemical and expression studies in keratinocytes will give a  M. Wegner3, M. J. Abramowicz4,5;  deeper understanding of the pathway leading to ichthyosis. 1Pediatrics, CHEI, Brussels, Belgium, 2HUDERF, Brussels, Belgium, 3Univer- 
P0602 . Mutation proÜle of MYO7A gene in Spanish patients with  sit\x89t Erlangen, Inst. Biochemie, N\x9ernberg, Germany, 4Hopital Erasme - ULB,  Usher Syndrome type I Brussels, Belgium, 5IRIBHM, ULB, Brussels, Belgium. T. Jaijo1, E. Aller1,2, S. Oltra1, C. N\x86jera2, M. Beneyto1, J. M. Mill\x86n1;  GCMB is a transcription factor whose defect in mouse results  in absent parathyroid glands, hypoparathyroidism, and residual  1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Departamento Gen\x8dtica  PTH production from aberrant cells in the thymic area. In man the  Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain. defect was reported in one familial case with undetectable serum  1-INTRODUCTION: Usher syndrome type I (USH1) is an autosomal  PTH. We observed a Üve year-old boy with severe, symptomatic  recessive disorder characterized by profound sensorineural hearing  hypocalcemia. The medical history was unremarkable. The  loss, retinitis pigmentosa and vestibular dysfunction. The Myosin VIIA  parents were Ürst cousins. An eight year-old sister had presented  (MYO7A) gene has been reported to be the main responsible for  a cardio-pulmonary arrest at the age of ten months associated with  USH1. profound hypocalcemia. Two other siblings were in good health.  2-OBJECTIVE: Mutation screening of the MYO7A gene in Spanish  No Ündings were noted on physical and neurological examination  patients with Usher syndrome type I was carried out in order to detect  except for a bilateral Chvostek sign. No speciÜc dysmorphia was  the mutations responsible for the disease in each patient. present. Blood chemistry showed isolated hypoparathyroidism with  3-MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from  severe hypocalcemia (Ca = 4.9 mg/dl, P = 10.6 mg/dl). PTH was  peripheral blood from 86 affected individuals corresponding to 58  inappropriately low but clearly detectable (7 pg/ml). 25(OH)vitD was  families. The mutation screening was performed by the use of SSCP  low and 1,25(OH)2vitD low-normal. Karyotype, 22q11 FISH, and  analysis of individually ampliÜed exons and intron boundaries. DNA  Calcium-Sensing Receptor gene sequencing showed no abnormality. fragments displaying an abnormal SSCP pattern were sequenced. SNP analysis showed possible linkage to the GCMB locus.  4-RESULTS: Sequencing the GCMB gene showed a missense Gly63Ser mutation,  Mutation Type Location Families homozygous in both affected siblings, heterozygous in both parents,  
S210 X Nonsense Motor 1 and not homozygous in unaffected sibs. This missense was absent  G214R Missense Motor 2 from 208 control chromosomes. Functional testing of the mutated  GCMB in DF-1 and COS cells co-transfected with a GCM-responsive  R336H Missense Motor 1 promoter fused to a luciferase reporter showed loss of transactivation  A397D Missense Motor 1 activity despite unaltered DNA-binding activity. This is the second  1614-1615del Frameshift Motor 1 family reported with hypoparathyroidism linked to a GCMB defect.  
C628 X Nonsense Motor 1 It conÜrms the presence of detectable levels of circulating PTH as  Q821X Nonsense IQ 3 observed in the corresponding mouse KO. K1080X Nonsense MyTH4 1 R1168P Missense MyTH4 1 
P0601 . Inactivating missense and nonsense mutations in the  epidermis-type lipoxygenase genes in patients with autosomal  
E1170 K Missense MyTH4 2 recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI). 
E1327 K Missense FERM 1 K. Eckl1, P. Krieg2, F. Andr\x8d1, W. K\x9ester3, E. Seemanov\x864, I. Verma5, H. Trau- 4039-4053del Frameshift FERM 1 pe6, G. F\x9erstenberger2, H. Hennies1;  
L1484 F Missense FERM 1 1Gene Mapping Centre and Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Max-Delbr\x9eck Cen- T1566M Missense FERM 1 trum for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2Div. of Eicosanoids and Tumor  Y1719C Missense Post-SH3 2 Development, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 3To- 6025delG Frameshift FERM 2 mesa Specialist Clinic, Bad Salzschlirf, Germany, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics,  5-CONCLUSION: USH1 is caused by a high diversity of mutations  Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Sir  in MYO7A, which have been found to be distributed along the entire  Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, India, 6Dept. of Dermatology, University of  gene. M\x9enster, M\x9enster, Germany. Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) forms a clinically  
P0603 . 
C282 Y and H63D mutations of HFE gene in patients with  and genetically heterogeneous group of hereditary hemochromatosis and in patients with increased risk  severe hereditary keratinization disorders. Up to the present, Üve loci  of hereditary hemochromatosis for ARCI have been mapped. Mutations in ALOX
E3  and ALOX12B  A. V. Lavrov1, A. A. Baev2, I. K. Surkova1, A. Y. Alii1, N. P. Bochkov1;  on chromosome 17p13, which code for two epidermal lipoxygenases,  were recently described in ichthyosis patients from Mediterranean  1I.M. Setchenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation,  countries. Epidermis-type lipoxygenases (LOX) are preferentially  2Research Center for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical  synthesized in skin. Products of ALOX
E3  and ALOX12B, 12R- Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. LOX and eLOX-3, are subsequent members of the same pathway  Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a widly-spread hereditary  converting arachidonic acid via 12(R)-HPETE to the corresponding  disease, related to iron overload resulting in severe organ damage. It  epoxyalcohol, 8(R)-Hydroxy-11(R),12(R)-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid. is associated with missense mutations in the HFE gene. About 85- Here we describe molecular and clinical Ündings in 150 families  90% of HH patients are homozygous for the 
C282 Y mutation; 5-10%  with ARCI originating from Middle Europe, Turkey, India, and Arab  are homozygous for H63D or are compound heterozygotes 
C282 Y/ countries. We identiÜed 20 novel point mutations of ALOX
E3  and  H63D. No clear data is available on HH in Russia, though allele  ALOX12B, including 17 missense mutations, in 20 families. In  frequencies of 
C282 Y: 4.8% and H63D: 12.8% have been reported  ALOX12B, 14 mutations were found in exons 1-3,5-10, and 14. Six  from.some small East Siberian populations. mutations were detected in exons 3,5-6,11, and 13 of ALOX
E3 .  We examined 63 HH probands with clinical and biochemical data  To analyse the expression, recombinant mutated genes were  typical for HH. 44 blood samples were available for the study. These  expressed in HEK-293 cells, total protein was isolated and incubated  samples were genotyped for the 
C282 Y and H63D mutations: CC -  with the corresponding substrate, and enzymatic activity was  84.6%; CY - 10.3%; YY - 5.1%; HH - 56.8%; HD - 41.0%; DD - 2.2%.  measured. Analysis of reaction products demonstrated that all but  We also studied 609 patients from hepatology, endocrinology and  two recombinant mutants showed no enzymatic activity. Missense  cardiology departments as they were likely to have a high frequency  mutations Leu237Met and Arg145Ala in ALOX
E3 , though, showed  of HH. So far we genotyped 247 for 
C282 Y and 412 for H63D: CC  regular activity, pointing to coding polymorphisms. - 93.5%; CY - 6.1%; YY - 0.4%; HH - 69.4%; HD - 27.7%; DD - 2.9%. Investigation of disease causing mutations in ALOX
E3  or ALOX12B  The low frequency of mutant homozygotes among HH patients can Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 214 be explained by other mutations inÝuencing HH. We estimate high  
P0606 . A novel recurrent PTPN11 mutation in patients with  frequency of YY genotype in population according to second group  LEOPARD syndrome results; at the same time we got small number of cases with HH  A. Hadchouel1, B. Keren1, S. Saba1, Y. Sznajer2, D. Bonneau3, B. Le Heup4,  during 2 years of studies; this might mean that YY homozygotes donÒt  O. Boute5, A. Coeslier-Dieu5, D. Lacombe6, V. Layet7, S. Marlin8, G. Mortier9, G.  necessarily develop typical signs of HH. Plessis10, A. Toutain11, C. Baumann12, H. Cav\x8d13, A. Verloes1;  We would be very cautious about recommendations to use 
C282 Y/ 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Robert Debr\x8d Hospital, Paris, France, 2Hopital Univer- H63D genotyping for routine HH screening or diagnosis. sitaire Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 3Clinical Genetics Dept, University  Hospital, Angers, France, 4Clinical Genetics Dept, University hospital, Nancy,  
P0604 . Use of residual clinical blood samples for the  France, 5Clinical Genetics Dept, University Hospital, Lille, France, 6Clinical  establishment of genetically characterized cell lines Genetics Dept, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 7Clinical Genetics  J. C. Beck1, L. O. Williams2;  Unit, University Hospital, Le Havre, France, 8Clinical Genetics Unit, Armand  1Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, United States, 2Centers for  Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France, 9Clinical Genetics Dept, University Hospital,  Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States. Ghent, Belgium, 10Clincal Genetics Unit, University Hospital, Caen, France,  To capture rare and valuable diseases for research or diagnostic  11Clinical Genetics Dept, University Hospital, Tours, France, 12Clincal Genetics  standards, a strategy of collecting residual blood samples from  Unit, Robert Debr\x8d Hospital, Paris, France, 13Genetic biochemistry Dept, Robert  clinical testing labs was established. These samples were often  Debr\x8d Hospital, Paris, France. of signiÜcant age (7-14 days), and subsequent transformation for  LEOPARD syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant disorder  expansion and testing was uncertain. Thirty-three cell lines were  characterized by Lentigines and caf\x8d-au-lait spots, EKG anomalies,  established from quantities of blood as small as 1 ml. These samples  Ocular hypertelorism, Pulmonary stenosis, Abnormal genitalia,  contained mutations associated with genetic diseases of signiÜcant  Retardation of growth and Deafness. LS is due to speciÜc gain-of- public health importance. The targeted mutation was conÜrmed in  function mutations in the PTPN11 gene, which is mutated in roughly  all cell lines through reference testing. Further, all point and deletion  40% of clinically typical Noonan syndrome (NS) patients. LS shows a  mutations tested were stable through approximately 20 population  strong genotype/phenotype correlation, as only two recurrent, speciÜc  doublings in culture. Of the 33 cell lines, 21 (associated with 11  mutations (Y279C in the 7th exon and T468M in the 12th exon) have  diseases) were pilot-tested in a simulated performance evaluation  been reported insofar in 13 patients. Those mutations are observed in  program. Samples were sent to at least 5 laboratories, most of which  > 90% of all LS cases. routinely performed clinical testing for the targeted mutation. A total of  We report 20 new patients with LS, including 6 patients with Y279C,  25 molecular genetic laboratories tested some cell lines. At least two  8 with T468M, 3 patients with a new, recurrent mutation in exon  different molecular technologies were used. Mutations were correctly  13, and 3 patients with no detectable mutations. The new recurrent  identiÜed in 246/263 samples (93.4%). Problems were most often  LS mutation affects the PTP domain in a region in which very few  associated with DNA isolation steps and/or failed PCR reactions.  mutations have been reported insofar for NS. This new mutation was  The number of repeat sequences reported for Huntington disease  not yet reported in classical NS, and was not found in our cohort of  samples varied somewhat. Other errors appeared to be random.  over 320 NS cases. These results suggest that sample development for proÜciency  Detailed clincal data on our 20 cases will be shown. A comparison of  testing and performance evaluation should include pilot testing in the  detailed phenotypic data between the 2 most prevalent mutations will  Üeld whenever possible. These validated cell lines and/or products  be presented. derived from them will be available through Coriell Cell Repositories  (Camden, NJ, USA; www.coriell.org/ccr) for use in genetic testing  
P0607 . Novel 
S143 F mutation in LMNA presenting with features  quality assurance. of muscular dystrophy and progeria C. Wasner1, J. Kirschner2, A. Feuer1, R. Korinthenberg2, M. S. Wehnert1;  
P0605 . A repository for neurological gene discovery 1Institute of Human Genetics, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany, 2Department of  K. Gwinn-Hardy1, J. C. Beck2;  Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Ger- 1NINDS/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Coriell Institute for Medical  many. Research, Camden, NJ, United States. LMNA gene mutations cause the so-called laminopathies. They  Clearly family history plays a role in many neurological disorders,  have been associated to probably the widest range of phenotypes  suggesting genetic inÝuence. Gene discovery has elucidated  so far including autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular  some Mendelian causes of neurological disease and may reveal  dystrophy (AD EDMD), autosomal recessive Emery-Dreifuss  general biological mechanisms in those which do not have clear  muscular dystrophy (AR EDMD), limb-girdle muscular dystrophy  inheritance. Towards the goal of gene discovery, the NINDS has  type 1B (LGMD1B), dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects  established a repository of DNA samples, immortalized cell lines, and  (CMD1A), Charcot-Marie Tooth neuropathy (CMT2B), familial partial  accompanying clinical data for a set of disorders [Stroke, Parkinsons,  lipodystrophy (FPLD), mandibuloacral dysplasia (MAD), Hutchinson- Epilepsy, Motor Neuron Disease (see http://locus.umdnj.edu/ninds)].  Gilford progeria (HGPS), atypical WernerÓs syndrome (WNR),  This project is conceptually related to similar initiatives at other  lipoathrophic, insulin resistant diabetes mellitus, disseminated  institutes at the NIH (Including at NIGMS, NIAMS, NHLBI, and  leukomelanodermic papules, liver steatosis, cardiomyopathy  others). Data for each disease are collected using standardized  (LIRLLC), autosomal dominant neuropathy with cardiomyopathy  instruments, deÜned in clinical diagnostic elements (CDEs), which  and leukonychia and cardiocutaneous progeria. Additionally, several  are based on published diagnostic criteria for these disorders. To  intermediate phenotypes have been described combining features  date, the repository has received samples from more than 1,000  of different entities. Here we report on a Üve years old female patient  individuals, including 786 with Parkinsonism, 172 with stroke, 20 with  presenting in early childhood with muscle weakness and wasting  epilepsy, and 90 controls. Samples were collected in four foreign  of shoulder girdle and neck muscles. A muscle biopsy showed a  countries as well as multiple sites in the United States, providing  myopathic pattern. Later contractures of the pelvic muscles and the  a diversity in ethnicity. An initiative which allows reimbursement to  spine as well as progeroid features were noted including growth  those collecting samples exists to promote such large scale collection  retardation, scleroderma, scalp hair loss, cox valga, pointed nose,  and immediate sharing (http://grants2.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice- dysplasia of the clavicles and phalangeal dysplasia. Mutational  Üles/NOT-NS-03-016.html). In summary, the Üeld of Neurology is  analysis of the LMNA gene revealed a novel mutation 
S143 F, that  ready for complex gene discovery research. A major cooperative  is placed in the geneÓs region known for mutations associated to  effort is required; no single researcher is likely to obtain the large  atypical WRN. In summary, we present the Ürst patient with a LMNA  number of samples required for gene discovery. The NINDS  mutation who bridges the gap between muscular, dysmorphic  Repository will provide the resources needed. and progeroid phenotypes. This Ünding supports the view that  laminopathies represent a group of contiguous but clinically extremely  heterogeneous diseases.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 215 
P0608 . Genotype-phenotype correlations in Hungarian spinal  Budapest, Hungary, 7Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Department of Neurology, Ludwig- muscular atrophy families Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. T. Veronika1, å. Herczegfalvi2, L. T\x91m\x86r3, V. Karcagi1;  Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD2) are a clinically and  genetically heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive diseases,  1National Center for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 2Bethesda ChildrenÓs  characterized by progressive atrophy and weakness predominantly  Hospital, Dept. of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, 3National Institute of  in the proximal limb muscles. We present our clinical, histological,  ChildrenÓs Health, Budapest, Hungary. immunohistochemical, immunoblot and genetic results of two  Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the second most frequent  sisters suffering from so far unclassiÜed autosomal recessive limb  autosomal recessive disease. SMA has been subdivided into three  girdle muscular dystrophy. Haplotype analysis for genes known to  clinical phenotypes (SMA I, II, III) based on severity of symptoms.  be involved in autosomal recessive limb girdle muscular dystrophy  Homozygous exon deletions in SMN1 gene are responsible for all  was performed in the genetically informative family. On Western  three types of SMA in 95% of the cases. The SMN1 gene has been  blotting the speciÜc bands of calpain3 were absent while with the  mapped to 5q13 region, which contains multiple copies of genes.  actin antibody normal band intensity was present. This suggested  There is a centromeric copy of the SMN gene, SMN2 whose copy  a primary defect of the calpain protein. Direct sequencing the 24  number inÝuences clinical severity. exons revealed that the two siblings have the same compound  The aim of this publication is to show the summary of the results  heterozygous mutation: in exon 4 there was a 1bp size deletion  of molecular diagnosis on spinal muscular atrophy which has been  (c.550delA) while a missense mutation Arg355Trp (CGG>TGG;  performed since 1993 exclusively by our laboratory in Hungary. c.1063C>T) was found in exon 8. Both of these mutations were  For the research of the genetic background inÝuencing the  already published in the LGMD2A database (http://www.dmd.nl/ phenotypes, homozygous deletions in exon 7 and 8 of SMN1 and in  capn3_home.html), therefore their pathogenic role is highly likely. The  exon 5 of NAIPt genes were recorded and correlated with the type of  c.550delA mutation is relative frequent in the European population.  clinical severity in 147 SMA families. Lack of SMN2 gene was also  In the Russian ethnic group this mutation has been reported to be  detected and the ratio of homozygous deletions in the parents of the  conserved with a founder haplotype. It can be assumed that this  patients in different clinical subgroups was calculated. mutation might be frequent in the Hungarian LGMD2A patients as  According to our data deletion of exon 5 of NAIPt occurred more  well. frequently in SMAI (55%) than in SMAII (16%) and SMAIII (3.5%)  We would like to emphasize the importance of the above described  patients. Homozygous deletions of the SMN2 gene in parents were  combined strategy in diagnosing limb girdle muscular dystrophies only found in the SMA I group. Our results correspond well to the data published by other  
P0611 . The JAG1 gene mutations in Polish patients with Alagille  researchers and shows that the size of the deletion in 5q13 might  syndrome have an inÝuence on the phenotype of the disease. D. Jurkiewicz1, E. Popowska1, C. Gl\x89ser2, D. Piekutowska1, E. Ciara1, M.  Borucka1, I. Hansmann2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1;  
P0609 . IdentiÜcation of mutation in family of slovak Roms with  Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I 1The ChildrenÓs Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institut f\x9er  I. Zmet\x86kov\x861, G. Min\x86rik1, H. Pol\x86kov\x862, E. Fer\x86kov\x861, V. Fer\x86k1, L. K\x86dasi2;  Humangenetik und Medizinische Biologie, MLU Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,  Germany. 1Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology  Alagille syndrome (AGS) is a multisystem, autosomal dominant  and Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. disorder characterized by abnormal development of the liver, heart,  Crigler-Najjar syndrome type (CN I) is a rare autosomal recessive  skeleton, eye and face. Many studies have demonstrated that  disorder, which is characterized by nonhemolytic severe  mutations in the JAG1 gene result in the AGS phenotype. The JAG1  unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. The disease is due to hepatic  gene encodes a transmembrane protein which is a ligand in the  dysfunction of uridine-diphosphoglucuronosyltransferase activity  evolutionarily conserved Notch signaling pathway, taking part in cell  (UGT, E.C. 2.4.1.17) toward bilirubin. UGTs are a family of enzymes  fate determination and differentiation. In this study a group of 31  that conjugate various endogenous and exogenous compounds with  Polish patients with clinically recognized Alagille syndrome and their  glucuronic acid and facilitate their excretion in the bile. Bilirubin UGT  families were investigated to estimate frequency and type of mutation  is the only isoform that signiÜcantly contributes to the conjugation  in the JAG1 gene. Sixteen different mutations, including 12 novel and  of bilirubin. Complete inactivation of this enzyme causing Crigler- 4 recurrent changes, were identiÜed. Among them are 7 frameshift,  Najjar syndrome type I leads to accumulation of unconjugated  5 nonsense, 2 splice site and 2 missense mutations. Most of the  bilirubin in serum and bile, usually above 340 Ⱥmol/l level, which  mutations (75 %) are suspected to result in truncation of the JAG1  may cause later bilirubin encephalopathy (kernicterus) and death  protein. Forty percent of the changes were identiÜed in exons 2 and  in infancy or childhood. Here we report the results of the molecular  4, coding a highly conserved region. The remaining mutations are  characterization of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase gene (UGT1A1)  spread along the entire coding sequence of the gene. Screening of  in a family of Slovak Roms with CN I. Out of 12 children, born to  available parental samples revealed that in 3 out of 11 investigated  consanguineous parents, we have examined 4 patients with CN I  families the speciÜc mutations were inherited from mother (2 cases)  and their 3 unaffected sibs, aged 4 to 11 years. Primers we used  or father (1 case). The low number of inherited mutations indicates  were self designed. Sequence analysis of both the speciÜc exon 1  that a signiÜcant number of AGS cases are sporadic or due to  of UGT1A1 gene and common exons 2-5 in all 4 patients showed  undetected parental mosaicism. mutation in exon 4, the previously described deletion of an A at codon  That study was partly supported by the Subsidies for Scientists 2000  407 (delA1220). Deletion A at codon 407 results in a premature stop  program of the Foundation for Polish Science and by KBN, Project  codon and until now wasnÓt described in homozygous status. All of  No. 0609/
P05 /2003/25. our patients were homozygous for delA1220 mutation and another  3 sibs were heterozygous. The homozygosity of this mutation in our  
P0612 . CFTRdele2,3(21kb) in German patients patients is a consequence of consanguinity among the parents. D. Stolz, P. Happel, C. Nohl, U. M\x9eller, D. Nolte;  
P0610 . Molecular detection of the calpain defect causing limb- Klinikum der Justus-Liebig-Universit\x89t, Giessen, Germany. girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A in a Hungarian family The mutation CFTRdele2,3(21kb) is characterized by the loss  V. Karcagi1, R. Horv\x86th2, C. R. Mueller3, A. H\x9ebner4, L. T\x91m\x86r5, H. Pik\x961, S.  of exons 2 and 3 in the CFTR mRNA. This results in premature  Komoly6, H. Lochm\x9eller7;  termination of translation due to use of a premature stop codon within  exon 4. In Germany, the CFTRdele2,3(21kb) was detected in 1.5%  1National Center for Public Health, Budapest, Hungary, 2Jahn Ferenc Hospital,  of all cystic Übrosis (CF) chromosomes (D\x99rk et al., 2000) suggesting  Dept. of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Dept. of  that it should be included in routine CF diagnosis. Medical Genetics, University Wurzburg, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics,  1390 DNA samples of affected patients, relatives and persons  Technical University, Dresden, Germany, 5National Institute of ChildrenÓs  at risk were tested retrospectively for the presence of the  Health, Budapest, Hungary, 6Jahn Ferenc Hospital,Dept. of Neurology,  CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation. We detected seven mutated alleles. Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 216 Three were found in a compound heterozygous state of severely  Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (TNDM) is a rare form  affected patients and four alleles in healthy carriers. All affected  of diabetes occurring in about 1/400,000 births. It presents in  children carry the CFTRdele2,3(21kb)/dF508 genotype. Furthermore,  growth retarded neonates within 6 weeks of birth with persistent  we deduced the genotype of a deceased girl with the diagnosis of  hyperglycaemia. Patients usually require exogenous insulin therapy  áatypical CFÐ. No DNA probe of the girl was available but her parents  but the condition is transient with recovery by 18 months of age.  were tested positive for mutations CFTRdele2,3(21kb) and R347P,  However about 40% of patients relapse and develop type 2 diabetes  respectively. Pedigrees and clinical information of affected patients  later in life. A large proportion of TNDM cases are caused by three  will be presented. abnormalities of chromosome 6 involving an imprinted locus at  6q24. In our cohort of 63 patients we have identiÜed, using standard  
P0613 . A re-classiÜed and a new ICF patient suffer from DNA  methodology, 17 (27%) patients with paternal UPD of chromosome 6,  hypomethylation 21 (33%) patients with paternal duplication of the 6q24 TNDM critical  B. Kloeckener-Gruissem1, M. Riegel1, W. Berger1, T. G\x9eng\x99r2;  region and 11(17%) patients with undermethylation of the maternally  inherited homologue of an imprinted CpG island at 6q24. In a further  1University of Zurich, Dept. Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland,  14 (22%) cases no abnormality of chromosome 6 has been identiÜed. 2University of Zurich, Kinderspital, Zurich, Switzerland. We have now developed a method based on bisulphite treated DNA  The ICF sydrome (OMIM#242860) is a rare autosomal recessively  and methylation sensitive PCR which can rapidly identify all three  inherited disorder. At a young age, patients suffer from recurrent  abnormalities of 6q24. This method has correctly identiÜed the nature  infections, primarily of the respiratory system, due to an immune  of the mutation in 38 samples with 6q24 abnormalities. There were  deÜciency. Chromosomal centromeric instability of chromosome 1, 9  no false positives or false negative results. The samples consisted of  and 16 is a hallmark feature of the syndrome, resulting frequently in  10 with paternal UPD6, 6 with a methylation defect at 6q24, 15 with  radial conÜgurations. Commonly, patients display facial anomalies  a paternal duplication including 6q24, 1 sample with maternal UPD6  and mental retardation of varying degree. Most ICF patients carry  and 6 with a maternal duplication including 6q24. 14 normal control  mutations in the gene for the DNA methytransferase 3b (DNMT3b)  samples were also correctly assigned. and consequently hypomethylation of satellite II DNA is observed.  Another syndrome (OMIM#243340) in a boy from consangineous  
P0616 . Molecular analysis of human and mouse Pax6 homeobox  parents also displays recurrent infections of the respiratory system,  missense mutants. facial anomalies and mental retardation, features that resemble  A. V. DÒElia1, C. Puppin1, R. Lonigro1, A. Pianta1, V. van Heyningen2, G.  those of the ICF sydrome. Additionally, polydactyly, hypoplasia of the  Damante1;  ischiadic bones, and complex renal dysfunction were also diagnosed.  Due to the similarity of some aspects of both syndromes we asked  1Universit\x87 di Udine, Udine, Italy, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh,  whether they share underlying molecular defects. We analysed this  United Kingdom. patient as well as a new ICF patient at the molecular and cytogenetic  Mutations of Pax6 gene cause aniridia in humans and the Small eye  level. The ICF hallmark features, namely radial chromosomal  phenotype in mice. Pax6 binds DNA through two conserved domains:  conÜgurations and satellite II hypomethylation were found in both  the Paired domain (PRD) and the Homeodomain (HD). In contrast  patients. The DNMT3b sequence of the putative promoter and coding  to the PRD, very few missense mutations have been found in Pax6  region is normal. Aberrant alternative splicing was not observed.  HD in humans or mice, and none of these was studied in terms of  From our data we conclude that both syndromes may result from  DNA binding. In this investigation, we have studied the DNA-binding  deÜcient DNA methylation, possibly due to second site mutations. properties of the three missense HD mutations found so far in  humans and mice: R242T, (human); V256E and 
S259 P (mouse). The  
P0614 . IdentiÜcation of a new mutation (G56D) in the arginine  R242T mutation was described in a child with unilateral iris coloboma  vasopressin receptor 2 gene (AVPR2) in a familiy with X-linked  and normal visual acuity. The V256E phenotype is very similar to the  nephrogenic diabetes insipidus Small eye, while 
S259 P has a milder phenotype. A. Mainberger1, L. Hempel2, D. Morris-Rosendahl1;  The binding properties of these mutants were compared by  gel-retardation assays to those of the wild-type Pax6 HD. The  1Institute for Human Genetics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany, 2Klinik  experiments were performed using either isolated HDs or PRD-HDs,  f\x9er Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, S\x9edharz-Kranhenhaus, D-99734 Nordhausen,  with different oligonucleotides. The R242T mutant shows the same  Germany. binding activity of the wild-type HD, while for the two V256E and  Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is characterized  
S259 P mutants the DNA binding activity is abolished. Since mutant  by polyuria and polydipsia due to an inability to concentrate urine  R242T does not show a DNA-binding defect, its transactivation  despite normal or elevated plasma concentrations of the antidiuretic  activity was investigated by cotransfection assays. HeLa cells were  hormone arginine vasopressin (AVP). In 90% of families the disease  transfected with reporter plasmids containing Pax6 binding sites and  (MIM304800) is inherited in a X-linked recessive manner, caused  either the R242T mutant or wild-type expression plasmids. R242T  by mutations in the AVPR2-gene on Xq28, mostly in or near regions  mutant shows a transcriptional activity three-four folds higher than  coding for the transmembrane domains of the receptor. Molecular  the wild-type protein. These data indicate that developmental defects  genetic testing of the AVPR2 gene detects more than 97% of disease- due to Pax6 HD missense mutations may be due to molecular  causing mutations in individuals with X-linked NDI. IdentiÜcation of  mechanisms independent from the DNA-binding function. mutations in the AVPR2 gene can facilitate early diagnosis of NDI,  thereby preventing serious complications such as growth and mental  
P0617 . PCR detection of Y speciÜc amelogenin sequence in  retardation. This study describes the presence of a new potentially  Turner Syndrome by modiÜed primer set disease-causing point mutation, 701G>A, resulting in the amino acid  G. Ferri1, S. Ceccardi1, C. Bini1, M. Falconi2, L. Caenazzo3, S. Pelotti1;  substitution G56D, in the Ürst transmembrane domain of AVPR2 in an  affected male. Family analysis revealed the mutation in the patientÓs  1Dept of Medicine and Public Health Section of Legal Medicine University of  unaffected mother, his mildly affected grandmother and in two  Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Dept. of Anatomical Science University of Bologna,  unaffected female relatives. His unaffected brother carried a normal  Bologna, Italy, 3Dept of Enviromental Medicine and Public Health Section of  AVPR2 allele. Documentation of the diversity of mutations will assist  Legal Medicine University of Padua, Padua, Italy. in revealing the full spectrum of clinical variation and may contribute  Y chromosome material is detected in up to 6% of patients by  to early diagnosis and treatment of NDI. karyotype analysis, by molecular approach this frequency varied from  0% to 61% depending on the molecular methodology used. A nested  
P0615 . Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM) :molecular  PCR was considered a non reliable method by Nishi et al., 2002  diagnosis using methylation sensitive PCR because of the risk of contamination that overestimates the frequency  D. O. Robinson1, D. Mackay1, J. Shield2, I. K. Temple3;  of Y speciÜc sequences. We have developed a high sensitivity methodology based on Y  1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, Wilts., United Kingdom,  speciÜc amelogenin sequence ampliÜcation. The amelogenin sex test  2Dept of Child Health, University of Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Wessex Clinical  is widely screened in several populations, but the major drawback  Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 217 is the competition that can occur when a small amount of male DNA  B-/-L-/- mice. Their proliferative potential is quantiÜed based on their  can be inhibited by a large excess of female DNA. To overcome  capacity to generate primary and secondary neurospheres in culture.  these difÜculties we have design a new primers set using nucleotides  Furthermore, neurospheres are tested for their ability to differentiate  differences in the X and Y homologous region, choosing mismatches  into intact neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. In addition  at 3Ó end between Y and X sequences. We tested this approach  to investigating the effects of cathepsins B and L on proliferation  amplifying samples with males DNA with known concentration diluted  and multilineage potential of neural stem and progenitor cells, the  1:1000, 1:10000 and 1:100000 in females excess. This new primers  suitability of cathepsin B-/-L-/- stem cells for proteomic approaches is  successfully amplify only Y region even with a 100.000 fold excess of  evaluated with the aim to identify neuron-speciÜc in vivo substrates  female DNA. As a control the 6-bp insertion in amel Y is included in  for cathepsins B and L. the amplicons. We tested 41 patients with Turner syndrome via modiÜed primer  
P0620 . Detection of mutations in post-morten well characterized  set and Y speciÜc sequence was found in 4 cases supported by  samples in familial Alzheimer disease karyotype analysis and in 2 without cytogenetic evidences. J. Armstrong1,2, N. Vidal1, I. Ferrer1;  We conclude that amelogenin ampliÜcation with modiÜed primers is  1Unitat de Neuropatologia, Hospital de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat  a useful tool to detect cryptic Y chromosome material showing high  (Barcelona), Spain, 2Cancer Research Institute, Hospitalet de Llobregat  sensitivity and minimal risk of contamination. (Barcelona), Spain. In early-onset familial AlzheimerÓs disease (AD) pathogenic mutations  
P0618 . Molecular genetics of G6PD and determination of two  have been found in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene, and  kinds of mutations in G6PD gene in a family in state of Golestan the presenilin (PS)-1 and PS-2 genes. We screened for mutations  M. Noori-Daloii1, S. Mohammad Ganji2, L. NajaÜ3, Z. Hajebrahimi3, M.  in these genes in 6 patients with familial AD from the Spanish  Sadeghizadeh3, M. Sanati2;  population. These patients have conÜrmed AD and one amyloid  1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University  angyopathy only. We detected one pathogenic change in one familial  of Medical Sciences Tehran,, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2National  patient (M139T), one polymorphism change in one familial patient  Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NRCGEB),  (
E318 G) and one not well characterized change in the APP gene  Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Genetics Dept., Faculty of Basic Sciences,  (A713T). The 713 codon has been related with schizophrenia, and  Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). the change A713T has been described as a polymorphism. We have  Glucose -6- Phosphate Dehydrogenase is a highly polymorphic  not found this change in the APP gene in control population, and we  enzyme that is encoded by X-link (Xq28) human gene. G6PD  concluded that this polymorphism could likely be related to AD. deÜciency is the most common human metabolic inborn error, which  affected more than 400 million people worldwide. The main clinical  
P0621 . Molecular diagnostics in genetics : techniques and  manifestations are neonatal jaundice and acute hemolytic anemia.  difÜculties Up to now, more than 100 molecular variants have been identiÜed.  P. Willems;  In the present study we have detected three common molecular  GENDIA, Antwerp, Belgium. variants of G6PD analyzed on peripheral blood samples of 71  Although the human genome project is nearly completed, and all  patients with G6PD deÜciency in state of Golestan in the north of  human genes are known, molecular diagnostics for genetic diseases  Iran by RFLP technique. In this ways, it revealed that Mediterranean  remains a challenging problem. mutation is predominant in this area 69% and 26.8% have Chatham  Whereas the disease gene for more than 1000 genetic disorders  mutation, but none of the samples were found to be Cosenza  has been identiÜed, molecular diagnostics are available for only a  mutation. In this study, we also faced on an interesting case; a family  minority of these in most countries. Furthermore, the analysis is often  with Üve members including parents, two sons and one daughter,  incomplete, slow and expensive. The most important bottlenecks for  while two of them (father and the youngest son) have normal G6PD  cost-effective molecular diagnostics are the nature of the mutation  activity and three of them (mother, the eldest son and daughter) are  and the rareness of genetic diseases in general. G6PD deÜciency. The eldest child is an affected boy in hematology  Some disorders caused by a single or a few mutations can be  and molecular genetic tests. Molecular analysis showed Chatham  easily diagnosed by molecular methods, but the vast majority of  mutation in him. Their daughter has acute anemia symptom too.  genetic diseases are caused by private mutations speciÜc for a  Molecular analysis showed her heterozygous in both of Chatham and  single family . Consequently, the whole gene has to be analysed  Mediterranean mutations. While the mother showed weak symptoms  by complete sequencing, or screening methods such as WAVE,  about G6PD deÜciency with Chatham mutation. The details of this  DGGE or SSCP followed be sequencing of the abnormal fragments.  study will be discussed. This laborious methodology is only cost-effective when enough  samples are available. Due to the rareness of most of the genetic  
P0619 . Neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation in the  disorders this can not be set up cost-effectively on a regional or  absence of cathepsins B and L even national level.To facilitate genetic diagnostics an international  E. H\x99sl1, S. Stahl1, E. Asan2, U. Felbor1;  network of diagnostic labs was organised, existing of many referral  1Department of Human Genetics, University of W\x9erzburg, Germany,  labs worldwide, 20 expert test labs, and 1 central lab that accepts all  2Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of W\x9erzburg, Germany. samples and issues all results. This network is called GENDIA (for  Progressive myoclonus epilepsy of the Unverricht-Lundborg type  GENetic DIAgnostics). GENDIA now offers diagnostic tests for more  (EPM1) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the cysteine  than 400 genetic diseases (www.GENDIA.net). protease inhibitor cystatin B. Cystatin B knockout mice reproduce  many EPM1 features which can be partially rescued by removal of  
P0622 . Mutational analysis of xanthine dehydrogenase gene in  the cysteine protease cathepsin B. This suggests that cathepsin  four Japanese patients with classical xanthinuria type I. B contributes to EPM1 pathogenesis when it is not regulated by  K. Ichida, Y. Yamaguchi, I. Ohno, T. Hosoya;  its physiological inhibitor cystatin B. Moreover, the identiÜcation of  Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. cathepsin B substrates will likely add to elucidate the molecular  Classical xanthinuria is an inherited metabolic disorder caused  basis of EPM1. We have previously shown that cathepsins B and  by a deÜciency of xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH), resulting in  L functionally compensate for each other in vivo. Mice deÜcient for  hypouricemia. Classical xanthinuria frequently present with renal  both cathepsins show a dramatic accumulation of lysosomes within  calculi and occasionally lead to renal failure. Classical xanthinuria is  selective brain neurons. We here conÜrm subsequent apoptosis of  classiÜed into two categories. Classical xanthinuria type I lacks only  cathepsin B-/-L-/- forebrain neurons by immunohistochemistry with an  XDH activity by XDH gene mutations, while type II results from dual  antibody against activated caspase-3 and by electron microscopy.  deÜciency of XDH and aldehyde oxidase due to mutations in the  To further analyze cell-type speciÜc effects of cathepsins B and L,  molybdenum cofactor sulfurase gene. Classical xanthinuria is easily  we isolated and expanded neural stem and progenitor cells from  differentiated by means of the allopurinol loading test. As allopurinol  12-day-old fetal forebrains of wild-type, cathepsin B-/-, and cathepsin Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 218 is converted to oxypurinol by both XDH and aldehyde oxidase,  performed PFGE that revealed the duplication. By these methods  oxypurinol is detected in urine and serum of patients with classical  were also analyzed the HNPP patients. xanthinuria type I upon administration of allopurinol. We have  By Real Time PCR in the normal controls a ȘȘCt ratio range from  identiÜed XDH gene mutations of new four xanthinuric Japanese  0.788 to 1.164 (0.98°2(0.094)) has been identiÜed. All patients with  who have no kinship each other. The results of allopurinol loading  the duplication showed values higher than 1.164, whereas the HNPP  test for two patients indicated xanthinuria type I. For the other two  patients revealed values below 0.72. The results indicate that Real  patients, we diagnosed their xanthinuric type by XDH gene analysis.  Time PCR shows superior sensitivity to microsatellite analysis and  Urolithiasis was not found in any patient. Urolithiasis frequency in  has the additional advantage of being a fast and uniform assay for  xanthinuric patients including our cases in Japan has been less than  quantitative analysis of both CMT1A and HNPP. in other countries. It is probably related with water quality, climate  and food. We identiÜed homozygous novel point mutations 
C3853 T  
P0625 . Genotype- Phenotype correlations for a wide spectrum of  (Q1285Ter) and G446A (R149H) and homozygous deletion 
C2567 Del  mutations in the AT
P7 B Gene in two patients. The amino acid sequences around R149H were well  E. Panagiotakaki1, M. Tzetis2, N. Manolaki3, G. Loudianos4, E. Manesis5, S.  conserved in most species. These Ündings indicate that this region  Nousia-Arvanitakis6, E. Kanavakis7;  will be important for maintaining the XDH activity. 1Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Medical Genetics,  Universityof Athens, Athens, Greece, 3First Dept of Pediatrics, Athens, Greece,  
P0623 . Search for mutations in Russian patients with  4Ospedale Regionale per Le Microcitemie, Cagliari, Italy, 5Hippokration General  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Hospital, Athens, Greece, 6Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki,  M. V. Golubenko1, K. V. Puzyrev2, E. N. Pavlukova2, O. A. Makeeva1, H.  Greece, 7Athens University, Athens, Greece. Vosberg3, V. P. Puzyrev1;  Molecular analysis of the AT
P7 B gene on 93 Greek Wilson disease  1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of  (WND) index patients from 69 unrelated families and their relatives  Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Max-Planck Institute for Physiological  resulted in the characterization of twenty different mutations  and Clinical Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany. accounting for 86.13% of the WND chromosomes. The most frequent  To study mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)  were: H1069Q (34.78%), R969Q (12.31%), 2530delA (7.24%),  in Russia, consecutive HCM patients (N=25) were recruited at the  
L936 X (6.52%), Q289X (6.52%), and I1148T (2.89%), while 81.15%  Tomsk Cardiological Centre. Clinical examinations were based on  of the mutations are concentrated in 8 exons. Thirty cases proved  standard criteria including exercise tolerance tests, echocardiography  homozygous for 9 different mutations, 22 of which were index  and blood pressure monitoring (to exclude systemic hypertension).  cases. Patients that are homozygous for H1069Q and R969Q have  Three cases were clearly familial, whereas others were presumably  a milder disease presenting at an older age. These two missense  sporadic. Two major HCM genes were investigated by SSCP analysis  mutations ameliorate the disease severity even in compound  and subsequent DNA sequencing, MBP
C3  and MYH7. MBP
C3   heterozygosity. At the other end of the disease spectrum are patients  was studied in 25 individuals, and MYH7 was investigated in 11  carrying protein-truncating mutations (nonsense and frameshift),  individuals. Three mutations were identiÜed in MYBP
C3  and three  that lead to more severe disease with a signiÜcantly earlier age of  in MYH7. The cause in one family was resolved, in two others not.  onset and lower ceruloplasmin level (P 0.004 for both). Additionally  Five mutations were found in sporadic patients. Four of the mutations  a signiÜcant difference was found in the serum copper value (P  were new (Leu714Arg and Arg1712Trp in MYH7, int16 +1gŗa and  0.05) for mutation 2530delA. Clinical phenotype is associated to  int22 +2tŗg in MYBP
C3 ). Two were described before (Arg663His  some extent with the disease-causing mutations but other genetic  in MYH7 and Gln1233ter in MYBP
C3 ). These mutations were not  factors and environmental inÝuences could also have a direct effect  detected in a population control (N>100). Mutations in MYBP
C3  are  on the severity of the disease symptoms which would explain the  predicted to affect splicing or to cause truncation of the protein. The  marked clinical heterogeneity that we observed, even within sibs  changes in MYH7 are missense mutations. The clinical manifestation  sharing the same genotype. An early diagnosis of WND preferably  of the Leu714Arg mutation was unusually severe in two identiÜed  at the presymptomatic stage, prevents disabling residual symptoms.  carriers (father and son). This is the Ürst systematic study of HCM  Therefore knowledge of the disease mutation spectrum for a speciÜc  causes in a Russian population. Further investigations will be  population allows more efÜcient mutation detection. focussed on relatives of presumed sporadic cases. The fact, that four  of the mutations were new, extends the range of the known genetic  
P0626 . Detection of deletions in exons 7 and 8 of the SMN gene  heterogeneity of HCM causes. Current evidence suggests variable  in SMA patients in Khouzestan province from Iran severity (or penetrance) of the mutations identiÜed by us. G. Mohammadian;  Iranian Health Ministery, Ahwaz, Iran (Islamic Republic of). 
P0624 . Diagnosis of haploid and triploid based on measurement  The term SMA is used for a clinically and genetically heterogeneous  of gene copy number in CMT and HNPP. group of neuromuscular disorders.Two types of disease occur  A. Patitucci1, M. Muglia1, A. Magariello1, F. L. Conforti1, R. Mazzei1, T.  prenatally which include AMC and CAN. Childhood SMAs are divided  Sprovieri1, A. L. Gabriele1, C. Ungaro1, G. Peluso1, A. Quattrone1,2;  into types I, II and III.Patients are distinguished on the basis of age  1Institutes of Neurological Sciences - CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of  of onset and severity of the clinical course as assessed by clinical  Neurology - University ÐMagna GraeciaÑ, Catanzaro, Italy. examination, muscle biopsy and electromyography. ARTICLE Four genes SMN, NAIP, 
P44 , and H4F5 have been mapped to  A 1.5-Mb tandem duplication, including the PM
P22  gene in  a 850kb interval on 5q13, which is involved in the causation and  chromosome 17p11.2-12 is responsible for 70% of the cases  severity of SMA. The SMN gene exists as a telomeric copy (tel SMN)  of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1A). A reciprocal deletion  and a highly homologous centromeric copy (cen SMN). Both copies  of this region causes the hereditary neuropathy with liability to  show identical sequences, except for Üve single nucleotide changes  pressure palsies (HNPP). We report the results obtained by Real  at the 3Ó- end of the gene (intron 6 to exon 8). However only deletion  Time PCR in 25 HNPP, 71 CMT and 58 normal controls based on  / mutation in tel-SMN is seen to cause SMA. Homozygous deletions  measurement of gene copy number. The CMT1A unrelated patients  of cen-SMN were found in about 2-3% of carriers and controls. In  were previously analyzed by the presence of 3.2 Kb junctional  this research, we have studied deletions of exon 7 and 8 of the SMN  fragment and microsatellite markers. 43/71 (60.56%) revealed the  gene using PCR/RFLP techniques. 33 individuals from 25 families in  3.2 fragment, 63/72 (85,91%) could be identiÜed by combined use  Khouzestan were investigated for the SMN gene deletion. Genetic  of PCR and microsatellite markers . The duplication in the samples  counseling and pedigree analysis were performed for indivduals. 88%  by microsatellite analysis was inferred when at least one of the  of cases were positive for presence of the above deletions. Using  seven microsatellites showed the presence of three different alleles.  the procedure described here we will be able to detect the carrier  10/71 (14,09%) of the patients did not show either 3.2 band or  individuals. three different alleles, but they showed an allelic ratio indicative for  a duplication. In order to conÜrm the duplication in this group, we Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 219 
P0627 . A new locus for a childhood onset, slowly progressive  mental retardation syndrome occurring predominantly in Caucasians.  autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia maps to  Over 80 different mutations have been detected, some of which  chromosome 11p15 are frequent. Mutational spectra in SLOS patients vary signiÜcantly  A. Maat-Kievit1, G. Breedveld1, D. te Raa1, B. van Wetten2, E. Brusse2, J. van  across Europe (Witsch-Baumgartner et al., 2001). Swieten2, B. Oostra1;  Here we have analysed haplotypes associated with IV
S8 -1G>C,  T93M, R404C, and G410S using intragenic SNPs in unrelated SLOS  1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands,  patients originating from France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,  2Dept. of Neurology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Spain, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. For the T93M mutation 6  The cerebellar ataxiaÓs are a heterogeneous group of  different haplotypes A, B, C, F, J, and P were observed. The R404C  neurodegenerative disorders, characterised by symptoms and signs  mutation was found associated with 4 different haplotypes A, B, D,  of cerebellar degeneration and by pyramidal and extrapyramidal  and F and the G410S mutation with two haplotypes A and F. All three  features as well as polyneuropathy in a variable extent. The  mutations were associated with speciÜc haplotypes depending on the  clinical picture shows large variation in age at onset and disease  geographic origin of the SLOS patient, suggesting recurrent founder  progression. The mode of inheritance in hereditary ataxiaÓs can be  origins for these mutations. The data indicate that T93M founder  autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X-linked. mutations have occurred in the Mediterranean region. Similarly  Here we report a non-consanguineous Dutch family with a pure  the R404C mutation has founders in France, UK, and in Germany.  spinocerebellar phenotype with cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal  The G410S mutation has appeared twice, once in the Eastern  signs, posterior column involvement with deep sensory loss, a  Mediterranean region and once in Western Europe. In contrast the  postural tremor and absence of other (non-) neurological features.  splice site mutation IV
S8 -1G>C was found associated with only one  Neuroimaging shows atrophy of the cerebellum, vermis, pons and  haplotype (A) indicating one historically old founder effect the age of  medulla oblongata. Onset of symptoms is in early childhood but  which was calculated at 3000 years using Ýanking microsatellites. remarkably, the severity of symptoms and progression of the disease  Together this suggests that DHCR7 mutations have independently  within this family is very variable. The clinical phenotype of the  reached high frequencies in different European populations indicating  family is not consistent with any of the known autosomal recessive  selection. cerebellar ataxiaÓs. Using a systematic genome wide scan we mapped the responsible  
P0630 . Mutation detection of CFTR gene using ARMS and SSCP  gene for autosomal recessive ataxia in this family to a 5.9 cM interval  methods in Iran on chromosome 11p15. A large number of genes and expressed  N. Yazdanpanahi1, M. Mojarrad1, p. Derakhshandeh-Peykar1,2, M. RaÜee3,  sequence tags are identiÜed in this critical region. No obvious  R. Mirfakhraie1, M. Jalali1, M. Rahmani1, D. Farhud1, M. Hashemzadeh1, F.  candidate gene can be assigned, as genes for ataxia mostly have  Mirzajani1, F. Mirzajani4;  different functions and features. 1school of Public Health, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Genetic Clinic,  
P0628 . Difference in allelic expression of the CLCN1 gene and  Valie-Asr Sq. 16, Keshavarz blvd., Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 3Tabriz  the possible inÝuence on the myotonia congenita phenotype Pediatrics Hospital, Tabriz-Iran, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 4National  M. Duno1, E. Colding-J¾rgensen2, M. Grunnet3, T. Jespersen3, J. Vissing4, M.  Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic  Schwartz1;  of). Cystic Übrosis (CF), the most common severe lethal autosomal  1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, 4062, University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,  recessive disorder in whites, is caused by mutation in the CFTR gene  2Dept. of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark,  on chromosome 7q31. The carrier frequency among Caucasians is  3Dept. of Medical Physiology, The Panum Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark,  approximately 1 in 25, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 2500  4Dept. of Neurology, University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. live birth. CF patients have two defective alleles and may either be  Mutations in the CLCN1 gene, encoding a muscle-speciÜc chloride  heterozygous for different mutations, or homozygous for one of the  channel, can cause either recessive or dominant myotonia congenita  mutations. (MC). The recessive form, BeckerÓs myotonia, is believed to be  Since the identiÜcation of the gene responsible for CF, more than  caused by two loss-of-function mutations, whereas the dominant  1000 mutations was described in CFTR gene of patients affected by  form, ThomsenÓs myotonia, is assumed to be a consequence of a  cystic Übrosis, but the prevalence of the CF shows a geographical  dominant negative effect. However, a subset of CLCN1 mutations  and ethnical variations in the world. The Delta F508 mutation in  can cause both recessive and dominant MC. We have identiÜed two  CFTR gene accounts for over 70 % all mutant CFTR alleles in the  recessive and two dominant MC families segregating the common  Europeans to 20 % in the Asians. R894X mutation. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR did not reveal  First the DNA samples of 92 CF chromosomes has been tested for  any obvious association between the total CLCN1 mRNA level in  eight common mutations: ȘF508, W1282X, 621+1G>T,1717-1G>A,  muscle and the mode of inheritance, but the dominant family with  G542X, G551D, N1303K, R560T by using the ARMS method .  the most severe phenotype expressed twice the expected amount  Results from this study revealed the following frequencies: ȘF508:  of the R894X mRNA allele. Thus, the CLCN1 gene is subject to  19.5%, G542X: 10%, W1282X: 6.5%, N1303K: 1.1%, 621+1G>T:  variation in allelic expression. Variation in allelic expression has not  0%,1717-1G>A: 0%, G551D: 0% , R560T 0%.Then by using SSCP  previously been described for CLCN1, and our Ünding suggest that  method for samples which we didnÓt Ünd any mutation by ARMS  allelic variation maybe an important modiÜer of disease progression  system, we scanned exons 4, 7, 10, 11 and 13 of CFTR gene. By  in myotonia congenita. using sequencing we Ünd two mutations in exon 4, one mutation in  exon 7 and two mutations in exon 13. 
P0629 . A mosaic pattern of common recurrent and founder  DHCR7 mutations causing the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome in  
P0631 . Disease causing ARX gene mutation in the XLMR  Europeans pedigree MRX33 M. Witsch-Baumgartner1, M. Rossi2, M. Giros3, R. I. Kelley4, P. Clayton5, S.  A. Ostendorf1, J. Gecz2,3, C. Schwartz4, E. Holinsli-Feder1,5;  Lechner1, D. Labuda6;  1Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Cytogenetics  1Institut f\x9er Medizinische Biologie und Humangenetik, Innsbruck, Austria,  and Molecular Genetics, WomenÒs and ChildrenÒs Hospital, North Adelaide,  2Department of Pediatrics, Frederico II University, Naples, Italy, 3Institute for  Australia, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,  Clinical Biochemistry, Barcelona, Spain, 4Kennedy Krieger Institute and Dept. of  4J.C. Self Research Institute, Greenwood Genetics Center, Greenwood, SC,  Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United  United States, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of Munich, Munich,  States, 5Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,  Germany. United Kingdom, 6Centre de Recherche, H\x98pital Sainte-Justine, Montr\x8dal, PQ,  X-linked gene defects may account for one third of all idiopathic  Canada. forms of mental retardation in males, and most of these cases are  Mutations in the DHCR7 gene cause the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome  non-syndromic. The Ünding of causative mutations in 12 different  (MIM 270400), an autosomal recessive metabolic malformation and  genes as well as linkage studies have established that non-syndromic Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 220 XLMR is highly heterogenous; until recently it was believed that  anomaly. Another interesting observation is that SAL
L4  mutations can  up to 100 X-linked genes might be involved. However, as judged  also be associated with severe heart defects i.e. tetralogy of Fallot.  from the recent Ündings that up to 20 percent of all patients with  Our results therefore extend the phenotypic spectrum of SAL
L4   this condition have mutations in the ARX gene, the total number of  mutations and provide further proof that Okihiro and acro-renal-ocular  genes may be much lower. We have previously reported a large  syndromes are allelic conditions. family (MRX33) with non-syndromic XLMR and showed that the  genetic interval containing the disease-related genes maps to Xp11.4  
P0634 . Inherited defects in structural components of the  Î Xp22.12. As homeodomain genes are known to play crucial roles  cartilage extracellular matrix of chondrodysplasias in the development of cerebral structures, ARX was considered as a  N. Ghasemi1, J. McClure2;  strong candidate gene for this XLMR family, as it has been mapped  1Yazd medical sciences university, Yazd, Iran (Islamic Republic of),  to this region. To search for mutations in the MRX33-family, we used  2Manchester university, Manchester, United Kingdom. direct sequencing of ARX-PCR products. The analysis revealed the  The human chondrodysplasias are a heterogeneous group of  presence of a 24bp duplication in exon 2 duplicating nucleotides  heritable connective tissue disorders, which are caused by defects in  428-451. This resulted in a polyalanine expansion from a tract of  endochondral ossiÜcation. 12 alanines (amino acids 144-155) to a tract of 20 alanines. This  A difference in the lectin binding patterns of normal and diseased  duplication is known to be causative for XLMR in 3 families and for  growth plates has been established (Horton 1982, Miosge et al  the Partington syndrome in 2 families. Here we describe the fourth  1998). Abnormal tissues showed alteration in carbohydrate residues  XLMR family with a mutation in the ARX gene. compared to normal, even in those cases with the same histology  as the normal growth plate. Lectins have been used in a variety  
P0632 . Genotype-phenotype correlation and founder effect in  of tissues to examine differentiation and maturation involving the  SMA linked to 5q13 without homozygous deletion of SMN1 sugar moieties of both cellular and matrix glycoconjugates and study  V. Cusin1, O. Clermont2, P. Burlet3, P. Benit3, A. Munnich3;  distribution, concentration and organisation of matrix carbohydrates. . 1Centre de G\x8dn\x8dtique - Hopital dÓEnfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Fa- In the present study the growth plates from the costochondral  cult\x8d de M\x8ddecine X Bichat, INSERM E 0339,, Paris, France, 3H\x98pital Necker- junctions were sub-divided into two groups: normal and pathological.  Enfants Malades, INSERM U 393, Paris, France. A panel of 16 biotinylated lectins was applied to these two groups  Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive  under the same conditions: HHA, PSA, LCA, e-PHA, l-PHA, UEA-I,  disease linked to 5q13 locus in 95% patients. SMN1 homozygous  AAA, ECA, CTA, AHA, DBA, VVA, SBA, HPA, WFA and DSA. deletion is found at least in 98% of them. In 1.8-3.8%, a genotype  The results obtained showed dissimilarity in glycosylation patterns  associating SMN1 deletion and a subtle mutation was reported. between the matrices of the normal and abnormal growth plate. In  Using long range PCR and sequencing, we found 10 mutations  addition, a group of growth plates, known to be sites of secondary  including Üve mutations never reported so far and Üve recurrent  malformation accompanying the primary defect, although displaying  mutations. Overall reported families carrying a subtle mutation is  a histologically normal appearance, also showed an altered  77: 69% showed a mutation in amplicon 6 (45.5%) or 3 (23.4%).  glycosylation pattern. Skeletal disorders were all associated with  The most frequent mutations described in different populations are  a loss of bisection in N-glycans, strongly suggesting that GnTIII  c.815A>G (13%) and c.770_780dup11 (11.7 %) in exon 6. Both  is defective and its gene is, therefore a target for further analysis.  showed common haplotypes in all patients with the same mutation,  Variation between the disorders was consistent with variation in the  supporting the hypothesis of a founder effect rather than mutation  point in the processing reactions at which GnTIII was acting. hot spot. Other mutations are probably population speciÜc as  439_443delTGAAG in Italy, c.399_402delAGAG in Spain or c.585_ 
P0635 . Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deÜciency: Biochemical  586insT and c.885+3del4 in France. and mutation analysis in patients detected by tandem mass  Moreover, SMN2 dosage in 19 heterozygous compounded SMA  spectrometric acylcarnitine proÜling patients correlates with the phenotype, except for exon 5 and 6  K. Gempel, A. Rettinger, I. Bieger, M. F. Bauer, K. D. Gerbitz;  deletion showing 3 SMN2 associated to a severe phenotype (SMA  Academic Hospital Schwabing, Muenchen, Germany. I). This deletion could have a toxic effect. As exon 6 contains  Mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) deÜciency is  a self oligomerisation domain, this deletion can generated an  the most common inherited disorder of lipid metabolism in adults.  abnormal dimerisation of the Smn protein. In SMA, other molecular  Patients suffer from recurrent myoglobinuria, muscular weakness  mechanisms than haploinsufÜciency are possible. and myalgia, triggered by exertional exercise, cold, infection, and/or  prolonged fasting. We have previously shown that tandem mass  
P0633 . Novel mutations in the gene SAL
L4  provide further  spectrometric serum acylcarnitine proÜling is a sensitive, rapid and  evidence for Acro-Renal-Ocular and Okihiro syndromes being  non-invasive tool for detection of CPT II deÜciency (Gempel et al.,  allelic entities, and extend the phenotypic spectrum. 2002). Seven newly diagnosed patients were further characterized by  W. Borozdin1, M. J. Wright2, R. C. M. Hennekam3, M. C. Hannibal4, Y. J. Crow5,  measurement of CPT II activity in leukocytes and/or muscle biopsy  T. E. Neumann6, J. Kohlhase1;  and by mutation analysis of the CPT2 gene. The most sensitive  1University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2International Centre for Life,  (
C16 +
C18 :1/
C2 ) acylcarnitine ratio was clearly elevated in all patients  Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 3University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,  (range: 0,119-0,263; reference range: 0,011-0,048). CPT II activity  Netherlands, 4University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5St  in leukocytes as measured in the backward direction and inhibition  JamesÓs University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 6University of M\x9enster,  of CPT I by 5 % Triton X-100 ranged from 0,01 to 0,46 nmoles/ M\x9enster, Germany. min/mg protein (reference range: 1,0-2,5). A combined PCR-RFLP  Okihiro syndrome results from mutation in the putative zinc Ünger  and gene sequencing approach revealed six different pathogenic  transcription factor gene SAL
L4  on chromosome 20q13.13-13.2. To  mutations which have been previously described in association with  date, 13 different mutations have been reported. These mutations  the muscular phenotype of CPT II deÜciency. Two patients were  have been found in patients with Okihiro syndrome as well as in  homozygous for the common 
S113 L mutation, while three patients  patients who received the primary diagnosis of Holt-Oram syndrome,  had the 
S113 L mutation in combination with 
E487 K (two brothers)  acro-renal-ocular syndrome, and Thalidomide embryopathy. However,  or 1238_1239delAG/F448L. The second-most prevalent mutation  patients diagnosed with acro-renal-ocular syndrome show markedly  
P50 H was found in one patient together with the R124X mutation.  different involvement of the eye, ranging from Duane anomaly to  The seventh patient was homozygous for the R161W mutation. In  structural eye defects. In order to extend the genotype-phenotype  conclusion, we show that CPT II deÜciency can be safely and rapidly  correlations in Okihiro and related syndromes, we performed further  diagnosed from a small blood sample by a combined tandem mass  mutation analysis in patients with those conditions. Here we report  spectrometric, biochemical and genetic approach. Üve novel SAL
L4  mutations in Üve unrelated families, among them  a family previously reported as acro-renal-ocular syndrome with  the affected members showing structural eye defects but no Duane Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 221 
P0636 . Mutation analysis of MEC
P2  gene in Taipei City University Faculty of Medicine Department of Urology 06100 Sihhiye, Ankara,  L. Tsai1, K. Chang1, W. Hwu2, W. Lee2, Y. Su2, C. Tzeng3;  Turkey. Mutations of the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance  1WomenÓs and ChildrenÓs Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 2National  Regulator (CFTR) can cause congenital bilateral absence of the vas  Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Chi-Mei Hospital,  deferens (CBAVD) as a primarily genital form of cystic Übrosis. The  Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China. spectrum and frequency of CFTR mutations in Turkish males with  Background: Rett syndrome(RTT) is a neurodevelopmental  CBAVD is largely unknown. We investigated 51 Anatolian patients  disorder caused by mutations in the methyl-CpG binding protein 2  who had been diagnosed with CBAVD at the Hacettepe University,  gene(MEC
P2 ). In order to understand the extent of MEC
P2  mutation  Ankara, for the presence of CFTR gene mutations by direct  in Chinese population, we analyzed MEC
P2  on 20 patients with  sequencing of the coding region and exon/intron boundaries. We  clinical suspicious of RTT and 100 patients with idiopathic mental  identiÜed 27 different mutations on 72.5% of the investigated alleles.  retardation in Taipei City. Two-third of the patients harboured CFTR gene mutations on both  Methods: All patients enrolled were Ürst excluded fragile x syndrome  chromosomes. Two predominant mutations, IV
S8 -5T and D1152H,  through FMR-1 analysis. The coding sequences of MEC
P2  gene  accounted for more than one-third of the alleles. Five mutations were  were ampliÜed by PCR. For patients of idiopathic mental retardation,  observed for the Ürst time. With one exception, all identiÜed patients  the suspected PCR products were sequenced after screened by  harboured at least one mutation of the missense or splicing type.  denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). For  In conclusion, although classic cystic Übrosis is relatively rare in  patients of high risk for MEC
P2  mutation (either x-linked mental  Turkey, CFTR mutations are responsible for the majority of CBAVD in  retardation suggested from family history or RTT suspected by  Anatolian males. neurologist or psychiatrist), PCR products were directly examined by  automatic sequencing. 
P0639 . CFTR gene mutations in patients with CFTR associated  Results: The analysis revealed 6 disease-causing mutation from 8  disorders sporadic patients, including one male case. Among these 8 patients,  A. Divac, A. Nikolic, J. Kusic, D. Radojkovic;  only 5 belonged to typical RTT phenotype. These mutations included  4 missense mutations and two deletions. Three mutations were  Institute of molecular genetics and genetic engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and  located in the methyl-CpG-binding domain and one in transcriptional  Montenegro. repression domain, two in C-terminal segment. Two mothers were  This study was undertaken to test the possible involvement of CFTR  noted of mutation carrier after familial investigation. No mutation was  gene mutations and polymorphisms in etiology of male infertility,  identiÜed among 19 cases suggested of XLMR. chronic pancreatitis, disseminated bronchiectasis and chronic  Conclusion: In addition to typical RTT phenotype, patients with  obstructive pulmonary disease in Serbian patients. MEC
P2  mutation had different clinical presentation in Chinese  We analyzed 110 patients with CFTR associated disorders (21  population. Our study provided an efÜcient approach to discover the  infertile men, 39 patients with chronic pancreatitis, 31 patients with  domains of MEC
P2  mutation. This analysis facilitate the diagnosis  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 19 patients  of RTT at the molecular level and provide insight into the molecular  with disseminated bronchiectasis). CFTR gene was screened for  pathology of Rett syndrome. presence of mutations and polymorphisms using the combination of  PCR and subsequent mutation detection methods (HA, PSM, SSCP,  
P0637 . A new allelic variant K695M in the MEFV gene in a Turkish  DGGE, sequencing). Several mutations were detected: F508del,  family suffering from FMF R74W, R75Q, G126D, 711+3A/G, V920L, 
L997 F and F1052V. In all  I. Keser1, E. Manguoglu1, E. Ozguven2, G. Luleci1;  four groups of patients common polymorphisms (1716G/A, 2377C/ T, 2694T/G, 3417A/T, 4002A/G, 4029A/G, 4404C/T, 875+40A/G,  1Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey, 2Antalya State Hospital, Antalya, Turkey. 1001+11A/T, M470V, IV
S6  (GATT)m) were also detected. The  Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a recessive disorder  frequencies obtained for mutations and 5T allele at Tn polymorphic  characterised by episodes of fever and neutrphil-mediated serozal  site are shown in the table. inÝammation. The gene, MEFV, responsible for this disease,  comprises 10 exons and 781 codons. Twenty-nine mutations, mostly  clinical status mutations frequency PI (statistical  5T frequency PI signiÜcance) located in the exon 2 and especially in exon 10 of the MEFV gene,  have been identiÜed so far. Here, we describe a 9 year old male  male infertility 7/62* 11.29% <0.0001 5/62* 8.06% 0.142 child with a family history of FMF who suffered from recurrent fever  chronic pan- 2/78* 2.56% 0.855 0/78* 0 - creatitis accompained by pains in the abdomen. During a Üve years period he  experienced attacks about once every six months. He was threated  disseminated  bronchiec- 3/38* 7.89% 0.118 0/38* 0 - by colchicine for four years. Genomic DNA, extracted from peripheral  tasis blood lymphocytes of the proband and his parents, were analysed  COPD 11/62* 17.74% <0.0001 8/62* 12.90% 0.018 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), followed by cycle sequencing  using ABI 310 Genotyper system. We detected homozygously a  *number of screened chromosomes mutation, AAGÏATG(LysÏMet), in codon 695 in the exon 10 of  These Ündings suggest that CFTR protein may be involved in  the FMF gene, MEFV, that resulted in a substitution of methionine  etiology of obstructive azoospermia and chronic obstructive  for arginine (K695M) in proband. His parents were carrier for this  pulmonary disease, but not in chronic pancreatitis and disseminated  mutation heterozygously. In addition, both proband and his father  bronchiectasis in Serbian patients. Further investigations on a larger  were found to be carrier for R202Q, the of which is unclear in the  cohort of patients are needed for conÜrmation of these results. clinical reÝection of the FMF. However, probandÓs father has been  
P0640 . Deletions and duplications in the dystrophin gene:  clinically more affected than mother. We suggest that this mutation  retrospective and prospective MLPA analyses show complex  (K695M) is Ürstly found in a Turkish family and causes to FMF. Also,  rearrangements and previously undetected deletions the association of R202Q with K695M or with mutations should  be investigated in carriers and/or patients with FMF due to clinical  B. Janssen, C. Hartmann, V. Scholz, J. Zschocke;  differences. Institute of Human Genetics Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Background: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker  
P0638 . Mutations of the CFTR gene in Turkish patients with  muscular dystrophy (BMD) are common X-chromosomal disorders  congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens frequently caused by genomic rearrangements. Since 1988 we have  D. Dayanga\x8c1,2, H. Erdem1, E. Yòlmaz1, A. Ėahin3, C. Sohn2, M. \x84zg\x9e\x8c1, T.  used multiplex PCR to screen for deletions in the dystrophin (DMD)  D\x99rk2;  gene. 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology  Methods: Using the novel multiplex ligation-dependent probe  06100 Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey, 2Medical School Hannover Clinics of Obstetrics  ampliÜcation (MLPA) method for genomic quantiÜcation of all 79  and Gynecology Podbielskistr. 380, D-30659, Hannover, Germany, 3Hacettepe  DMD exons we performed a retrospective analysis on 92 mutation- negative male cases. Furthermore, 31 female individuals, two chorion Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 222 villi samples and 21 male patients were tested prospectively. MLPA  Among the patients, 20 (29%) showed molecular variants of GJB2.  reagents were obtained from MRC-Holland. The PCR products were  In addition to known mutations (35delG, del
E120 ,V27I, R32H,  quantiÜed on an ABI 3100 sequencer. V37I, R127H), a novel G109W mutation was found in a compound  Results: Previously undetected deletions were found in four  heterozygote with the 35delG. Four novel sequence variants (IV
S1 - reinvestigated cases (delEX10-11, delEX19, delEX38 and delEX61- 6T>C, IV
S1 -2A>C, Y158Y, K221N) were also detected. 63). In addition we found 11 previously unrecognised duplications  30 (11%) controls showed molecular variants of GJB2, 14 of which  dispersed over the whole gene, corresponding to a duplication rate  (carrier rate of 5%) having a disease-causing mutation (M34T,  of 12% among deletion-negative and 6% among all patients. Similar  35delG, R127H, 
E47 X, 167delT). Four novel sequence variants  results were obtained in the prospective study. In one individual  (IV
S1 -6T>C, IV
S1 -2A>C, A/G at -8, D159N) were also detected.  we found a complex rearrangement involving a duplication of  Neither patients nor controls were carrying the 342-kb deletion in  two regions: dupEX45-48 and dupEX54-56. In another patient a  the GJB6, indicating that the occurence of this defect is restricted to  duplication of exons 46-53 coincided with a deletion of exon 37. certain populations. Conclusion: We conclude that MLPA is a highly sensitive alternative  In conclusion, GJB2 mutations resulted responsible for almost one  to multiplex PCR. It can also be used to detect female carriers.  third of the NSHL in our patients and the carrier frequency in the  Approximately 7% of all deletions had been previously overlooked by  Italian population resulted very high. multiplex PCR. 
P0643 . Dilated cardiomyopathy and novel mutations in ALM
S1  in  
P0641 . Leprechaunism with unimpaired insulin-binding caused  Alstr\x99m Syndrome. by novel mutations in the insulin receptor gene J. Bond1, K. J. Flintoff2, J. Higgins1, E. Roberts1, D. J. Cockburn2, G. R. Taylor2,  C. T. Thiel1, H. Sticht2, D. M\x9eller-Wieland3, I. Knerr4, M. Zenker1, H. D\x99rr4, A.  G. Woods3,1;  Rauch1;  1University of Leeds, Leeds, West Yorkshire, United Kingdom, 2Regional  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,  Genetics Laboratory & Cancer Research UK Mutation Detection Facility, St  Germany, 2Institute of Biochemestry, Department of Bioinformatics, University  JamesÓs University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical  of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine  Genetics, St JamesÓs University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom. II, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics and  Alstr\x99m Syndrome is a rare progressive autosomal recessive  Adolescent Medicine, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. disease. In the Ürst decade of life it commonly presents as a severe  The human insulin receptor (INSR) is a heterotetramer composed of  cone-rod dystrophy, truncal obesity, acanthosis nigricans and  two insulin binding ŋ subunits and two tyrosinase kinase Ȳ subunits.  progresses to include sensory neural deafness, male hypogonadism,  Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations within the  and NIDDM in the second decade of life. The lifespan of affected  insulin binding domain lead to severe impairment of insulin-binding  individuals is shortened, with death usually occurring from renal or  associated with Leprechaunism, a syndrome characterized by  heart failure in the Üfth decade. One more rarely reported clinical  excessive hyperglycemia with hyperinsulinism and early mortality,  feature of Alstr\x99ms is dilated cardiomyopathy, manifesting either  pre- and postnatal growth retardation and distinct dysmorphism, while  within the Ürst year of life when it often spontaneously regresses, or  mutations with preserved insulin-binding capacity were demonstrated  in the second decade. in other insulin resistance disorders. We studied 7 families in which the index case presented with a  We report on a 9 year old girl with characteristic Leprechaunism  dilated cardiomyopathy prior to the diagnosis of Alstrom syndrome  phenotype and hyperinsulinism with hyperglycemia (400mg/dl),  being made. The gene for Alstr\x99m syndrome, ALSM1, has been  but with prolonged survival. Unexpectedly, insulin-binding assays  identiÜed and thirteen protein truncating mutations have been  in her Übroblasts revealed no signiÜcant alterations. Nevertheless,  published to date of which 6 are clustered in exon 16. Of these  sequence analysis of the INSR gene showed that the patient was  mutations one is associated with a dilated cardiomyopathy. We have  compound heterozygous for 2 novel missense mutations 
C186 F  identiÜed seven novel ALM
S1  mutations in our Alstr\x99m Syndrome  and R256C in exon 2 und 3 within the insulin-binding domain. These  families. The mutations are all protein truncating and 3/7 are located  mutations segregate in the family according to autosomal recessive  in exon 16. inheritance, were not present in 96 control samples and affect  There is no distinct clustering or distribution pattern of the ALM
S1   highly conserved amino acids. Bioinformatic analysis suggests that  mutations associated with dilated cardiomyopathy compared to those  the loss of a disulphide bond caused by 
C186 F mutation results in  previously reported. We therefore suggest dilated cardiomyopathy  the destabilization of loop and that the R256C mutation increases  may be a more common feature of Alstr\x99m Syndrome than previously  the tendency to form an alternative (non-native) disulÜde bonding  recognised. A clinical screening service for ALM
S1  mutations has  pattern in INSR, which is both likely to disturb protein function.Thus  been established in Leeds. we demonstrate, that mutations in the insulin binding ŋ subunit of  the INSR gene leading to Leprechaunism may not necessarily end  
P0644 . Detection and estimation of heteroplasmy for  up in impaired insulin-binding, but may also alter the INSR function.  mitochondrial mutations using Nanochip and Pyrosequencing  Insulin-binding is therefore not a valid parameter for predicting INSR  Technology mutations as proposed. H. E. White1, V. J. Durston1, A. Seller2, C. Fratter2, J. F. Harvey1, N. C. P.  Cross1;  
P0642 . Prevalence of GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in non- 1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2Oxford  syndromic hearing loss among the Italian population Medical Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom. V. Mantovani, P. Paterini, M. Montaguti, D. Bastia, V. Cerreta, P. Selva, M.  Disease causing mutations in mitochondrial DNA are typically  Cenci, R. Parente;  heteroplasmic and therefore interpretation of genetic tests for  S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy. mitochondrial disorders is problematic. The reliable measurement of  Mutations in the gene encoding connexin 26 (GJB2) have been  heteroplasmy in different tissues may help identify individuals who  described as a major cause of genetic non-syndromic hearing loss  are at risk of developing speciÜc complications and allow improved  (NSHL). Recently, a deletion involving connexin 30 (GJB6) was  prognostic advice for patients and family members. We evaluated the  associated with autosomal recessive NSHL, frequently observed  NanoChip§ Molecular Biology Workstation and Pyrosequencing©  in patients from Spain, France and Israel. In order to evaluate the  technology for the detection and estimation of heteroplasmy for  prevalence of GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in Italy, we have studied  six mitochondrial point mutations associated with the following  69 patients with mild to profound NSHL or deafness, recessive or  diseases: Lebers Hereditary Optical Neuropathy (LHON), G3460A,  apparently sporadic. In addition, we have screened 285 control  G11778A & T14484C; Mitochondrial Encephalopathy with Lactic  subjects with normal hearing to evaluate the carrier frequency. A  Acidosis and Stroke-like episodes (MELAS), A3243G; Myoclonus  mutation screening by DHPLC and sequencing of GJB2 gene and  Epilepsy with Ragged Red Fibres (MERRF), A8344G and Neurogenic  the detection by multiplex PCR of 342-kb deletion in the GJB6 were  muscle weakness, Ataxia and Retinitis Pigmentosa (NARP)/Leighs:  performed. T8993G/C. Results obtained from the Nanogen and Pyrosequencing Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 223 assays for 50 patients with presumptive mitochondrial disease  
P0647 . IdentiÜcation and characterization of a candidate gene in  were compared to those obtained by the current àgold-standardÒ  Joubert syndrome diagnostic technique, PCR and restriction enzyme digestion. Overall,  S. Kantarci1, N. Tommerup2, U. Kristoffersson3, R. Stanyon4, E. Boltshauser5,  the NanoChip§ Molecular Biology Workstation provided accurate  E. Hatchwell1;  genotyping for the six mitochondrial assays but had limitations in  1Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Woodbury, NY, United States, 2The Dpt. of  determining the degree of heteroplasmy for some mutations. The  Medical Genetics, IMBG, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Co- Pyrosequencing assays provided both accurate genotyping and good  penhagen, Denmark, 3The Dpt. of Clinical Genetics, The University Hospital of  determination of mutational load for all mutations. Pyrosequencing  Lund, Lund, Sweden, 4Comparative Molecular Genetics Core, NCI, Frederick,  also compared favourably when reagent costs and time of analysis  MD, United States, 5ChildrenÒs University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. were considered. Whilst both systems can be used for detection and  Joubert Syndrome is a rare, clinically and genetically heterogeneous  quantiÜcation of mitochondrial mutations, Pyrosequencing offered a  syndrome, characterized by brain stem and cerebral malformations,  number of advantages in terms of accuracy, speed and cost. hypotonia, ataxia, abnormal eye movements, hyperpnea, neuro- ophthalmologic abnormalities, and mental retardation. The  
P0645 . Spinocerebellar ataxia type (SCA2) associated with white  biochemical and molecular basis of JS remains unknown. matter affectation We have used Ýow sorted derivative chromosomes to map the  J. Corral1, J. Armstrong2,1, I. Bonaventura3, I. Ferrer2, V. Volpini1;  translocation breakpoint in a patient with JS associated with a  1Cancer Research Institute, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain, 2Institut  de novo, balanced translocation t(2;22)(q13;q11.1). We initially  de Neuropatologia, Hospital de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona),  generated a microarray containing BAC sets that span chromosomes  Spain, 3Hospital M\x9btua de Terrassa, Terrassa (Barcelona), Spain. 2 and 22 at 1 MB intervals. We narrowed the translocation breakpoint  Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2; 12q23-24) is characterized by  to a region between two BACs that are separated by 4MB. Sequence  slowly progressive ataxia and dysarthria associated with slow saccadi  tagged site (STS)-PCR was performed at higher density levels and  eye movements, as well as relatively high incidence of dystonia or  the breakpoint localized to within a 324 bp region. chorea and dementia. SCA2 is caused by a (CAG) repeat expansion  The breakpoint on chromosome 2q13 interrupted a number of  n sequence coding a polyglutamine tract. The pathological range (n) of  predicted genes.. Our analysis of a predictive gene cluster has  CAG repeats varies from 35-to >77; the wild type (n) is 15 to 29. The  conÜrmed the presence of a ubiquitously expressed gene, whose  expansions usually increases in size when transmitted to successive  precise structure differs somewhat from generations. any of the members of the cluster. Using 5ÓRACE and 3ÓRACE  We present an index SCA2 familial case showing white matter  experiments and inter-exon RT-PCR from 28 human tissues, we have  affectation and without alfa-sinuclein deposits. Detection of CAG  found that this gene, named JSC (for Joubert Syndrome Candidate)  expansion mutation was performed by PCR in a post-mortem sample  pro term, contains 10 exons, produces a transcript of ~6 kb and  and results in a genotype 22/36. We have also identiÜed SCA2  spans a genomic region of over 500kb. The gene appears to be  expansions in several familial related individuals. In conclusion, CAG  expressed in all tissues examined. There is a large CpG island at the  expansion mutations can correlate with white matter affectation in  5Óend. The gene has homologues in mouse, rat, fugu and drosophila. spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. We have sequenced all 10 exons of the JSC gene in the patient and  have failed to detect any clear mutations. 
P0646 . The very recently identiÜed type 2A juvenile  haemochromatosis gene (HF
E2 A), a candidate modiÜer of the  
P0648 . Molecular study of Spinocerebellar Ataxias in Iranian  
C282 Y homozygous phenotype Patients G. Le Gac1,2, V. Scotet1, S. Jacolot1,3, C. Ka1,3, I. Gourlaouen2, L. Bryckaert2, C.  M. M. Banoei1, M. Houshmand1, M. H. Sanati1, F. Hormozian1, S. NaÜsi2, A.  Mura1,3, C. Ferec1,2;  Soltanzadeh2;  1INSERM U613, Brest, France, 2EFS-Bretagne, Brest, France, 3Universite de  1National Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran,  Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, France. Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). BACKGROUND: The most common form of haemochromatosis is  Objective: To assess the frequency of common types of Autosomal  an adult-onset condition which has mainly been associated with  Dominant Cerebellar Ataxia (ADCA), SCA1 (spinocerebellar ataxia  the HF
E1  
C282 Y/
C282 Y genotype. The phenotypic expression of  type 1), SCA2, SCA 3/MJD spinocerebellar ataxia type 3/Machdo- this genotype is very heterogeneous and depends on a complex  Joseph disease), SCA 6 and SCA 7, CAG trinucleotide repeat  interplay of genetic and non genetic factors. Aim of the present study  expansion [(CAG)n] among patients clinically diagnosed with  was to determine if mutations in the very recently HF
E2 A gene were  hereditary SCA. IdentiÜcation of the type of ataxia is important to  associated with more severe iron overload phenotypes in 
C282 Y- determine the disease prevalence, diagnosis and right treatments for  homozygous patients. RESULTS: From a cohort of 310 
C282 Y- patients. homozygous patients, we found 9 carriers (6 males and 3 females)  Materials and Methods: 18 patients from 12 families who clinically  of an additional HF
E2 A missense mutation at the heterozygous state  diagnosed for SCA were used as subject for this study. Polymerase  (
L101 P, 
S105 L, 
E302 K, N372D, R335Q or the previously described  chain reaction were used to detect (CAG)n repeats in following SCA  G320V). Iron indices of these 9 patients appeared to be more severe  types: SCA1, SCA 2, SCA 3/MJD, SCA 6 and SCA7. Polyacrylamide  than those observed in 
C282 Y-homozygous patients of identical sex  gel electrophoresis, product and stained with silver staining. . We  and similar age ranges. Thus, the mean serum ferritin concentration  are conducting detail mutational analysis by sequencing of PCR  of the 6 males with a HF
E2 A mutation was signiÜcantly higher than  products. that of 
C282 Y-homozygous males without an additional mutation  Results: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA 1) was identiÜed in 2  (2350.3 [s = 1429.9] vs 1227.2 [s = 1130.1] ´g/L; p = 0.0233,  families with 6 studied patients. All affected family members were  Student t test). CONCLUSION - DISCUSSION: We have recently  heterozygous for a CAG repeat expansion in the SCA 2 gene, one  reported that mutations in gene that encodes hepcidin could explain  family with 5 patients showed anticipation. Proband in this family  one part of the 
C282 Y/
C282 Y-related phenotypic heterogeneity by  was a 22 years old male who showed ataxia, gait, disturbance and  accentuating the iron burden. Our new data revealed that mutations  incoordination. Another patient had any family history for SCA. This  in HF
E2 A could be associated with a similar effect. Taken together,  sporadic phenomenon was found also in other family with SCA type  these results emphasized that search for modiÜer genes could  7. enable us to more precisely distinguish those 
C282 Y-homozygous  Conclusion: Because of this is the Ürst report in molecular level about  patients with a higher risk to develop a severe iron overload and,  SCA, itÒs difÜcult to get conclusion for SCA prevalence, evidence  consequently, clinical complications. shows more patients who clinically diagnosed with SCA in Iran that  Genetic diagnosis could help clinician to make decision for their  treatments of patients.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 224 
P0649 . A change in the phase of segregation in a male CMT1A  
P0651 . Large genomic APC deletions are a frequent cause of  carrier due to a recombination event within the duplicated region  familial adenomatous polyposis of chromosome 17p11.2 S. Aretz1, D. Stienen1, E. Mangold1, C. Pagenstecher1, S. Uhlhaas1, R. Caspa- K. A. Bosse1, A. Caliebe2, W. Friedl3;  ri2, P. Propping1, W. Friedl1;  1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Hospital Cologne, Co- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 2Department  logne, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Kiel, Kiel, Germany,  of Medicine, University Hospital, Bonn, Germany. 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal-dominant  Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a clinically and genetically  precancerous condition of the colorectum that is caused by germline  heterogeneous peripheral neuropathy characterized by gait problems  mutations in the tumour suppressor gene APC. Most mutations  and impaired hand function due to distal paresis and sensory  reported in the literature are point mutations. Large genomic deletions  dysfunction. CMT1, the demyelinating form, has an estimated  might account for a substantial number of patients. Indeed, earlier  prevalence of 1/2500. We report on a three-generation family in  we had detected large deletions in 4 FAP families based on apparent  which the father and his mother present with the typical clinical  nonpaternity of intragenic and closely Ýanking polymorphic markers.  picture of CMT1A. The parents came to see us with their three  Here we present results of a systematic search for large deletions by  daughters, 13, 16 and 17 years old, asking for genetic advice. At  use of MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliÜcation). The  the time of Ürst contact none of the girls had developed symptoms  MLPA test kit (MRC Holland) contains 20 paired probes spanning the  of CMT1A. In general, CMT1A leads to signiÜcant motor disabilities  entire APC region. We could characterise the 4 deletions detected  in adult life. Therefore, the parents wished predictive molecular  by linkage analysis (2 deletions of the complete APC, one deletion  testing in order to help their children to decide for an appropriate  of exons 8-15 and one deletion of exons 14-15). Subsequently, we  profession. Molecular genetic investigations by microsatellite  examined a subset of 49 unrelated patients in whom no mutation had  analysis showed that the father and the grandmother share the same  been detected by PTT of exon 15 and DHPLC of exons 1-15B, and  characteristic 1.5 Mb duplication on chromosome 17p11.2 containing  identiÜed large deletions in another 14 patients. Eight of the patients  the peripheral myelin protein 22 gene (PM
P22 ). Analysis of the three  were identiÜed with different partial deletions encompassing one up  daughters demonstrated that two children inherited the nonduplicated  to several exons, while the remaining 6 patients had deletions of all  grandpaternal haplotype. The youngest daughter presents with a  20 fragments. The relatively high proportion of large deletions in this  doubled gene dosage of the markers 4A, D17
S2228 , 9A, 9B and  Ürst subset of patients (28%) may be due to a selection of patients for  10A and three unique alleles for the marker D17
S2230 . Interestingly,  an autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance and typical FAP, part of  the duplication of 1.5 Mb was composed of one grandpaternal and  them showing no heterozygozity for intragenic polymorphisms. one grandmaternal haplotype. We conclude that a homologous  The study was supported by the German Cancer Aid (grant 70-2783- recombination event in the meiosis of the father resulted in a change  Fr 1). in the segregation phase of the duplication. 
P0652 . Molecular genetic characterization of intrahepatic  
P0650 . Hereditary hemochromatosis: genotype/phenotype  cholestasis of pregnancy correlations for the main HFE mutations I. Giannatou1, J. Traeger-Synodinos2, P. Kaminopetros3, S. Kitsiou2, A. Galla1,  V. Scotet1, M. M\x8drour2, A. Mercier2, B. Chanu2, T. Le Faou3, O. Ragu\x8dn\x8es4, G.  A. Tsezou4, E. Kikidou3, E. Kanavakis2;  Le Gac2, C. Mura1, J. Nousbaum5, C. F\x8drec1;  1Cytogenetics Laboratory, 2nd dept Pediatrics, University of Athens  1INSERM U 613, Brest, France, 2EFS-Bretagne, Brest, France, 3EFS-Bretagne,  ÐP&A.KyriakouÑ ChildrenÓs Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Medical Genetics,  Quimper, France, 4Laboratoire de g\x8dn\x8dtique mol\x8dculaire, Brest, France, 5Ser- University of Athens, ÐAghia SoÜaÑ ChildrenÓs Hospital, Choremio Research  vice dÓH\x8dpato-gastroent\x8drologie, CHU La Cavale Blanche, Brest, France. Laboratory, Athens, Greece, 3The Fetal Medicine Practice, Athens, Greece,  Characterized by iron overload, hereditary hemochromatosis (HH)  4University of Thessaly, Medical School,Department of Biology, Larissa,  is the most common autosomal recessive disorder in Caucasian  Greece. populations. It is a complex disorder whose phenotypic expression  Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP) is a disorder which  results from interactions between genetic and environmental factors.  complicates otherwise normal pregnancies, increasing risk of fetal  A candidate gene for HH (HFE) was cloned in 1996, including a  loss or preterm delivery. Prevalence varies between populations  main mutation (
C282 Y), two susceptibility factors (H63D, 
S65 C)  (0,01% USA, 27,6% Chile).The etiology of ICP is multifactorial  and a tenth of private mutations. This study aimed to compare the  including genetic, hormonal and environmental factors. This  phenotypic expression of the main HFE genotypes. study investigated molecular genetic factors possibly involved  We retrospectively analyzed a cohort of HH patients treated in  in development of ICP in Greece: Multi-Drug Resistance gene 3  western Brittany, France. A clinical questionnaire, completed at the  (MDR3); Uridino-glucuronosyl-transferase (UGT1A1) gene; and  time of onset, provides information on biochemical parameters,  Estrogen Receptor genes (ERalpha, ERbeta). MDR3 encodes  clinical data, genotype and treatment. a P-glycoprotein mediating translocation of phosphatidylcholine  This study included 585 patients: 433 
C282 Y/
C282 Y, 114 
C282 Y/ across the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes; mutations in  H63D and 38 H63D/H63D. Age at onset and iron parameters values  MDR3 have been observed in ICP. The UGT1A1 gene encodes  (serum iron, serum ferritin, transferrin saturation) were signiÜcantly  uridino-glucuronosyl-transferase which mediates steroid metabolism.  lower in the two last groups (respectively, p=0.02 and p<0.001 for  Estrogen receptors are ligand-activated transcription factors that  each parameter). The 
C282 Y/H63D and H63D/H63D genotypes  mediate action of estrogen in target tissues. In 10 Greek women  were associated with lower frequency of arthritis (p=0.0012) and  with clinical and biochemical Ündings of ICP and 45 Greek pregnant  skin pigmentation (p<0.0001) in comparison with the 
C282 Y/
C282 Y  women without ICP (controls) we investigated the presence of  genotype. Moreover, higher proportions of metabolic disorders  4 MDR3 gene mutations previously observed in patients with  (p<0.0001) and high-blood pressure (p=0.02) were observed in  Progresssive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis and/or ICP (ex6  patients carrying those genotypes. Comparison of the 
C282 Y/H63D  7bpdel, ex14 cd546C>A and 1712delT, ex23 cd957C>T). Additionally  and H63D/H63D genotypes showed no signiÜcant difference,  we investigated: distribution of microsatellite allele-sizes linked to  excepted a signiÜcantly higher proportion of skin pigmentation among  the UGT1A1 gene (TA repeats in promoter), the ERalpha gene (TA  the H63D-homozygous patients (p=0.028). This study highlights  repeats in promoter) and the ERbeta gene (CA repeats in intron 5).  the genotype/phenotype correlations for the main HFE genotypes.  No MDR3 gene mutations were found in any case. For the UGT1A1  The results conÜrm that the two less common HFE genotypes are  gene, 20% of ICP cases vs 16% of non-ICP cases had the (TA)7/ associated with milder forms of HH, and show that the patients  (TA)7 genotype. Microsatellite allele-size distribution of the ERalpha  carrying those genotypes present more frequently metabolic  and beta genes did not show obvious differences between the two  disorders. groups. Overall conclusive results are precluded by the small number  of cases studied so far.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 225 
P0653 . Molecular analysis of a translocation t(17;20)(q25;q13) in  criteria involved positive sweat tests (Cl > 60 mmol/l) and typical  a patient suffering from SRS clinical Ündings of pulmonary and gastrointestinal disease. F. Matthes, M. Ayala-Madrigal, I. Hansmann, D. Schlote;  DNA diagnostics by means of detection of the dF508 mutation  began in 1991. Since this period the number of mutations routinely  Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany. screened in CF patients gradually increased to 12, analysed by  A severe Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS), a heterogenous disorder  ARMS, restriction and gel retardation tests. Eleven mutations have  characterized by growth retardation, lateral asymmetry and  been found in 262 CF chromosomes with relative frequencies as  other dysmorphologies, ascertained in a girl with a translocation  follows: dF508 - 60.8 %; CFTRdele2,3(21kb) - 7.0%; 2184delA  t(17;20)(q25;q13), was reported by Ramirez-Due\x95as et al. (1992). - 3.7%; N1303K - 3.5 %; 3849+1kbC-T - 1.9%; W1282X - 1.6  Here we report the molecular analysis of both breakpoint regions  % G542X - 1.2%; R334W - 0.8%, R553X, R347P and 
S549 N -  based on speciÜc PAC and BAC clone contigs. Several clones  0.4%, giving overall detection rate of 82.7 %. Our data show that  could be identiÜed giving signals on both chromosomes 17 and  CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation, particularly common in Eastern  der17 in FISH analysis using proband metaphase chromosomes so  Europe, has a higher frequency in Belarus than in any other  establishing a reÜned clone contig for the 17q25 region. According to  population. the mutation analysis of the candidate region for hereditary neuralgic  First trimester prenatal diagnosis has been performed in 38 CF  amyotrophy (HNA; Meuleman et al., 2001) we could localize the  families by means of direct mutation analysis and combined analysis  gene SE
C14 L1
 nearby the region of interest by PCR approach. STS  using the intragenic polymorphism IV S6
a-GATT in the CFTR  content mapping and sequencing of the clone insert ends resulted in  gene. Eight affected, 18 heterozygous and 12 normal fetuses were  locating the breakpoint within 81,5 kb in the 5ª- region of SE C14
L1 . detected. Corresponding FISH analysis resulted in the identiÜcation of a PAC  We are continuing analysis, in order to identify other mutations in so  clone R
P1 -232n11 spanning the breakpoint on chromosome 20  far uncharacterised CF alleles. The knowledge of the spectrum of  including parts of the Receptor Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Rho  mutations causing CF in our country would provide useful information  gene (PTPRT) considered to be another SRS candidate gene. In  to design the best approach in pre and postnatal diagnosis of CF and  order to establish a precise physical map of the region of interest  for population screening. we located one XhoI fragment of R
P1 -232n11 distal to the 20q13  breakpoint. Further experiments using other clone subfragments  
P0656 . The axonemal intermediate dynein gene DNAI1 and  should lead to a high resolution map of the 20q breakpoint region  asthenozoospermia thus giving novel information on the genetic background of SRS. C. Foresta, A. Ferlin, F. Ganz, C. Cazzadore, A. Garolla, L. Bartoloni;  
P0654 . Molecular characterisation of 20 patients with Cohen  University of Padova, Padova, Italy. syndrome: Spectrum of mutations in COH1 The axonemal intermediate dynein gene DNAI1 is mutated in Primary  W. Seifert1,2, C. Schumi1, A. Rauch3, K. M. Eckl1, M. Karbasiyan4, A. Reis3, D.  Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD), an hereditary disorder characterized  Horn4,5, H. C. Hennies1;  by recurrent pulmonary and upper respiratory tract infections.  This disease is due to immotility of cilia covering the respiratory  1Max Delbr\x9eck Center (MDC), Berlin, Germany, 2Faculty of Biology, Chemistry,  epithelium. Since the ultrastructure of the cilia is almost identical  and Pharmacy, Free University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute of Human  to the ultrastructure of the Ýagellum, these patients have often  Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 4Institute of Human  immotile spermatozoa (asthenozoospermia). It may be possible that  Genetics, Charit\x8d, University Medicine of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 5Institute of  different mutations in the DNAI1 gene lead to different phenotypes.  Medical Genetics, Charit\x8d, University Medicine of Berlin, Berlin, Germany. To investigate this hypothesis we performed a mutation search in  Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder,  the DNAI1 gene in 20 infertile asthenozoospermic men without  highly variable and mainly characterized by mental retardation,  respiratory problems.In three patients we detected three different  microcephaly, truncal obesity, short stature, craniofacial features,  base changes never described before. Two of these variations  myopia, retinal dystrophy, and neutropenia. Mutations in a novel  change the aminoacid. In exon 1 a G>T introduces a new GT donor  gene, COH1, on chromosome 8q22 were recently reported in Cohen  splice in the open reading frame and changes the Ala in position 8  syndrome patients from Finland and other parts of Northern Europe.  into a Ser (A8S). In exon 19 a C>T changes the arginine 650 in a  Here we describe molecular and clinical Ündings in 20 patients  cystein (R650C). DHPLC analyses showed that these two alleles are  with Cohen syndrome from twelve families, originating from Brazil,  not present in 50 fertile men from the same ethnic origin and in 30  Germany, Lebanon, Oman, Poland, and Turkey, with mutations  italian PCD patients. The above variations are both in heterozygosity  in COH1. We identiÜed a total of 17 different novel mutations,  and they are not frequent polymorphisms. If this trend will continue  including nine nonsense mutations, six frameshift mutations, and  we will Ünd that changes in DNAI1 gene are present in 10% of  two potentially pathogenic missense mutations. In a Lebanese family  asthenozoospermic patients. We will perform electron microscopy  with an overlapping phenotype of Cohen and Mirhosseini-Holmes- and functional studies to assess the pathogeneity of these changes.It  Walton syndromes we found a mutation in the splice acceptor site  is important to discriminate between environmental and genetic  of intron 51 resulting in activation of a cryptic splice acceptor site in  asthenozoospermia, in order to allow responsible reproductive  exon 52 and a lack of 16 bp mRNA sequence. Patients from four  choices to carriers of a genetic condition. consanguineous families and one family without known consanguinity  carried homozygous mutations, all others were compound  
P0657 . Mutation search in the intermediate axonemal dynein  heterozygous. All mutations were found only once, distributed  gene DNAI1 in 30 Italian patients with Kartagener Syndrome throughout the coding region of COH1 as far as known today. Our  C. Cazzadore, L. Bartoloni, A. Ferlin, A. Beghin, C. Foresta;  Ündings demonstrate that Cohen syndrome may be caused by  mutations in COH1 also in patients from outside Northern Europe  University of Padova, Padova, Italy. with a clinical picture diverging from the homogeneous phenotype  Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare (1:20000) heterogeneous  of Finnish patients. A consistent genotype/phenotype-correlation,  hereditary disorder characterised by immotility of cilia, leading to  however, has not been found so far. The COH1 product appears to  recurrent pulmonary and upper respiratory tract infections. The  have a certain tolerance to residue substitutions. These data indicate  chronic infections often result in bronchiectasis, and they can  that COH1 is subject to wide allelic heterogeneity. seriously damage the lungs, which may need to be transplanted.  Dextrocardia, with or without heterotaxia (situs inversus totalis),  
P0655 . Molecular diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis in Belarus: Update is present in about 50% of the patients. If recurrent respiratory  K. Mosse, N. Mosse, G. Tsukerman;  infections, ciliary dyskinesia and situs inversus are present,  the pathology is named Kartagener Syndrome (KS). The  Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus. ultrastructure of the cilia is almost identical to the ÝagellaÓs one  The incidence of cystic Übrosis (CF) in Belarus is about 1:8000  and patientsÓ spermatozoa often are vital with immotile Ýagella  newborns. Since 1991 a total of 131 unrelated Belarus families with  (asthenozoospermia). at least one affected subject have been investigated. Diagnostic  We collected 30 unrelated KS/PCD patients from all around Italy. Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 226 Diagnosis was established on the basis of respiratory tract infections,  homozygosity but none of these changes seems to be pathogenetic. bronchiectasis, electron microscopy of cilia or Ýagella. Over half  of the patients to date analysed has a dynein arm deÜciency.We  
P0660 . Search for structural rearrangements of the HBII-85  searched the patientsÓ DNA for mutations in the genes in which  snoRNA gene cluster in patients with atypical PWS mutations leading to PCD/KS have already been described: DNAI1,  H. Nazlican, S. Gro¦, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach, B. Horsthemke, K. Buiting;  an intermediate dynein chain, DNAH5 and DNAH11 two heavy chain  Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89tsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. axonemal dyneins. We Ünished the analysis of the entire DNAI1  Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a neurogenetic disorder caused by  gene (20 exons and Ýanking intronic regions) and no pathogenetic  the loss of function of one or more imprinted genes in 15q11-q13,  alterations were found. Our Ündings show that in Italy PCD/KS is  which are paternally expressed only. Some of the genes encode  almost never due to mutations in the DNAI1 gene (less than 3,3%).  proteins, whereas others encode small nucleolar RNA (snoRNAs).  Preliminary data on DNAH5 and DNAH11 show that the previously  Paternal deletions in mice have pointed to the presence of a gene  reported mutations are not frequent in Italy. It is possible that the  or genes between Snurf-Snrpn and the Ipw exons, which may  Italian patients share the same mutated gene/s which is to be  contribute to the PWS phenotype. Based on its location, the HBII-85  individuate. snoRNA gene cluster, which consists of 27 gene copies, is a potential  candidate for this. 
P0658 . Functional analysis of mutant alleles identiÜed in  In three patients with atypical PWS and a balanced translocation, the  Spanish mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (SanÜlippo A) patients translocation breakpoints are located in exon 20 of SNURF-SNRPN.  M. Montfort1, L. Vilageliu1, E. Garrido1, A. Chab\x86s2, J. J. Hopwood3, D.  In one case studied, loss of HBII-85 expression was observed.  Grinberg1;  Since repeated DNA sequences can be targets for recombination  1Departament de Gen\x8etica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona,  events, it is possible that patients with some features of PWS have  Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioqu\x91mica Cl\x91nica, Hospital Cl\x91nic, Corporaci\x96  a rearrangement or deletion of the HBII-85 cluster. To address  Sanit\x87ria Cl\x91nic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Lysosomal Diseases Research Unit,  this question, we Ürst screened 11 patients with atypical PWS by  Department of Chemical Pathology, WomenÓs and ChildrenÓs Hospital,  Southern blot analysis and found no evidence for a deletion or  Adelaide, Australia. a rearrangement. To screen a larger cohort of patients, we have  Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (MPS IIIA) is an autosomal recessive  established a multiplex ampliÜable probe hybridization (MAPH)  lysosomal disorder caused by the deÜciency of sulfamidase (SGSH;  assay, which allowed us to detect copy number changes at nine  EC 3.10.1.1), which is needed for the heparan sulfate catabolism.  different positions inside the 55 kb HBII-85 snoRNA gene locus in one  Approximately, 70 mutations have been identiÜed in different  hybridization. A locus from chromosome 8 served as a control. So far,  countries as responsible for MPS IIIA. Our group recently reported  in 94 patients with mental retardation and obesity, no deletion could  the molecular defects of 26 unrelated Spanish patients. In order to  be detected. demonstrate the causality for MPS IIIA of some of these mutations,  we expressed 8 out of the 14 mutant alleles present in that group  
P0661 . Screening for genomic rearrangements involved in non- of patients and the two variants of the polymorphism p.R456H. In  syndromic X-linked mental retardation particular, we expressed the mutant enzymes carrying changes:  W. Chen, S. Lenzner, L. Jensen, S. Haas, H. Ropers;  p.
S66 W, p.R74H, p.Q85R, p.R206P, p.
L386 R, p.R433Q, p.R433W  Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. and c.1079delC, using a baculovirus expression system. The  Genomic rearrangements play an important and hitherto  expression and further characterization revealed that the activity of  underestimated role in the etiology of human genetic disease.  the majority of these mutant alleles were severely compromised,  Very often, such rearrangements are mediated by non-allelic  presenting only 1-2% of the wild type enzyme activity. Only mutations  homologous recombination (NAHR) between low-copy repeats  p.
S66 W and p.R206P showed some levels of activity, 10% and  (LCRs). In one of our recent studies aiming at the detection of all  18% of wild type enzyme, respectively. In all cases, we detected the  causative mutations in families with non-syndromic X-linked mental  presence of the expected two forms of the sulfamidase, the precursor  retardation (NS-XLMR), we have found in only 1/3 of the families  and the mature proteins, indicating a normal processing of the mutant  tested functionally relevant mutations. It is conceivable that some  enzymes. of the missing mutations may not be detectable by point mutation  screening, such as submicroscopic rearrangements due to NAHR  
P0659 . Genome-wide homozygosity search in two brothers with  between LCRs. This has prompted us to search for possible genomic  Kartagener Syndrome rearrangements in patients with XLMR. In silico studies conducted  L. Bartoloni, A. Beghin, C. Cazzadore, C. Vinanzi, A. Ferlin, C. Foresta;  in our group have revealed 435 nearly identical LCRs, which are  University of Padova, Padova, Italy. present on the X chromosome in at least two copies. Due to possible  Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare heterogeneous hereditary  incomplete and incorrect assembly of genomic sequences some of  disorder characterised by immotility of cilia, leading to recurrent  the computationally identiÜed duplicated segments might be artifacts.  pulmonary and upper respiratory tract infections, which often result  Therefore, we have experimentally proven (by PCR on male DNA and  in bronchiectasis, and progressively damage the lungs (with need of  subsequent sequencing) that 32 out of 80 putative X chromosome  transplant). Dextrocardia, with or without situs inversus, is present  speciÜc duplications show apparent heterozygosity, indicating their  in 50% of the patients. If respiratory infections, ciliary dyskinesia  duplicated nature. Additionally, we could independently conÜrm these  and situs inversus are present, the pathology is named Kartagener  results by Southern Blot hybridization. Analyzing the genomic regions  Syndrome (KS). Often patientsÓ spermatozoa are vital with immotile  Ýanked by these 32 duplications we have identiÜed 39 candidate  Ýagella. Cilia and Ýagella have in common the axoneme, a structure  genes, which could be affected by possible rearrangements. These  given by about 250 different proteins. A deÜcit in any one of them may  genes are being investigated in patients from XLMR families with  have pathological consequences. Here we present two KS brother  overlapping linkage intervals by gene expression studies, by multiplex  that donÓt show mutations in the genes already associated to KS  ampliÜable probe hybridization (MAPH) and by multiplex ligation- (the axonemal dyneins DNAI1, DNAH5 and DNAH11) and lack outer  dependent probe ampliÜcation (MLPA). dynein arms. Their parents have a common ancestor. We assumed  that KS is due to homozygosity of a mutated alleles identical by  
P0662 . Isolated COX-deÜciency - broad clinical spectrum caused  descent (IBD). We performed a genome-wide microsatellite analysis  by mutations of nuclear and mitochondrial genes using 180 markers and we found the brothers share the same  P. Freisinger1,2, R. Horvath1, E. Shoubridge3, M. Jaksch1;  chromosome X and are homozygote for chromosomes 20, 17p,  1Metabolic Disease Center M\x9enchen-Schwabing, M\x9enchen, Germany,  19ptel, and few other markers. We focused our candidate gene  2Institute of Medical Genetics Technical University, M\x9enchen, Germany, 3McGill  search in these regions. Two heavy chains dynein genes map in the  University, Montreal, PQ, Canada. short arm of H
C17 . One, DNAH2, has only been annotate (and we  Isolated deÜciency of cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is a common  are cloning it), while the other, DNAH9, consists of 69 exons. To date  cause of respiratory chain disorders (1:20 000). It is frequently  we analysed more than 50 DNAH9 exons, we found some variants in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 227 associated with severe symptomes like Leigh disease, hypertrophic  found SCA 7 to be the second most prevalent form in our population. cardiomyopathy or fatal cardioencephalomyopathy of infancy,  The Ürst neuropathological sign was gait ataxia with visual failure,  usually caused by defects of nuclear-encoded COX assembly genes  and the pathological repeat range was between 35-55 repeats. (SURF1, SCO2, SCO1, COX10, COX15). A slowly progressive late- The tendency for earlier onset and increased phenotypic severity in  childhood onset myopathy with variable encephalopathy can be  younger generations (anticipation) is caused by mutations of the mtDNA encoded COX subunits (COI-III). clearly demostrated. There are juvenile cases resulting in death (5- In order to establish genotype-phenotype correlations we present  7 years) in three families with paternal allele transmision. In these  the molecular and clinical Ündings in our collective of 72 patients  cases the paternal allele size was greater than 41 repeats. In siblings  with isolated COX deÜciency. Most frequently COX deÜciency is  of the same generation the youngest patients present larger alleles  caused by mutations of SURF1. We summarise the clinical and  and this correlates with an earlier onset and more severe phenotype. genetic Ündings of our 15 patients carrying mutations in SURF1.  Five of these eight families share the same geographical location  SCO2 encodes a protein transporting Cu++ to COX. A common  (Guadalajara), three of wich are those aforementioned families  (
E140 K) mutation was found either compound heterozygous or  presenting juvenile cases resulting in death. Therefore, a common  homozygous in all patients described so far. Seven of our 8 cases  genetic origin is strongly suspected. Further linkage analysis could  developed cardioencephalomyopathy with death in the Ürst weeks  provide evidence of founder effect. (heterozygous patients) or Ürst year (homozygous patients) of life.  In one homozygous patient substitution with copper-histidinate was  
P0665 . Simultaneous investigation of Üve polymorphisms  associated with a recovery of cardiomyopathy, however she died at  associated with cardiovascular disorders in a multiplex PCR  age 39 months of pneumonia. Two cases with mutations in COX10  reaction combined with Ýuorescent minisequencing presented with Leigh-like disease and anaemia. A stop-mutation  M. Szĵke, A. Sebe, K. Kond\x86s, T. Tak\x86cs, C. Jeney;  (W58X) in mtDNA-encoded COIII was found in a patient presenting  GENOID Ltd., Budapest, Hungary. at age 12 years with a non-progressive mild myopathy. Mutations in  Here we descriebe a novel approach for simultaneous screening of  tRNASer were detected in 5 cases causing progressive myoclonus  Üve polymorphisms associated with cardiovascular diseases. epilepsy and myopathy. Summarising our Ündings we provide a  The Leiden mutation of coagulation factor V is a signiÜcant risk factor  diagnostic strategy in cases with isolated deÜciency of COX. for thromboembolic diseases; G202210A mutation of coagulation  factor II (prothrombin) is of low frequency, and it is a risk factor mainly  
P0663 . Increased polymorphism of the mitochondrial DNA  in association with Leiden mutation. The 
C677 T polymorphism of  polymerase gamma gene (POLG) among astenozoospermic  MTHFR gene was found to correlate with the plasma homocysteine  patients. level, elevated plasma homocysteine being a risk factor for coronary- J. Mart\x91nez1, K. Holub1, A. Fontanet2, J. L. Ballesca2, R. Oliva1;  artery disorders. T196C polymorphism of the gene encoding  1University of Barcelona and Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Clinic,  glycoprotein IIIa (PLA) may cause disorders of platelet binding,  Barcelona, Spain. and was found to correlate with the occurrence of acut coronary  Infertility in humans affects between 10 and 15% of all couples at  syndrome (ACS). The C-453A polymorphism in the promoter region  reproductive age. Different genetic defects have now been identiÜed  of the Übrinogen gene can be associated with elevated Übrinogen  in an important proportion of infertility cases in man. Exogenous  level, being a risk factor for ischemic cardiac disease. factors such a infection or trauma explain an additional number of  We elaborated a multiplex PCR reaction combined with Ýuorescent  cases of male infertility. However, still today, in the majority of cases  minisequencing (SNaPshot), for simultaneous detection of the  of male infertility or subfertility a genetic or environmental cause  mutations mentioned above, using the ABI Prism 310 Genetic  can not be identiÜed. In the present work we have focussed on the  Analyzer. We think this is a cost-effective and powerful tool for  POLG polymorphism as potential genetic risk factor. Two hundred  conducting correlation studies in a target population. and forty seven patients and sixty four blood donors were included  in this study. The POLG polymorphism was determined essentially  
P0666 . Maternal Transmission of a New Mutation in a Family with  as previously described (Rovio et al, Nat. Genet., 2001, 29 (3): 261- Mild Sotos Syndrome 262). The wild type genotype was found in more of an 80% in all  N. Kohlschmidt1, E. Hiller1, M. Wagner1, H. Engels2, K. Haug2, T. Haaf1, U.  groups studied. The heterozygous mutant frequency was increased  Zechner1;  from 6% in controls to 10-12% in the different infertile groups  1Institute of Human Genetics, Mainz University School of Medicine, Mainz,  although the differences were not statistically signiÜcantly. However  Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn University School of Medicine,  a signiÜcantly increased frequency was found in the homozygous  Bonn, Germany. POLG mutant in the asthenozoospermics group (6%) as compared  Sotos syndrome is characterized by mental retardation, pre- and  to the non-asthenozoospermics patients (0.5%). This results could  postnatal overgrowth, and typical facial features. For nearly forty  be related to the energy related function or mitochondria. Supported  years Sotos syndrome had to be diagnosed on the basis of clinical  by grants from Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnologia (BMC 2003-  features of which the most important was the facial gestalt, a rather  03937), fondos FEDER, Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo (V-2003-  vague criterion which may explain a diagnostic overlap with Weaver  REDCO7A-O) and by Generalitat de Catalunya (2001 SGR00382) to  syndrome. R.O. In 2002 came a sudden shift in interest from the clinical specialist to  the molecular geneticist when Kurotaki et al showed a microdeletion  
P0664 . Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 7. Correlations Between  of the NSD1 Gene on one chromosome 5q35 in 45/112 individuals  Phenotype And Genotype In 8 Spanish Families. with a clinical diagnosis of Sotos syndrome and an intragenic  M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas, A. Gimenez-Pardo, D. Mayo, D. Cantalapiedra, M.  mutation in another 16/112. These Ündings could only partly be  Garc\x91a-Hoyos, J. Gallego-Merlo, I. Lorda-Sanchez, C. Ayuso;  reproduced in Caucasians in whom intragenic mutations of the NSD1  Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. gene were more common and larger microdeletions seemed to be  Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 is an autosomal dominant cerebellar  rare. disorder with retinal degeneration. So far, only four familial cases with molecular studies have been  Symptoms are dysarthria, dysphagia, ataxia and progressive visual  published , a Ünding that supports clinical observations of a low  impairment. The expansion of a coding CAG repeat in the SCA 7  recurrence risk in siblings and children. gene causes this disease and displays as in other neurodegenerative  We investigated a family with two affected children and their likewise  conditions with marked anticipation of both onset age an rate of  affected mother with typical clinical features, especially overgrowth  progression. but a remarkable intellectual catch-up, which enables them to attend  In an extensive genetic study of more than Üve hundred Spanish  normal school and work as a skilled craftsperson, respectively. families affected with ataxia we conclude that eight of them present  Sequence analysis revealed a missense mutation 6523T>A, which  an increased number of repeats in the SCA 7 gene. Of all dominant  causes a change from cystine to serine in the protein. ataxias for which a genetic cause could be established, we have  Interestingly its position in exon 23 is close to the deletion Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 228 6532delTGCCCCAGC reported in a familial case by T\x9erkmen at al  Henri Mondor Hospital, Creteil, France. (2003). Cystic Übrosis (CF), one of the most frequent hereditary diseases in  the Caucasian population, is mainly due to point mutations scattered  
P0667 . X-linked Juvenile Retinoschisis In 14 Spanish Families:  over the whole cystic Übrosis transmembrane conductance regulator  IdentiÜcation Of 4 Novel Mutations (CFTR) gene. CFTR gene deletions are rare but their frequency  R. Riveiro1, M. Garc\x91a-Hoyos1, D. Cantalapiedra1, A. Queipo1, C. Ramos1, M. J.  may be underestimated because missed when using conventional  Trujllo-Tiebas1, M. Baiget2, C. Ayuso1;  PCR techniques. We have developed an assay based on semi- quantitative Ýuorescent PCR targeted on the 27 CFTR exons in a  1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital San Pau, Barcelona, Spain. three multiplex-format to screen for unknown rearrangements in 62  Introduction: X-linked juvenile retinoschisis (XLRS) is a disorder  CF patients or parents of CF patients bearing one or two unidentiÜed  characterized by bilateral macular involvement with onset on the Ürst  CF alleles after an extensive CFTR gene study. We characterized  decade of life. Affected males show areas with splitting of the nerve  eight different rearrangements in eleven patients, of which all but  Über layer of the retina (ÐschisisÑ) and presence of vitreous veils,  one are new: CFTRdele1-24, CFTRdele1, CFTRdele2, CFTRdele3- giving the aspect of a Ðspoke wheelÑ pattern. 10,14b-16, CFTRdele14b-17b, CFTRdele17a-17b, CFTRdele17b  The R
S1  gene maps to Xp22.2-22.1, has 6 exons and encodes a  and CFTRdup4-8. Taking into account the previously characterized  224 amino acid protein with a highly conserved discoidin domain,  CFTRdele2-3, CFTRdele17a-18 and CFTRdele19 anomalies in  implicated in cell-cell adhesion, being very important during retinal  four other CF patients, gene rearrangements thus account for 19%  development. of unidentiÜed CF alleles and of almost 1% of total CF mutations  Objective: IdentiÜcation of mutations in R
S1  gene in 14 Spanish  in our population. These results suggest a hotspot for deletions at  families clinically diagnosed of XLRS. the IV
S17 b(TA) microsatellite. Given the feasibility and reliability  Patients and Methods: We studied 14 unrelated Spanish families.  of the method here described and its sensitivity to detect large  The 6 exons of the R
S1  gene were ampliÜed by PCR and sequenced  rearrangements as well as single nucleotide deletions/insertions,  in an ABI PRISM 310. Restriction assays were performed to conÜrm  which altogether account for 23% of the CF mutations described,  novel mutations (when possible). Haplotype analyses with STRs  its place in the strategy for CFTR studies is worth to be considered  were also performed. in the second line after the screening for frequent mutations. The  Results: We could identify 7 previously described mutations in 9  availability of such a tool has notable implications for patientsÓ care  families (
E72 K in 3 families) and 4 novel mutations in 5 families  and genetic counseling for the patients and their family. (Q154R in 2 families). Two of them were Ðde novoÑ. Conclusions:  
P0670 . Mutation analysis of AT
P7 B gene in Wilson disease  ß High frequency of Ðde novoÑ mutations: the site of mutations are  patients of Turkish origin mainly in CG dinucleotides. G. Loudianos1, M. Lovicu2, V. Dess\x923, M. B. Lepori3, A. Zappu3, V. Dess\x923,  ß Haplotype analyses result very useful for showing that 
E72 K  B. Altuntas4, A. Yuce5, N. Kocak5, S. Ozsoylu6, H. Kayseril7, N. Akar8, S. De  mutation arose independently in different Virgiliis3, M. Pirastu9, A. Cao2;  families (hot spot). ß However, Q154R mutation was identiÜed in 2 families and they  1Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica  share haplotypes, so we can not rule out e Neurofarmacologia, CNR-Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze  identity by descent. Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Universit\x87 di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Department  of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Gazi University, Ankara,, Turkey, 5Pediatric  
P0668 . Mutational screening of the ARX, MEC
P2  and FMR2  Gastroenterology Unit, Hacette University, Ankara, Turkey, 6Fatih University  genes in a series of 200 male patients with mental retardation. Medical Faculty, Ankara,, Turkey, 7Division of Medical Genetics, Institute of  M. Rosati, M. Pomponi, G. Marino, A. Terracciano, A. Pampanos, P. Chiurazzi,  Child Health, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Department of Pediatric  G. Neri;  Molecular Genetic, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, 9Istituto di Genetica delle  popolazioni, CNR, Alghero, Alghero, Italy. Universit\x87 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore di Roma, Roma, Italy. Wilson disease (WD), an autosomal recessive disorder of copper  X-Linked Mental Retardation (XLMR) is a genetically heterogeneous  transport results from mutations in the AT
P7 B gene. To date more  condition which can present in either syndromic (MRXS) a  than 200 mutations of the AT
P7 B have been identiÜed. In the  nonspeciÜc (MRX) form. The ARX and the MEC
P2  genes were found  last years we have analyzed the molecular basis of WD in the  mutated in both MRXS and MRX cases, while expansions in the  mediterranean and suggested strategies of molecular testing in  FMR2 gene are usually associated with MRX. We screened 200 male  speciÜc populations. In this study we summarize the results of  patients with mild to severe MR for mutations in the ARX, MEC
P2   mutation analysis of the AT
P7 B gene in 71 WD families originating  and FMR2 genes. All patients were negative for the ampliÜcation in  from Turkey. Using the SSCP and sequencing methods we have  the FMR1 gene, thus excluding fragile X syndrome, and none of them  characterized the 81% of the analyzed chromosomes and identiÜed  had dysmorphic features. Only few (7%) had a history of seizures  44 WD causing-mutations (32 missense, 6 frameshift, 3 splice, 3  or infantile spasms. ARX mutations were screened by SSCP, using  nonsense) suggesting a high allelic heterogeneity for WD in this  8 primer pairs designed by us (available upon request). We found  population. The most frequent mutation Arg778Gly, is only present in  4 cases with a silent point mutation in exon 4 (G1347T), one with a  the 7.7% of the analyzed chromosomes. Most of identiÜed mutations  G>T transversion in intron 3 (position +81) and one de novo case  i.e. 78.2% reside in 10 exons, 2II, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19 of  with the 24-bp duplication previously described by Stromme et al.  the AT
P7 B gene. In 40/71 analyzed families, mutation was identiÜed  [Nature Genet (2002) 30:441-445]. This latter patient was a 4-year  in the homozygous state suggesting a high degree of consaguinity.  old child with dystonic movements of the hands, typical of Partington  The presence of a few number of homozygotes for a speciÜc  syndrome. The MEC
P2  gene was analyzed by direct sequencing of  mutation doesnÓt permit a genotype-phenotype correlation study.  the entire coding sequence. We only found 5 silent point mutations  Our study suggests that molecular analysis of AT
P7 B in Turkish WD  in exon 3 and one G>C transversion in intron 3 (+30). Finally, no  patients should include as Ürs step the analysis of the ten exons  expansion was detected in the CGG repeat of the FMR2 gene. Our  reported above, and subsequently the remaining gene. These data  results suggest a minor role for the ARX gene in causing nonspeciÜc  can be used for a strightforward geneting study not only in Turkey but  XLMR and indicate that other yet unidentiÜed genes wait to be  also in other countries composed of genetically mixed populations  characterized. like the USA and other West European countries. 
P0669 . Rapid detection of CFTR gene deletions and  
P0671 . Genetic analysis of the oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum  rearrangements by semi-quantitative Ýuorescent multiplex PCR  (OAVS) and implications for genetic counselling S. Fischer, D. Wieczorek, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach, B. Horsthemke, H. L\x9edecke;  F. Niel, J. Martin, B. Costes, F. Dastot-Le Moal, B. Boissier, M. Goossens, E.  Girodon;  Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Universit\x89tsklinikum Essen, Germany. The oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum is a developmental disorder Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 229 characterised by hemifacial microsomia, epibulbar tumors, ear  
E165 D, ins/del exon 25, V189I, G531R, D786Y, R273H, 
E334 K,  malformations and vertebral abnormalities. Most cases are sporadic,  R470W, Y340X, A693S , IV
S12 +1G>A, IV
S24 -2A>G) and not  but rare familial cases suggest that OAVS has a genetic basis. detectable in 100 normal controls, thus excluding the possibility of  We studied a patient with OAVS and multiple exostoses.  polymorphisms; three patients (16%) had two mutations affecting  Chromosome analysis of this patient revealed a translocation 46,X MYP
C3 . Average age at diagnosis in the 19 patients was 41.3°14.6  X,t(4;8)(p15.3;q24.1). The chromosome 8 breakpoint disrupts the  years;8 (42%) were female.Of note, evidence of systolic impairment  multiple exostoses gene EXT1. Since there is no evidence for a gene  (ejection fraction <0.50) was present in a high proportion of patients  causing OAVS on 8q24.1, we cloned the chromosome 4 breakpoint.  (n=5, 23%; p<0.05 versus the overall study group).Conclusions: In  This breakpoint disrupts the RAB28 gene. We analysed RAB28 in 75  a regional HCM population from Central Italy, MYBP
C3  mutations  patients, but did not Ünd any mutation. were common (15% of unrelated patients); were associated with a  The BAPX1 gene maps 76.4kb proximal to the chromosome 4  broad spectrum of clinical and echocardiographic manifestations,  breakpoint. Although the gene is not disrupted itself, the translocation  with a high prevalence of systolic impairment; and had different  disrupts the evolutionarily conserved linkage group of the homeobox  mechanisms (missense, nonsense, insertion/deletion, splice-site).  genes HMX1, MSX1 and BAPX1. Previous studies in mice and  Most of the mutations were novel including those found in the three  Xenopus have shown a role of BAPX1 in craniofacial development,  patients with compound heterozygosis.(Carrier et all., 1997, Circ Res,  which makes BAPX1 a good positional candidate gene for OAVS. 80:427). We screened 92 patients for BAPX1 mutations. In 10 patients we  found 6 different rare nucleotide changes, 3 with and 3 without an  
P0674 . Real Time PCR for carrier screening of the commonest  effect on the amino acid sequence. In 2 families the amino acid  mutations of Beta-Thalassemia in a Northern Italy Region changes were also found in non-affected relatives. P. Battaglia1, E. Baritono1, E. De Fanti1, G. Trevenzoli2, G. Consolaro2, R.  Whereas BAPX1 is biallelically expressed in normal Übroblasts, we  Schiavon1;  found monoallelic expression in Übroblasts from one patient. It is  1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Legnago Hospital, Italy, 2Division of  tempting to speculate that epigenetic silencing of one allele may  Pediatry, Legnago Hospital, Italy. cause OAVS. The haemoglobin disorders interesting the production of beta globin  chains are markedly high in several regions of Italy. The most  
P0672 . Molecular analysis in 163 unrelated patients with  common beta thalassemia mutations found in Italy are Cd39 albinism: Mutations in the genes for OCA1, OCA2, OCA3, and  (C->T) and IVSI-110 (G->A), accounting for 40% and 23%  OCA4 respectively of microcytemic individuals. To know the frequency of  C. Z\x9ehlke1, A. Dalski1, M. Kaufmann1, S. Opitz1, A. Lipka1, U. Rundshagen1, E.  carriers of these mutations in our country, we tested DNA samples  Schwinger1, B. K\x89smann-Kellner2;  of 828 schoolchildren aged 13-15 years, resident in the southern  1Medizinische Universit\x89t zu L\x9ebeck, L\x9ebeck, Germany, 2Universit\x89t des Saar- of the Verona province (Italy). The gold standard method we chose  landes, Homburg, Germany. was a multiplex PCR based on ARMS principle and visualisation of  Human oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a clinically and genetically  amplicons by UV transillumination of agarose gel. We also optimised  heterogeneous disorder that affects approximately 1 in 20,000  a multiplex PCR for rapid screening for these mutations utilizing a  individuals. Defects in the melanin biosynthesis or transport result  procedure based on Real Time PCR and SYBR GREEN detection.  in little or missing pigment. To date, mutations in four genes have  Moreover we could compare several modern PCR-Real Time  been identiÜed in patients with recessively inherited oculocutaneous  analysers: a) Bio-Rad i-Cycler, b) Stratagene Mx3000, c) MJR MJ  albinism. Here we report the Ürst analysis of a large West European  Opticon2 . In the children studied we found 27 carriers of mutations  DNA sample collection for the tyrosinase gene (OCA1), the P gene  (3,26%). 17 cases (2,05%) were found etherozigouse for Cd39 while  (OCA2), the tyrosinase related protein-1 gene (OCA3), and the MATP  10 cases (1,21%) resulted as carriers of IVSI-110 mutation. Our  gene (OCA4) of 163 unrelated patients. results have evidenced a non elevated frequency of these molecular  For the OCA1 gene, we found 78 different DNA variations in 82  defects, contrasting with a higher percentage of microcytemic  individuals. Among these are 68 nucleotide substitutions resulting in  subjects. amino acid changes, stop mutations and polymorphisms as well as  We are extending the genetic analysis to other mutations not  four nucleotide insertions and six deletions. Furthermore, we found  investigate in the present study that might be associated with  an accumulation of three to Üve mutations in 17 patients with OCA1.  microcytemia. To this purpose the employ of the Real Time PCR was  Results of the OCA2 gene analysis revealed three patients who carry  found very useful. Furthermore the method we have optimised is not  two mutations in this gene. For 18 patients single mutations have  expensive, while is particularly adapted for rapid analysis in a large  been detected. Interestingly, 10 patients carried mutations within the  number of individuals. OCA2 gene as well as within the OCA1 gene. One patient showed  a combination of an OCA2 plus an OCA3 mutation. In addition to  
P0675 . Prevalence of mutations in the CFTR gene among  single mutations in the OCA3 gene in Üve patients, we detected  patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis polymorphisms for this locus. Finally, we identiÜed Üve individuals  N. Bogdanova1, P. Simon2, F. Wei¦2, U. Antkowiak1, M. Lerch2, J. Horst1, B.  with two and six cases with a single OCA4 mutation. These include  Dworniczak1;  ten so far unknown OCA4 mutations. Overall, we were able to detect  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of M\x9enster, Germany, 2Department of  mutations in 63% of patients. Gastroenterology, University of Greifswald, Germany. Recent evidence of mutant CFTR alleles being associated with  
P0673 . áBurnt-outÐ phase hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and  chronic idiopathic pancreatitis (CIP) indicated that in some patients  systolic dysfunction : association with MYBP
C3  gene mutations. this may be a monosymptomatic atypical mucoviszidosis. In the  F. Girolami, I. Passerini, I. Olivotto, D. Vargiu, F. Cecchi, F. Torricelli;  present study we apply for the Ürst time sequencing of the whole  Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Florence, Italy. coding region of the CFTR gene next to screening for frequent CF  Objectives: We studied the clinical and genetic features of  mutations to allow a precise estimation of the prevalence of CF  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) caused by mutations in the  alleles.66 patients, aged between 5 and 63 years with CIP were  Cardiac Myosin-Binding Protein C gene (MYBP
C3 ) in italian patients.  included in the study. All patients were screened for 86% of the CF  Background: Mutations in MYBP
C3  represent the cause of HCM in  mutations in the Caucasian population. The heterozygous or negative  about 15% of familial cases. Studies have shown that HCM caused  patients were then subjected to sequencing analysis. by MYBP
C3  mutations may have a delayed onset and is usually  Twelve (18.2%) of the patients were detected to carry mutant CFTR  benign. Methods: All 35 exons of MYBP
C3  were screened by DHPLC  allele(s). Compound heterozygosity for F508del and another CF  followed by automatic sequencing. The diagnosis was based on  mutation was present in three patients (4.5%) and nine (13.6%)  two-dimensional echocardiographic identiÜcation. Results: Overall,  were heterozygous for one (rare) mutation, not detectable with the  we identiÜed 22 MYP
C3  mutations in 19 patients (a 15% prevalence).  screening panel. Fifteen mutations (68%) were novel (IV
S18 +1C>T, A522T, V771M,  The incidence of atypical mucoviszidosis in our patient group is 1:Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 230 22 and the prevalence of CF carriers is 1:7, i.e. signiÜcantly higher  
P0678 . SL
C22 A5 homozygous 844delC mutation: sudden  than in the normal population. These Ündings support the evidence  infant death and carnitine responsive cardiomyopathy in Roma  for association of mutant CFTR alleles with CIP. Screening for the  families as novel phenotypes of the OCTN2 mutations common CF mutations would be therefore indicated, especially in  J. Bene1,2, G. Mogyor\x96sy3, V. Havasi1, K. Koml\x96si1, L. Pajor4, G. Talian1, K.  adolescent patients. The elevated heterozygosity rate for rare CF  M\x8dhes1,2, B. Melegh1;  changes is of importance in terms of family planning (higher risk for  1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of P\x8dcs,  a CF affected offspring). Most of the mutations in our cohort will be  P\x8dcs, Hungary, 2MTA PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group, University of  missed by the screening panels and require more intensive analyses. P\x8dcs, P\x8dcs, Hungary, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Debrecen,  Debrecen, Hungary, 4Department of Pathology, University of P\x8dcs, P\x8dcs,  
P0676 . ABCR gene mutations related-Stargardt disease in Italian  Hungary. patients. We identiÜed an inherited single base deletion of 844C of the  I. Passerini, F. Girolami, A. Sodi, U. Menchini, F. Torricelli;  SL
C22 A5 (solute carrier family 22 member 5) gene, causing a  Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Florence, Italy. premature stop codon and thus a truncated protein in two non  Purpose:Stargardt disease (STGD) is a progressive juvenile-to- consanguineous Hungarian Roma (Gypsy) children presented  young adult-onset macular degeneration, characterized by severe  with cardiomyopathy and slight myopathy. Introduction of carnitine  reduction of central visual acuity and normal peripheral vision. STGD  therapy resulted in dramatic improvement of the cardiac symptoms.  is predominantly inherited as an autosomal recessive trait; even  Family investigations revealed four sudden deaths, two of them  if autosomal dominant forms have been described. Homozygous  corresponded to the classic SIDS phenotype. In postmortem tissue  and compound heterozygous mutations in the ABCR gene are  specimens we could verify the homozygous mutation. In liver  responsible for recessive Stargardt macular dystrophy. In this study  specimens reserved from two patients lipid droplet vacuolization  we determined the mutation spectrum in the ABCR gene in a group  could be observed mainly in the peripherolobular regions of the  of Italian patients with autosomal recessive Stargardt disease  acini. Besides a generalized hypertrophy, lipid vacuoles were also  .Methods:Thirteen families from central Italy , some members of  seen in the heart tissue, predominantly in the subendocardial areas.  which were affected by autosomal recessive STGD, were clinically  Review of all OCTN2 cases reported so far revealed that this is the  examined. All 50 exons of the ABCR gene were screened by  Ürst description of classic familial sudden infant death syndrome with  DHPLC and direct sequencing techniques.Results: In all patients  deÜnitively established SL
C22 A5 mutation and with presentation  we reported some mutations of ABCR gene . Some of them have  of the histopathology Ündings. Genetic analysis of 26 relatives with  been already described and among them Gly1961Glu was the most  different parental lineages revealed 14 carriers; this strongly suggests  frequent in our series. Seven novel mutations were identiÜed:three  a high prevalence of this mutation in certain Roma populations.  missense mutations (Thr970Pro, Phe1015Ile and Leu2221Pro);  Another novel feature of our cases is that the affected patients  two nonsense mutations (Cys1177Stop and Trp1408Stop); two  exhibited only decreased carnitine levels. This Ünding suggest  small deletions (5905delG and 6636delA). The missense mutations  that not only patients with zero or trace carnitine levels should be  were not detected in 150 unaffected control individuals of Italian  considered as carnitine deÜciency. origin.Conclusions:Some novel mutations in ABCR gene in STGD  patients were reported. These data conÜrm the extensive allelic  
P0679 . Pathophysiology of syndromic combined pituitary  heterogeneity of the ABCR gene, in agreement with previous  hormone deÜciency due to a LHX3 defect observations in patients with Stargardt disease from Italy. The  M. Sobrier1, T. Attie-Bitach2, I. Netchine3, F. Encha-Razavi2, M. Vekemans2, S.  frequent report of novel mutations is probably related to the great  Amselem1;  number of exons in the ABCR gene, which favours rearrangements in  1INSERM, Creteil, France, 2INSERM, Paris, France, 3Hopital Trousseau, Paris,  DNA sequence. France. Ref.Allikmets et al., 1997, Science, 227,1805. Combined pituitary hormone deÜciency (CPHD) has been associated  with mutations in genes encoding pituitary-speciÜc transcription  
P0677 . Analysis of the expression levels of genes mapping in  factors. This condition involves also extrapituitary abnormalities,  the critical region in WBS patients thereby deÜning a syndromic form where both LHX3 and LHX4  G. Merla1, R. Lyle1, C. Howald1, C. Wyss1, C. Gehrig1, S. E. Antonarakis1, M.  (two closely related genes encoding LIM-homeodomain factors)  Zabot2, The GRIEG Consortium, Hospices Civils de Lyon, A. Reymond1;  are implicated; moreover, these two genes are believed to share  1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Hospices Civils  redundant biological properties. The rare patients identiÜed with  de Lyon, H\x98pital Debrousse, Lyon, France. a LHX3 mutation display a complete deÜcit in all but one anterior  An increasing number of human diseases, such as the Williams- pituitary hormones, a short neck and anteverted shoulders. These  Beuren contiguous gene syndrome (WBS, OMIM#194050), are  features, not reported in Lhx3 and Lhx4 knock-out mice nor in  recognized to result from recurrent DNA rearrangements involving  patients with a LHX4 molecular defect, prompted us to analyze the  unstable genomic regions. Rearrangements are facilitated by  molecular consequences of a LHX3 23-bp deletion involving a splice  the presence of region-speciÜc low-copy repeats and result from  donor site identiÜed in one family and the LHX3 and LHX4 expression  nonallelic homologous recombination. It is often assumed that these  patterns during early human development. This deletion leads to exon  aneuploidies will lead to underexpression of genes mapping to the  skipping, as revealed by in vitro LHX3 transcription. The resulting  commonly deleted region. But it is not clear that all genes will be  protein, which lacks the second LIM domain and the homeodomain,  expressed at half of the level observed in controls. For example,  has lost transcriptional capability. Using in situ hybridization, we  regulatory feedback loops may ensure that many genes are  showed that the. LHX3 and LHX4 genes are expressed in the  expressed at normal levels. In WBS patients no systematic attempt  developing anterior pituitary gland and along the rostro-caudal length  has been made to identify which genes are underexpressed, to what  of the spinal cord. Here, they are mainly expressed in the ventral  level, and, critically, in which tissues and at which time. Furthermore,  part giving rise to motorneurons and interneurons. Whereas LHX4  it is conceivable that the large chromatin rearrangement harbored by  expression is transient, LHX3 is expressed at all stages studied. By  WBS patientsÓ inÝuences the transcription levels of genes that map  contrast, no expression is detected in tissues forming muscles and  centromeric or telomeric to the critical region even if these genes are  the axial skeleton. This suggests that the extrapituitary anomalies  present in two copies. We have used quantitative real-time PCR to  result from a LHX3-dependent neurological defect. This defect is not  accurately measure the expression of the genes haploinsufÜcient in  rescued by the closely related protein LHX4. WBS patients. We studied in 25 WBS patients and 10 controls a total  of 41 genes mapping to the WBS critical region, its Ýanking repeats  
P0680 . Automated analysis of common mutations and  and neighboring regions in two different cell lines (skin Übroblasts and  polymorphisms in the human cystic Übrosis gene using a new  lymphoblastoid). The measure of their relative expression will allow to  diagmostic kit and Genemapper© software assess the contribution of each genes to WBS features. E. H. Schreiber, S. Koepf, L. Nguyen, E. Swartzman, C. Kumar, M. A. Zoccoli; Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 231 Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, United States. (NF1GRD) can down-regulate RAS in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the cystic Übrosis  We report our Ürst experience with introducing of a technique termed  transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We have  the FASAY method (Functional Analysis of Separated Alleles in  developed a diagnostic device (kit) that is based on multiplex PCR  Yeast) for detection of heterozygous NF1GRD mutations in our NF1  ampliÜcation and subsequent probing of the various alleles by the  patients. We established DNA/RNA banking of our clinicaly conÜrmed  oligonucleotide ligation assay (OLA). The assay detects the mutant  NF1 patients for retrospective or perspective study of this disease.  and normal alleles for 33 common multi-ethnic mutations in a core  To this date, our DNA/RNA bank consists of 150DNA samples and  panel. In addition, reÝex reagents are provided for the genotyping of  40RNA samples of NFI patients. To optimalize the FASAY we start  polymorphisms 5T, 7T, and 9T in intron 8 as well as for I506V, I507V  with transformation of E. coli (DH5ŋ) by centromeric vector pRSPGK- and F508C in exon 10. Separation (via capillary electrophoresis)  NF1 (wild type) and pRSPGK (-NF1GRD) kind gift of Dr. Chikashi  and detection of the OLA fragments is achieved on the Applied  Ishioka, Japan, preparing linearized gap repair vector and mutant  Biosystems ABI PRISM§ 3100 Genetic Analyzer where a full plate  NF1GRD expression vectors as positive controls of FASAY analysis  with 96 samples can be processed in under 4 hours of unattended  (QuikChange kit ,Stratagene) operation. The resulting data are analyzed in an automated fashion  We hope that this work with an introducing of the functional analysis  using Applied Biosystems GeneMapper© software that has been  of mutations in the extended NF1 GRD may well provide further  conÜgured for CF. GeneMapper© software presents genotype data  insights into the mechanisms of pathogenesis associated with NF1. along with quality control Ýags. It also allows for sorting of samples by  This work is supported by the grant NM7627-3. the detected normal genotype or by heterozygous and homozygous  mutations for Ünal review by the investigator. We have validated the  
P0683 . Novel compound heterozygote CY
P1 B1 mutations in a  kit reagents and the CF-speciÜc analysis system by correct detection  patient with RiegerÓs anomaly and genotyping of all mutations present in the Coriell reference panel  G. Chavarr\x91a1, A. Caliebe2, M. Kautza2, U. Backheuer3, K. Michels-Rauten- MUTCF, as well as mutations within a characterized set of clinical  strauss1, A. Reis1, B. Rautenstrauss1;  samples. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Gene- tics, Kiel, Germany, 3Ophthalmologic Hospital, Rendsburg, Germany. 
P0681 . No mutation in the LMNA gene in four patients with  Glaucomas are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of  Hallermann-Streiff syndrome optic neuropathies resulting in optic nerve atrophy which can lead  K. Kutsche1, M. Sutajova1, R. Cichy1, B. Albrecht2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2;  to permanent loss of vision. The disease affects over 40 million  1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Universitaetsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Ham- people worldwide and is the second most prevalent cause of bilateral  burg, Germany, 2Institut fuer Humangenetik, Universitaetsklinikum Essen,  blindness in the Western world. Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG),  Essen, Germany. associated with a primary angle defect, manifests at birth or in early  Hallermann-Streiff syndrome is a rare inherited disorder characterized  childhood and follows an autosomal-recessive pattern of inheritance.  by small face with a thin pointed nose and microretrognathia,  Secondary congenital glaucoma is associated with a variety of  congenital cataracts, microphthalmia, hypotrichosis, skin atrophy,  anomalies involving different tissues of the eye summarized as  proportionate short stature, and neonatal teeth. Although the  anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD). Distinct subtypes of ASD include  syndrome shares several phenotypic features both with progeria  aniridia, AxenfeldÓs anomaly, RiegerÓs anomaly, iridogoniodysgenesis,  and mandibulofacial dysostosis, it is regarded a separate entity. We  PetersÓ anomaly and posterior embryotoxon. Mutations in the  ascertained four patients presenting with typical signs of Hallermann- CY
P1 B1 gene, a member of the cytochrome 
P450  superfamily, are  Streiff syndrome. Conventional cytogenetic analysis showed a normal  frequently found in PCG patients but have also been reported for  karyotype in all patients. Although the pattern of inheritance is not yet  one PetersÓ anomaly patient. Mutations in FOX
C1 , a transcription  known, autosomal dominant new mutations have been suggested.  factor, have been reported to cause Rieger- and AxenfeldÓs anomaly.  Recently, mutations in the lamin A/C (LMNA) gene have been  We found two CY
P1 B1 mutations (Trp57Stop, c.4832delCTC) in a  found both in patients with progeria and mandibuloacral dysostosis.  sporadic patient with RiegerÓs anomaly and suspected congenital  Due to the overlapping phenotypic features between progeria and  glaucoma. No family history of the disease was reported. The  Hallermann-Streiff syndrome, we speculated that the latter one might  nonsense mutation Trp57Stop predicts a truncation of the 
P4501 B1  be an allelic disorder and performed mutation analysis of LMNA. In  polypeptide by 486 aminoacids. The c.4832delCTC mutation  one patient, we identiÜed a homozygous IV
S6 -44C>T transition that  eliminates one out of three leucines, they are located in the highly  was also present in heterozygous state on one of 170 control alleles.  conserved I-helix region of the protein. Sequence analysis of the  A second patient was heterozygous for the mutation c.1930C>T  entire coding region of the FOX
C1  gene revealed no mutation. This is  (p.R644C). We found this heterozygous change in the mother of  the Ürst report of CY
P1 B1 mutations causing the complex symptoms  the patient suggesting that it was not associated with the disease.  of RiegerÓs anomaly. The same mutation was previously described in a patient with  familial dilated cardiomyopathy, a disease known to be caused by  
P0684 . Search for mutations causing non-syndromic X-linked  heterozygous mutations in LMNA. However, the c.1930C>T change  mental retardation (NS-XLMR) by high-throughput PCR based  was also found in an unaffected individial. In summary, no obvious  sequencing and mRNA expression proÜling of candidate genes  disease causing mutations were detected in the LMNA gene in four  on proximal Xp patients with Hallermann-Streiff syndrome suggesting that it is not the  L. R. Jensen1, M. Amende1, M. Rosenkranz1, B. Moser1, V. Gimmel1, C. Bunk1,  major gene for this syndrome. T. Honeck1, S. Klages1, S. Schmoger1, A. Beck1, R. Reinhardt1, A. Tzschach1,  M. Hoeltzenbein1, J. Chelly2, C. Moraine3, J. Fryns4, H. Yntema5, B. Hamel5, J.  
P0682 . Our Ürst experience with establishment of the FASAY  Gecz6, M. Partington7, V. Kalscheuer1, H. Ropers1, S. Lenzner1;  method for detection of loss-of-function mutations in the NF1  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2INSERM  gene of the Czech patients. U129-ICGM, Facult\x8d de M\x8dd\x8dcine Cochin, Paris, France, 3INSERM U316,  B. Ravěukov\x86, J. Kadlecov\x86, A. Kratochv\x91lov\x86, R. Gaillyov\x86;  Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Tours C\x8ddex, France, 4Center for Human Genetics,  University Hospital Brno, dept.of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic. University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Dept. of Human Genetics,  NeuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most frequent human  University Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Dept. of Cytogenetics  genetic disorders, with an incidence of 1 in 3500. Associated with  and Molecular Genetics, WomenÓs and ChildrenÓs Hospital, North Adelaide,  the abnormal growth of neural crest-derived cells, it is characterised  Australia, 7Univ. of Newcastle, Nsw, Australia. by the presence of caf\x8d-au-lait spots, cutaneous neuroÜbromas,  X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) affects approximately 2 out of  plexiform neuromas, Lisch nodules. The NF1 gene is classiÜed as  1000 males 2/3 of which show non-syndromic XLMR (NS-XLMR).  tumour supressor gene. The gene product , neuroÜbromin, displays  Searching for disease-causing mutations in NS-XLMR is complicated  partial homology to GTPase-activating protein(GAP). The GAP- by the genetic heterogeneity of this condition. However, by pooling  related domain (GRD), encoded by exons 20-27a, is the region  weighted linkage data from 125 different families we could show that  with known biological function. The GRD of the human NF 1 protein  >30% of the mutations leading to XLMR are located on proximal Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 232 Xp and in the pericentric region (Ropers et al. 2003). Recently, we  
P0687 . Clinical, molecular, and genotype-phenotype coorelation  have screened 32 linked families for mutations in 48 brain-expressed  study from 25 observations of oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1  genes from a 7.3Mb interval on Xp. In at least 10 of the families  : French and Belgian collaborative study. tested we have identiÜed possibly causative mutations, which  C. Thauvin-Robinet1, M. Coss\x8de2, V. Cormier-Daire3, L. Van Maldergem4,  involve 5 different genes. To discover the causative mutations in  A. Toutain5, Y. Alembik6, E. Bieth7, V. Layet8, P. Parent9, A. David10, A.  the remaining 22 families, we are now investigating 28 additional  Goldenberg3, G. Mortier11, D. H\x8dron12, A. Nivelon-Chevallier1, F. Huet13, D.  genes, which had not been fully annotated at the start of the Ürst  Devys2, V. Cusin14, A. Donzel14, J. Teyssier14, L. Faivre1;  screen or had been omitted for other reasons. We make use of a  1Centre de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Diagnostic G\x8dn\x8dtique,  semi-automatic mutation screen consisting of automated primer  Strasbourg, France, 3D\x8dpartement de G\x8dn\x8dtique, H\x98pital Necker-Enfants Mala- design, PCR ampliÜcation, DHPLC and sequence analysis. As some  des, Paris, France, 4Institut de Pathologie et de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Loverval, Belgium,  disease-causing mutations may not be detectable by our PCR-based  5Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique, Tours, France, 6Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddicale, H\x98pital  approach, we also screen mRNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines of  Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 7Laboratoire de G\x8dn\x8dtique, CHU Purpan,  patients for expression changes and altered splicing patterns. Until  Toulouse, France, 8Unit\x8d de Cytog\x8dn\x8dtique et G\x8dn\x8dtique m\x8ddicale, Le Havre,  now, one third of 4202 PCR products have been analyzed, and 7  France, 9D\x8dpartement de P\x8ddiatrie et de G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddicale, Brest, France,  sequence variants in 4 different genes have been identiÜed. Three of  10Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique m\x8ddicale, Nantes, France, 11Centre de G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8d- these variants were not found in healthy controls. dicale, Ghent, Belgium, 12D\x8dpartement de G\x8dn\x8dtique cytog\x8dn\x8dtique et embryo- logie, La Piti\x8d-Salp\x8dtri\x8ere, Paris, France, 13Service de P\x8ddiatrie 1, H\x98pital dÓEn- 
P0685 . IdentiÜcation of the molecular defects in Spanish and  fants, Dijon, France, 14Laboratoire de G\x8dn\x8dtique Mol\x8dculaire, Dijon, France. Argentinian mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy  The oral-facial-digital type 1 is an X-linked dominant syndrome with  syndrome) patients, including 11 novel mutations lethality in males, belonging to the heterogeneous group of the oral- E. Garrido1, D. Grinberg1, A. Chab\x86s2, L. Vilageliu1, B. Cormand1;  facial-digital syndromes. Clinical features include facial dysmorphism  1Departament de Gen\x8etica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut  with hyperplastic buccal frenula, lingual hamartoma, biÜd or lobulated  de Bioqu\x91mica Cl\x91nica, Barcelona, Spain. tongue, cleft lip or palate, and distal anomalies such as brachydactyly.  Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, or mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI)  Polycystic kidney disease and central nervous system malformations  is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder due to the  are commonly associated. Inter- and intra-familial clinical variability  deÜciency of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase or arylsulfatase B  is high. Recently, the OFD1 gene has been reported to Xp22.2-p22.3  (ARSB). Mutation analysis in 15 MPS VI Spanish and Argentinian  and eighteen mutations have been reported in the literature. Here,  patients resulted in the identiÜcation of 11 ARSB new mutant alleles:  we report on a French and Belgian collaborative study including  six missense mutations (p.
L82 A, p.Y138C, p.G308R, p.
P313 A,  25 cases in 16 families. Clinical results were superimposable with  p.
C447 F and p.
L472 P); a nonsense mutation (p.W322X); a single  those described in the literature except for previously unreported  nucleotide deletion (c.427delG); and three intronic changes affecting  short stature (16 %). Direct sequencing analysis in the OFD1 gene  splice sites: IV
S5 -8(T>G) and IV
S5 -1(G>C), which disrupt the  identiÜed 11 mutations, including 9 frameshift, 1 nonsense mutation  acceptor site of intron 5 resulting in skipping of exon 6, as shown by  and 1 missense mutation and spanning in 9 different exons. With the  RT-PCR, and IV
S5 +2(T>A), not tested at RNA level. We also report  association to literature cases, we showed that majority of mutations  seven previously described mutations (p.R95Q, p.R160Q, p.R160X,  (65.5 %) were located in exons 3, 8, 9, 13 and 16. Phenotype- p.R315Q, c.238delG, c.237-243delGGTGCTC and a genomic  genotype correlation performed on 46 cases revealed a signiÜcative  deletion that includes exon 5), as well as several non pathogenic  correlation between polycystic kidneys disease and splice mutations  polymorphisms: IV
S1 -26(T>C), IV
S5 -27(A>C), p.G324G, p.V368M,  versus other mutations, mental retardation and mutations located  p.V376M, p.
S384 N i p.
P397 P. Mutation analysis was performed by  in exons 3, 8, 9, 13 and 16 versus other exons. X-inactivation study  PCR ampliÜcation and sequencing of the ARSB eight exons and  in lymphocytes was skewed in 6/19 cases and was of particular  Ýanking regions. Molecular defects were conÜrmed by restriction  interest in three familial cases with striking intrafamilial variability. In  analysis and have not been detected in 100 control chromosomes.  conclusion, we suggest that clinical inter and intrafamilial variability  This is the Ürst report on ARSB mutations in Spanish and Argentinian  could be explained at least in part by allelic heterogeneity and X- populations. Most of the patients are compound heterozygotes, while  inactivation status. only four of the patients are homozygous, demonstrating the broad  allelic heterogeneity of the disease. Two mutations (IV
S5 -1 G>C and  
P0688 . Missense mutations and gene interruption in PROSIT240,  IV
S5 -8 T>G,) are present in both populations. a novel TRA
P240 -like gene, in patients with congenital heart  defect (dTGA) 
P0686 . Mutational analysis of MYH9 in patients with giant  N. Muncke1, C. Jung1, H. R\x9ediger2, H. Ulmer2, R. Roeth1, A. Hubert1, E.  platelet syndromes Goldmuntz3, D. Driscoll3, J. Goodship4, K. Sch\x99n1, G. Rappold1;  M. L. Austinat1,2, L. Lubenow1,3, A. Greinacher1,3, M. S. Wehnert1,2;  1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Abteilung f\x9er Kardiologie,  1Ernst Moritz Arndt University, Greifswald, Germany, 2Human Genetics, Greifs- Kinderklinik Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Division of Cardiology,  wald, Germany, 3Immunology and Transfusion medicine, Greifswald, Germany. Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine,  Autosomal dominant giant platelet syndromes including May Hegglin  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, PA, United States, 4Institute of Human  anomaly, Fechtner syndrome, Sebastian platelet syndrome and  Genetics, International Center for Life, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne,  Alport like syndrome are considered monogenic disorders caused by  N
E1  3BZ, United Kingdom. mutations in MYH9 encoding the heavy chain of non-muscle myosin  Background - Congenital heart disease (CHD) represents the  IIA (NMMHC-IIA). By SSP or RFLP analysis, we have screened  most common severe birth defect affecting 0.7-1% of all neonates,  18 patients suffering giant platelet syndrome for 16 known MYH9  amongst which 5-7% display a transposition of the great arteries  mutations. In 12 patients we could identify the disorder causing  (TGA). TGA represents a septation defect of the common outÝow  mutation (amino acid changes; K371N, R702C, R702H, D1424H,  tract of the heart, manifesting around the Üfth week during embryonic  D1424N (4 patients), 
E1841 K (2 patients), and R1933X (2 patients)).  development. Despite its high prevalence very little is known about  Extending the mutational analysis to the whole gene by heteroduplex  the etiology of the disease. analysis and direct sequencing, we identiÜed a novel DNA variation  Methods and Results - Using a positional cloning approach we  172T>G leading to a predicted Y11X stop mutation resulting in a  isolated a novel gene, PROSIT240, that is interrupted in a patient  putatively truncated NMMHC-IIA protein. In the residual 5 patients  with a chromosomal translocation, displaying a transposition of the  no mutations in MYH9 were found by heteroduplex analysis. As  great arteries and additionally mental retardation. High expression  our study shows, it is necessary to screen the whole MYH9 gene  of PROSIT240 within the heart (aorta) and the brain (cerebellum)  not just the known mutations. Possibly, only 72, 2 % of the patients  correlates well with the malformations observed in the patient and  suffering giant platelet syndromes are caused by mutations in MYH9.  prompted further analyses. PROSIT240 shows signiÜcant homology  This leads to the conclusion that further so far unknown genes are  to the nuclear receptor coactivator TRA
P240 , suggesting it to be a  associated to giant platelet syndromes. new component of the TRAP complex. Interestingly, several TRAP Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 233 components have been previously shown to be important in early  at the homozygous state (n=2), or associated with another mutation  embryonic development in various organisms, making PROSIT240  at BB
S1  (n=3). Compound heterozygous mutations have been found  an excellent candidate gene to be correlated to the patientªs  in BB
S2  (1 family), and BB
S6  (1 family). In seven other families, only  phenotype. Subsequent mutational screening of 97 patients with  one heterozygous mutation has been identiÜed (once in BB
S1 , twice  isolated dTGA revealed three missense mutations in PROSIT240,  for BB
S2  and three times in BB
S6 ). This high score of heterozygotes  which were not detected in 400 control chromosomes. suggests the existence of at least another mutation, possibly at an  Conclusions - Together, these genetic data suggest that PROSIT240  unidentiÜed gene. No patient was found to date to disclose triallelism.  is involved in early heart (and brain) development. We currently extended our cohort of patients with 84 additional  Circulation 2003;108: 2843-2850 families, in order to further test the putative triallelic hypothesis and  investigate other candidate genes. 
P0689 . Mutation analysis in Hereditary Angioedema identiÜes  patients at risk for developing acute and life threatening edema 
P0691 . FANCD2 as a key human caretaker gene with propensity  T. Foerster1, A. Kocot1, J. Schr\x99der1, W. Kreuz2, E. Ayg\x99ren-P\x9ers\x9en2, I. Marti- to somatic reversion nez-Saguer2, K. Bork3, I. Scharrer4, C. R. M\x9eller1, J. Oldenburg1,5;  R. Kalb1, H. Hanenberg2, S. Herterich1, M. Grompe3, A. Auerbach4, D. Schind- 1Dept. of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany,  ler1;  2Dept. of Pediatric Medicine, Frankfurt, Germany, 3Dept. of Dermatology, Mainz,  1University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2University of Duesseldorf,  Germany, 4Dept. of Internal Medicine, Frankfurt, Germany, 5Institute of Transfu- Duesseldorf, Germany, 3Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR,  sion Medicine and Immunonhaematology, Frankfurt, Germany. United States, 4The Rockefeller University, NY, NY, United States. Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease due  The conserved FANCD2 gene serves as a central effector in the  to mutations of the 
C1  inhibitor gene (
C1 INH). The 
C1 INH protein  evolutionarily novel Fanconi anemia / BRCA caretaker pathway.  is the sole inhibitor of the 
C1 r and 
C1 s components of the classical  Monoubiquitination of the FANCD2 protein appears crucial for  complement pathway and the major regulator of factors XI and XII  efÜcient repair of DNA double strand breaks and interstrand  and of plasma kallikrein in the contact system. crosslinks. Mutations in FANCD2 result in the rare FA-D2 subtype  HAE manifests as acute intermittent swellings of nearly every organ  of Fanconi anemia (FA): to date, only 8 of 241 FA patients in  especially of the skin and the gastrointestinal tract. Laryngeal edema  the European registry (EUFAR) have been assigned to this  may cause suffocation and if not treated properly can be fatal. complementation group (LEVITUS et al., Blood online 2003).  We have sequenced the 8 exons of 
C1 INH in 96 HAE families (157  FANCD2 mutation analysis is complicated by the presence of 8  members) from specialised outpatient clinics in Frankfurt and Mainz.  pseudogene regions such that no FANCD2 mutation have been  In 20 families with 42 members, we found mutations that were  published beyond those in the initial gene identiÜcation report  already known from the literature. In 69 families with 103 members,  (TIMMERS et al., Mol Cell 7, 249-262, 2001). Among FA LCL and  we identiÜed 55 different novel mutations. In further 7 families with 12  primary Übroblast cultures that could not be assigned to any other  members, large deletions were detected by Southern blotting. The  complementation group, we identiÜed by immunoblot and retroviral  mutation spectrum is composed of 41% missense and 8% nonsense  complementation screening 16 patients from 14 independent  mutations, 31% small deletions, 10 % splice site mutations, 10%  families as FA-D2. Sequence analysis of cDNA or/and gDNA from 7  large deletions. This distribution corresponds well to published data.  patients revealed 1 homozygous missense mutation in a conserved  Our data bring to 174 the total number of 
C1 INH mutations. Some of  region, 6 splice site mutations resulting in exon skipping, 2 small  the novel missense mutations are pointing to functionally important  deletions, 1 frameshift insertion, and 1 nonsense mutation in the  amino acid residues within the 
C1  inhibitor protein. compound heterozygous patients. 5 patients developed mosaicism  Routine molecular genetic analysis by direct sequencing and  in hematopoetic precursor cells resulting in mitomycin C resistance  Southern blotting is effective in identifying causative mutations in  in their lymphocytes, which hitherto has been described only for FA-A  most HAE families. Early diagnosis of mutation carriers prior to  and FA-C patients. Our data classiÜes FANCD2 as a FA gene with  clinical manifestation is essential in prevention and treatment of acute  innate propensity to somatic reversion. This study contributes to an  and life threatening edema. improved deÜnition of the FA-D2 phenotype, the FANCD2 mutation  spectrum, and the somatic reversion mechanisms (Ðnatural gene  
P0690 . The Bardet-Biedl syndrome: molecular analysis of 27  therapyÑ). families C. Stoetzel1, H. Hichri2, V. Laurier1, S. Caron1, P. Bitoun3, C. Hamel4, D.  
P0692 . On the molecular basis of warfarin resistance in rats. Lacombe5, B. Leheup6, D. Martin-Coignard7, G. Morin8, A. Verloes9, D.  M. Huenerberg1, S. Rost1, A. Fregin1, H. J. Pelz2, C. R. M\x9eller1, J. Oldenburg1,3;  Bonneau10, F. Perrin-Schmitt1, M. Coss\x8de11, J. Mandel11, H. Dollfus12;  1University of Wuerzburg, Dept. of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany,  1U596-INSERM, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de Diagnostic G\x8dn\x8dtique,  2Federal Biological Research Center for Agriculture and Forestry, Muenster,  CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 3Service de p\x8ddiatrie, h\x98pital Jean Verdier, Bondy,  Germany, 3Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immune Haematology of the  France, 4U583-INSERM, Montpellier, France, 5Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddicale  DRK Blood Donor Service, Frankfurt, Germany. CHU, Bordeaux, France, 6Service de M\x8ddecine Infantile III et G\x8dn\x8dtique Clini- For 60 years, coumarin drugs (e.g. warfarin) are in use for the  que CHU, Nancy, France, 7Service de P\x8ddiatrie, Centre Hospitalier, Le Mans,  treatment of thromboembolic events in humans and for pest control  France, 8D\x8dpartement de P\x8ddiatrie CHU, Amiens, France, 9Unit\x8d de G\x8dn\x8dtique  in rodents. Coumarins target blood coagulation via inhibition of the  Clinique, H\x98pital Robert Debr\x8d, Paris, France, 10Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8d- vitamin K epoxide reductase complex (VKOR), and in high doses  dicale CHU, Angers, France, 11Laboratoire de Diagnostic G\x8dn\x8dtique CHRU,  lead to spontaneous fatal bleedings. VKOR recycles vitamin K 2,3- Strasbourg, France, 12Service de G\x8dn\x8dtique M\x8ddicale, H\x98pital de Hautepierre,  epoxide to vitamin K hydroquinone, an essential cofactor for the  Strasbourg, France. post-translational gamma-carboxylation of several blood coagulation  Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder  factors. wich associates cognitive Resistance to warfarin and its more potent derivatives (e.g.  impairement, retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, polydactyly,  difenacoum, bromadiolon) has been reported for several wild  hypogenitalism and renal disease. The signiÜcant genetic  populations of rats and mice. The recent identiÜcation of the VKOR
C1   heterogeneity in BBS is supported by the mapping of at least eight  gene, a key component of the VKOR, allowed for the characterisation  loci (BB
S1  to 8). Among them, six genes are identiÜed: BB
S1 ,  of the molecular basis of warfarin resistance (Rw). BB
S2 , BB
S4 , BB
S6 , BB
S7  and BB
S8 . The BBS phenotype for some  Four mutations in the rat VKOR
C1  gene have been identiÜed in Rw  patients seems to require the presence of three mutant alleles at  animals from Denmark, Germany and the UK. While Danish and  two different loci, deÜning Ðtriallelic inheritanceÑ. We report here the  German rats share an Y139C mutation of supposedly common origin,  study of the six identiÜed BBS genes in a cohort of 33 BBS patients  three different mutations were observed in British rats all clustering in  from 27 families. Mutations have been scored in 14 families. Two  a hydrophobic domain of the protein. Upon recombinant expression,  mutations within the same gene have been identiÜed in 7 families.  all Rw mutations conferred resistance to warfarin at the expense of  BB
S1  is most frequently implied with the common M390R substitution  a lower basal VKOR activity. This is in line with previous reports on Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 234 the reduced Ütness of Rw rats in the absence of warfarin selection.  
P0695 . Description of a CDKN1C mutation in familial BWS with  VKOR
C1  mutations alone, however, do not explain the observed  variable penetrance differences in sensitivity against second generation coumarins.  D. Prawitt1, B. G\x89rtner-Rupprecht1, T. Enklaar1, L. R. Brixel1, D. Reutzel1, E.  Apparently, other modulating factors are required for multiple  Lausch1, C. Spangenberg1, H. J. Pander2, B. U. Zabel1;  resistance. 1Universit\x89tskinderklinik, Mainz, Germany, 2Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. BWS is a congenital overgrowth syndrome with an increased risk  
P0693 . A mutation creating an upstream initiation codon in the  of developing embryonic tumours, such as Wilms` tumour (WT)  SOX9 5ª UTR causes campomelic dysplasia (5% of affected children). The cardinal features are exomphalos,  G. Scherer1, D. Johnson2, J. Tolmie3, D. Morris-Rosendahl1;  macroglossia and neonate gigantism. BWS is generally sporadic, only  1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany, 2Institute  10-15% have a familial history. To date, no general molecular basis  of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill NHS Trust, Glagow, United Kingdom, 3Institute of  for BWS has been deÜned. The only mutations identiÜed, are loss-of- Medical Genetics, Yorkhill NHS Trust, Glasgow, United Kingdom. function mutations in the imprinted CDKN1C gene. Such mutations  Campomelic dysplasia (CD) is a semilethal skeletal malformation  appear to be associated with increased umbilical abnormalities,  syndrome that results from de novo heterozygous mutations in SOX9.  but not with increased WT predisposition. In the remaining BWS  These mutations are distributed over the entire coding region and  subgroups an alteration of the tight epigenetic regulation of 11p  cause loss-of-function of the protein, resulting in haploinsufÜciency.  gene expression (e.g. patUPD) seems to be the cause of the  We report on a 2 year-old girl with a 46,XX karyotype who has clinical  syndrome. We analysed three generations of a family with a mother  and radiological features of surviving CD, including micrognathia,  and one child affected with cardinal features of BWS (without WT).  tracheomalacia, small scapulae, 11 pairs of ribs and short ischia.  After excluding a patUPD and hypomethylation at KCNQ1OT1, we  Sequence analysis of the SOX9 coding region failed to reveal a  sequenced the CDKN1C gene and found a 16 bp deletion in exon  mutation. However, a heterozygous mutation G>A at position 188  2 at position 1977-1992 (
C1977 del16). Interestingly this missense  in the 5ª UTR was found. The patientªs mother, father and healthy  mutation was heterozygously present in the affected persons as  brother were homozygous G/G at this position, as were 100 control  well as in the maternal grandmother, who did not suffer from BWS.  chromosomes. Paternity was conÜrmed by microsatellite marker  The preferential maternal expression of CDKN1C goes along with  analysis. The G>A mutation creates an upstream translation start  the maternal transmission of the phenotype and may explain why  codon (GTG>ATG) with a much better Üt of its Ýanking sequence to  the grandmother is not affected. One remarkable observation is that  the Kozak consensus than that at the wildtype ATG start codon (4/6  the mother has only mild BWS characteristics. Familial BWS cases  vs. 1/6). If used, the upstream ATG would lead to translation of a  with variable phenotypes enable the determination and a differential  short peptide of 62 amino acids from a reading frame that terminates  analysis of effector genes. Prospects in this regard are discussed. just after the wildtype ATG start codon. Such an upstream open  reading frame could reduce or prevent translation of the wildtype  
P0696 . Characterization of deletions in patients with spinal  protein. Reduced amounts of SOX9 protein from the mutant mRNA  muscular atrophy (SMA) type I,II and III and determination of  would be compatible with the milder phenotype of the patient.  SMA carriers using MLPA analysis Although described only rarely in human genetic disease and for the  H. H. Lemmink1, A. H. van der Hout1, J. Dijkhuis1, C. Lummen1, J. P.  Ürst time here for CD, mutations creating upstream ATG codons may  Schouten2, Y. J. Vos1, C. H. C. M. Buys1;  be more common than generally assumed. 1Academic Hospital Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2MRC Holland,  Amsterdam, Netherlands. 
P0694 . InÝuence of Übrillin-1 fragments on matrix  In about 95% of patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)  metalloproteinase expression in cell culture: A potential factor in  mutations have been identiÜed in the SMN1 gene localized at  the pathogenesis of the Marfan syndrome chromosome 5q12-13.The clinical phenotype of SMA varies from  P. Booms1, R. Pregla2, A. Ney1, F. Barthel2, D. P. Reinhardt3, A. Pletschacher1,  the lethal SMA type I, the intermediate type II and the milder type III.  P. N. Robinson1;  Almost 95% of patients of all three clinical types have a homozygous  1Charit\x8d University Hospital, Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Germany,  deletion of at least exon 7 of the SMN1 gene. A very similar gene,  2German Heart Institute of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Dept. Of Molecular Biology,  SMN2, centromeric to SMN1, has been proposed as a modifying  University of L\x9ebeck, L\x9ebeck, Germany. gene, since patients with the milder forms of SMA appear to have  The Marfan syndrome, a relatively common autosomal dominant  more SMN2 gene copies. A novel multiplex ligation-dependent probe  disorder of connective tissue, is caused by mutations in the gene  (MLPA) assay has been adapted by us to quantify SMN1 and SMN2  for Übrillin-1 (FBN1). Fibrillin-1 is the main component of the 10-12  gene copy numbers. SMA carrier analysis using MLPA has been  nm microÜbrils that together with elastin form elastic Übers found in  validated by comparison with results obtained by our conventional  tissues such as the aortic media. Recently, FBN1 mutations have  dosimetric exon 7 SMN analysis of 54 SMA carriers and 49 normal  been shown to increase the susceptibility of Übrillin-1 to proteolysis  control samples. MLPA analysis did not result in any discrepancies.  in vitro, and other Ündings suggest that the upregulation of matrix  Subsequently, a total of 19 SMA type I, 30 type II and 27 type III  metalloproteinases (MMPs) as well as fragmentation of microÜbrils  patients were tested and in all these cases at least exon 7 of SMN1  could play a role in the pathogenesis of the Marfan syndrome. was absent. The MLPA can be used as a robust and reliable method  In the present work we have investigated the inÝuence of Übrillin- for diagnosis of SMA patients and carriers. Upon MLPA analysis  1 fragments on the expression of MMP-1, MMP-2, and MMP-3  about 84% of type I, 93% of type II and 81% of SMA type III patients  in a cell culture system. Cultured human dermal Übroblasts were  carried a total of 2, 3 and 4 SMN2 gene copies, respectively,  incubated with several different recombinant Übrillin-1 fragments. The  conÜrming that the SMA phenotype is clearly associated with the  expression level of MMP-1, MMP-2, and MMP-3 was determined by  number of SMN2 gene copies. quantitative RT-PCR, and the concentration of the corresponding  proteins was estimated by quantitative Western blotting. Our results  
P0697 . How to prepare stable reference materials for genetic  establish that treatment of cultured human dermal Übroblasts with  testing several recombinant Übrillin-1 fragments induces up-regulation of  J. Marki-Zay1, C. L. Klein1, P. Corbisier1, D. Gancberg1, H. Schimmel1, C.  MMP-1 and MMP-3. A similar effect was seen upon stimulation with a  Mannhalter2;  synthetic RGD peptide. The expression of MMP-2 was not inÝuenced  1European Commission - Joint Research Centre, Institute for Reference Mate- by treatment. rials and Measurements, Geel, Belgium, 2Molecular Biology Division, Depart- Our results suggest that Übrillin fragments may themselves have  ment of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University Vienna,  pathogenic effects by leading to upregulation of MMPs, which in turn  Vienna, Austria. may play a part in the progressive breakdown of microÜbrils thought  In order to harmonise, standardise and improve the quality of genetic  to play a role in Marfan syndrome. diagnostic services the establishment of reference measurement  systems is of pivotal importance. Diagnostic measurements must Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 235 be accurate, precise, speciÜc, comparable among laboratories and  (MJD) is an autosomal dominantly inherited neurodegenerative  traceable to the available reference measurement procedures and  disorder caused by the expansion of a CAG stretch in the MJD1 gene  available reference materials of a higher order. CRMs are recognised  encoding a polyglutamine repeat in the respective ataxin-3 protein.  as excellent means to check analytical accuracy and create crucial  The reason why expanded polyglutamines lead to neurodegeneration  reference points in the process of the development of comprehensive  in SCA3 patients remains uncertain to a great extend. measurement systems. The current lack of CRMs for molecular  In order to analyse the effect of polyglutamine expansions in the  genetic tests leads to assays not traceable to an accepted common  ataxin-3 protein on gene expression patterns we generated three  standard. stable transfected human SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cell lines  A number of genetic CRMs are presently under development by a  expressing ataxin-3 with a variable number of polyglutamine repeats:  European Consortium including Institute for Reference Materials  15 polyglutamine repeats as control as well as 77, and 148 repeats  and Measurements (IRMM) in the course of the ongoing CRMGEN  as disease models, respectively. A comparable expression of the  shared cost action project funded by the EC, and by IRMM in close  introduced ataxin-3 construct among the different cell lines was  co-operation with the Committee of Molecular Biology Techniques of  conÜrmed by western blotting. For the expression analysis total  the IFCC. RNA was isolated from three independent cultures of each cell line  Stability of the produced DNA-based CRMs is of central importance.  grown under identical conditions. Differences in gene expression  In order to improve the stability of genetic CRMs and optimise the  would therefore be solely due to different numbers of polyglutamine  DNA preservation, repeats within the ataxin-3 protein. The analysis of gene expression  -Testing protocols were optimised and described according to ISO  was carried out using the Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array  GUIDE 34 and BCR guidelines, (Affymetrix) covering about 47.000 different transcripts. The optained  - A model system for certiÜcation of DNA-based RMs was  microarray data was analysed by pairwise comparison of the three  established, disease model samples with the controls. Genes with uniform  - Different approaches for stabilisation of nucleic acid-based RMs  regulation in seven of these nine comparisons were deÜned as  were investigated, differently expressed genes. We identiÜed in our study genes out of  - Several additives were tested to achieve high stability, twelve functional groups which are differentially expressed as a result  - Freeze-drying processing and packaging were optimised to improve  of a polyglutamine expansion in the ataxin-3 protein. the stability and recovery rate. The knowledge gained in this feasibility study will be used to produce  
P0700 . Development and application of a full-coverage X- stable and suitable and commutable CRMs for clinical genetic testing. chromosomal BAC array for high-throughput screening of  genomic alterations in patients with X-linked mental retardation. 
P0698 . CertiÜed Reference Materials (CRMs) for the analysis of  D. Lugtenberg1, J. Veltman1, K. Osoegawa2, P. de Jong2, H. Brunner1,  the human factor II (prothrombin) gene G20210A mutation J. Chelly3, J. Fryns4, H. Ropers5, C. Moraine3, A. Geurts van Kessel1, E.  C. L. Klein1, S. Rieger2, D. Gancberg1, J. Marki-Zay1, P. Corbisier1, H. Schim- Schoenmakers1, B. Hamel1, H. van Bokhoven1, H. Yntema1;  mel1, C. Mannhalter2;  1University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2BACPAC  1European Commission - Joint Research Centre, Institute for Reference Mate- resources, Oakland, CA, United States, 3European XLMR consortium,  rials and Measurements, Geel, Belgium, 2Molecular Biology Division, Depart- www.EURO-MRX.com, France, 4European XLMR consortium, www.EURO- ment of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University Vienna,  MRX.com, Belgium, 5European XLMR consortium, www.EURO-MRX.com,  Vienna, Austria. Germany. The recent progress in molecular pathology made DNA-based assays  Current genetic and molecular data suggest that up to 100 genes  an important area of laboratory medicine and essential in patient  for nonspeÜcic X-linked mental retardation (MRX) exist. About 15 of  care. DNA tests allow the detection of genetic alterations responsible  these have been identiÜed. Seven of these 15 MRX genes have been  for inheritable disease conditions, higher risk to develop diseases or  identiÜed upon characterisation of chromosomal aberrations, such  altered drug metabolism. as translocations and deletions. Since most of the cytogenetically  Although DNA tests have a high impact on the clinical decision- visible X-chromosomal deletions have already been studied, novel  making, and the number of tests performed in diagnostic laboratories  methods are needed to efÜciently identify small submicroscopic  is high, issues of quality have not yet been given sufÜcient attention,  alterations in MRX patients. The technology that we have focussed  and currently no CRMs for clinical genetic testing available. on is array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (arrayCGH).  Therefore, the ScientiÜc Committee of Molecular Biology Techniques  We have constructed a full-coverage X-chromosomal genomic  (C-MBT) in Clinical Chemistry of the IFCC has initiated a joint project  BAC array consisting of approximately 1500 clones. The sensitivity  in co-operation with the European Commission- Joint Research  and speciÜcity of the technology were tested in a series of normal  Centre, Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements to  versus normal control experiments and a series of patients with  develop and produce plasmidic CRMs for the analysis of the human  known copy number changes at the X chromosome. Our array  prothrombin gene G20210A mutation. allows the detection of copy number changes smaller than 100 kb  A gene fragment chosen was produced that spans all primer  on the human X chromosome. Next, the full-coverage chromosome  annealing sites published until today. Both the wildtype and the  X-array was used for the analysis of selected MRX patients from the  mutated alleles of this gene fragment were cloned into a pU
C18   European XLMR consortium. In the Ürst set of 24 linked families we  plasmid and two plasmidic RMs were produced. In addition a mixture  already have identiÜed several single copy number changes, which  of both plasmids was produced mimicking the heterozygous situation. had remained uncovered upon traditional karyotyping and previous  In the present study, different possibilities to stabilise and package  linkage analyses. Both deletions and duplications were detected,  puriÜed DNA were also investigated to improve stability and recovery  ranging in size from 200 kb to 7 Mb. This study clearly demonstrates  rate of the CRMs after freeze-drying. To assess the commutability  the power of the arrayCGH technology. Deletion and ampliÜcation  of these reference materials, a Üeld study was launched, where the  mapping can now be performed at the submicroscopic level and will  material performed with excellence. allow high throughput identiÜcation of chromosomal regions harboring  This series of plasmidic CRMs are to the best of our knowledge the  MRX genes. world-wide Ürst clinical genetic CRMs introduced. 
P0701 . Two cases of alobar holoprosencephaly and mild facial  
P0699 . Effect of polyglutamine expansion on gene expression in  dysmorphism with novel ZI
C2  mutations. SCA3. L. E. Wehner1, K. Diepold2, A. Hammersen2, M. Knauth3, B. Zoll1, C. Gross4, U.  T. Schmidt1, A. Steinbach1, J. Boy1, S. Poths1, M. Bonin1, F. Laccone2, O.  Hehr4;  Riess1;  1Georg-August-University G\x99ttingen, Institute of Human Genetics, G\x99ttingen,  1University of T\x9ebingen, T\x9ebingen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics,  Germany, 2Georg-August-University G\x99ttingen, Department of Pediatrics and  University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany. Pediatric Neurology, G\x99ttingen, Germany, 3Georg-August-University G\x99ttingen,  Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 (SCA3) or Machado-Joseph-Disease  Department of Neuroradiology, G\x99ttingen, Germany, 4Center for Gynecological Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 236 Endocrinology, Reproductive Medicine and Human Genetics, Regensburg,  expression is downregulated after 
E11 .5. In this study, we have  Germany. homozygously inactivated Sox9 during mouse gonadal development  Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a brain malformation characterised by  using the Cre/loxP system. XY mutant gonads develop as ovotestes  failure of proper formation of midline structures of the forebrain. It is  or ovaries. In mutant ovaries, at 
E13 .5, expression of Sox9 and of  relatively common, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 16000  other early testis markers such as Amh and Sf1 were not detected; at  live births and 1 in 250 during embryonic development. The aetiology  
E14 .5, Dax1, a gene with differential sexual expression, resembles  of HPE is heterogeneous and includes chromosomal aberrations,  the female expression pattern, and Dmc1, an early ovarian meiosis  teratogenic factors and single gene defects. marker, is detected. In sex-reversed mice with complete absence  We report on two cases of HPE. Both patients showed alobar HPE  of testis cords, sexual ducts develop along the female pathway. We  with a large monoventricle and lack of forebrain midline structures.  conclude that during gonadal development, Sox9 is necessary for  In contrast to the severe brain malformation, both patients showed  testis cord formation and for the expression of early male pathway  only mild facial dysmorphism with mild hypotelorism and midface  genes, and that, other than in humans, inactivation of both Sox9  hypoplasia. Both developed macrocephaly and died at the age of 8  alleles is needed to cause XY sex reversal. years (case 1) and 3 months (case 2), respectively. In both cases we identiÜed mutations in exon 1 of the ZI
C2  gene.  
P0704 . Expression analysis of mutant alleles identiÜed in  Case 1 had a heterozygous deletion c.661delA resulting in a  Gaucher disease patients revealed possible ÐmodiÜerÑ  frameshift and a premature termination codon (N221fsX224). In case  polymorphisms 2 we identiÜed a heterozygous nonsense mutation c.782G>A, leading  L. Vilageliu1, M. Montfort1, A. Chab\x86s2, D. Grinberg1;  to a stop codon (W261X). 1Departament de Gen\x8etica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona,  Our report expands the number of reported ZI
C2  mutations in  Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioqu\x91mica Cl\x91nica, Hospital Cl\x91nic, Corporaci\x96  holoprosencephaly to 13, including the Ürst nonsense mutation.  Sanit\x87ria Cl\x91nic, Barcelona, Spain. Of all cases of ZI
C2  mutations reported so far, no patient showed  Gaucher disease, the most prevalent sphingolipidosis, is caused  severe facial dysmorphism despite the frequently observed severe  by the deÜcient activity of acid beta-glucosidase, mainly due to  brain phenotype. Therefore, the detection rate of mutations in ZI
C2   mutations in the GBA gene. Over 200 mutations have been identiÜed  might be considerably higher in the subgroup of patients with alobar  worldwide, more than 25 of which were in Spanish patients. In  holoprosencephaly without severe facial dysmorphisms as compared  order to demonstrate causality for Gaucher disease, some of them:  to the detection rate of 3-4% for ZI
C2  mutations in the overall group  p.
P182 L, p.N188S, p.R257X, p.Y313H, p.
E326 K, p.
P391 L, p.N392I,  of sporadic HPE cases. p.I402T and the double mutants [p.N188S; p.
E326 K] and [p.
L444 P;  p.
E326 K], were expressed in Sf9 cells using a baculovirus expression  
P0702 . The Mouse Mutant áShort DigitsÐ (Dsh) a Model for the  system. Besides, mutations p.N370S, p.D409H and p.
L444 P were  Regulation of Sonic Hedgehog and Brachydactyly also expressed for comparison. The levels of residual acid beta- G. C. Schwabe1, M. Niedermaier1, S. Fees2, P. Selby3, S. Mundlos1;  glucosidase activity for some of the mutant enzymes were negligible.  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2ChildrenÒs Hos- Other group of enzymes (p.N370S, p.I402T, p.D409H, p.
L444 P  pital, Mainz, Germany, 3Life Sciences Division, Oak Ridge, TN, United States. and [p.
L444 P; p.
E326 K]) gave levels of activity ranging from 6% to  The mouse mutant áshort digitsÐ (Dsh) is a radiation induced mutant  14% of the wild type. The mutant enzymes produced by the cDNAs  with a complete holoprosencephaly phenotype in the homozygote  carrying alleles p.N188S and p.
E326 K showed high activity (66.6%  and a limb reduction phenotype in the heterozygote. Analyzing  and 42.7% of wild type enzyme, respectively). Expression studies  950 meioses Dsh/+ was Üne mapped within a 12 MB interval on  revealed that the p.
E326 K change, which was never found alone in a  mouse chromosome 5, comprising Sonic Hedgehog (Shh). Shh  Gaucher disease-causing allele, when found in a double mutant such  expression is severly downregulated in the homozygote, yet no  as [p.N188S; p.
E326 K] and [p.
L444 P; p.
E326 K], decreases activity  mutation was detected within the Shh coding region or conserved  compared with that found for the other mutation alone. These results  putative enhancer elements. Using a complementation assay we  suggest that p.
E326 K should be considered a ÐmodiÜer variantÑ rather  show that Dsh and Shh-/- are allelic. The heterozygous Dsh mutant  than a neutral polymorphism, as previously considered. Mutation  exhibits missing/fused second phalanges of all digits and missing  p.N188S, which produces a mutant enzyme with the highest level of  interphalangeal joints reminiscent of human brachydactyly type A1.  activity, is probably a very mild mutation or another ÐmodiÜer variantÑ. Histological analysis reveals disruption of chondrogenesis and joint  formation starting from 
E13 .5 in Dsh/+. In the developing limbs of  
P0705 . New mutations of the NF1 gene on patients with  Dsh/+ the expression patterns of Ihh, Ptc and Gli genes as well as  neuroÜbromatosis type 1. Gdf5 and Pthlh are disrupted starting at 
E13 .5. The presented data  O. Drozd1, N. Kvasnitsky2, O. Babenko1, M. Nemtsova1, D. Zaletayev1;  make it highly likely that in the Dsh mutant a genomic inversion  1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,  disrupts Shh regulation by numerous conserved long range cis- 2Ternopol State Medical Academy, Ternopol, Ukraine. enhancer elements that reside outside the mapping interval. The  NeuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant  heterozygous phenotype may be explained by disruption of Ihh and  disorder affecting ~ 1 in 3500 individuals. NF1 is fully penetrant at the  Gdf5 signaling in the heterozygote possibly through alteration of Shh  age of 5 years and has a variable clinical expression, even among  regulation of a higly conserved limb enhancer located approximately  members of the same family. High number of sporadic cases (up to  1 Megabase upstream of Shh. 50%) is observed. The disorder is caused by mutations in the NF1  gene, one of the largest human genes, composed of 60 exons and  
P0703 . XY sex reversal, caused by inactivation of one SOX9  spanning more than 300 kb of genomic DNA, and is considered to  allele in humans, needs inactivation of both Sox9 alleles in mice be a tumor-suppressor gene. It has a high mutation rate with most  F. J. Barrionuevo1, S. Bagheri-Fam1, M. M. Taketo2, R. Kist1,3, G. Scherer1;  mutations predicted to lead to truncated proteins. The mutations  1Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany,  occur throughout the gene and most have a frequency of less than  2Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan,  1%. A comprehensive analysis of the mutational spectrum might help  3The Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. to elucidate the role of different NF1 mutations. DNA from periferal  Heterozygous inactivating mutations in SOX9 cause the human  blood leucocytes of 25 patients (7 familial and 18 sporadic cases)  skeletal malformation syndrome campomelic dysplasia (CD) together  with NF1 were screened for mutations. For each patient the whole  with XY sex reversal. In contrast, heterozygous Sox9 mutant mice  coding sequence and adjacent intronic sequenses were investigated.  do not show any XY sex reversal. Homozygous Sox9 null mutant  We have used SSCP-method with subsequent direct sequencing of  mice die before 
E11 .5, preventing the study of gonadal development.  abnormal bands. Three novel mutations were found: six-nucleotide  In mammals, SOX9 is expressed in the undifferentiated gonad  in-frame deletion in exon 28 (4973-4978delTCTATA), deletion A in  of both sexes just before the onset of male sex determination.  exon 29 (position 5248), resulting in frameshift and TŗA substitution  This expression continues in Sertoli cells during the entire testis  in exon 29 (position 5498). We are currently working on development  development, whereas in developing female gonads, Sox9  of indirect DNA methods for prenatal diagnosis in NF1 families and Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 237 on optimizing the effectiveness of mutation screening. mutations were identiÜed: Asp47His in exon 1 and Gly232Arg in exon  4. No one known mutation was found. Also we have found following  
P0706 . Novel Lamin A/C mutation in dilated cardiomyopathy  polymorphisms in affected patients: T1073C, ivs5-22gŗa, ivs5-25gŗ patient c, ivs5-30cŗa, ivs5-31gŗc in exon 5; ivs8-44cŗt in exon 9; 
C1910 T  A. Chuhrova1, N. Kotlukova2, O. Plotnikova1, H. Zaklyazminskaya1, G.  in exon 10; G2286C in exon 12 with frequecies 4,5%, 9%, 9%, 9%,  Rudenskaya1, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1;  4,5%, 18%, 95%, 9% per chromosom respectively. This work was supported in part by grant 03-04-49311-a of Russian  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,  Foundation for Basic Research 2Perinatal Cardiology Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a myocardial disorder characterized  
P0709 . Real-time quantitative PCR as a routine method for  by ventricular dilatation and impaired systolic function leading to  screening large rearrangements in Rett Syndrome: report  heart failure and sudden death. About one-third of idiopathic DCM  of three cases of MEC
P2  deletion and one case of MEC
P2   are inherited, autosomal dominant form occurs most frequently and  duplication. exhibits both clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity. To date 11  F. Ariani1, F. Mari2, C. Pescucci2, I. Longo2, M. Bruttini2, I. Meloni2, G. Hayek3,  genes, including lamin A/C (LMNA) gene, have been associated with  R. Rocchi4, M. Zappella3, A. Renieri2;  autosomal dominant DCM. Here we described patient with diagnosis DCM conÜrmed at 6 month  1U.O. Genetica Medica Policlinico, Siena, Italy, 2U.O. Genetica Medica, Siena,  who had prenatal hypotrophy, heart failure, acute dilatation of left  Italy, 3Neuropsichiatria Infantile - Az. Osp. Senese, Siena, Italy, 4Neurologia  ventriculum and atrium and mitral regurgitation, ejection fraction 29%.  - Universit\x87 di Siena, Siena, Italy. ProbandÓs parents were healthy. We have studied DNA of this patient  Mutations in the X-linked MEC
P2  gene are found in 70-80 % of  by PCR-SSCP analysis of LMNA gene coding region (12 exons)  cases of classical Rett syndrome (RTT) and in about 50% of cases  divided into 14 fragments with sequencing of abnormal conforms.  of Preserved Speech Variant (PSV). This high percentage of MEC
P2   Gly635Asp mutation was found in exon 11. This mutation was not  mutations, especially in classical RTT cases, suggests that another  described previously. major RTT locus is unlikely. Missed mutations may be due to the  This work was supported in part by grant 03-04-49311-a of Russian  limited sensitivity of the methodology used for mutation scanning  Foundation for Basic Research and/or the presence of intronic mutations. In a double copy gene,  such as MEC
P2  in females, current methodologies (DGGE, SSCP,  
P0707 . Transcriptional alterations and retinal degeneration in  DHPLC, direct sequencing) are prone to miss gross rearrangements.  SCA7 and HD transgenic mice Three previous reports have shown the presence of large deletions in  G. Abou-Sleymane, D. Helmlinger, C. Weber, J. Mandel, D. Devys, Y. Trottier;  a fraction of MEC
P2 -negative classical RTT patients. We developed  a reliable, single tube, quantitative PCR assay for rapid determination  IGBMC, Illkirch, France. of MEC
P2  gene dosage. This method involves a multiplex reaction  HuntingtonÓs disease (HD) and Spinocerebellar Ataxia type7 (SCA7)  using a FAM labeled TaqMan probe with a TAMRA quencher derived  belong to a group of nine inherited neurodegenerative diseases  from MEC
P2  exon 4 and two primers derived from the same exon  caused by a polyglutamine expansion in the respective proteins.  and RNAaseP as an internal reference. We validated this assay  Regional neurodegeneration is speciÜc to each disease, in particular  through the analysis of 15 female and 15 male healthy controls  SCA7 is the only one to display degeneration in the retina, a tissue  and we then applied this method to 20 classic RTT and 12 PSV  usually spared in HD. Recent evidences indicate that transcriptional  patients, all negative for MEC
P2  mutations. We identiÜed four gross  alterations could underlie the retinal dysfunction in SCA7. We  rearrangements: three deletions in classical RTT patients and one  previously showed that a SCA7 mouse model (R7E) and the R62 HD  duplication in a PSV patient. Our results conÜrm that a fraction of  mice develop a similar retinal phenotype as revealed by progressive  MEC
P2 -negative RTT cases have MEC
P2  gross rearrangements  thinning of photoreceptors segments and decreased rod ERG  and we propose real-time quantitative PCR as a simple and reliable  response. Comparison of retinopathy in HD and SCA7 mice offers the  method for routine screening of MEC
P2  in addition to DHPLC  opportunity to assess whether the molecular pathways underlying rod  analysis. dysfunction are identical. Here we report a gene expression analysis  on R7E, R6 and control retina using MOE 430A Affymetrix Genechips  
P0710 . Germ-line mosaicism in Rett syndrome: is it more  (22 690 probe sets). Around 11500 transcripts were detected present  common than expected ? in the retina of control mice. We observed in both mouse models  F. Mari1, F. Cogliati2, R. Caselli1, I. Longo1, F. Ariani1, M. Bruttini1, I. Meloni1, S.  a downregulation of several components of the phototransduction  Russo2, L. Larizza2, G. Hayek3, M. Zappella3, A. Renieri1;  pathway. These results were conÜrmed by RT-PCR and Northern  blot experiments, showing an early, and drastic downregulation of  1Medical Genetics, Dept.Mol.Biol., University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Laboratory  rhodopsin suggesting that downregulation of photoreceptor genes  of Molecular Biology - Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 3Department of  expression plays a critical role in polyglutamine induced retinal  Child Neuropsychiatry, Azienda Ospedaliera Senese, Siena, Italy. degeneration. Down and up regulation of genes involved in other  Rett syndrome is an X-linked neurodevelopmental dominant disorder  pathways was also observed. A similar number of genes was found  that almost exclusively affects girls. The vast majority of cases are  dysregulated between the R6 and the R7E mice. sporadic and are caused by de novo mutations in MEC
P2  gene,  located in Xq28. Only a few familial cases have been reported: in four  
P0708 . Molecular-genetic study of LMNA gene in Russian Emery- cases the mother was an asymptomatic carrier and in two cases the  Dreifuss muscular dystrophy patients. germ-line mosaicism in the mother was postulated. Due to the above  O. Plotnikova, A. Chuhrova, G. Rudenskaya, S. Tverskaya, H. Dadali, A.  reported cases of germ-line mosaicism we decided to offer prenatal  Polyakov;  diagnosis to all expectant mothers with a Rett daughter despite the  absence of the causative mutation in their blood. We describe here  Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. the outcome of the Ürst eight cases of prenatal diagnosis carried  Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is inherited disorder  out by our center. In seven cases (5 females and 2 males) the fetus  characterized by early contractures of elbows and Achilles  did not carry the mutation. In one case the female fetus did carry  tendons, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness, and  the same mutation as the affected sister. The couple decided to  a cardiomyopathy with conduction blocks that is life-threatening.  interrupt the pregnancy and to devolve fetal tissues of the affected  Three modes of inheritance exist: X-linked, autosomal dominant, and  fetus for research purposes. This positive prenatal test strengthens  autosomal recessive. Autosomal forms of Emery-Dreifuss muscular  the importance of performing prenatal diagnosis in all cases of Rett  dystrophy (EDMD) are caused by mutations in the gene encoding  syndrome, even when the mutation is apparently de novo. Moreover,  lamin A/C (LMNA; 150330). our results indicate that germ-line mosaicism may be considered for  We have studied DNA of 22 EDMD patients by PCR-SSCP analysis  the assessment of recurrence risk during genetic counseling. of LMNA gene coding region (12 exons) divided into 14 fragments  with sequencing of fragments revealed abnormal patterns. Two novel Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 238 
P0711 . Increased PARP-1 (ADP ribosylation 1) in lymphocytes  Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro. from elderly subjects and premature aging syndromes Cystic Übrosis (CF) is the most common fatal autosome recessive  S. B. Ozdas1, N. H. El\x8cioglu2, I. Onaran1, A. D\x99ventas3, V. Tezcan3, G.  disease in Caucasians. Worldwide collaboration has resulted in  Kanògur1;  discovery of almost 1300 mutations in CFTR gene and a large  number of polymorphisms. 1Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey,  After screening of 175 CF patients from Serbia and Montenegro, we  2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University Hospital, Istanbul,  have detected 18 different CFTR mutations with F508del being the  Turkey, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Istanbul,  most frequent (72.28% of CF alleles). A total of 18 mutations cover  Turkey. 82.57% of CF alleles in this group. Natural aging process is associated with decreased efÜciency of DNA  Since the main goal of diagnostic analysis was to allow families at  repair mechanism and oxidative stress mediated DNA damages.  risk to do prenatal diagnosis, we have started with haplotype analysis  Damaging oxidative stress includes reactive oxygen species (ROS)  in all cases where one or both CF alleles remain uncharacterized.  generating chemicals, UV radiation and ionizing radiation. High  Analysis was done for 6 diallelic sites and one tetranucleotide  permanent concentration of ROS induce a variety of damages in DNA  repeat (XV2C-KM19-M
P6 D9-J44-IV
S6 a(GATT)-M470V-T854T) on  including oxidized bases, DNA strand breaks, formation of cross links  58 F508del, 11 non-F508del and 40 normal chromosomes. The  between DNA and proteins. GATT polymorphism was detected by difference in mobility of the  The DNA fragmentation is to be known to induce poly-ADP  PCR product on 8% PAGE gel. Other haplotypes were determined  ribosylation which is a posttranslational modiÜcation of nuclear  after restriction digests of the RFLP-PCR products were separated  proteins,catalyzed by poly (ADP- Ribose) polymerase (PARP-1),  by agarose gel electrophoresis. Strong linkeage disequilibrium was  known to be involved in in cell proliferation, differentiation and  observed for CFTR mutations and one haplotype (1-2-2-1-6-1-1),  transformation as well as in recovery from DNA damage. Activation  while normal chromosomes mostly were associated with another one  PARP-1 is one of the earliest respons of mammalian cells to  (2-1-1-1-7-1-2). DNA damage. Therefore detection PARP-1 level will conÜrm the  In this work authors will discuss their results in details, showing the  presentation of actuel DNA strand breaks. importance of haplotype analysis in population where the molecular  There are few studies about poly (ADP-ribosylation) activation  basis of CF is highly heterogeneous. regarding natural aging but none about premature aging so far. For searching the relationship with aging and PARP-1 and DNA  
P0714 . Heterozygous PITX2/RIEG1 whole gene deletion is  fargmentation; we carried out a comperative study on lymphocytes  associated with the Growth Hormone deÜciency of the Rieger  by natural elderly subjects, premature aging syndrome patients and  syndrome healthy young adults as a control group. P. Bitoun1, K. A. Machinis2, E. Semina3, B. Benzacken4, E. Pipiras4, J. C.  As a result there was signiÜcant increase in PARP activity in  Murray5, S. Amselem2, V. Cacheux2;  lymphocytes from Hutchinson-Gilford progeria and Werner syndrome  patients when cmpoared with the elderly subjects and healthy  1Medical Genetics, Jean Verdier Hospital,C.H.U. Paris-Nord,, Bondy, France,  young controls. Highest level were detected in progeria syndromes.  2Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Henri Mondor Hospital, Creteil, France,  DNA fragmentations were also signiÜcantly increased by both aged  3Dept of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin,, Milwaukee, WI, United  groups. The results show that, the increase rate of poly (ADP- States, 4Cytogenetics and Reproduction Biology, C.H.U. Paris-Nord,, Bondy,  ribosylation) in lymphocytes correlates interestingly with the speed of  France, 5Dept of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. the aging process. Background: Rieger syndrome(RS)is a developmental disorder, which  associates Rieger ocular anomaly , umbilical defects and hypodontia.  
P0712 . Mutation analysis in 202 tuberous sclerosis patients  Additional features have been reported in RS patients and most  using a combination of different methodical approaches notably growth hormone deÜciency. None of these patients were  K. Mayer1, M. Burkert1, M. Kupka1, U. Heinrich1, H. Klein1, H. Rott2;  found to have mutations in the PITX2/RIEG1 gene contrarily to 40%  of our patients with isolated Rieger syndrome . 1Laboratory for Medical Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 2Institute of Human  Purpose: We hypothesised that the RS patients with GH deÜciency  Genetics, Erlangen, Germany. may have deletion of the PITX2 gene a midline pituitary expressed  Tuberous sclerosis is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by  bicoid transcription factor gene. mutations in TS
C1  or TS
C2 . Worldwide efforts in mutation detection  Methods : We tested 4 families with RS plus GH deÜciency or short  demonstrated a broad spectrum of lesions in both genes without  stature by FISH using 4 cosmids containing the PITX2 gene and  mutational hotspots. In our study, 202 patients with a deÜnite or  microsatellite markers form the region. suspected clinical diagnosis of TSC have been referred to genetic  Results: We found 2 families with heterozygous deletion of the PITX2  testing. In the Ürst 104 patients, the Protein Truncation Test was  gene using FISH and microsatellites. This conÜrms the major role of  applied for the TS
C1  and TS
C2  coding regions and supplemented  PITX2 as a midline and pituitary expressed gene although it is still  with a screening of mutation cluster regions in TS
C1  by HDA/TGGE  unclear whether the PITX2 deletion alone is sufÜcient to cause the  and in TS
C2  by DHPLC. Southern Blot analysis was used for large  GH deÜciency. TS
C2  deletion screening in all 104 cases. In a second approach,  98 additional patients were analysed by direct sequencing of all 62  
P0715 . Scad DeÜciency: Approach To A Diagnostic Challenge exons of both genes. Patients tested negative were subsequently  D. Matern1, J. C. Huey1, J. L. Winters1, C. D. Cuthbert1, P. Rinaldo1, N.  screened for large TS
C2  deletions by FISH and long range PCR.  Gregersen2, S. Hahn1;  Mutations were identiÜed in 133 families. Detection rates were 66%  for PTT combined with HDA/TGGE, DHPLC and Southern Blot in  1Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Aarhus  the Ürst 104 patients compared to 65% for sequencing followed  University, Aarhus, Denmark. by FISH and long range PCR in the second 98 cases. Truncating  The clinical phenotype of short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase  TS
C1  mutations were identiÜed in 32 cases including 14 families. Of  (SCAD) deÜciency is highly variable in age of onset and severity of  the 101 detected TS
C2  mutations, 72 are small truncating, 6 large  symptoms. Similarly, ethylmalonic aciduria (EMA) and elevations  deletions, 20 missense mutations and 3 one-amino acid deletions.  of 
C4 -acylcarnitine (
C4 ) in blood are informative but not speciÜc  Of 13 TS
C2  families identiÜed by genetic testing, only 7 had  markers. The existence of possibly pathogenic SCAD gene variants  previously been known as familial cases. The remaining 6 have been  and the absence of reliable enzyme assays in tissue other than  discovered by the evaluation of family members of index patients with  muscle make the diagnosis of SCAD deÜciency a signiÜcant  unclassiÜed missense mutations or small in frame deletions. diagnostic challenge. We report our experience with a tiered approach to patients  
P0713 . Genetic analysis of extra- and intragenic marker  evaluated because of abnormal newborn (n=7) or high risk screening  haplotypes in a group of cystic Übrosis patients from Serbia and  (EMA and/or 
C4 ) results (n=38). Methods: Plasma and urine were  Montenegro analyzed for acylcarnitines and organic acids, respectively. When  D. Radivojevic, M. Djurisic, T. Lalic, M. Guc-Scekic, P. Minic, A. Sovtic;  the EMA excretion and/or 
C4  concentration was elevated, Übroblast Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 239 cultures were established for in vitro probing with L-carnitine,  of 200 families suggests that parent-to-offspring transmission of  palmitic acid, and labeled L-valine and L-isoleucine followed by  mutations was autosomal recessive in 91.5% and pseudo-dominant  acylcarnitine analysis of the culture medium using tandem mass  in 8.49%. spectrometry. Sequencing of the SCAD gene followed when  indicated. Results: 29 of 45 (64%) patient cell lines accumulated  
P0718 . The DNA-diagnostics of X-linked recessive Emery- butyrylcarnitine in vitro (0.26-2.04 ´mol/g prot.; controls: <0.25). Six  Dreifuss muscular dystrophy carried 2 pathogenic mutations. Ten carried 1 pathogenic mutation  U. Kuropatkina, A. Chuhrova, G. Rudenskaya, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov;  in addition to homozygosity (4/10) or heterozygosity (6/10) for the  Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. common variants. Two cases were diagnosed with isobutyryl-CoA  Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is characterized by early  dehydrogenase (IBD) deÜciency and 2 with deÜciency of complex  contractures, slowly progressive muscle wasting and weakness with  I of the respiratory chain by another method. Conclusion: This  a distinctive humero-peroneal distribution and cardiac conduction  diagnostic approach reliably identiÜes patients with SCAD and IBD  defects leading to dilated cardiomyopathy. There are autosomal and  deÜciencies. For patients with either normal or only mildly abnormal  X-linked forms of EDMD which connected with mutations in lamin  butyrylcarnitine levels in Übroblasts and absence of pathogenic  A/C gene (1q21.2) and mutations in emerin gene (EMD), which is  mutations alternative diagnoses should be pursued. located in Xq28 respectively. For DNA diagnostics of X-linked EDMD  we have carried out PCR-SSCP analysis all EMD 6 exons in 23 male  
P0716 . Molecular analysis of haemophilia B in Iranian patients:  patients. We have reviled the alteration of electrophoretic mobility in  three new mutations in the FIX gene. some exons in fore different patients. During sequence analysis we  G. Rastegar lari1, S. Enayat1, P. Fard Esfahani1, M. Rassoulzadegan1, F.  determined two point mutations, one of them (Tyr34Stop) was known  Moghadam1, J. M. Lavergne2, F. Ala1;  and published in EMD database and other (Asp72Val) was unknown  1Iranian Hemophilia Care Center, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Inserm  previously. The next novel mutation is 2- nucleotides deletion in  U143, Paris, France. combination with 12- nucleotides insertion after nt72, which result  Haemophilia B is a X-linked recessive bleeding disorder caused by a  in frame-shift in EMD Ürst exon. The last reviled mutation is 4 bp  deÜciency of factor IX affecting 1/30 000 males. There are about 800  insertion after nt 2294 in second exon EMD which result in frame-shift  haemophilia B patients in Iran and the identiÜcation of the causative  too. This mutation also is unpublished previously. More severe clinical  mutation in the factor IX genes of these patients and their families  features including cardiomyopathy appeared in patient with frame- leads to precise carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis in affected  shift mutation in Ürst exon EMD. families. DNA samples were obtained from 29 unrelated haemophilia  This work was supported in part by grant 03-04-49311-a of Russian  B patients and some of their female relatives. The whole of FIX gene  Foundation for Basic Research sequence, including intron/exon Ýanking regions and promoter, was  analysed by conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE).  
P0719 . The spectrum of mutations in CMT1X patients from  Only the exons with abnormal band pattern were sequenced and  Russia a total of 25 mutations were identiÜed. However in four of them, no  A. Polyakov1, I. Mersijanova1, H. Dadali1, V. Fedotov2, N. Kirilenko3, I.  abnormal band was detected by CSGE. For these patients, all the  Sharkova3, N. Baryshnikova3;  exons and Ýanking regions have been sequenced and a mutation  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genetic  was found in all 4 patients. The identiÜed mutations included 28  counseling Department, diagnostic Center,, Voronezh, Russian Federation,  base substitutions and an isolated one base deletion. Three of these  3Medical State University of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutations (31267deltaA, G93S, Q246K) have not been previously  We have been studying Russia Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy  reported, but the others have been previously reported and present  (CMT) type 1X patients for the last several years. At present, our  in the database. It was interesting to note that more than 85% of  family material consists of 31 families, of which 104 patients with  theses mutations have been found in exon 2, 5 and 8 (30%, 15%  different mutations in GJB1 gene. Most mutations (96,8%) located in  and 42% respectively) suggesting that mutations in these 3 exons  the coding region (in the 2 exone) of the GJB1 gene from 59 to 262  are very frequent in our haemophilia B patients. Analysis of factor IX  codon, advantage in second extracellular loop (26,7%), intracellular  mutation in the rest of our haemophilia B patients is now in progress  loop (16,7%) and Ürst transmembrane domen (16,7%). One family  for precise carrier detection and possible use in prenatal diagnosis. have mutation in the noncoding region - IV
S1 +2T>C. In 87,1% of our CMT 1X families we detected 21 previously reported  
P0717 . Genetic testing and counseling of FMF patients in  missens point mutations: [I20G; N21S], V23A, W24R, M34K, Q80R,  Armenia V84G, V91M, R142Q, R142Y, F193L, W44Q, W44C, 
C53 Y, R164Q,  T. F. Sarkisian, H. S. Ajrapetyan, G. R. Shahsuvaryan;  V181M, R183H, 
E186 K, M93V, A97P, R107W, 
E208 K. 9,7% of our  Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. CMT 1X families had deletion, that produced frame shifts: 62delG,  Molecular analysis of 3000 patients with Familial Mediterranean  606delC, 784-785delAT. Five patients from two families showed to  Fever (FMF, MIM 249100) demonstrated correlation between  our knowledge previously unreported base changes: 62delG and  spectrum of MEFV mutations and clinical severity, including renal  606delC. In our family material we have not discover insertions,  amyloidosis. Carriers of mutations in 250 healthy persons were 1: deletions and nonsense mutations. 5 with distribution of most mutations: M694V (4.7%); V726A (4.6%);  M680I (1.8%); R761H (0.2%); F479L (0.4%); 
P369 S (4.9%); 
E148 Q  
P0720 . Novel GJB1 mutation associated with mild phenotype  (3.4%) was different from data obtained from patients: M694V  CMT1X disease (50.6%), V726A (22.3%), M680I (18.7%), R761H (3.2%), M694I  H. Dadali1, I. Mersijanova1, A. Polyakov1, V. Fedotov2, N. Kirilenko3, I.  (0.4%); 
E148 Q (2.2%), F479L (1.3%). 98.65% of patients had 7  Sharkova3, N. Baryshnikova3;  mutations, and in 77% both alleles were mutated in exon 10. Most  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genetic  part carried two mutations (74.8%) compared with patients with  counseling Department, diagnostic Center, Voronezh, Russian Federation,  one (18.6%), three (0.7%) and without mutations (5.9%). Frequent  3Medical State University of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation. genotypes were M694V/M694V (20.9%), M694V/V726A (18%),  X-linked motor and sensory neuropathy has been found to be due to  M694V/M680I (12.7%), M680I/V726A (9.8%), M680I/M680I (3.4%),  mutations in the GJB1 gene, mapping to Xq13.1 region, encodes for  V726A/V726A (2.8%), M694V/R761H (2.8%). Differences between  the gap junction protein - connexin 32. Of 230 mutations identiÜed  frequency of mutations among patients and healthy individuals  in CMT1X families, most are missense mutations. The phenotype  suggests that 
E148 Q mutation was associated with a mild phenotype,  of CMT1X has been divided into mild, moderate, and severe. Most  and 
P369 S mutation was found in asymptomatic carriers. Genotypes  missense mutations showed a mild clinical phenotype, whereas  with 
P369 S mutation were not associated with clinical features.  all nonsense mutations, the larger deletions and the insertion that  M694V homozygous genotype had an unfavorable prognostic value  produced frame shifts showed severe phenotypes. We report a  for renal amyloidosis. Results suggest that penetrance depends on  novel mutation identiÜed in Russian family. In this family with four  type of mutations involved in pathogenesis of FMF. Pedigree analysis Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 240 affected individuals, the 1 bp deletion - 62delG- in the codon 21  screened some of encoding regions of CFTR gene and identiÜed six  second nucleotide was found. The mutation predicts a shift in the  disease-causing mutations on 66 unreleated CF chromosomes from  reading frame and termination of translation after amino acid 83. The  33 Iranian Cystic Fibrosis families. In the present study, we disinged  proband is a 25-year-old male who has a sings of a demyelinating  ARMS -PCR for detection these six mutations(ȘF508, 2183AA>G,  sensorimotor neuropathy. His electrophysiological Ündings were  574delA, D110H, R334W, 2043delG). The frequency of these  typical for CMT1 type. Three another patients - his mother and two  mutations is : 25.75%, 4.54%, 3.03%, 1.51%, 1.51%, and 1.51%  sisters -had only discrete walking difÜculties and atrophy of the  respectively. This study showed that the developed ARMS-PCR  peroneal muscles. There electrophysiological Ündings indicating an  method is a rapid, costbeneÜt and suitable assay for detection and  axonal neuropathy. determination of above mutations. 
P0721 . Novel PKU mutation associated with mild phenilketonuria  
P0724 . SNP-array mapping of a novel locus for autosomal  in patient from Voronezh region recessive retinitis pigmentosa to chromosome 14q24 A. Anichkina1, S. Tverskaya1, T. Kachanova2, V. Fedotov2, A. Polyakov1;  A. R. Janecke1, A. Gal2, C. Becker3, E. Schmid4, F. R\x9eschendorf3, P. N\x9ernberg3,  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genetic  G. Utermann1;  counseling Department, diagnostic Center, Voronezh, Russian Federation. 1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Medical University of Inns- Phenilketonuria is an autosomal recessive disease caused by  bruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Hamburg,  mutation in phenilalanin hydroxylase gene (PAH). Up to date it is  Hamburg, Germany, 3Gene Mapping Center,Max-Delbr\x9eck Center for Molecular  known more than 400 mutations. We have studied more than 300  Medicine, Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Medical  patients from different Russian region for mutations in 5, 7 and 12  University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. exons of PAH gene. All Ünd mutations except one are published in  Hereditary retinopathies represent the major cause of adult  PAH mutations database. Here we describe the novel mutation in  genetic blindness in the western world. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP)  PAH gene in patient from Vorenezh region (Russian Federation)  is a heterogeneous group of retinal dystrophies characterized by  which were reviled by PCR-SSCP analysis with following sequence.  degeneration of the rod and cone photoreceptor cells. Therein,  We have reviled the nucleotide change G->A, which result in amino  autosomal recessive RP (arRP) is the most frequent form. Today,  acid substitution G256D. This mutation was found in compound  the etiology and pathomechanism of the disease remain unknown in  heterozygote with R408W mutation. Phenilketonuria usually is  >= 85% of cases. Although causative mutations for arRP have been  associated with a severe mental retardation especially without diet  reported in about 30 different human genes, these explain only a  therapy. However this patient have not regular diet therapy in his  minority (< 15 %) of arRP cases. We identiÜed three consanguineous  early childhood but severe mental retardation were not determined. kindreds with a total of 13 patients affected by autosomal recessive  nonsyndromic childhood-onset retinal dystrophy that were thought  
P0722 . Linkage study of a large CMT family from Udmurtia,  to belong to an extended Austrian pedigree. Whole genome scan by  Russian Federation high-densitiy microarray analysis of SNPs mapped the disease locus  O. ShÒagina1, S. Tverskaya1, H. Dadali1, H. Osipova2, R. Zinchenko1, E. Ginter1,  to chromosome 14q23.3-q24.1, and a shared founder haplotype  A. Polyakov1;  deÜned a critical interval of 1.53 cM. Using this approach, we  rapidly detected a small region of homozygosity that might have  1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation,  been missed by conventional methods. Current mutation analysis  2Regional Medical Genetics Consultation, Izhevsk, Russian Federation. of candidate genes from the critical interval will contribute to the  Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT) is a heterogeneous group of  revelation of the etiology and pathomechanism of this condition. peripheral nervous system disorders with a broad spectrum of clinical  severity and different pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant  
P0725 . Investigation of mutations involved in macular corneal  CMT is classiÜed into two forms based on neuropathogloical criteria.  dystrophy CMT1 is characterized by demyelination and remielynation, while  M. Ataii1, A. EshghAbadi2, M. H. Sanati1, M. A. Zare2, M. Houshmand1;  CMT2 exhibits axonal degeneration. To date at least 6 different  genetic loci is known for CMT type 1 and 5 others for CMT type 2.  1National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  Here we described large CMT family from Udmurtia, Russia with  Republic of), 2Farabi eye Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). 11 affected persons in three generations. All of them have typical  Macular corneal dystrophy (MCD) is an autosomal recessive  clinic neuropathy but type undetermined. The associated features of  disorder leading to severe visual impairment. The carbohydrate  some patients are tremor of hands or signs of spno-cerebellar ataxia  sulfotransferase 6 (CHST6) gene, which encodes the corneal N- or both. We have curried out linkage analysis for some CMT loci to  acetylglucosamine 6-O-sulfotransferase on 16q22 has been identiÜed  established disease type in this family. The D1
S2663 ; D1
S2667 ;  as a causative gene for MCD. We screened the CHST6 gene for  D1
S450 ; D1
S228  markers were investigated for CMT2A; D8
S136 ;  mutations in Iranian patients with MCD, in order to determine the  NEFL-CA - for CMT2E; D7
S2490 ; D7
S2470 ; D7
S675  - for CMT2F.  range of pathogenic mutations. Genomic DNA was extract from  All these loci as well as MPZ locus and gene and CMT1A locus were  peripheral blood leukocytes of 14 patients with MCD. The coding  excluded as disease locus in this family. The investigation other CMT  regions of the CHST6 gene were ampliÜed using three pairs of  loci are in progress now but we suggesting the presence of additional  primers and ampliÜed products were directly sequenced. Mutation  CMT locus in this family. analysis of the CHST6 coding region identiÜed 10 different mutations  in 14 Iranian patients with MCD. We found new heterozygote  
P0723 . Detection of mutations ȘF508, 2183AA>G, 574delA,  mutation in 
C1166 G mutation in CHST6 gene by Sequencing.  D110H, R334W, 2043delG in Iranian Cystic Fibrosis by ARMS- We suggest that sequencing technique is the best method for the  PCR population, which we do not know much about genetic background. M. H. Darvishi1, T. Hamzehloei1, M. Karimi1, A. Khatami2;  
P0726 . Molecular analysis of CFTR gene mutations in Iranian CF  1Pasteur institute of iran,biotechnology department, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  patients Republic of), 2Emam Khomini Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). R. Alibakhshi1,2, M. Zamani1;  Cystic Fibrosis is an autosomal disorder caused by mutations in  the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator(CFTR)  1Dept of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Tehran University of Medical  gene,which may cause a common lethal disease. Since isolation of  Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of), 2Dept of Biochemistry,  the gene more than 1000 mutations have been reported to the Cystic  Faculty of Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah,  Fibrosis Analysis Consortium. The frequency of these mutations  Iran (Islamic Republic of). varies in different populations. IdentiÜcation of mutations causing  Cystic Übrosis (CF) is a common autosomal recessive disorder  Cystic Fibrosis in the Iranian population is essential for assessment  caused by mutations in the cystic Übrosis transmembrane  of the molecular basis of CF in Iran and development of strategies  conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. More than 1000 mutations  for prental diagnosis and genetic counseling. We have previously  and 200 different polymorphisms have been reported in the CFTR Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 241 gene. It has been recognized as the most lethal genetic disease and  exonic regions and the other patients in the intronic region. frequently causing death in children. Founded exonic mutations in patients were Gl0l95A in exon 13,  The frequency of CF mutations is not known in Iranian population. To  A10419C in exon14, 
C13430 T, 
C13978 A in exon 19. identify Iranian common CF mutations, we have studied 50 Iranian  Further study in patientÓs families needs to reveal the role of these  CF patients. All affected individuals were unrelated and diagnosed as  mutations. having CF according to the world health organization criteria (WHO).  It seems that mutation diagnosis in MYH7 gene can give us a good  The DNA of patients was isolated from blood cells by the salting out  prognosis to prevent sudden death of affected ones. method. All patients were screened for 8 CFTR gene mutations which  are common in European population by using allele speciÜc PCR  
P0729 . IdentiÜcation and sizing of GAA trinucleotide repeat  technique. The results showed that frequencies of these mutations  expansion of FridreichÒs Ataxia in 15 Iranian patients in Iranian are different than European population. In ȘF508, the  M. Shafa Shariat Panahi, M. Houshmand;  frequency was decrease to 12 percent as compared with 66 percent  National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  in the European, while, the frequency of N1303K increased to 5 %  Republic of). as compared with 1.5% in the European. However, we increased the  FriedreichÓs ataxia is a neurodegenerative disorder whose clinical  number of the samples to 100 and our results will give more accurate  diagnostic criteria for typical cases include a) early onset age, b)  results in the number and the frequency of mutations in Iranian  autosomal recessive inheritance c) progressive ataxia of limbs and  population.  gait and d)absence of lower limb tendon reÝexes. It is the commonest  genetic cause of ataxia and is associated with the expansion of a  
P0727 . Germline deletion of the SH2D1A gene in a Russian  GAA repeat in intron 1 of the frataxin gene. Approximately 96% of  family. patients are homozygous for this expansion mutation with 4% being  E. V. Zaklyazminskaya, V. M. Kozlova, A. V. Polyakov;  compound heterozygotes for the repeat expansion and a point  Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutation. X-linked limpoproliferative syndrome (XLP, DuncanÓs disease) is a  We studied 15 Iranian patients (9 females and 6 males) from 7  rare inherited disorder characterised by a defective immune response  unrelated families. DNA from each patient was extracted and  to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. The gene responsible for XLP  frequency and length of (GAA)  repeat in the Ürst intron of the  n has been identiÜed as the four-exon SH2D1A gene encoding a 128- gene FRDA was analyzed using a long-Range PCR test. Also we  amino-acid protein. This protein acts as a regulator of at least two  investigated impact of GAA size on neurological Ündings, age of  signal transduction pathways initiated by the cell surface molecules  onset and disease development. SLAM and 2B4. The most frequent types of mutations are genomic  Homozygous GAA expansion was found in 12 cases (80 %) all typical  and intragenic deletions. cases. In 3 cases (20 %), no expansion was observed, ruling out  We studied DNA of 1 affected male. Twelve-years-old patient died  the diagnosis of FriedreichÒs ataxia. In cases with GAA expansions,  due to fatal EPV infection. Proband had fever, virus-associated  ataxia, scoliosis and pes cavus, cardiac abnormalities and some  lymphohistiocytosis, aplastic anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, hepatic  neurological Ündings occurred more frequently than in our patients  failure. Diagnosis XLP was conÜrmed post-mortem using molecular  without GAA expansion. Molecular analysis was imperative for  genetic methods. diagnosis of FriedreichÒs ataxia, not only for typical cases, but also  DNA was extracted from post-mortem histological sample conserved  for atypical ones. Diagnosis bases only on clinical Ündings is limited,  by parafÜn and blood samples. PCR products of 1-4 exons of the  however, it aids in better screening for suspected cases that should  SH2D1A and microcatellite marker in the 2 intron of the same gene  be tested. were ampliÜed using original primers. We identiÜed complete deletion  of SH2D1A gene in probandÓs DNA. ProbandÓs mother and her sister  
P0730 . Molecular studies on prevalence of LHON primary point  had two copies of SH2D1A. Using microsatellite polymorphic markers  mutations in Iranian patients we found that deletion has been located between Xq27 and Xq13.  F. Sharifpanah1, A. Tabasi A2, S. Lavasani1, M. Houshmand1;  This is the Ürst case of molecular diagnostics of the DuncanÓs disease  1National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  in Russia. Republic of), 2Farabi Eye Hospital, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally form of  
P0728 . Investigation on mutations of MYH7 gene in Iranian  central visual loss that occurs sub acutely in young persons. The aim  Hypertrophy cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients of this study was to deÜne the prevalence of a panel of mitochondrial  M. Montazeri1, M. Ghani Kakhki1, G. Estahbanati1, G. Estahbanati2, D. Farhud3,  DNA (mtDNA) mutations associated with Leber Hereditary Optic  F. Nouhi4, M. Peyghambari2, N. Givtaj2, M. Houshmand1;  Neuropathy (LHON) in Iranian LHON population. We studied four  1National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  well-known LHON associated primary point mutations (at nucleotide  Republic of), 2Heart Hospital (Shaheed Rajaei), Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic  positions 11778, 3460, 14484 and 14459) in 35 Iranian LHON  of), 3Tehran University of medical Sciences, School of public Health, Tehran,  patients. On the basis of our study 11 affected patients were positive  Iran (Islamic Republic of), 4Heart Hospital (Shaheed Rajaei),, Tehran, Iran  for one of four primary LHON point mutation, 10 patients were males  (Islamic Republic of). (91%) and one was female (9%). The G11778A was found in all the  Hypertrophy cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic disorder typically  females (100%) of the patientÓs family and no one showed the LHON  inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with variable pen trance  phenotypes. We were detected 72% for the G11778A mutation. 14%  and variable expressivities. The disorder has been estimated to occur  for the G3460A mutation, 7% for the G14459A point mutation and  in 0.05-0.2% of the population. the 7% for the T14484C point mutation in our patients. Our results  Mortality rate for individuals with HCM is 4% per year. In this study,  showed similarity of Iranian LHON families with Russian, European  we vest igated on 50 blood samples . Our investigation is focused on  and North American. So, 10 new point mutations were detected in the  mutation detection in bMHC gene in exons that have more common  rest of patients who had not any primary LHON point mutations in hot  mutation. PCR is done by 13F and 15R primers and also by 19F and  spot region for LHON disease (ND6 gene). 21R primers to amplify respectively 847bp and 799bp fragments.  These amplimers were sent for sequencing. Other exons which have  
P0731 . Detection in mtDNA deletion in infertile men. more common mutation like exons 13, 14 15, 19, 20 and 21 and then  S. Mirzaei1, F. Alkandari2, M. Houshmand1, M. Shafa Shariatpanahi1, L.  would be sequenced. If there is high-risk mutation in the patientÓs  Bastaki1;  family they would be referred to cardiologists for implanting ICD or  1National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  drug therapy. In This study 52 HCM affected patients have been  Republic of), 2Genetic Center, Maternity Hospital, Kuwait., Tehran, Iran (Islamic  evaluated for mutations in exon 13-14-15-19-20-21 of MCH7gene  Republic of). with the aid of PCR and sequencing. Mitochondrion is an intracellular of organelle that present between  Result showed that 14 of 52 patients had mutation after study their  10 to1000 in every cell. Mitochondrion contains a double - strand  sequencing chromatogram. Four of these 14 patients had mutation in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 242 circular DNA with 16,569 nucleotide pairs. Every mitochondrion has  consanguinity marriage in this region, we thought the frequency of  2 - 10 mtDNA copies. The important role of mitochondria is energy  this disease will be more than expected amount for this geographical  production. This energy was produced by oxidative phosphorylation  region. reaction. There are 75 - 100 numbers of mitochondria in midpiece  region of sperm. The role of these mitochondria is ATP producing for  
P0734 . CFTR mutations in Ecuador sperm motility and mobility, which is important for fertilization. MtDNA  R. I. Burgos Gal\x86rraga, J. C. Ruiz-Cabezas;  mutations cause difÜcult in energy producing of process and results  SOLCA, Guayaquil, Ecuador. disorder in motility of sperm. Deletion in mtDNA of 100 infertile men  Cystic Übrosis is a common hereditary recessive disease that affects  were investigated by standard and multiple PCR. We were found 3  2500 of new born in Caucasoid population. In Ecuador there is only  patients with mitochondrial deletions. The deletion sizes were 7Kb  one report for DF508 mutation in 20 patients with cystic Übrosis. In  Break point of deletions was according to sequencing. Southern blot  this group it was described an allelic frequency of this mutation of 26  analysis needs to detect the percentage of deleted mtDNA in those  % using Innolipa CF9. patients. The present study analyzed 60 patients with cystic Übrosis diagnosed  at the two principal cities in Ecuador, Quito and Guayaquil. There  
P0732 . Isolation of three novel disease genes indicate  are many techniques for analyzing CFTR gene mutations, some of  heterogeneity but clustering of XLMR genes in the Xp21.1-11.21  them designed for a speciÜc area. This work used the ASO technique  region (Innolipa). A. Meindl1,2, C. Lenski1, G. Wen3, M. Platzer3, S. Engert1, H. Hellebrand1,2, F.  This is the Ürst screening to detect CFTR gene mutation in our  Kooy4, R. E. Stevenson5, G. Nguyen6, C. E. Schwartz5, J. Ramser1,2;  country, we had two objectives: to determine percentage of already  1Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 2Technical University, Mu- described mutations and to identify new mutations in order to  nich, Germany, 3Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, Germany, 4Univer- design the best test to permit in the future a rapid screening in our  sity of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood,  population. SC, United States, 6College de France, Paris, France. With this method, we detected 59,8% of mutant alleles (DF508 35%,  Based on a systematic screening approach within the scope of the  G85E 15%, G551D 3,3%, G542X 3,3%, N1303K 1,6%, R334W  DHG
P2  project, we identiÜed three novel disease genes causing both  1,6%). The unknown mutations are being studied using DGGE  syndromic and nonsyndromic forms of X-linked mental retardation  technique and until now the most polymorphic zone is exon 6, but the  (XLMR). MRX9, a large Belgian family with mild to severe non- sequences are not yet ready. syndromic mental retardation, was found to have a mutation in a  Mutations Percentage human homologue of the bacterial 23S-rRNA methyltransferase  DF508 35% Ftsj, FTSJ1. The mutation is located in the conserved acceptor  G85E 15% splice site of intron 3 (IV
S3 -2A>G) and results in the skipping of  G551D 3,3% exon 4 and the introduction of a stop codon in exon 5. In E. coli Ftsj  G542X 3,3% could be associated with ribosomal stability. A family with mental  N1303K 1,6% retardation and epilepsy (XMRE) was found to have a mutation in  R334W 1,6% a putative exonic splice enhancer site for the AT
P6 A
P2  gene (see  Percentage of mutant alleles 59,8% Ramser et al.). Additionally the original Renpenning syndrome family,  characterized by short stature, microcephaly and XLMR, was found  
P0735 . Osteopontin gene mutation screening in patients with  to have a mutation in exon 5 of PQB
P1  gene (see Schwartz et al.). urolithiasis The idea that XLMR exhibits profound heterogeneity with a clustering  B. Gogebakan1, A. Arslan1, K. Sarica2, M. Canturk1, Y. Z. Igci1, N.  of disease genes in Xp11.4-11.21 is supported by the lack of  Buyukberber1, F. Yagcò2, E. A. Cakmak1, C. Yurtseven2, S. Gorucu1;  mutations in these three genes in many other linked families and in  1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Department  two other recently identiÜed XLMR genes: ZNF41 and ZNF81. Our  of Urology, Medical Faculty, Gaziantep University, Gaziantep, Turkey. data also indicate that except for PQB
P1  or ARX, most XLMR genes  Osteopontin (Opn) is multifunctional molecule which is involved in  are rarely mutated in linked families. Nonetheless, the identiÜcation of  biomineralizatin, leucocyte function, leucocyte recruitment, inducible  FTSJ1, AT
P6 A
P2  and PQB
P1  expand the pathways associated with  nitric oxide syntheses (iNOS) in both macrophage and primary renal  XLMR and their functional characterization should elucidate novel  tubular epithelial cells, cell survival, wound repairement, and tumor  mechanisms in cognitive development. invasion and metastatic spread. Cells bind Opn through integrin  receptors. Integrin binding may be RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) dependent  
P0733 . Molecular analysis of the (CAG)n repeat causing  or independent via SVVGLA (Ser-Val-Val-Tyr-Gly-Leu-Arg) motif.  HuntingtonÒs disease in 34 Iranian families. Familial and sporadic urolithiasis patients including control group  M. H. Sanati1, F. Hormozian1, M. Houshmand1, R. Ghiasvand2, M. M. Banoie1;  were investigated by SSCP analysis for Opn gene locus. Opn gene  1National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  is located on chromosome 4q13 and consists of 7 exons. The  Republic of), 2Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). nucleotide sequence between 3455-9445 bp is the coding region.  We have analyzed the distribution of CAG and adjacent polymorphic  The mutation screening which is the part of ongoing work, showed  CCG repeats in 71 Iranian individuals (34 patients and 37 unaffected  deviation in mobilities between 1575-1830 bp (Ost
P6 ), 2125-2290  family members) belonging to 31 unrelated families thought to  bp (OstP), and 9015-9371 bp (OstEx7a). Among the Üve mutations  segregate HD. We found one expanded CAG allele in 22 individuals  two in Ost
P6 , one in OstP, and two in OstEx7a region, only one in  (65%) belonging to 21 unrelated families. In these HD patients,  OstP region can be suspected for urolithiasis, because others were  expanded alleles varied from 40 to 83 CAG units and normal alleles  also either observed in or found control group. OstP region is the  varied from 13 to 36 CAGs. A signiÜcant negative correlation between  binding region of 
E4 TF1 (nuclear respiratory factor-2 subunit beta 1),  age at onset of symptoms and size of the expanded CAG allele  
E2 A (basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor), SP-1 (transcription  was found (r= - 0.51; p=0. 1); however, the size of the expanded  factor), AP-1 (transcription factor binding DNA-site), Ets1 (
E26  avian  CAG repeat could explain only about 26% of the variability in age  leukemia oncogene 1,5Ódomain), and TATA box. at onset (r2=0.26). In addition, we genotyped 25 unrelated control  individuals (total of 50 alleles) and found normal CAG repeats varying  
P0736 . Unexpected high frequency of somatic mosaicism  from 10 to 34 units. In conclusion, our results showed that not all  in patients with NF1 microdeletions caused by non-allelic  patients with the áHDÐ phenotype carried the expansion at the IT15  recombination between low copy repeats (LCRs) gene. Therefore, molecular conÜrmation of the clinical diagnosis in  H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1, L. Kluwe2, C. A. Sandig1, K. Wimmer3, U. Kramer4, A.  HD should be sought in all suspected patients, making it possible  Peyrl5, D. E. Jenne6, V. F. Mautner7;  for adequate genetic counseling. This Study is the Ürst report of  1University of Ulm, Department of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Laboratory  molecular diagnosis of Huntington disease among Iranian population  for Tumor Biology and Development Disorders, Department of Maxillofacial  and maybe in Middle East and with regard to high frequency of  Surgery, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Depart-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 243 ment of Medical Biology, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 4St. Anna  Hereditary Hyperferritinaemia cataract syndrome (OMIM #600866)  ChildrenÒs Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 5St. Anna ChildrenÒs Hospital, Vienna,  is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by persistently  Vienna, Austria, 6Max-Planck-Institute of Neurobiology, Department of Neuroim- high levels of serum ferritin not related to iron overload and by  munology, Martinsried, Martinsried, Germany, 7Neurology Department, Klinikum  bilateral nuclear cataract that arises at different ages. It is caused by  Nord, Hamburg-Ochsenzoll, Hamburg, Germany. mutations in the iron- responsive element (IRE) located in the 5-prime  The importance of low copy repeats (LCRs) as mediators of  non coding region of the ferritin light-chain gene. Several different  erroneous meiotic recombination generating constitutional  mutations, able to interfere with the afÜnity binding, at mRNA level,  chromosome rearrangements is well established. However, the  between IRE and iron regulatory proteins (IRPs), with consequent  signiÜcance and frequency of somatic recombination between  constitutive up-regulation of ferritin light-chain, have been described  LCRs is not clear. We observed an unexpected high frequency of  to date. mosaicism in patients with NF1 microdeletions caused by somatic  Genotype-phenotype correlation have been established, but it only  recombination between LCRs in the NF1 gene region. In 7 of 19  partially explains the marked phenotypic variability observed in the  patients investigated (37%), mosaicism of normal cells and those  disorder. with NF1 microdeletions was detected. Our studies also show that  We have identiÜed the novel 29C-G mutation in the IRE of the L- NF1 microdeletions are divided in two major subgroups with respect  ferritin gene in two unrelated Italian individuals. The Ürst patient is  to the breakpoints within the LCRs: In 11 of 19 deletions (58%),  a 45 year old man with serum ferritin levels of 550- 850 Ⱥg/l and  the breakpoints map to the WI-12393-derived LCR subregion.  bilateral ÐpulverulentÑ asyntomatic cataract. The second patient is a  Deletions of this type span 1.4 Mb and include 14 genes inclusive of  boy, aged 7, referred for persistent hyperferritinaemia (520-600 Ⱥg/l),  the NF1 gene. The second type of NF1 microdeletion, observed in  in whom ophthalmological evaluations have not revealed to date the  8 of the 19 cases (42%), has breakpoints in the JJAZ1 sequences  presence of lens opacities. Both the cases are apparently sporadic. within the LCRs. Deletions of this type (class II) encompass 1.2  The 29C-G substitution involves an highly conserved, paired cytosine  Mb and span 13 genes. Using somatic cell hybrids that contain  located in one of the lower stems of the IRE structure, below the  only one recombinant LCR, we mapped the breaks within the  region where recurrent mutations are present. It seems to act as a  JJAZ1 sequences. Astonishingly, in the majority (85%) of patients  ÐmildÑ mutation being associated with moderate increase of serum  with mosaicism, the deletions belong to class II. Therefore, the  ferritin and if present, with subclinical not very precocious cataract. JJAZ1 gene is a preferential target for strand exchange in somatic  recombinations leading to deletions of 17q11.2. The high rate of  
P0739 . IdentiÜcation DelA3314 in mitochondrial ND1 gene in  mosaicism in NF1 microdeletions has to be considered in the context  diabetic type 2 patients of genotype/phenotype correlations and also implies an important  G. Dorraj1, B. Larijani2, F. Mirzajani1, M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1;  role of the NF1 LCRs in somatic rearrangements. 1National Research Center forGenetic &Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran (Islamic  Republic of), 2, Endocrinology and Metabolism research Center, Shariati  
P0737 . A novel GDA
P1  mutation 439delA is associated with  Hospital, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Iran (Islamic Republic of). autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease MtDNA has 16.5 kb that carries 37 genes, including 2 RNAs, 22  P. Nicolaou1, D. M. Georgiou1, P. Koutsou1, J. Murphy2, D. Chitayat2, K.  tRNAs, and 13 polypeptide subunits of enzymes interfering with the  Christodoulou1;  oxidative phosphorylation. There is a variant of mtDNA mutations  1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The  which is A3243G tRNA(leu). Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. While high level (90%) of the A3243G mutation associated with  Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most common form of  MELAS but low level (50%) of this mutation related to diabetes  inherited motor and sensory neuropathy. CMT has been classiÜed  mellitus type 2 with or without Deafness. 5kb mtDNA deletion has  into two main types, the demyelinating and the axonal, based  been also reported in the patientÓs with diabetes mellitus type 2. We  on neurophysiological and neuropathological criteria. It may be  assessed the frequency of the A3243G and 5kb mtDNA deletion in  inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive (AR) or  Iranian diabetes mellitus type 2. DNA was extracted form blood of  an X-linked form. Seven loci/genes have thus far been identiÜed for  140 diabetic type 2 patients. Insulin rate of the patients were also  the demyelinating AR-CMT disease. These are: CMT4A mapped  tested. PCR-RFLP and SSCP methods were used to detect the  on chromosome 8q13-q21.1, caused by mutations in the GDA
P1   A3243G or other mutations in the mitochondrial tRNA(leu) gene. gene; CMT4B1 on 11q22, caused by MTMR2 mutations; CMT4B2 on  Standard and multiplex PCR were used to detect to 5kb deletion in  11p15, caused by SBF2 gene mutations; CMT4C on 5q32, caused  patientÓs mtDNA. We could not identify any deletion or A3243G point  by KIAA1985 mutations; CMT4D on 8q24.3, caused by mutations in  mutation in our cases. SSCP results showed new pattern of PCR  the NDRG1 gene; CMT4E on 10q21.1-q22.1, associated with EGR2  product in 7 patients. Sequencing was done by 3700 ABI capillary  mutations; and CMT4F on 19q13.1-q13.2, associated with PRX  system. An ÐAÑ nucleotide deletion in 3314 position was detected in  mutations. mitochondrial ND I gene. So farÓ this deletion has not been reported. We describe a consanguineous AR-CMT family of Iranian descent  with two affected young girls. The proband with disease onset at 26/12  
P0740 . Spectrum of mutations and single-nucleotide  showed evidence of a demyelinating neuropathy by electrophysiological  polymorphisms in Long-QT Syndrome genes KCNQ1, KCNH2  and neuropathological studies, whereas her younger sister with disease  and KCN
E1 . onset at 2 years old showed electrophysiological evidence of an axonal  R. Gaillyov\x861, J. Kadlecov\x861, T. Novotnć2, M. ÿiĀ\x86kov\x862, O. Toman2, B.  neuropathy. We linked the family to the CMT4A locus and identiÜed a  Semr\x86d2;  novel GDA
P1  mutation (439delA) that is associated with the disease.  1University Hospital Brno, Dept.of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic,  The above mutation results in an alteration in GDA
P1  from amino acid  2University Hospital Brno, Dept.of Cardiology, Brno, Czech Republic. 147 and it is predicted that a premature termination occurs subsequent  The Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited cardiac disorder  to amino acid 151. in which ventricular tachyarrhytmias predispose affected individuals  This study was Ünancially supported by the Muscular Dystrophy  to syncope, seizures, and sudden death. Ventricular repolarization  Association (USA). involves several distinct currents controlled by a number of different  ion channels. The defect in any of these channel genes can result in  
P0738 . Molecular analysis of the L-ferritin 5ÓUTR:  altered repolarization leading to LQTS. Presently six different genetic  identiÜcation of a novel mutation in two unrelated hereditary  loci are associated with LQTS: LQT1 (KCNQ1/11p15.5), LQT2  hyperferritinaemia cataract syndrome cases (KCNH2/7q35-36), LQT3 (SCN5A/3p21-24), LQT4 (Ankyrin-B/4q25- S. Majore1, A. Crisi1, B. M. Ricerca2, R. Rinaldi1, F. Binni1, M. J. Calvani3, P.  27), LQT5 (KCN
E1 /21q22.1-22.2) and LQT6 (KCN
E2 /21q22.1).  Grammatico1;  Mutations in potassium-channel genes KCNQ1 and KCNH2 are the  1Medical Genetics, University ÐLa SapienzaÑ, S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital,  most common cases of the LQTS. Rome, Italy, 2Hematological Unit, Sacro Cuore University, Rome, Italy,  We used single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis  3Pediatric Unit, S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy. to screen all exons of KCNQ1, KCNH2 and KCN
E1  gene in group Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 244 of unrelated Czech LQT patients. SSCP analyses were followed by  leading from Notch3 mutations to the CADASIL phenotype. sequency analyses of abberant conformers. DNA sequence analyses determined one frameshift mutation  
P0743 . Genetic characterization of NBS-like patients defective in  (
P631 fsX650) and three missense mutations (G325R, G350A  double strand breaks repair mechanism and T309I) of KCNQ1 gene. Mutations T309I and G350A were  M. Salvatore1, A. di Masi2, A. Antoccia2, F. Berardinelli2, A. Plebani3, C. Fiorini3,  novel. Mutation analyses of KCNH2 gene revealed three missense  D. Taruscio1, C. Tanzarella2;  mutations: R534C, A448T and A228V. Mutations A448T and A228V  1Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e Neuroscienze,Istituto Superiore di Sanit\x87,  have not been published yet. We also identiÜed eight different single- Roma, Italy, 2Department of Biology, University ÐRoma TreÑ, Rome, Italy,  nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in KCNQ1 and KCNH2 and two  3Clinica Pediatrica e Istituto Angelo Novicelli, Brescia, Italy. variants of introns in KCNH2 gene. The screening for mutations in the  We studied lymphoblastoid cell lines from 6 Njiemegen breakage  KCN
E1  gene revealed rare amino acid variants G38S and D85N. syndrome - like Italian patients with growth delay, immunodeÜciency  The potential role of rare polymorfhisms and rare allelic variants  and microcephaly. Defect in the repair of DNA double strand breaks  in the ion channels remains to be clariÜed with respect to drug  (DSBs) can lead to profound immunodeÜciencies. interactions and susceptibility to arrhytmia and sudden death in  Mutations in the Nbs1 gene lead to the Nijmegen breakage syndrome  common population. (NBS), an autosomic recessive disorder characterised by a bird- This work is supported by grant (IGA NA/ 7424-3) like face, immunodeÜciency, high frequency of malignancies,  chromosome instability, sensitivity to ionising radiation and abnormal  
P0741 . Segregation of a splice acceptor mutation IV
S3 -9 in the  cell-cycle checkpoints. CO
L1 A1 gene in a three generation OI type I family We studied cellular and molecular characteristics of our LCLs. H. Klein1, C. Marschall1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2, D. Wieczorek2, K. Mayer1;  PCR ampliÜcation of exon 6 showed the presence of both copies  1Laboratory for Medical Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 2Institute of Human  of the NB
S1  gene in all the investigated individuals. Furthermore,  Genetics, University Hospital, Essen, Germany. normal levels of proteins involved in the repair of DSBs (M/N/R  Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder of bone  complex, Lig IV, XRC
C4 ) were detected. Co-immunoprecipitation  formation resulting in brittle bones. More than 90% of patients with  assay conÜrmed the capability to form a proÜcient M/N/R complex. OI are thought to have mutations in the CO
L1 A1 or CO
L1 A2 genes  Radiosensitivity of some of the LCLs analysed was shown by the  coding for Type I procollagen. About two thirds of the mutations  induction of chromosome aberrations in a G2-phase assay. result in substitutions of glycin in the triple-helix forming domain.  After cells irradiation, p53 proÜciency in DNA-damage response  The remaining third is composed of frame shift and splice site  pathway was ascertained by immunoblotting either with a p53  mutations. We report the case of a patient with the mild form of OI  antibody or a speciÜc antibody for the phosphorylated form p53-p- type I lacking any classical mutation but exhibiting two potential splice  Ser15. site mutations identiÜed by complete sequencing of both genes:  Experiments are in progress to measure DSBs rejoining by means  IV
S12 +5A>T in the CO
L1 A2 gene and IV
S3 -9A>G in CO
L1 A1. Both  of pulsed-Üeld gel electrophoresis and more than hundred genes  changes do not alter highly conserved residues in intronic splice  involved in the response to DNA- DSBs will be analysed by means of  sequences. RT-PCR analysis of transcripts of a Übroblast culture  gene-array assay. Dissection of the clinical and cellular phenotype of  of the patient revealed an aberrant CO
L1 A1 splice product with an  these as well as future NBS-like patients will help to identify a subset  insertion of the last 8 bp of intron 3 resulting in a translational frame  of individuals with the NBS clinical phenotype. shift. This is due to the creation of an alternative 3Ó splice acceptor  Financially supported by the Project áGenetic tests: from research to  site in intron 3 by the single-base change at position -9. In addition,  clinicsÐ-ISS the analysis of several affected and unaffected family members  showed segregation of the CO
L1 A1 IV
S3 -9 change with the disease  
P0744 . Molecular study of ABCA4 gene on Spanish patients with  in three generations and supported the hypothesis that IV
S3 -9A>G  retinal dystrophies: preliminary results. represents the disease causing CO
L1 A1 mutation. D. Valverde1, R. Riveiro2, A. Queipo2, C. Ayuso2;  1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain. 
P0742 . A novel Notch3 gene mutation not involving a cysteine  Mutations in ABCA4 gene are associated to Üve distinct phenotypes:  residue in an Italian family with CADASIL Stargardt disease, fundus Ýavimaculatus, retinitis pigmentosa, cone- R. Mazzei, F. L. Conforti, T. Sprovieri, C. Ungaro, G. Di Palma, A. Patitucci, O.  rod dystrophy and age related macular degeneration. Direct analysis  Gallo, A. Magariello, A. Gabriele, M. Muglia;  of ABCA4 gene has important parameters to consider: Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche CNR, Mangone, Italy. - extraordinary allelic heterogenity (with low frequency for each  Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts  mutation) and leucoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a hereditary cerebrovascular  - variable rate of mutation (25-80%) disease leading to accumulating neurologic deÜcits and dementia.  - the large size of the gene (50 exons, 6800 pb open-reading-frame) CADASIL usually presents with early onset strokes in 43% of  68 Spanish patients with Retinal Dystrophies were screened for  patients. Additional manifestations include progressive subcortical  mutations in ABCA4 using genechip (Asperbio Ltd), followed by  dementia in 6%, psychiatric disturbances in 9%, and migraine in  haplotype analyses in some cases. 40%. Epilepsy has been reported in 2-10% of patients, most often  The gene chip could establish 54 disease-associated alleles out of  following strokes. 136 chromosomes (40%). We found 5 complex alleles. The most  CADASIL has been linked to nucleotide substitutions and deletions in  frequent reported allele, 5882G>A was observed in similar proportion  the Notch3 gene. CADASIL is caused by single missense mutations,  as in other populations (4, 41%), however the most frequent  small in-frame deletions, or splice site mutations in the Notch3  mutation in our study was 3386G>T with 8,82% of the allele disease  gene encoding a transmembrane receptor. All previously reported  associated. mutations resulted in an odd number of cysteine residues within  We detected both disease-associated ABCA4 alleles in 26%, one  one of the 34 epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like repeats in the  allele in 30, 8% and no mutation was found in 42% of the families. extracellular amino-terminal region of the Notch3 receptor. We report  The ABCA4 microarray detects only known variants and is currently  the Ürst evidence of a small deletion, which did not directly involve  expected to detect 56% of the disease-associated alleles in  a cysteine residue, located within the extracellular domain of the  populations of European origin. Notch3 gene causing CADASIL in a family from southern Italy. This  Therefore, for molecular diagnosis purposes, it is necessary to  deletion is predicted to result in a loss of four amino acids (88-91)  correct the mutation rate detection adjusted to Spanish frequencies  segregated with the neurologic and clinical phenotype suggesting  for any of the associated phenotypes. The combination of this method  that it is the causative mutation in the our study family. with other screening mutation methods or linkage family studies, in  The current Ündings demonstrate that the mutations not involving  addition to the inclusion of more mutations, will considerably increase  the cysteine residue in the Notch3 gene can cause CADASIL. This  the sensitivity to detect disease associated alleles. Ünding provides new clues for the investigation of the mechanism Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 245 
P0745 . EfÜcient detection of heterozygous intragenic ZFHX1B  
P0747 . Mutational Screening of the Notch3 Gene in Patients from  deletions by semi-quantitative Ýuorescent multiplex PCR  Southern Italy Affected by CADASIL: IdentiÜcation of Four Novel  improves molecular diagnosis of Mowat-Wilson syndrome Pathogenic Mutations F. Dastot-Le Moal1, F. Niel1, D. Mowat2, M. Goossens1;  C. Ungaro, T. Sprovieri, F. L. Conforti, A. Magariello, G. Di Palma, A. Patitucci,  1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, and INSERM U468, H\x98pital Henri Mondor,  O. Gallo, P. Peluso, A. Gabriele, M. Muglia, R. Mazzei;  Creteil, France, 2Department of Medical Genetics, The Sydney ChildrenÓs  Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche CNR, Mangone, Italy. Hospital, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts  Heterozygous mutations or deletions involving ZFHX1B (SI
P1 ) have  and Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL; MIM#125310) is a late-onset  recently been found to cause one form of syndromic Hirschsprung  syndrome characterized by subcortical ischemic strokes, attacks of  disease (HSCR), associated with microcephaly, mental retardation,  migraine with aura, and vascular dementia. Subcortical dementia,  and distinctive facial features, called Mowat-Wilson syndrome.  in all cases associated with pseudobulbar palsy, is the second  Patients with the characteristic facial phenotype and severe mental  commonest clinical manifestation of CADASIL. All individuals, both  retardation, but without HSCR, have also been shown to have  symptomatic and asymptomatic, have prominent signal abnormalities  mutations in this gene. We have so far identiÜed 40 truncating  on brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). mutations in more than one hundred patients studied. There are  CADASIL is caused by mutations in the Notch3 gene encoding a  patients presenting with the characteristic phenotype, who are  transmembrane receptor. The contribution of Notch3 mutations to the  likely to have Mowat-Wilson syndrome, but who do not display any  italian population incidence of CADASIL was unknown. In the present  ZFHX1B intragenic point mutations or another major chromosomal  study, twenty-Üve patients from 10 families of South Italy have  abnormalities at the 2q22-23 locus. Indeed, heterozygous intragenic  been clinically examined and submitted to neuroimaging studies.  deletions escape the routine PCR-sequence analysis procedure  Molecular investigation has been performed on 22 of 33 exons of  currently used by most laboratories, and this prompted us to  the Notch3 gene encoding for the extracellular domain, containing  develop a mutation analysis procedure suited to circumvent this  the 34 Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)-like repeats, by DHPLC and  difÜculty. We developed a semi-quantitative Ýuorescent multiplex  following direct sequence. PCR assay (QMF-PCR) in which a unique multiplex Ýuorescent  Ten pathogenic mutations have been detected: two in the exon 3  PCR ampliÜcation of all ten ZFHX1B exons is carried out under  (2x R90C), two in the exon 6 (2x R322C), four in the exon 8 (
C428 T,  conditions that allow rapid and reliable quantitative comparison of the  
C428 R, 
C440 S, R449C), one in the exon 10 (G528C), and one in  Ýuorescence of each amplicon in test samples and in controls. Using  the exon 22 (R1231C). Three mutations in the exon 8 and one in  this procedure, we could show that several patients, in which no  the exon 10 are new. All these missense mutations involve gain  mutations were previously found, bear in fact deletions or other small  or loss of a cysteine residue. Furthermore, we detect 14 different  rearrangements within ZFHX1B. More than 50% of ZFHX1B defects  polymorphisms, 7 out of 13 were nonsense substitutions, 5 were  identiÜed so far are insertion/deletion of 1-4 bp. As this efÜcient  amino acid changes, 2 intronic variations. method allows detection of single nucleotide deletion/insertion, it has  now replaced the superseded PCR-sequence assay in the strategy  
P0748 . FTSJ1: a novel player in X-linked mental retardation used in our laboratory to study this syndrome. K. Freude1, K. Hoffmann1, L. Jensen1, B. Moser1, V. des Portes2, H. Yntema3,  H. van Bokhoven3, C. Moraine4, J. P. Fryns5, J. Chelly6, J. Gecz7, S. Lenzner1,  
P0746 . Application of a high-resolution subtelomere array in  H. H. Ropers1, V. M. Kalscheuer1;  research and diagnosis. 1Max-Planck-Institut, Berlin, Germany, 2Pediatric Department, Centre  K. Kok1,2, T. Dijkhuizen2, B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, P. van der Vlies1, R. Fehrman2,  Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 3Department of  J. Verheij1, A. van der Veen1, K. Gerssens-Schoorl1, C. Buys2,1;  Human Genetics, University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Services  1Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands,  de G\x8dn\x8dtique-INSERM U316, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 5Center for  2Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, 6Institut Cochin de  Subtelomeric rearrangements are a signiÜcant cause of idiopathic  G\x8dn\x8dtique Moleculaire, CNRS/INSERM, CHU Cochin 75014, Paris, France,  mental retardation, but are often difÜcult to recognize with standard  7Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, WomenÓs and ChildrenÓs  cytogenetic banding techniques. FISH analysis of all subtelomeric  Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. regions is time-consuming and provides no information about the  Non-syndromic X-linked mental retardation (MRX) is a highly  extent of the aberration. As arrayCGH allows for sensitive analysis  heterogeneous condition, and most of the relevant genes are still  of copy number changes, we constructed a high-resolution array  undetected. We have shown that 1/3 of the missing mutations cluster  for the detection of unbalanced subtelomeric rearrangements. The  on the proximal short arm of the X-chromosome (Ropers et al., 2003),  latest version of this array covers the Ürst 5Mb of each subtelomere  and mutation screening of candidate genes from this interval revealed  with 8-12 BAC clones, while the Ürst 1 Mb approximates tiling path  that mutations in the polyglutamine binding protein 1 (PQB
P1 ) gene  resolution. A total of 432 autosomal BACs, 40 chromosome X- can result in syndromic and non-syndromic XLMR (Kalscheuer et  speciÜc, and 3 chromosome Y-speciÜc BACs, all linked to the human  al., 2003). Here we report that FTSJ1, a member of the FtsJ/RrmJ  genome sequence, are present on the array. The obtained data are  family of RNA methyltransferases, is another novel gene for MRX.  analysed with speciÜcally designed software. We present the results  We identiÜed splice site and truncating mutations in three families.  of a validation study on 40 samples of which cytogenetic and FISH  Northern blot analysis of RNAs from affected males revealed a  data were available. As an example illustrating the power of this array,  signiÜcantly lowered expression of mutant FTSJ1 transcripts. One  we present the case of a 20 year-old mentally retarded female patient  of these mutations results in skipping of exon 9, which encodes the  with short stature and dysmorphic features. Cytogenetic analysis  C-terminal part of the methyltransferase fold domain. Transfection  of the patientÓs blood lymphocytes revealed 46,XX,add(3)(p26).  experiments with mutant FTSJ1 showed that deletion of the relevant  FISH, however, revealed loss of the 3p subtelomere and complete  amino acid stretch leads to a markedly change of intracellular  staining with wcp3. ArrayCGH indeed conÜrmed the heterozygous  distribution of the FTSJ1 protein. deletion of the terminal subtelomeric region of chromosome 3p,  We are currently testing additional XLMR families for mutations in  which appeared to be 4 Mb. In addition, the adjacent 1.3-Mb segment  FTSJ1 and are trying to gain more insight into FTSJ1 function. In  appeared to be present in seven copies. Further analyses with a high  yeast, three homologous FTSJ1 proteins are known. The deletion  density chromosome 3-speciÜc array indicated a duplication of the  strains for these genes are presently being used for complementation  subsequent 6-Mb segment. The gain of material probably explains  studies. Furthermore, by performing RNA in situ hybridization  the cytogenetic observations. experiments, we investigate developmental expression patterns of  the FTSJ1 mouse orthologue and of Ýy paralogues.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 246 
P0749 . Aprataxin Mutations in Italian Patients with Ataxia and  patients develop nephropathy in spite of identical or similar LMX1B- Oculomotor Apraxia (AOA) mutations. It is suggested that yet unknown genetic modiÜers in the  L. Chessa1, M. Piane1, M. Scordo2, C. Savio1, I. De Santis1, M. Stegagno1, P. Lulli1; mixed genetic background may inÝuence the renal phenotype of NPS  patients. 1University ÒLa SapienzaÓ, Roma, Italy, 2Careggi Hospital, Firenze, Italy. In an attempt to identify modifying factors of LMX1B action, we  Between the patients referred to our center for Ataxia Telangiectasia  started to characterize the promotor region of the human LMX1B  (AT), about 20% show a ÒvariantÓ phenotype, i.e. absence of  gene and to search for kidney speciÜc regulatory regions. Extensive  telangiectasia, reduced radiohypersensitivity, normal alphafetoprotein  computer based analysis and interspecies sequence comparison  levels, late onset and slow progression of the disease. In most of  using the available genomic sequences of human, mouse, chicken  them, no ATM mutations and normal levels of ATM protein were  and Üsh revealed several conserved regions upstream of exon 1 and  found. within intron 2. From EST-data and RT-PCRs we have evidence that  Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia (AOA) shares with AT many  some of these upstream regions most probably correspond to a novel  of the neurological features but no telangiectasias neither  gene adjacent to LMX1B in antisense direction (ALH). To further  radiohypersensitivity; alphafetoprotein is elevated in AOA type 2  characterize possible regulatory regions, we mapped the transcription  but not in AOA type 1 patients, characterized by hypoalbuminemia  start point of LMX1B by RACE and primer extension analysis. In  followed by hypercholesterolemia. Patients with AOA1 have  silico analysis of the predicted promotor region revealed several  mutations in the aprataxin (APTX) gene, whilst patients with AOA2  evolutionary conserved putative transcription factor binding sites  are mutated in the senataxin (SETX) gene. which are quite common in other known podocyte speciÜc genes,  We studied by DHPLC the exons 5 and 6 of APTX gene in 20  e.g. Nephrin. Usage and further functional characterization of these  suspected AT patients but negative for ATM mutations; they showed  binding sites is in progress. oculomotor apraxia and normal alphafetoprotein levels. In 4 of  them we found APTX mutations in homozygosity; three presented  
P0752 . IdentiÜcation of Genetic Loci Associated with Familial  the described 837G>A base change in exon 6, the fourth a new  Frontotemporal Dementia mutation in exon 5. In another patient a base change not resulting in  L. Benussi1,2, S. Signorini1, R. Ghidoni1, A. Alberici1, L. Barbiero1, E. Feudatari1,  truncation was found; we are now examining 100 controls to exclude  L. Gigola1, F. Nicosia1, A. Paterlini1, T. Strom2, T. Bettecken3, T. Meitinger3, G.  a polymorphism. Noteworthing, all our AOA1 patients presented with  Binetti1;  telangiectasias, suggesting the possibility that the disease could be  more clinically heterogeneous than believed. 1IRCCS Centro San Giovanni di Dio- Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy, 2Institute of  Human Genetic, GSF- Munchen, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetic, GSF-  
P0750 . Analysis of Connexin 26 (GJB2) and Other Important  Muenchen, Germany. Gene Mutations in Turkish Families with Consanguineous  Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a frequent cause of dementia,  Marriages: Preliminary Findings accounting for 8-10% of pre-senile cases. In different clinical series,  S. Isin1, G. Coymak2, F. Akdas2, L. Perroni3, A. Guney1;  20 to 50% of cases have a family history of FTD (FFTD). Mutations  in the MAPT gene are responsible for between 9 to 14% of all  1Marmara University, Medical Faculty, Dept.of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey,  FFTD cases. The genetic cause of the remaining FFTD pedigrees  2Marmara University, Medical Faculty, Dept.of Audiology, Istanbul, Turkey,  is not yet known. Linkage analyses of large pedigrees indicated  3Laboratory of Human Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy. mapping of FTD to four loci. The objective of this project is to identify  It has been shown that the Connexin 26 gene plays the major role  genetic loci associated with FFTD. In order to achieve this aim, we  in the formation of Autosomal Recessive Non-Syndromic Hearing  performed linkage analysis in large pedigrees, which were negative  Loss (ARNSHL). The connexin 26 gene has more than 90 mutations  for MAPT mutations. Four large pedigrees and two small ones  causing ARNSHL. 35delG mutation is responsible from the 70%  have been enrolled in the study. A positive LOD score for markers  of all mutations. In our study we have selected 14 families having  D17
S791  and D17
S951  (2.903, 2.879) could be obtained for the  consanguineous marriage and each family having at least more than  largest pedigree (Brescia-F071), in the region of the MAPT gene.  one deaf child and non of the parents had hearing impairment. We  No deletion or duplication of exon 10 of MAPT gene was present in  performed DNA sequencing for the coding region of the connexin  any of the affected members. In conclusion, we identiÜed a pedigree,  26 gene to all of the 28 deaf patients. Within these 28 deaf children,  Brescia-F071 that, similarly to at least other Üve families described in  4 were homozygous and 1 was heterozygous for 35delG mutation,  literature, display a linkage to chromosome 17q21, in the absence of  2 were homozygous for del
E120  mutation, 1 was heterozygous for  MAPT gene mutations. M163V mutation and 4 were heterozgous for V153I polymorphism.  In addition we sequenced the normal hearing family members of the  
P0753 . The Role of GHR mutations in Idiopatic Short Stature patients whom we identiÜed as having mutations As a result, 5 were  E. Bonioli1, M. TaroÓ1, R. Gastaldi1, A. Citana1, R. Bertorelli1, D. A. Coviello2;  heterozygous for 35delG mutation, 2 were heterozygous for del
E120 ,  1 was heterozygous for M163V and 3 were heterozgous for V153I  1Istituto G. Gaslini, Dipartimento di Pediatria, Universit\x87 di Genova, Genoa,  polymorphism. From those which had no connexin 26 mutation we  Italy, 2Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy. have selected 1 deaf patient from such families and sequenced the  The term idiopathic short stature (ISS) describes children with a  5ÓUTR region of the connexin 26 gene and also analysed for the  height of more than two standard deviations below the mean, normal  large deletion in the Conexxin 30 gene but we were not able to Ünd  or slow height velocity, normal birth weight, absence of speciÜc  any mutation. The GJB2 is the most frequently mutated gene in  endocrine abnormalities, and no evidence of chronic physical or  ARNSHL and molecular diagnosis of this gene will give the patient  psychological illness. the opportunity to receive a better counselling In some ISS patients the presence of partial growth hormone (GH)  insensitivity was inferred from the low levels of GH binding protein. 
P0751 . Characterization of the human LMX1B promotor and  As it has been hypothesized that some of the children with diagnosis  search for kidney speciÜc regulatory elements of ISS may bear heterozygous mutations of the GH receptor (GHR),  S. U. Endele, S. Richter, A. Winterpacht;  we analyzed the 9 coding exons of GHR gene in 37 patients with ISS. We identiÜed a novel heterozygous transition T>C of the codon 2  Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,  of aminoacid 162 (144) resulting in the missense mutation V162A  Germany. (V144A). This mutation was not found in 100 control chromosomes.  The Nail-Patella syndrome (NPS) is a rare autosomal-dominant  In one patient we identiÜed in exon 8 a novel transition C>T  disorder characterized by typical skeletal abnormalities and, in  of aminoacid 112 determining the synonimous change 
C112 C  some cases (~50%), nephropathy. Nephropathy is the most serious  (
C94 C). The previously described single nucleotide polymorphism  aspect of NPS since it develops toward end-stage renal disease in  A>G of codon 3 of aminoacid 186 (168) in exon 9 resulting in the  approximately 15% of cases. NPS is caused by heterozygous loss  synonymous change G186G was demonstrated in 22 ISS patients  of function mutations in the LMX1B gene, encoding a member of the  (12 homozygous and 10 heterozygous) and in 23 controls (16  LIM homeodomain protein family. Interestingly, only 50-60% of NPS  homozygous and 7 heterozygous). The relative allele frequency was Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 247 similar in patients and in controls. 
P0756 . A novel missense mutation in Human TTF-2 (FKH
L15 )  Our data suggest that some mutations in the heterozygous state may  gene responsible for Congenital Hypothyroidism have some effect on stature, but since other factors inÝuence the  i. Baròė1, E. Zengin2, A. E. Aròsoy2, E. BattaloĔlu1;  biologic effect of a mutation on linear growth more investigation are  1Bogazici University, Dept of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey,  needed to clarify the role of GHR mutations in ISS. 2Kocaeli University, Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Kocaeli,  Turkey. 
P0754 . Structure-function analysis of bestrophin Congenital Hypothyroidism (CH) is a relatively common congenital  V. Milenkovic, F. Kr\x89mer, B. H. F. Weber;  disorder occurring in about 1 of 3000-4000 live births. Thyroid  Institute of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. dysgenesis (TD) is the most frequent cause of CH (85% of cases)  Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BMD) is an autosomal dominant  with the thyroid either absent, greatly reduced in size or ectopic. disease with juvenile onset that causes loss of visual acuity.  The pathogenesis of TD is as yet unknown, and the disease is  The vitelliform macular dystrophy type 2 (VMD2) gene has been  usually regarded as sporadic with a female predominance. The  associated with BMD and encodes a 585 amino acid transmembrane  data from knockout mice have demonstrated the roles of several  protein termed bestrophin. It is thought to be involved in ion transport  genes in thyroid organogenesis [thyroid transcription factors (TTF- across the basolateral membrane of the retinal pigment epithelium.  1 and TTF-2), Pax 8, and TSH receptor], and their impairment  Mapping of transmembrane topography by N-glycosylation and  has been occasionally reported in CH cases. TTF-2 is a member  insertion of protease cleavage sites suggests that bestrophin  of the forkhead/winged helix-domain protein family and regulates  contains four transmembrane domains (TMDs) with one additional  the transcription of target genes such as thyroglobulin and thyroid  hydrophobic segment immersed into the bilayer and the N- and the  peroxidase. long C-terminal portions facing the cytosol. The vast majority of the  Two missense mutations (A65V and 
S57 N) of human TTF-2 gene  known disease-associated alterations are missense mutations which  have been reported in four patients with CH. Here, we describe a  are non-randomly distributed along the protein clustering near the  CH case homozygous for a novel missense mutation (R102C) in the  predicted TMDs. The mechanism by which the missense mutations  forkhead domain of TTF-2 gene. She was born to consanguineous  cause disease is not clear. parents, with bilateral choanal atresia, cleft palate and spiky hair. Her  In order to understand the molecular pathology of bestrophin a  heterozygous parents were unaffected and 50 control chromosomes  mammalian heterologous expression system was established.  tested negative for the same mutation. The substitution at a highly  Twenty-eight missense mutations together representing the range  conserved residue in the forkhead domain suggests that the mutant  of BMD-associated alterations were generated by site-directed  TTF-2 protein in the patient results in impaired DNA binding and  mutagenesis and were transiently expressed in EBNA 293 cells. In  complete or partial loss of transcriptional function. Interestingly,  addition, the Üve cysteine residues of bestrophin were systematically  thyroid ultrasonography detected a normal thyroid tissue in the  mutated to serine moieties. Immunocytochemical and biochemical  patient. analyses of the mutated proteins are aimed to clarify the inÝuence of  amino acid alterations on the subcellular localization and membrane  
P0757 . HaploinsufÜciency of the SERPINA6 gene is associated  topology. In addition, a series of co-immunoprecipitation experiments  with severe muscle fatigue: First de novo mutation in  with wild type and mutated bestrophin deÜnes the precise region  corticosteroid-binding globulin deÜciency necessary for oligomerization. This study is expected to contribute  J. Meyer, C. Buss, U. Sch\x9elter, D. Hellhammer;  to a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying BMD  University of Trier, Trier, Germany. pathogenesis. Rare variants of the corticosteroid-binding globulin SERPINA6 with  reduced binding afÜnity to cortisol have previously been found in  
P0755 . Deletion of LETM1 - a cause for mitochondrial  very few families. Of these, a 367Asn variant, previously designated  dysfunction in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome patients? ÐCBG LyonÑ by Emptoz-Bonneton and coworkers (2000), was shown  A. Winterpacht1, S. Schlickum1, S. Richter1, J. C. Simpson2, S. U. Endele1;  to be associated with muscle fatigue in two out of three of the known  1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,  homozygote carriers. Heterozygote carriers of the ÐLyonÑ variant were  Germany, 2Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, European Molecular  not described as affected in these families. However, Üve out of 19  Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. carriers of the ÐNullÑ allele of a previously described Trp12-to-Stop  The leucine zipper, EF-hand containing transmembrane protein 1  mutation had Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (Torpy et al., 2001). Here,  (LETM1) has recently been cloned in an attempt to identify genes  we describe a de novo mutation resulting in the ÐLyonÑ variant of  deleted in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS), a microdeletion  the paternal SERPINA6 allele in a 22 years old patient with severe  syndrome characterized by typical facial dysmorphic features, severe  muscle fatigue. Our data strongly suggest that haploinsufÜciency  growth and mental retardation, hypotonia and seizures. LETM1 is  of SERPINA6 due to the Asp367-to-Asn mutation is involved in  deleted in almost all patients with the full phenotype and has recently  pathogenesis of muscular fatigue symptoms. No mutation was found  been suggested as a candidate gene for seizures in WHS patients.  in the patientÓs maternal SERPINA6 allele, therefore, we cannot rule  LETM1 encodes a protein with a transmembrane domain, two  out that environmental modiÜers may contribute to severity of disease  possible EF-hand motifs, a leucine zipper, several coiled-coil regions  in the patient, since his symptoms were frequently induced by stress,  and a putative SAP-domain. Using LETM1-EGFP fusion constructs  and his autonomic and endocrine reactivity to a laboratory stress test  and an anti Letm1 polyclonal antibody we could recently demonstrate  was extremely pronounced, suggesting a synergistic action of stress  that LETM1 is located in the mitochondria. hyper-reactivity and genetic vulnerability. Here, we present further data on putative protein domains of  LETM1 and a detailed sequence comparison of LETM1. LETM1  
P0758 . Protein expression analysis of natural PRO
S1  mutations  is evolutionary conserved throughout the eukaryotic kingdom with  associated with anticoagulant protein S deÜciency a strong conservation of speciÜc protein domains. LETM1 exhibits  B. Hurtado1, M. P\x8drez-Riba1, M. C. Mulero1, P. Garc\x91a de Frutos2, N. Sala1;  homology to the mitochondrial yeast protein MDM38. We observed  1Centre de Gen\x8etica M\x8edica i Molecular - Institut de Recerca Oncol\x97gica  an interesting similarity between the morphology of mitochondria from  (CGMM-IRO), LªHospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Institut de Investigacions  LETM1 overexpressing cells and from the yeast MDM38- ko-strains  Biom\x8ediques de Barcelona-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient\x91Ücas  reported by Dimmer et al. (2002). MDM38 is proposed to be involved  (IIBB-CSIC), Barcelona, Spain. in organelle morphology and our results suggest that in higher  This study was aimed at analysing the mechanism by which different  eukaryotes LETM1 may at least in part exert a similar function. This  natural protein S gene (PRO
S1 ) mutations result in anticoagulant  function might be linked to calcium homeostasis in higher eukaryotes  protein S (PS) deÜciency and thrombosis. With this purpose 4  since, in contrast to yeast, LETM1 contains EF-hand motifs. We  mutations associated with quantitative PS deÜciency in 3 Spanish  hypothesize that seizures as well as some other neuromuscular  pedigrees (143C>G in 5Ó-UTR and L-27H, 1418delA and M599T)  features of WHS patients may be caused by mitochondrial  and a neutral variant (R192K) were introduced by site directed  dysfunction resulting from a LETM1 deletion.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 248 mutagenesis in the wild type PRO
S1  cDNA cloned in pcDNA3.1.  98 families with triple A syndrome mutation hotspots became  PRO
S1  wt and mutant constructs were cotransfected with pSEAP  apparent including Q15K (exon 1) and 
S293 P (exon 8) occurred  in CO
S7  cells and the level of expression of the recombinant  in 16 respectively 21 families from different regions. Genotype/ proteins was analysed by western blot of the cell culture media  phenotype analyses revealed a highly variable occurrence, age of  and the cellular extracts. Protein band densitometry was used to  onset and severity of all clinical symptoms between patients with  quantify PS, which was normalised through SEAP measurements.  the same mutation. The severity and progression of neurological  The results obtained indicated a highly reduced expression of the  features cannot be correlated to the localization and the nature of the  L-27H and the 1418delA (frameshift and stop at 405) mutations and  mutations in ALADIN. To examine the cellular localisation of wildtype  a reduced expression of M599T in the cell culture media. L-27H and  and mutant ALADIN we investigated nine different ALADIN mutants:  1418delA were not detected in the cellular extracts. By contrast,  two nonsense (W84X, Q456X), two frameshift (F157fs, G397fs)  143C>G expression appeared to be higher than that of wild type  and Üve point mutations (Q15K, 
L25 P, H160R, 
S263 P, 
L381 R)  PS and no differences were found with R192K. From these results  using EGFP- (enhanced green Ýuorescence protein) tagged fusion  we conclude that PRO
S1  L-27H, 1418delA and M599T mutations  proteins. Whereas the proteins nonsense mutations were found  cause quantitative PS deÜciency by either reduced synthesis or  in the cytoplasm and the nucleus the proteins bearing frameshift  defective secretion of the mutant protein. Normal expression of  and 4 out of 5 point mutations were mislocalized predominantly in  R192K conÜrms that this is a neutral PRO
S1 . Increased expression  the cytoplasm. Despite the fact that the Q15K mutant protein does  of 143C>G, identiÜed in the same allele as L-27H, should be further  not affect NPC-targeting, patients bearing this mutation exhibit  analysed. a moderate to severe phenotype similar to those with truncating  We acknowledge grants ISCIII 01/1468 and SAF-2001-1059-
C02  mutations. This supports the hypothesis that ALADIN may play an  important role in nucleocytoplasmic transport. 
P0759 . Genomic deletions account for more than 10% of the  FOX
L2  mutations in BPES families and can be revealed by MLPA  
P0761 . Frequency of ocurring of the 3849+10kb C>T mutation in  analysis. Polish CF patients is signiÜcantly higher than in most of other  D. Beysen1, M. Fellous2, J. P. Fryns3, M. Splitt4, P. Bouchard5, S. Christin- populations. Maitre6, R. Veitia2, A. Nygren7, J. Schouten7, E. Lemyre8, C. Oley9, H. Hjalgrim10,  J. Bal, K. Czerska, A. Sobczyıska-Tomaszewska;  P. A. Koivisto11, L. Messiaen12, A. De Paepe1, E. De Baere1;  National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. 1Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2H\x98pital Cochin, Paris, France,  The 3849+10kb C>T mutation belongs to the group of splicing CFTR  3Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 4GuyÓs Hospital, London, United  gene defects. It creates a partially active splice site in intron 19 that  Kingdom, 5H\x98pital Necker, Paris, France, 6H\x98pital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France,  can lead to the insertion of a new 84-bp cryptic exon containing an  7MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Ste. Justine Hospital, Montreal, PQ,  in-frame stop codon. This mutation has been found to be associated  Canada, 9Birmingham WomenÓs Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 10The  with a milder form of disease manifestation. Patients carrying this  John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 11Tampere University Hospital,  mutation in one allele are characterised by: better nutritional status,  Tampere, Finland, 12University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United States. older age of onset, normal or slightly elevated chloride values (in  Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES,  comparison to homozygotes for delF508 mutation). MIM 110100) is an autosomal dominant genetic condition in which  Till now there have been 30 CF patients genotyped in our laboratory  an eyelid malformation is associated (type I) or not (type II) with  who have 3849+10kb C>T mutation in at least one allele of CFTR  premature ovarian failure (POF). In 2001, mutations in the FOX
L2   gene. There are 26 patients in this group with genotype: 3849+10kb  gene, encoding a forkhead transcription factor, have been shown  C>T / delF508. There are also two patients who are homozygotes  to cause both types of BPES. Since then more than 130 intragenic  for 3849+10kb C>T mutation, whose clinical data are being currently  FOX
L2  mutations have been reported and collected in the Human  collected. They are members of two unrelated families. This genotype  FOX
L2  Mutation Database (http://medgen.ugent.be/foxl2/). is very rare in Poland and in the world. In case of the other patients  In our series of BPES patients we identiÜed 80 FOX
L2   second mutation has been also identiÜed. rearrangements, including 71 intragenic mutations, 1 balanced  5 patients are carriers of this mutation in one allele and any other  reciprocal translocation and 8 FOX
L2  deletions. Two of these are  mutation in second allele has not been found. novel partial FOX
L2  deletions occurring in sporadic BPES patients,  Mutation 3849+10kb C>T is found in Polish population with frequency  one a novel total gene deletion in a BPES type I family and Üve are  of 3,9% of CF alleles which places this mutation at second position  microdeletions of the FOX
L2  region, three of which are novel. None  after delF508 (53%). of these deletions have been found in unaffected individuals. In comparison to the frequency in world population (0,2%) it`s  For the detection of the deletions we applied a combined approach  signiÜcantly higher score. That is why the identiÜcation of this  of custom-made MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe  mutation is a part of the routine diagnostics provided by our  AmpliÜcation, MRC-Holland), FISH analysis and genotyping with  laboratory. more than 30 microsatellite repeat markers. In conclusion, this is the Ürst study demonstrating the involvement of  
P0762 . Novel mutations in the GJB1 - connexin 32 (Cx32)-gene  partial and total gene deletions of FOX
L2  in the causation of BPES.  in Czech CMTX patients. These deletions can be revealed by MLPA, being a novel tool for  P. Seeman1, R. Mazanec1, P. Vondr\x86ěek2, M. Soukupov\x863, J. Kofer3, J.  FOX
L2  gene dosage analysis. These results show that genomic  Miluěk\x861, E. Seemanova1;  deletions account for more than 10% of the FOX
L2  mutations in  1Charles University Prague, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital and  BPES families and underline the importance of FOX
L2  gene dosage  Masaryk University, Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk Hospital ïst\x91 nad  analysis in routine screening of clinically well-deÜned BPES patients. Labem, ïst\x91 nad Labem, Czech Republic. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common hereditary  
P0760 . Cellular mislocalization of mutant ALADIN causes triple  neuromuscular disorder characterised by distal muscular weakness  A syndrome and atrophies, gait abnormalities and sensory deÜcit resulting from  K. Koehler1, A. Temme2, M. Schmitz2, H. Petzold1, A. Huebner1;  the peripheral neuropathy. CMTX1 is the second most frequent  1ChildrenÒs Hospital, Dresden, Germany, 2Institute for Immunology, Dresden,  genetically deÜned X-linked dominant subtype of CMT, caused by  Germany. mutations in the gap junction beta 1 (GJB1) gene. The triple A syndrome (MIM*231550) is a rare autosomal recessive  We report four, not yet reported mutations in the GJB1 gene  disorder characterized by adrenal insufÜciency, achalasia of the  (Leu9Phe, Val63Phe, Ile127Ser, Leu212Phe) detected in Czech  cardia, alacrima, and a variety of neurological and dermatological  CMT patients. All reported mutations segregated with the CMT  features. This disorder maps to chromosome 12q13 and is caused  phenotype. These mutations affected the intracelullar domains of the  by mutations in the AAAS gene encoding a novel WD-repeat protein  GJB1 protein - 1. IC, 2. IC and 3. IC respectively. In the families with  called ALADIN. ALADIN localizes to nuclear pore complexes (NPCs),  mutations Leu9Phe, Val63Phe, Ile127Ser, women were substantially  which is the sole site of nucleocytoplasmic transport. Investigating  milder affected than men and their age of onset was as least 20 years Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 249 later than in men. Affected men presented often by severe muscle  levels were slighthy elevated, and L/P molar ratios remained in the  atrophies in the four and Üfth decade. Nerve conduction velocities  normal range. (NCV) in affected patients were mostly within 30-40 m/s range and  The young patient suffers from vomiting Üts which last for many hours  often were ranged as intermediate or axonal lesion. Hearing loss was  until spontaneous resolution and recur with the same characteristics  not reported from any of these families. after an interval of 15-20 days. Metabolic acidosis with hyperlactemia  The mutation Leu212Phe appears to be de-novo, which is very  and elevated L/P and ketone body molar ratios were found.  rare in GJB1, since it was not detected in the patientªs mother.  Hyperalaninemia, lactaturia, and abnormal excretion of suberic,  Unfortunately this family was no more available for further studies.  adipic, and 3-hydroxy-butyric acids were observed. GJB1 gene should be tested in all CMT patients with an X-linked  Screening for 3243 np mutation in mitochondrial DNA was carried out  dominant family tree without the CMT1A duplication regardless to the  by PCR-RFLP method. electrophysiological type of polyneuropathy. Mutations in the GJB1  The A3243G bp mutation was detected in the boy and in his above  are more probable in familiar cases than in sporadic cases. mentioned relatives. In the boyÓs blood, the 3243 bp mutation with  Supported by IGAMZCR and VZ111300003 70% mutant mtDNA was detected. The mtDNA in the muscle was  heteroplasmic for the 3243 bp mutation in all cases. 
P0763 . Mutation analysis in Danish families with Bardet-Biedl  Our study has pointed out that in cases where the CVS appears to  syndrome show maternal segregation, particularly when it is associated with  T. Duelund1, K. Gr¾nskov1, T. Rosenberg2, K. Br¾ndum-Nielsen1;  increased lactates, mtDNA may be a suitable subject for further  investigation. 1John F. Kennedy Instituttet, Glostrup, Denmark, 2National Eye Clinic of the  Visually Impaired, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
P0766 . Congenital aÜbrinogenemia caused by uniparental  Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a complex genetic syndrome  isodisomy of chromosome 4 containing a 15-kb deletion  resulting in retinal dystrophy, postaxial polydactyli, obesity,  involving Übrinogen Aŋ-chain gene hypogenitalism among males, renal manifestations, and learning  S. Spena, S. Duga, R. Asselta, M. Malcovati, M. L. Tenchini;  disabilities. Linkage studies show great genetic heterogeneity. 8 loci  have been identiÜed, and 6 genes have been cloned. Until recently,  Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan,  BBS was thought to be an autosomal recessive disease, but it has  Milan, Italy. now been shown that in some cases the disorder shows triallelic  Uniparental disomy (UPD), i.e. the inheritance of both copies of a  inheritance. chromosome from only one parent, can occur either as heterodisomy  Of 100 patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome registered in the  or isodisomy. Several mechanisms (gametic complementation,  ÐRetinitis Pigmentosa RegisterÑ at the National Eye Clinic for the  trisomic rescue, and compensatory UPD) may lead to UPD, which  Visually Impaired (Copenhagen, Denmark) 60 patients in 53 families  can result in clinical condition either by producing homozygosity for  gave accept to participate in our research. The aim of the project is to  recessive mutations or as a consequence of aberrant patterns of  genotype the Danish Bardet-Biedl population. In BB
S1  one frequent  imprinting. To date, out of the 47 theoretical possibilities of UPD for  mutation has been identiÜed, M390R, with a frequency of 18-36  entire chromosomes, 32 have been observed. Their highly variable  % among all BBS-patients (allele frequency 0,14-0,32). We tested  frequency depends on the involved chromosome and on its parental  for this mutation by restriction enzyme analysis of a pcr product.  origin. Concerning chromosome 4, only one case of UPD for maternal  We found 10 homozygotes (9 families) and only one heterozygote,  isochromosome 4p and 4q has been described in a living patient. corresponding to19% of the Bardet-Biedl patients having this  In the last few years, several genetic defects have been identiÜed in  mutation (allele frequency 0,18). the Übrinogen gene cluster, located at 4q31.3-q32.1 chromosomal  Mutation analysis is being performed of the BB
S1  and BB
S6  genes  region, as the cause of congenital aÜbrinogenemia. This rare  using dHPLC, denaturing high performance liquid chromatography.  autosomal recessive coagulation disorder is characterised by the lack  Results from the mutational analysis will be presented. of Übrinogen in plasma. In this study, a mutational screening performed in an aÜbrinogenemic  
P0764 . Two novel mutations in the FGD1 gene in Aarskog-Scott  Thai proband enabled the identiÜcation of a homozygous 15-kb  syndrome deletion involving the Übrinogen Aŋ-chain gene that represents the  T. Kaname, K. Yanagi, Y. Chinen, K. Naritomi;  largest aÜbrinogenemia-causing deletion identiÜed so far. Since this  mutation was inherited only from the mother and non-paternity was  University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan. rule-out, a maternal UPD was hypothesised. Genotyping of family  Faciogenital dysplasia 1 (FGD1) gene has been identiÜed as a  members for markers spread over the entire chromosome 4 revealed  responsible gene for Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS). We found two  a maternal isodisomy. novel point mutations of the FGD1 gene in two AAS families. In one  The absence of pathological phenotypes other than aÜbrinogenemia  family, a missense mutation was identiÜed in the exon 11 (2626C>T),  in the analysed proband suggests that there are no maternally  substituting tryptophan for arginine at the position 636 whithin  imprinted genes on chromosome 4 with a major effect on phenotype. the pleckstrin homology domain of FGD1. In the second family, a  nucleotide transition was identiÜed at the Ürst position of 5Ó splice site  
P0767 . Mutation analysis and clinical course in NF2 Polish  of intron 14 (IV
S14 +1G>A), reducing FGD1 expression. This is the  patients Ürst report of a mutation at a splice site of FGD1 gene. M. Laniewski-Wollk1, A. Koziarski2, A. Wojtkiewicz3, A. Szpecht-Potocka1;  
P0765 . A mitochondrial DNA mutation (A3243G mtDNA) in a  1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Clinic of Neurosurgery  family with cyclic vomiting. CSKWAM, Warsaw, Poland, 3Paediatric, Hematology and Oncology Clinic of  C. Di Bella, S. Briuglia, V. Merlino, V. Procopio, E. Canfora, C. Salpietro, L.  Medical Academy, Bydgoszcz, Poland. Rigoli;  NeuroÜbromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant disease of  the nervous system characterized by a tumor predisposition in which  Unit\x87 Operativa di Genetica ed Immunologia Pediatrica, Policlinico  affected individuals develop multiple schwannomas, meningiomas  Universitario, Messina, Italy. and ependynomas. NF2 gene has been hypothesized to function  Patients with a cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) have experienced a  as a tumor suppressor gene. We were looking for mutations in NF2  minimum of three distinct episodes of vomiting and nausea usually  gene in 23 patients (17 families) with clinical features of NF2, sending  involving more than four emeses in one hour at the peak. They feel  from different medical centers in Poland. Using SSCP as a screening  quite well between episodes. method for detection of mutations in blood and tumor samples and  A family was recruited with four members suffering from CVS: a  sequencing DNA we have found 5 germline nonsense mutations  5 year old boy , his mother, the maternal grandmother and aunt.  in our tested group. Three of these mutations are known: c.52 C.T  The three adults were affected by CVS during childhood. Metabolic  in exon 1; c.169 C.T in exon 2; c.592 C.T in exon 6. Two mutations  investigations revealed permanent hyperlactemia with elevated L/P  in exon 11 are new: c.1002_1003insG and c.1029_1030insCC.  in the boyÒs mother. In the maternal grand-mother and aunt, lactate  After detailed clinical analysis we conclude that all of these defects Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 250 correlate with severe clinical course (they generate truncating protein- presenting a parallel array of allele-speciÜc oligonucleotide probes  product). What is very interesting that we did not Ünd any somatic  for each mutation. The entire procedure from blood sampling to  mutations in tested tumor samples suggesting that there are may  the identiÜcation of mutations requires less than 6 hours, and  be any other mechanisms, except of KnudsonÓs two hit hypotesis,  hybridization/detection may be carried out manually or essentially  which are involved in expression of NF2 gene. Clinical observations  automated using existing instrumentation. The test is simple and  of our patients are consistent with D.EvansÓs group results (2002)  convenient, requires very small amounts of samples, and can easily  concerning mortality of NF2 patiens and recommendation that they  be modiÜed to include additional mutations. could be reffered to specialty treatment centers. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) 
P0768 . Study of the involvement of the Fragile X Syndrome  
P0770 . Analysis of the proteolipid protein gene in patients with  molecular mechanisms on the clinical characteristics of carrier  PMD females: Preliminary Results B. Bilir1, Z. Yapòcò2, E. BattaloĔlu1;  E. G-Alegr\x91a1, E. Ruiz2, A. Fern\x86ndez-Rivas2, M. M\x91nguez2, A. Delgado3, F.  1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul,  Ramos4, C. Mart\x91nez-Bouzas1, M. I. Tejada1;  Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology,  1Unidad de Gen\x8dtica.Hospital Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 2Departamento  Istanbul, Turkey. de Psiquiatria.Hospital Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 3Departamento de  Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a rare hypomyelinating  Pediatr\x91a.Hospital Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 4Laboratorio de Pediatria. Facultad  disorder of the central nervous system with X-linked recessive  de Medicina, Zaragoza, Spain. inheritance. The prevalence in the US is estimated to be about  Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause of  1/300,000-1/500,000. Clinical features include nystagmus, ataxia,  mental retardation. Although the clinical phenotype is well known in  stridor, spasticity, and mental retardation. The clinical severity and  males, this is not the case in carrier females. age of onset vary widely among the patients. About 80% of patients  We have undertaken a complete clinical and molecular study in  clinically diagnosed as PMD have been shown to carry a mutation in  carrier females and in normal women belonging to FXS families  the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene, which is located on chromosome  ascertained in our Hospital with two objectives: 1) to determine the  Xq21.3-Xq22. In addition to the point mutations and deletions in the  relative impact of the molecular mechanisms of FXS -number of CGG  PLP gene, duplications involving the entire gene have been shown to  repeats, methylation status, gene expression and FMRP production-  be the major genetic abnormality causing PMD. on the clinical involvement of female carriers and 2) to study which  In the framework of this study, the genetic basis of PMD was  of these parameters could predict better the phenotype in females to  investigated in samples from 16 PMD families, including a total of 20  improve diagnosis, and prevention. patients (16 males and 4 females). None of the male patients in our  We present here our preliminary results in 37 females belonging to  cohort showed heterozygosity for RFLP markers, exon 4-AhaII and  15 different families. CGG expansion and methylation were studied  DX
S17 -TaqI polymorphisms within the PLP gene. Interestingly, the  by PCR and Southern blotting (Stb12.3), obtaining 10 FM, 1 Mosaic,  affected brothers in one family and the sisters in another were found  19 PM and 7 normal. We have determined the relative levels of  to inherit different maternal alleles for at least one of the markers  FMR1mRNA by use of quantitative real-time Ýuorescence detection  used, suggesting genetic heterogeneity. To detect duplications  (RT-PCR) in 20 females, showing only a slightly overexpression in  interphase FISH and quantitative multiplex PCR are currently being  PM women. Finally, we have studied the FMRP expression in hair  performed. Screening of the PLP gene in these patients using SSCP  roots by antibody test in 28 females, showing a very low percentage  and subsequent sequencing analyses revealed presence of exon 4- of expression in FM females (between 5 to 10%). AhaII polymorphism in Üve patients and a previously reported 
P215 S  Physical and behavioural phenotype has been completely studied in  mutation in hemizygous condition in another patient. the 37 females: In FM women, 6/10 have the typical FXS phenotype,  The present study will help our understanding of the pathogenesis of  and mental retardation in different degrees is present in 7/10 of them.  the PMD phenotype. Most of the studied PM carrier females have adaptive disorder and  four of them present ovarian failure. 
P0771 . Frequency of HFE H63D, 
S65 C and 
C282 Y mutations in  patients with iron overload and controls from Toledo, Spain. 
P0769 . Reverse-hybridization assay for mutations associated  C. de Diego, M. Murga, P. Mart\x91nez-Castro;  with hereditary sugar intolerance Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain. G. Kriegsh\x89user1, W. Krugluger2, D. Halsall3, F. Kury1, C. Oberkanins1;  Hereditary Hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive  1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Dept. Clinical Chemistry,  disease caused by a defective iron absorption. 
C282 Y is the most  Municipal Hospital Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, Austria, 3Dept. Clinical Biochmistry,  frequent HFE gene mutation causing HH in Northern European  Addenbrookeªs Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. populations and their descents. However, two other mutations, H63D  Dietary carbohydrates for humans include polysaccharides (starch),  and 
S65 C, have been described as pathogenic changes. In this study  disaccharides (sucrose, lactose) and monosaccharides (glucose,  we have tried to evaluate the frequency of these three mutations in  fructose, galactose). During digestion, speciÜc enzymes will initially  our community. Ninety three patients and one hundred Üfty controls  hydrolyze poly- and disaccharides into their monosaccharide  were screened for H63D, 
S65 C and 
C282 Y mutations using a PCR- constituents, which then become absorbed by apical cells of the  RFLP based strategy. We have found a very low frequency of 
C282 Y  small intestine and further metabolized. A variety of genetically  homozygous patients 7% in disagreement with previous studies.  determined enzyme and transporter deÜciencies may cause  The remaining patients were H63D homozygous 17%, H63D/
C282 Y  hereditary intolerance to common dietary sugars. Lactose intolerance  compound heterozygous 9%, H63D/
S65 C compound heterozygous  (adult-type hypolactasia, lactase non-persistance) is an extremely  1%, H63D heterozygous 24%, 
C282 Y heterozygous 8%, 
S65 C  frequent autosomal recessive condition causing diarrhea, nausea  heterozygous 2% and 32% of patients lacked any of the 3 mutations  and Ýatulence. It is highly associated with two mutations located  studied, despite they showed clinical/biochemical Hemochromatosis  upstream from the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) gene locus.  features. We have observed a high frequency of H63D mutation both  Hereditary fructose intolerance is an autosomal recessive disorder  in controls and patients and the main genotypes implicated in HH  caused by mutations in the aldolase B gene. Affected subjects  in our series were H63D homozygous and H63D/
C282 Y compound  suffer from severe abdominal pain, vomiting, hypoglycaemia, and  heterozygous. We propose here, do not avoid the H63D mutation  unless fructose-containing food is strictly avoided may even die from  study in HH patients from our geographic area. Moreover, further  irreversible damage of the liver and kidney. studies are needed to elucidate what is the role of this mutation in the  We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay for the rapid  developing of HH and what genetic/environmental additional factors  and simultaneous detection of two mutations (-13910 C/T, -22018  are implicated in it. G/A) upstream to the LPH gene and four mutations (del4
E4 ,  A149P, A174D, N334K) in the aldolase B gene. The test is based  on multiplex DNA ampliÜcation and hybridization to a teststrip Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 251 
P0772 . Ten years of study of PWS Polish population analysis. Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D  A. Szpecht-Potocka, E. Obersztyn;  PAGE) is the only method currently available for the simultaneous  separation of thousands of protein according to their isoelectric point  Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. and molecular weight. In this study, protein expression maps for sera  The Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a genetic and neurologic  from healthy individuals are compared with maps from patients with  behavioral disorder linked to abnormalities in imprinted domain  fragile X syndrome. PDQuest© analysis detected 75 % of proteins  on chromosome 15q11-q13, characterized inter alia by hypotonia,  being conserved between the normal and fragile X serum which are  hyperphagia in early childhood resulting in obesity, hypogonadism,  most likely the housekeeping proteins of the samples. Two protein  short stature and moderate mental retardation. All of genetic  spots of interest and another four protein spots are found to be 5 fold  abnormalities in PWS are associated with loss of expression of  down-regulated in fragile X patient serum. There are also two protein  paternally derived alleles. Using karyotyping, FISH and methylation  spots that are over expressed in fragile X syndrome serum. Further  analysis we have examined 292 patients, diagnosed in different  studies should be carried out using proteomics approach in attempt  medical centers in Poland, susspected to be PWS and we conÜrmed  to explain the structural, functional and interactive properties of  PWS diagnosis in 102 cases (35%). We identiÜed 51 cases of  FMRP protein in serum towards gene therapy and drug development  paternal deletion (50%), 16 patients with mUPD (16%) and 3 patients  purposes. with imprinting defect (3%). In 5 cases we could not detect molecular  defect because of noninformative microsatellite analysis. All of  
P0775 . The patient with Duchenne`s muscular dystrophy: case  PWS patients have classical phenotype for deletion, mUPD and ID  report what we present in details. Four of patients of our 292 cohort have  N. Pronina, Z. Krumina, R. Lugovska;  shown PWS-like phenotype but we did not Ünd any abnormalities  on chromosome 15. Because of PWS is a multigenic disorder it is  Latvian State Children`s Hospital; State Medical Genetics centre, Riga, Latvia. possible that gene mutation may occur in these patients. We also  Duchenne`s and Becker`s muscular dystrophy (DMD & BMD) is an  conclude that there is signiÜcant difference between correct clinical  X linked recessive lethal disease, that represent the most common  diagnosis of PWS in specialty treatment centers then in others. In  genetic neuromuscular disease of childhood. specialty treatment Polish medical centers the propotion of conÜrming  Sixty Üve percent of DMD and BMD cases are caused by deletion of  PWS and sharing of particular molecular defects are consistent with  one or more exons in the dystrophin gene, duplications cause these  those observed in tested cohort in other caucasian population. diseases in 6% to 7% of the cases. Our patient is a 7-years-old boy referred to the geneticist with  
P0773 . Detection of subtelomeric rearrangements in patients  following indications: muscle weakness, difÜculty climbing stairs,  with idiopathic mental retardation using MLPA celiac disease, and undifferential hepatitis. The proband is the fourth  L. Rooms1, E. Reyniers1, R. van Luijk1, S. Scheers1, J. Wauters1, B.  child of healthy, unrelated parents. Ceulemans2, J. Van Den Ende1, Y. Van Bever1, R. F. Kooy1;  The diagnostic investigations showed the elevated level of serum  creatine kinase, AST and ALT. 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Hospital Antwerp,  The molecular diagnostic for this patient was carried out by multiplex  Edegem, Belgium. DNA ampliÜcations of the dystrophin gene using three multiplex PCR  Despite the clinical relevance of subtelomeric rearrangements,  assays: the 9-exon Chamberlain-set, 9-exon Beggs-set and 7-exon  responsible for 5-10% of cases of unexplained mental retardation,  Kunkel-set. There were found 15 deletions of different exons in the  methods to screen for cryptic chromosome aberrations near the  dystrophin gene. telomeres on a routine basis are scarce. None of the methods  Because of so large deletion in dystrophin gene the deletion in  described so far are entirely satisfactory, e.g. fast, reliable and cheap.  contiguous glycerol kinase gene is presumable, and glycerol kinase  Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe AmpliÜcation (MLPA) is a new  enzyme activity should be measured. Thereby, this case requires the  method based on the ampliÜcation of ligated probes hybridized to  further investigation. chromosome ends. It enables detection of possible rearrangements  of all chromosome ends in just two multiplex reactions. Our initial  
P0776 . New mutations and polymorphisms identiÜed in MEC
P2   study revealed six subtelomeric rearrangements in 126 patients  gene causing Rett syndrome with idiopathic mental retardation, including two 1pter deletions, a  D. Zahorakova1, R. Rosipal1, J. Hadac2, N. Misovicova3, A. Zumrova4, V.  1qter deletion, a 3pter deletion, a der(11)t(11;20)(qter;qter) and a  Bzduch5, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1;  19pter duplication, giving a detection rate of 4.8%. In one case, an  apparent 21qter deletion appeared to be a false positive due to a  1Department of Pediatrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague,  3bp deletion at the site of the probe. Recently a new probeset in  Czech Republic, 2Department of Child Neurology, Thomayer University  which all telomeres can be screened in just one multiplex reaction  Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Martin  was developed. We were able to detect all tested aberrations with  University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 4Department of Child Neurology,  this novel probe set. Moreover, results for chromosome ends 2q and  University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Pediatrics,  6p that were variable in the Ürst generation probe set, were more  Commenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. reliable. Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeC
P2 ) is a protein which binds  In addition, we have narrowed the breakpoint region of the patients  speciÜcally to methylated DNA and is thought to act as a global  with the terminal 1p, 1q and 11q deletions down to 30-68 kb and  transcriptional repressor. MeC
P2  contains two main functional  aim to determine the breakpoint sequence in order to increase  domains: a methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) followed by a  our insights in the mechanisms responsible for the telomeric  transcriptional repression domain (TRD). Mutations in MEC
P2   chromosome breakage. Moreover, we aim to survey the genes  gene lead to decrease/loss of MeC
P2  function and cause a severe  involved in the clinical phenotype. neurodevelopmental disorder Rett syndrome (RTT). It affects almost  exclusively females and is primarily sporadic in nature. More than  
P0774 . Analysis of Protein expression level in Two-Dimensional  200 mutations have been identiÜed in MEC
P2 . We report mutation  Gels of Fragile X Syndrome analysis of 58 girls with clinical diagnosis of RTT from Czech and  A. Sharizah1, A. Sazaly2, R. Rosli1;  Slovak Republics. Genomic DNA was used to amplify the coding  sequence and exon/intron borders of MEC
P2  gene. Products were  1University Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia, 2University Malaya Medical  examined by RFLP and sequencing. The analysis revealed 20  Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. different mutations in 48 patients (82%). Four of them have not been  Fragile X syndrome is the second most common genetic cause  previously published: a missense mutation 
P302 S and deletions  of mental retardation. It is caused by a large expansion of this  IV
S2 -16delT, 
S357 fs and Ș
S357 . Moreover the frequency of mutation  CGG repeat (full mutation) that leads to silencing of the FMR1  T158M compared to other databases (9.34%) has been much more  gene and the absence of the FMR1 gene product, a 70 - 80 kDa  higher in our patients (20.83%). Two novel polymorphisms - 587C>G  protein (FMRP). The aim of this study is to qualify and quantify the  and 1161C>T were also detected. Our results show molecular  expression level of the proteins separated in two dimensional gel  heterogeneity in Czech and Slovak patients with RTT, facilitate the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 252 RTT diagnosis at the molecular level, and provide insight into the  that until recently even the frequency of this type of rearrangements  molecular pathology of RTT. Supported by grant LN 00A079. was completely unknown. A couple of techniques have been  developed to circumvent these problems (real time PCR, multiplex  
P0777 . Various novel patterns of inheritance of the long QT  ampliÜable probe hybridisation MAPH), but it turned out that these  syndrome: Pitfalls in molecular genetic diagnosis. techniques are too complicated or uncertain to perform diagnostics in  E. S. Sahin1, O. Z. Uyguner1, A. Dindar2, A. Kòlòc3, H. Eris1, A. Uzumcu1, H.  a routine setting. Kayserili1, K. Nisli2, G. Hofner4, A. Rauch5, S. Ozer6, M. Yuksel-Apak1, M.  By analysis of 20 so far unresolved DMD/BMD cases we proved  Pusch7, B. Wollnik1;  that the recently developed multiplex ligation-dependent probe  ampliÜcation technique (MLPA; MRC-Holland) is sensitive enough to  1Division of Medical Genetics, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University,  uncover all female carriers of deletions and duplications. Reliability of  Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Istanbul Medical Faculty,  the results is exceptional, automation is possible and we developed  Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Gulhane Military Hospital,  an Excel based program to facilitate calculation of the results. After  Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Childrens Hospital  loci or gene speciÜc adaptation MLPA technology enables reliable  Friedrich-Alexander University, Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany, 5Institute  determination of gene copy numbers in the complete genome. Even  of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University, Erlangen-Nuremberg,  analysis of genomic DNA isolated from archived tissue specimen is  Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe  possible and we expect that use of this technique will be helpful to  University, Ankara, Turkey, 7Istituto di Cibernetica e BioÜsica, CNR, Genova,  answer many yet unresolved questions in human genetics. Italy. 
P0781 . GJB2 gene mutations: genotypic and phenotypic  
P0778 . Association of the neprilysin (NEP) gene with  correlation susceptibility to complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) D. Feldmann1, H. Blons1, F. Denoyelle2, E. Garab\x8ddian3, R. Couderc1, C. Petit4,  K. Huehne1, S. Leis1, C. Preller1, F. Birklein2, B. Rautenstrauss1;  S. Marlin5;  1Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany, 2Johannes Guthenberg  1Laboratoire de Biochimie, Inserm U587, AP-HP,H\x98pital A Trousseau, Paris,  University, Mainz, Germany. France, 2Sercice dÓORL et de Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, Inserm U587, AP- HP,H\x98pital A Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Service dÓORL et de Chirurgie Cervico- 
P0779 . VSX1 mutational analysis in keratoconus Faciale, AP-HP,H\x98pital A Trousseau, Paris, France, 4Unit\x8d de G\x8dn\x8dtique des  L. Bisceglia1, M. Ciaschetti2, P. A. Parafan Campo2, P. De Bonis1, N. Delle  d\x8dÜcits Sensoriels Inserm U587, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 5Service de  Noci3, C. Pizzicoli3, C. Macaluso4, M. Grifa1, P. Ciavarella1, F. Vaira5, L. Zelante1;  G\x8dn\x8dtique Clinique, Inserm U587, AP-HP,H\x98pital A Trousseau, Paris, France. 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Studio  GJB2 mutations represent the Ürst cause of congenital non- Medico Associato, Chieti, Italy, 3Ophtalmology, University of Foggia, Foggia,  syndrommic hearing loss in developped countries (DFNB1). We  Italy, 4Ophtalmology, University of Parma, Parma, Italy, 5Studio Oculistico,  analysed the phenotype and the genotype of 265 French patients  Manfredonia, Italy. presenting a homozygote mutation or double heterozygote mutations  Keratoconus is a frequent non inÝammatory disorder characterised  in GJB2, or the association of a GJB2 mutation with the GJB6  by progressive conical protrusion of the cornea and central stroma  deletion : del(GJB6-D13
S1830 ). If the 35delG remains the more  thinning. It is a major indication for cornea transplantation in the  frequent variant of GJB2 (68% of the alleles), we identiÜded a  Western world and its prevalence is 1:2000. Although the vast  total of 29 different mutations in this gene, and 6 of them could be  majority of cases are sporadic, a positive family history has been  considered as recurrent. We described 4 new mutations 355del9,  documented in 6-10% of patients. The autosomal dominant pedigrees  573-574delCA, M151R and Y115X. We have compared the deafness  are more frequent and strongly reveal incomplete penetrance and  observed in patients homozygous 35delG and in patients with other  variable expressivity. In these families the astigmatism is interpreted  genotypes. The mutations 
L90 P and V37I were associated with a less  as fruste form of keratoconus. Mutations in VSX1 homeobox gene  severe phenotype than homozygous 35delG. This result is important  have been identiÜed in patients affected by two distinct inherited  for genetic conselling and physiopathologic studies of DFNB1. corneal dystrophies, posterior polymorphous dystrophy and  keratoconus. 
P0782 . The mutational spectrum of RUNX2 and genotype- Direct sequencing of the Üve exons and intronic Ýanking regions  phenotype correlations in cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) of the VSX1 gene in 63 Italian patients, diagnosed by corneal  U. Baumert, I. Golan, D. M\x9e¦ig;  topography, allowed us to identify three nucleotide changes leading  University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. to the, already described, aminoacid substitutions D144E, G160D  Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare bone dysplasia characterized  and 
P247 R. The changes were detected at heterozygous state in all  by high penetrance and variable expressivity. Mutations in the Runt- individuals identiÜed. The D144E allele was found in a patient and  related transcription factor RUNX2 have been correlated with this  in his son affected by astigmatism. The G160D and 
P247 R alleles  disorder. Several mutations affecting the coding region of this gene  were found either in affected and clinically unaffected individuals in  are known. two keratoconus families.This observation is in agreement with the  The aim of this study was to identify the spectrum of mutations in the  concept accepting the keratoconus as a dominant trait with variable  RUNX2 gene in our CCD patientsÒ cohort and to determine possible  expression and incomplete penetrance. Nevertheless, considering  genotype-phenotype correlations. Since most of the symptoms are  the keratoconus not strictly as a mendeleian trait but to some extent  located in the craniofacial region, the phenotype was examined  a complex disease, the previous and our results could represent a  focusing on craniofacial and otorhinolaryngological aspects.  dowel of an interesting puzzle that is being clarifying. Therefore, radiologic and clinical examinations were carried out under  deÜned conditions. After informed consent, the coding sequence of  
P0780 . The Gordian knot is cut: multiplex ligation-dependent  the RUNX2 gene was analyzed using PCR, restriction digest and  probe ampliÜcation allows reliable identiÜcation of female DMD/ direct sequencing. BMD carrier We screened the RUNX2 gene for mutations in 26 familial and  B. Dworniczak, M. Hermes, B. Hitschfeld, J. Horst;  sporadic patients and identiÜed 11 different mutations in a total of 19  Institute of Human Genetics, UKM, Muenster, Germany. patients, including 13 index patients. In total we detected 5 different  A long standing problem in human genetics and especially in  missense mutations in 7 subjects, i.e. in 54 % of the 13 index  diagnostics is the fast and reliable identiÜcation of changes of gene  patients, and 4 frameshift mutations, as well as 2 stop mutations. The  copy numbers. A well known example is the Duchenne muscular  overall CCD phenotype as deÜned by our clinical observations varied  dystrophy. It is known since about 15 years that in 60% of the  from mild expressions to the full blown phenotype. patients deletions within the dystrophin gene are disease causing.  A clear intrafamilial variability as well as a clear intraphenotypic  However the identiÜcation of female carriers remained a difÜcult  correlation was found. Furthermore, a clear correlation between  analytical challenge and identiÜcation of exon duplication events  the overall expressivity of the phenotype and the localization of the  which are disease causing as well, have been that far out of range  mutation within the RUNX2 protein was established. This study gives Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 253 new insights on the craniofacial correlation of the phenotype to the  boundaries in patients with one conÜrmed mutation. The second  genotype involving a wide interdisciplinary approach. mutations were found the in 23. The mutation frequencies found in  our patients are presented 
P0783 . A new ESE (Exonic Splicing Enhancer) mutation as cause  for recurrent infections 
P0786 . Novel CY
P11 B1 sequence variants in adolescent and  N. Pfarr1, D. Prawitt1, C. Schroff1, M. KirschÜnk2, J. Pohlenz1;  adult patients with clinical signs of hyperandrogenism 1ChildrenÒs Hospital, Mainz, Germany, 2Institute of Immunology, Heidelberg,  R. Achmann1, U. Gro¦2,1, U. Machemer1, H. M. Schulte2,1;  Germany. 1genteQ GmbH, Hamburg, Germany, 2Endokrinologikum, Hamburg, Germany. One of the major mechanisms of the innate immune system to  Steroid 11¦-hydroxylase (CY
P11 B1, 
P450 c11) is a mitochondrial  prevent infections of the body with pathogenic microorganisms is  cytochrome 
P450  enzyme necessary for cortisol biosynthesis.  the activation of a system of plama proteins, the complement, which  Point mutations, small insertions and deletions as well as complex  leads to convertion of the complement components 
C3  and 
C5  into  rearrangements have been identiÜed in patients with classic and non- their biologically active split products. Dysfunction of 
C5  results  classic 11¦-hydroxylase deÜciency. in propensity for severe recurrent infections. Up to now only two  We sequenced exon and Ýanking intron sequences as well as parts  nonsense mutation for human 
C5  deÜciency have been reported.  of the 5Ó- and 3Ó-Ýanking regions of CY
P11 B1 genes in 490 unrelated  Here we report a patient with complete 
C5  deÜciency as revealed  patients from different ethnic origin with the clinical diagnosis of  by immunochemical and functional analyses. No obvious functional  hyperandrogenism. Androgen excess due to mutations in CY
P21   mutation was found after sequencing the 41 Exons of the gene  was excluded prior to screening CY
P11 B1. Apart from previously  (including the promotor region), only a nucleotide transition in Exon  reported polymorphisms, 24 novel sequence variants were detected  10 leading to an exchange from one alkaline amino acid to another  in CY
P11 B1. Six variants (-225G>A, -216A>G, -196_-186del(GGA one. Family members with reduced serum 
C5  were heterozygous  )GGins(GGA)GG, -179_-178delCCinsC, -170C>T, -150C>G) are  3 2 for this sequence alteration whereas the patient was homozygous.  located in the 5Ó-Ýanking region. Five silent mutations in codons 81  We suggsted that this alteration is causative or is tightly linked  (TAC>TAT), 145 (AAT>AAC), 338 (CAG>CAA), 346 (GCC>GCT) and  to the causative mutation. Recent Ündings revealed, that exonic  347 (GCC>GCG), respectively, as well as 8 missense substitutions,  splicing enhancers (ESEs) facilitate the recognition of an exon by the  
L24 R (CTG>CGG), D82N (GAC>AAC), V129L (GTG>CTG),  splicing apparatus and a mutation in an ESE could result in splicing  
P135 T (CCT>ACT), 
S150 L (TCG>TTG), A415T (GCC>ACC),  defects. To determine the possible impact of this transition on an  G452R (GGG>AGG) and D480N (GAC>AAC) respectively, were  ESE we used the Rescue-ESE programm. The result showed that  detected in the coding region. The nonsense mutation Q102X  the nucleotide exchange alters and shifts but does not abolish an  (CAG>TAG) was found in exon 2. Finally, we identiÜed the intronic  ESE. RT-PCR experiments with RNA from lymphocytes of all family  substitutions IV
S2 +6C>T, IV
S2 -58G>A, IV
S2 -57G>T and IV
S2 - members showed skipping of Exon 10 in all individuals with the  42C>T, respectively. Most variants (21/24) were observed only  mutated allel leading to a frameshift and a premature stop codon. once or twice. The presence of -216A>G and IV
S2 -42C>T (allele  frequency 1.7% and 2.1%, respectively) with similar frequency  
P0784 . Molecular Step Diagnostics of Long QT Syndrome in a healthy control group suggests that both variants are non- C. Marschall, J. H\x99rmann, H. Klein;  pathogenic polymorphisms. While silent mutations should not affect  11¦-hydroxylase activity, the clinical importance of the majority of the  Laboratory for Medical Genetics, Martinsried, Germany. described changes in non-coding and coding regions of CY
P11 B1  Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a disorder of the cardiac conduction  has yet to be deÜned. system that is characterized by a delay in repolarization and  prolongation of the QT interval >440 msec. Affected individuals are  
P0787 . Lymphocyte culture with puromycin treatment improves  predisposed to ventricular tachyarrhythmias (torsades de pointes),  NF1 mutation screening efÜciency syncopes, seizures and sudden death. Five genes coding for ion  H. C. Kruyer;  channel proteins have been implicated in the autosomal dominant  Romano-Ward form of LQTS: KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A, KCN
E1   Institut de Recerca Oncologica, Barcelona, Spain. and KCN
E2 . Mutations in KCNQ1 and KCN
E1  may also cause the  The analysis strategies for NeuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1)  recessive Jervell Lange Nielsen form that is associated with deafness  diagnostics have continuously evolved in function of the increased  and a QTc >500 msec. Some mutations in the SCN5A gene result  knowledge of the NF1 gene and the new molecular techniques  in Brugada syndrome, a form of idiopathic ventricular Übrillation  available in our Üeld. Since 1991 we have been offering genetic  characterized by right bundle-branch block pattern, ST segment  testing for NeuroÜbromatosis type 1 (NF1) via mutational screening  elevation and sudden death. of the entire NF1 coding region using the cDNA-SSCP/HD approach,  Molecular diagnostic analysis of all 5 LQTS-associated genes is  with all alterations being characterised at both the DNA and RNA  labour intensive and costly. We therefore developed an efÜcient  level. Although this method dramatically increased the mutation  double stranded sequencing based mutation scanning method. The  detection rate, a considerable percentage of mutations remained  analysis is performed in three steps taking mutation frequency in the  undetected. Apart from the inherent difÜculty due to the large size of  different exons into consideration. To date, 170 unrelated individuals  the gene and the great heterogeneity of mutations, the main technical  with LQTS were analysed step by step. More than 100 different  problem was the generally poor quality of RNA obtained due to  mutations were found in 110 independent families. 60% of the  inevitable delays in transporting blood samples to our laboratory.  mutations resided in mutational hot spots such as exons coding for  This leads to two major problems, RNA obtained from aged samples  the pore regions and were identiÜed in the Ürst step (9/62 exons). shows a high number of artefacts due to a cold-shock effect and  the detection of germline nonsense mutations can be hampered  
P0785 . Mutations in Norwegian Cystic Fibrosis Patients. by the NMD phenomenon. In order to avoid these problems, and  K. Eiklid, O. Storr¾sten;  as reported by others (Wimmer et al. 2000), we have introduced  short-term lymphocyte culture with puromycin treatment prior to RNA  Ullev\x8bl University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. extraction. These cultures have lead to a great improvement in RNA  The Norwegian CF mutation frequencies are missing from the  quality, the virtual exclusion of artefacts and the elimination of the  European CF map. NMD event. Although results are very preliminary, we have improved  In Norway we have registered ca.250 patients with Cystic Fibrosis.  our detection rate from 65% (81% familial/51% sporadic) to 86%  We have determined CFTR-mutations in CF-patients referred to  (100% familial/82% sporadic), together with a signiÜcant reduction in  our lab for the last 10 years. Our Norwegian patients come mainly  the time and costs required for performing the screening. from the eastern and middle part of Norway. Using the ABI OLA  31m mutation kit and 3 additional mutations (394delTT, R117C and  4005+2T-C) we have determined the genotype in 151 patients.  We then sequenced all 24 exons in the CFTR gene with the intron Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 254 
P0788 . The InÝuence of FBN1 mutations on Fibrillin-1-Versican  
P0790 . Deletion analysis of Macedonian SMA families Binding S. Kocheva1,2, S. Vlaski-Jekic3, M. Kuturec1, G. D. Efremov4;  A. Ney, P. Booms, G. Guo, P. N. Robinson;  1Pediatric clinic,Medical faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of  Charit\x8d University Hospital, Berlin, Germany. Macedonia, 2Reseach Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,  The Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a common hereditary disorder of  Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The former Yugoslav  connective tissues that is characterized by clinically highly variable  Republic of Macedonia, 3Clinic of Neurology,Medical faculty, Skopje, The former  manifestations in the cardiovascular, skeletal, and ocular systems.  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 4Researc Center for Genetic Engineering and  MFS is caused by mutations in the Übrillin-1 gene (FBN1) on  Biotechnology, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The former  chromosome 15q21.1. Fibrillin-1 is a main component of the 10- Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. 12 nm microÜbrils that play an important role in the deposition of  The spinal muscular atrophies are a clinically and genetically  tropoelastin during the formation of elastic Übers and also have an  heterogeneous group of neuromuscular disorders caused by  anchoring function in many tissue types. degeneration of the a-motor neurons of the anterior horns of the  Next to nothing is known about the inÝuence of FBN1 mutations on  spinal cord. According to the age of onset and severity of the clinical  the interactions of Übrillin and Übrillin-containing microÜbrils with other  manifestations, SMA is classiÜed into three types: Werdnig-Hoffman  components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). However, disruption  disease (SMA I) the most severe form, SMA type II with intermediate  of the intermolecular interactions in connective tissue could be an  severity and Kugelberg-Welander disease (SMA III), the mild form. A  important aspect of the molecular pathogenesis of Marfan syndrome. locus for the three clinical forms of SMA was mapped to chromosome  Recent results indicate that the C terminal region of versican,  5q11.2-q13.3. With a estimated birth prevalence of 1 in 10,000 and  associates with Übrillin microÜbrils, and binds to an unknown site  a carrier frequency of about 1/40 the SMAs are the second most  between cbEGF module #11 and cbEGF module #21. We have  frequent autosomal recessive hereditary disorders. narrowed down the binding site between the versican CLD domain  In this report we present the molecular analysis of the SMN gene  and Übrillin-1 using a series of recombinant Übrillin-1 and versican  in 21 Macedonian SMA families. Deletions of the SMN gene were  constructs using blot-overlay and other assays. Using in vitro  found in 92% (11/12) of patients with the severe form of SMA, nine of  mutagenesis, we have generated a series of Übrillin-1 constructs  12 cases were homozygous for a deletion of exons 7 and 8 and two  harboring mutations identiÜed in persons with Marfan syndrome and  cases were homozygous for a deletion of exon 7. SMN exons 7 and  used these to identify the inÝuence of the mutations on Übrillin-1- 8 were deleted in 80% (4/5) of patients with SMA type II. We did not  versican binding in vitro. We will present current results on binding  Ünd a deletion in four patients with SMA type III. Molecular studies  studies and on Übrillin-1 and versican immunohistochemical studies  are replacing conventional investigations for SMA and have a high  of dermal Übroblast cultures from individuals with Marfan syndrome. uptake prenatally. 
P0789 . Novel PANK2 mutations and genotype-phenotype  
P0791 . Molecular genetics of cystinuria: forty-two new  correlation in a large collection of european patients with  mutations, the Ürst SL
C3 A1 mutation that segregate with  pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration phenotype non-I, SL
C7 A9 mutations that segregate with  K. Hoertnagel1, N. Nardocci2, B. Garavaglia3, I. Novakovic4, A. Weindl5, T.  phenotype I and partial dygenia Klopstock6, T. Meitinger7;  M. Font Llitj\x96s1, M. Jim\x8dnez1, L. Bisceglia2, L. Zelante2, P. Gasparini3, M.  1GSF Research Centre for Environment and Health, Neuherberg, Germany,  Palac\x91n4, V. Nunes1;  2Department of Child Neurology, National Neurological Institute ÐCarlo BestaÑ,  1Institut de Recerca Oncol\x97gica, LÓHospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Medical  Milano, Italy, 3Department of Molecular Neurogenetics, National Neurological  Genetics Service (IRCSS-Hospital CSS), San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Medical  Institute ÐCarlo BestaÑ, Milano, Italy, 4Institute of Biology and Human Genetics,  Genetics Service (ICRSS- Hospital CSS), San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy,  School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro,  4Departament de Bioqu\x91mica i Biologia Molecular (UB), Barcelona, Spain. 5Department of Neurology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany,  Cystinuria is an autosomal recessive aminoaciduria due to a  6Department of Neurology, Klinkum Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians- disorder of renal reabsorption of cystine and dibasic amino acids,  University, Munich, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Technical  that results in urolithiasis of cystine, in which two phenotypes (I:  University of Munich, Munich, Germany. silent heterozygotes, and non-I: amino acid hyperexcretion in  Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is  heterozygotes) have been described. Mutations in the heterodimeric  a juvenile onset, autosomal recessive disease associated with  amino acid transporter for cystine and dibasic amino acid cause  progressive movement alterations, such as dystonia, rigidity,  cystinuria: mutations in the heavy subunit, rBAT, coded by SL
C3 A1,  choreoathetosis and spasticity and the less frequent symptoms  cause type I cystinuria while mutations in the light subunit bo,+AT,  retinitis pigmentosa, optic atrophy, parkinsonism and epilepsy (MIM  coded by SL
C7 A9, mostly cause non-type I cystinuria. 42 new  234200). The syndrome is caused by mutations in the hPANK2 gene  mutations have been identiÜed: 26 in SL
C3 A1 and 16 in SL
C7 A9,  which encodes a pantothenate kinase that shows a dual localisation  that include the Ürst two large rearrangements found in SL
C7 A9.  to the cytosol and to mitochondria. The new and already identiÜed mutations explain 89.9%, 88.2% and  To date 54 mutations have been identiÜed, which are widespread  83.8% of the type I, type non-I and untyped alleles, respectively, of a  throughout the gene. In this study, we screened for mutations in  cohort of 166 cystinuria probands. A phenotype-genotype correlation  the hPANK2 gene in 42 unrelated patients of european descent,  in these families, based on the new genetic classiÜcation that we  representing 25 typical and 17 atypical cases. In total, we identiÜed  have recently proposed (type A and B due to mutations in SL
C3 A1  43 mutated alleles, comprising 24 different mutations and including  and SL
C7 A9 respectively) revealed that: i) SL
C3 A1 mutations show  14 novel ones. 31 mutations exchanging an amino acid and 12  phenotype I with the exception of dup
E4 -
E9  that shows phenotype  mutations predicted to result in premature truncation of the PANK2  non-I in most of the cases, and ii) 10 SL
C7 A9 mutations, which are  protein were detected. found in 14% of the type B heterozygotes, show a phenotype I. We  A standardized set of clinical data has been compiled from each  also report two mixed families whose carriers bear mutations in both  patient and correlated with the severity of the mutation as assessed  genes, and in one of these families partial non-pathologic dygenia  (1) according to the degree of evolutionary conservation of the  is present as they present higher urinary excretion pattern than the  mutated residue and (2) by functional testing of mutant proteins using  single heterozygotes, but this is not sufÜcient to cause the disease. a complementation assay in E.coli. Integrating this data we observe,  that the assessed severity of mutations correlates well with the age of  
P0792 . Molecular genetic diagnosis of calpainopathies: analysis  onset, but not with the course of the disease. of 20 cases. R. Bernard1, C. P\x8dcheux1, E. Hammouda2, A. Urtizberea3, B. Eymard3, F.  Leturcq4, N. L\x8dvy1;  1Hopital dÓenfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Genethon III, Evry, France,  3Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 4Hopital Cochin, Paris, France.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 255 Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMD) constitue a genetically  cholinergic neurons, and SMN2 in the spinal cord of SMA fetuses.  heterogeneous group of hereditary disorders. Clinically, the patients  SMA spinal cords showed reduced ChAT expression with respect  are affected by proximal muscle weakness and wasting, symmetrical  to controls although the proportion of motor neurons negative for  and progressive, of upper and lower limbs. Dominant (LGMD1) and  ChAT immunostaining was similar in both groups suggesting that  recessive (LGMD2) forms are observed. Until now 10 genes have  the surviving motor neurons in SMA fetuses could have a cholinergic  been identiÜed in recessive forms, deÜning LGMD2A to LGMD2J. function similar to that of controls. A high level of full-length SMN  LGMD2A is caused by mutations in the CAPN3 gene, located in  transcripts with tiny amounts of delta7 isoform (of SMN1 origin)  15q15.1-15.3. CAPN3 encodes a protein mainly expressed in the  was detected in control fetal spinal cord, whereas SMA spinal  squeletal muscle, the calpa\x94ne 3, belonging to a family of intracellular  cord showed a tiny decrease in the FL but a substantial increase  non lysozomal proteases. Its function in the muscular Über is still not  in delta7. Control and SMA spinal cord showed a differential SMN  well known, but it could play a role in catabolism and apoptosis, and  expression whereas in other tissues unaffected by the disease such  interacts with other members of the myoÜbrillar complex (Titine). We  as intestine, lung, adrenal gland, kidney and eye, the expression was  are now realizing the molecular exploration of the gene, for diagnosis  similar between controls and SMA samples. In these tissues, SMN2  help, in the molecular genetics laboratory in Marseille. The analysis  may compensate for the absence of SMN1 whereas in SMA motor  of the 24 coding exons of the gene has been performed in a Ürst serie  neurons, the increase in delta7 expression could contribute to the  of 20 unrelated cases, selected on clinical basis and after Western  disease. Supported by FIS 02-1275. Blot study of the muscular biopsy. The molecular strategy was  based on an SSCP screening followed by sequence analysis of the  
P0795 . A dual phenotype of periventricular nodular heterotopia  fragments with an abnormal migration pattern. We thus evidenced  and frontometaphyseal dysplasia (PVNH+FMD) in one patient  16 mutations, of which only a half have been already reported. We  caused by a single FLNA mutation leading to two functionally  discuss the results in relation to the clinical and proteic data of the  different aberrant transcripts patients. As some patients remain with no molecular conÜrmation  M. Zenker1, A. Rauch1, A. Winterpacht1, A. Tagariello1, C. Kraus1, T.  of the diagnostic hypothesis of calpainopathy, we also discuss the  Rupprecht2, H. Sticht3, A. Reis1;  molecular strategies in this context. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2University ChildrenÒs Hos- pital, Erlangen, Germany, 3Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry, Erlangen,  
P0793 . The brain-expressed c-Jun terminal kinase JNK3 is  Germany. truncated in a patient with a severe neurodegenerative disorder  Background: Two disorders, periventricular nodular heterotopia  and associated chromosome translocation (PVNH) and a group of skeletal dysplasias belonging to the oto- S. A. Shoichet1, L. Duprez2, C. Menzel1, E. Vamos2, H. H. Ropers1, V. M.  palato-digital (OPD) spectrum, are known to be caused by FLNA  Kalscheuer1;  mutations, so far. The cerebral and skeletal phenotypes, however,  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of  are considered mutually exclusive because of the different presumed  Medicine, University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. effects of the respective FLNA gene mutations, leading to loss  We have investigated the breakpoints in a male patient with  of function (PVNH) and gain of function (OPD), respectively. We  severe neurodegeneration and a de novo balanced translocation  describe here clinical and molecular Ündings of the Ürst patient  t(Y;4)(q11.2;q21). By Ýuorescence in situ hybridisation, we have  manifesting periventricular nodular heterotopia in combination with  identiÜed genomic clones from both chromosome 4 and chromosome  frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD), a skeletal dysplasia of the OPD- Y that span the breakpoints. Fine mapping of the chromosome 4  spectrum. breakpoint indicated that the c-Jun terminal kinase 3 gene (JNK3)  Methods: Molecular analysis was performed by direct sequencing  is disrupted in the patient. This gene is predominantly expressed in  of the entire coding sequence of the FLNA gene. Expression of the  the central nervous system, and it plays an established role in both  FLNA transcript was studied in Übroblasts by RT-PCR. neuronal differentiation and apoptosis. Moreover, expression studies  Results: A novel de novo mutation 7315CŗA in exon 45 of the FLNA  in the patient lymphoblastoid cell line conÜrm that the truncated JNK3  gene was identiÜed. It leads to two aberrant transcripts, one full  protein is indeed expressed, and that the disrupted transcript is not  length transcript with the point mutation causing a substitution of a  subject to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, as is often the case for  highly conserved leucine residue (
L2439 M) and a second shortened  truncated mRNAs or those harbouring premature termination codons.  transcript lacking 21 bp due to the creation of an ectopic splice donor  Over-expression studies with the mutant protein in various cell lines  site in exon 45. indicate that both its solubility and cellular localisation differ from that  Conclusion: We propose that the dual phenotype (FMD+PVNH) is  of the wild type JNK3; it is plausible, therefore, that the presence  caused by two functionally different, aberrant Ülamin A proteins and  of the mutant JNK3 in neuronal cells disrupts normal JNK3 signal  therefore represents an exceptional model of allelic gain-of-function  transduction, thereby resulting in the severe neurological phenotype  and loss-of-function phenotypes due to a single mutational event. in the patient. Current studies aim to characterise the function of  both wild type JNK3 and various truncation mutants, and to examine  
P0796 . LMNA, MTMR2 and GDA
P1  : implication in autosomal  their inÝuences on the cellular localisation of other brain-expressed  recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease proteins such as Ȳ-arrestin 2 and JSA
P1 , two of the known JNK3- A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1, R. Bernard2, T. Hammadouche3, A. Megarbane4, D.  interacting proteins. These studies will shed light on the mechanism  Grid5, N. Levy1;  by which the presence of a truncated JNK3 has a dominant and  1Inserm U491, Marseille, France, 2Hopital dÓenfants de la Timone, Marseille,  detrimental effect in our patient. France, 3CHU Ben-Aknoun, Alger, Algeria, 4Facult\x8d de Medecine, Beyrouth,  Lebanon, 5Genethon III, Evry, France. 
P0794 . Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and Survival Motor  Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disorders constitute the most frequent  Neurone 2 (SMN2) expression in the spinal muscular atrophy  inherited peripheral neuropathies. Electrophysiological criteria serve  (SMA) spinal cord during human development to classify patients as carrying demyelinating (CMT1), axonal (CMT2)  E. F. Tizzano, C. Soler-Botija, I. Cusco, E. L\x96pez, J. Parra, R. Bordes, M.  or intermediate neuropathies. All modes of inheritance have been  Baiget;  reported, with recessive forms being less frequent, more severe  Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. and with earlier onset. We report further evidence that homozygous  SMA is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the  mutations in LMNA, MTMR2 and GDA
P1  cause respectively  SMN1 gene which result in degeneration and loss of motor neurons  axonal (CMT2B1), demyelinating (CMT4B1) and mixed (CMT4A)  of the spinal cord. Although the SMN2 gene is the highly homologous  neuropathies in consanguineous families affected with autosomal  SMN1 copy present in all patients, it cannot prevent the disease.  recessive CMT. We identiÜed the LMNA c.892C>T founder mutation  Both genes potentially encode for identical proteins although most  segregating in 11 more Algerian families affected with axonal CMT.  of the SMN1 transcripts are full length (FL) whereas the majority  MTMR2 sequencing revealed a non sense change and a one- of the SMN2 transcripts lack exon 7 (delta7). We investigated  base insertion, respectively in two Algerian families affected with  the expression of ChAT, which is the most speciÜc marker for  a demyelinating ph\x8dnotype. Finally, GDA
P1  splicing mutation in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 256 one Algerian family and nonsense mutation in a Lebanese family,  sequences of which are as yet undetermined, but may be affected  caused very severe intermediate CMT in both families. LMNA  by the breakpoint. Perhaps of even greater relevance is the fact that  codes for Lamins A/C, major structural proteins of nuclear laminae  the chromosome 14 breakpoint interrupts the sequence of a novel,  in vertebrates. MTMR2 encodes a member of the myotubularin  hitherto uncharacterised transcript. Northern blot analysis indicated  phosphatase multigenic protein family, with speciÜc activity towards  that this transcript is approximately 8kb, and that it is expressed  phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate. On the other hand, GDA
P1   exclusively in foetal brain. Current studies aim to further characterise  structure and expression pattern locate it at the crossroads between  this transcript, and to determine its relationship to both FOXG1B and  gangliosides and Gluthatione S-Transferases diverse functions.  the patient phenotype. While GDA
P1  is mainly expressed in nervous tissues, LMNA and  MTMR2 are ubiquitously expressed. Additionally, different mutations  
P0799 . Genetic instability of normal Spinocerebellar Ataxia type  in LMNA cause a series of only partially related hereditary disorders.  8 (SCA8) alleles Unraveling the functional interplays underlying the pathophysiology  A. I. Seixas1, S. Martins1, P. Magalhaes1, J. Sequeiros1,2, I. Silveira1,2;  of CMT diseases is today the main issue, focusing on the relation  1UnIGENe, IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Universidade do Porto, Porto,  structure-function-ph\x8dnotype. Portugal. SCA8 is a dominant ataxia, associated with other neurological signs,  
P0797 . Association of anion exchanger 3 (SL
C4 A3) gene with  caused by an untranslated CTG repeat expansion in the 3Ó end of  idiopathic generalised epilepsy the SCA8 gene. Its transcript is an endogenous antisense RNA,  K. P. Lenzen;  overlapping the Kelch-like 1 (KLH
L1 ) gene, with unknown function.  Max-Delbr\x9eck-Centrum, Berlin, Germany. The CTG repeat is preceded by a polymorphic, stable (CTA), in a  n Idiopathic generalised epilepsies (IGE) affect about 0.6% of  conÜguration (CTA) -(CTG), and is highly unstable. Large alleles  3-29 n the general population and account for 30% of all epilepsies.  are seldom found in the general population, which brought a lot of  The aetiology of IGE is genetically determined, but the complex  controversy to SCA8 expansion being the direct cause of disease. pattern of inheritance suggests an epistatic interaction of several  We previously reported a high germinal instability of the (CTG) in  n  susceptibility genes. Our recent genome scan on 130 IGE multiplex- both normal and expanded alleles. We have now 1) assessed the  families revealed suggestive evidence for a susceptibility locus  mutability region of this locus, by sequence analysis of the (CTG)  n for common IGE syndromes in the chromosomal region 2q36  Ýanking region (~3460 bp), and 2) performed haplotype analysis with  (ZNPL = 2.98 at D2
S1371 ; p = 0.00053). The gene encoding  seven SNPs in Üve SCA8 and twenty control families. A high number  anion exchanger 3 (SL
C4 A3) has been mapped to this candidate  of variations, including base substitutions, insertions and deletions  region. SL
C4 A3 is prominently expressed in neurons and performs  were found within the examined region, but most were non-recurrent  an electroneutral exchange of chloride and bicarbonate. To study  de novo variations; no signiÜcant difference as to the type or number  the potential role of SL
C4 A3 in epileptogenesis, we performed  of variations existed when SCA8 and control families were compared.  linkage disequilibrium mapping in the region of 320 kb, harboring  Instability of normal alleles was observed in a maternal transmission  the SL
C4 A3 gene. Therefore, four SNPs (C_2915503, rs2305055,  to two sibs. Sequence analysis showed that also normal, not just  rs635311, and rs2891833) and one STR were genotyped in 415  expanded alleles, have interrupted CTA/CTG tracts. The only two  German IGE patients and 275 healthy population controls. We  haplotypes found in expanded chromosomes were also the most  found suggestive evidence for allelic associations of IGE with two  frequent in normal chromosomes from the control population. In  adjacent SL
C4 A3 polymorphisms (rs2305055: p = 0.027; rs635311:  conclusion, both expanded and normal alleles are fairly unstable  p = 0.052). Haplotype analysis showed a signiÜcant association  during meiotic transmission, despite the conserved pattern of SCA8  of both SL
C4 A3 polymorphisms with IGE (p = 0.015). Our results  haplotypes observed in the Ýanking region. suggest that variation within the SL
C4 A3 gene confers a common  but small susceptibility effect (OR Ç 2.2) to the aetiology of IGE  
P0800 . Factor IX gene mutations in Haemophilia B patients syndromes. Considering that rs635311 encodes the amino acid  M. H. Muslumanoglu1, O. Cilingir1, K. Kavakli2, M. Ozdemir1, Z. Gulbas1, S.  substitution A867D, which is located in an extracellular loop near to  Artan1;  a N-linked glycosylation site preceeding transmembrane segment  1Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. M8, it is possible that the associated D867 allele itself mediates an  The clinical and molecular basis of hemophilia B is heterogeneous  epileptogenic effect. and the clinical severty is related to the levels of factor IX activity. The main purpose of this study was to perform molecular diagnosis  
P0798 . Studies on the brain-expressed transcripts affected by  of hemophilia B disease by DNA sequence analyses of the promoter,  a chromosome rearrangement in a female patient with severe  poly A and coding regions of the factor IX gene. Evaluation of the  brain malformations usage of technique in the diagnosis of factor IX gene mutations will  S. Kunde1, S. A. Shoichet1, P. Viertel1, C. Apacik2, H. Ropers1, V. Kalscheuer1;  light up further studies that aim to obtain mutation proÜle of the factor  1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Kinderzentrum  IX gene spesiÜc to Turkish population. M\x9enchen, Munich, Germany. By this aim, blood samples from thirteen clinically diagnosed  We have investigated the chromosome abnormalities in a female  hemophilia B patients were analysed by the automatic capiller gel  patient exhibiting a severe cognitive disability associated with  electrophoresis tecnique. At least one mutation were identiÜed in  complete agenesis of the corpus callosum and other gross  the patients, expect one case with mild hemophilia B of 11 identiÜed  anatomical brain malformations. The patient carries a balanced  molecular abnormalities, two were new mutations according to  de novo translocation t(2;14)(p22;q13). Fluorescence in situ  ÐHemophilia B mutation bankÑ data of the recognised mutations, 33%  hybridisation led to the identiÜcation of breakpoint-spanning genomic  were localised at the exon 8 of the factor IX gene. The frequency  clones on both chromosomes 2 and 14, and sequence analysis of  of mutations was higher in the CpG rich regions of the gene and  the relevant regions indicated that one or more uncharacterised  missens mutations was regarded as the most common type of  genes may be affected by the breakpoints. In view of the severe  mutations causing severe hemophilia B and this conclusion was in  brain phenotype, the breakpoint on chromosome 14, which lies  accordance with the literature. in a region harbouring genes and ESTs derived predominantly  In conclusion, we suggested that capiller DNA sequencing is a fast  from brain tissue, became the focus of current studies. Fine- and efÜcient approach to identify mutations in the factor IX gene and  mapping by Southern hybridisation conÜrmed that the breakpoint  the results of this study will light up further studies in obtaining the  lies approximately 6 kb from the 3Ó end of the well-characterised  factor IX gene mutation proÜle of the Turkish population. forkhead transcription factor FOXG1B, which is essential for normal  development of the telencephalon in mice (Xuan et al. 1995). Human  
P0801 . Application of DHPLC for FBN1 mutation detection:  FOXG1B is an intronless gene with predominantly brain-restricted  identiÜcation of 58 novel mutations expression. Interestingly, our analysis of FOXG1B transcripts in foetal  G. M\x86ty\x86s1,2, E. Arnold2, M. Maudrich2, W. Berger1, B. Steinmann2;  brain suggests the presence of several novel splice variants, the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 257 1University of Zurich, Institute for Medical Genetics, Division of Medical Molecu- knowledge gained in this process is used to develop guidelines for  lar Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 2University  the production of CRMs for any genetic test. Special emphasis is  ChildrenÒs Hospital, Division of Metabolism and Molecular Pediatrics, Zurich,  given to the commutability of the candidate RMs, i.e. their ability to  Switzerland. perform under a wide range of test protocols and experimental set-up  Mutations in the human FBN1 gene cause the Marfan syndrome  conditions. (MFS), an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder.  PCR-based RMs were developed for hereditary haemochromatosis  Knowledge about FBN1 mutations is important for early diagnosis,  (HH) at the Dublin laboratory. These prototype RMs have reached  management, and genetic counseling of MFS. However, mutation  an advanced stage of testing with the consortium having recently  detection in FBN1 is a challenge because the gene is very large in  completed a Üeld trial in conjunction with the European Molecular  size (~235 kb) and the ~600 mutations detected so far are scattered  Genetics Quality Network. In addition, homogeneity and stability  over all 65 exons, being largely unique to each affected family. studies are currently being carried out at the JRC-IRMM, where a  While direct sequencing may be the most efÜcient way to identify a  model system for certiÜcation of DNA-based RMs was established  mutation in small genes, screening methods appear to be advisable  and described according to ISO guide 34 and the BCR guidelines.  for large genes such as FBN1. We have previously evaluated the  Different approaches for stabilisation of the prototype RMs are being  sensitivity of DHPLC for FBN1 mutation detection (89-99%, P = 0.05)  investigated with respect to carrier DNAs and storage conditions. and outlined a possible strategy for screening of point mutations and  *EU Contract G6RD-CT-2001-00581 small insertions/deletions in FBN1. We have applied this strategy to screen 94 unrelated patients with  
P0804 . Mutation spectrum in the GFAP gene and clinical  MFS or Marfan-like phenotype. We have thereby detected 76 FBN1  characteristics in patients with Alexander disease mutations, 58 of which were novel and 3 recurred in unrelated  M. Meins, J. Herchenbach, M. Hagedorn, J. T. Epplen;  patients. The mutations comprised 41 missense, 14 nonsense,  Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany. and 12 splice site substitutions as well as 7 deletions, 1 insertion,  Alexander disease is a dominantly inherited disorder of cerebral  and 1 insertion-deletion. We have also analyzed the presence of a  white matter due to mutations in the glial Übrillary acidic protein  FBN1 mutation in a total of 139 members of 34 families by direct  gene (GFAP). The most common infantile form presents as  sequencing and identiÜed the respective family speciÜc mutation in a  mental retardation and megalencephalic leukodystrophy with  total of 75 relatives. Since DHPLC is less expensive than sequencing,  onset in the Ürst 1-2 years of life. Occurrence is usually sporadic  the costs for mutation detection by using a combination of DHPLC  caused by de novo mutations. Affected infants show delay of  and sequencing are lower than for that by sequencing alone. developmental milestones, macrocephaly, seizures, spasticity and  rapid deterioration. Neuroradiological features include different white  
P0802 . Functional analysis of SL
C7 A7 mutations in renal tubular  matter changes, enlarged ventricles, and basal ganglia abnormalities.  cells from patients affected by lysinuric protein intolerance. Neuropathological examination reveals pathognomonic countless  M. Sperandeo1,2, P. Annunziata2, P. Piccolo1, L. Maiuri1, L. Vacca1, A. Pepe1, E.  Rosenthal Übers, astrocytosis, and demyelination. Juvenile and adult  Christensen3, G. Andria1, G. Sebastio1;  forms of Alexander disease are characterized by a later onset and  1Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 2Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Rome, Italy,  more slowly progressive course. It has been matter of a longstanding  3Metabolic Laboratory - Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. debate whether the juvenile and adult subtypes have the same  Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal recessive defect  etiology as infantile Alexander disease. of cationic amino acids (CAA) transport at the basolateral membrane  We have analyzed the GFAP gene in more than 30 patients with  of epithelial cells in the intestine and kidney, caused by mutations  clinical and neuroradiological suspect of Alexander disease, most  of the SL
C7 A7 gene. We present results of a functional study of  cases were diagnosed as infantile form. Missense mutations and rare  SL
C7 A7 mutations in the most suitable cellular system, i.e. renal  sequence variants were detected in approx. 50% of cases. There  tubular cells. Two independent patients, showing failure to thrive  was a clear clustering of mutations at the mutation hot spots in exon  and severe tubular nephropathy, were found to be homozygous for  1 and exon 4, affecting arginine 79 and arginine 239. However, also  the W242X mutation (patient 1) and homozygous for the R333M  pathogenic mutations affecting non-arginine residues in other exons  mutation (patient 2), respectively. This latter mutation, an apparently  were identiÜed, demonstrating the beneÜt of sequence analysis  missense mutation, generates, indeed, a heterogeneous population  in all coding exons, in particular in cases with a clinical course  of mutant transcripts. Both mutations were studied in renal tubular  characterized as juvenile or adult Alexander disease. cells isolated from urine of the patients according to Inoue et coll.  (Clin. Nephrol. 53:90-98, 2000). The origin of renal tubular cells  
P0805 . Further evidence for heterozygote advantage of GJB2  was deÜned by appropriate immunohistochemical stainings. By  deafness mutations: a link with cell survival Ülter uptake experiments, the arginine transport resulted strongly  J. E. A. Common1, W. Di1, D. Davies2, D. P. Kelsell1;  defective at the basolateral membrane. The use of renal tubular cells,  1Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and the London School of  isolated from urine samples, represents the best model to study the  Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, London, United  effect of a mutation in LPI and cognate diseases. This cellular model  Kingdom, 2Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, LincolnÓs Inn  might also represent the most suitable system to test the efÜcacy of  Fields Laboratories, London, United Kingdom. experimental therapeutic approaches. Gap junctions composed of connexins (Cx) are intercellular channels  that provide a mechanism of synchronised cellular response  
P0803 . Preparation of certiÜed reference materials for hereditary  facilitating metabolic and electronic functions of the cell. Mutations in  haemochromatosis the GJB2 gene that encodes Cx26 are the major cause of autosomal  D. E. Barton1, E. M. Donohoe1, J. Marki-Zay2, C. L. Klein2;  recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL). The high carrier  1Our LadyÒs Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin, Ireland, 2Institute for Reference  frequency of these GJB2 mutations in many ethnic groups suggests  Materials and Measurements (IRMM), Geel, Belgium. there may be a heterozygous advantage. A previous study has shown  The use of appropriate Reference Materials (RMs) to validate test  a link with the skin, speciÜcally a thicker epidermis in heterozygotes  equipment or testing methods is an important part of any analytical  and homozygotes for the R143W GJB2 allele. testing system. CertiÜed reference materials (CRMs) are RMs whose  Here, we describe in vitro analysis of deafness-associated missense  characteristics have been fully documented and validated. Currently,  GJB2 mutations that provide further evidence of a physiological  no CRMs are available for genetic testing. The CRMGEN project  mechanism that could provide GJB2- phenotypic advantage in vivo.  is a 14-centre collaboration funded by the European CommissionÒs  Immortalized keratinocytes and other cell lines were transfected with  Measurement and Testing program*. We are developing reference  various mutant and wildtype Cx26-EGFP constructs. 48 hours post  measurement systems and producing CRMs for molecular genetic  transfection, unÜxed cells were FACS analysed for EGFP expressing  tests. Prototype RMs are being developed for a wide range of tests.  cells and also propidium iodide, the latter as an indicator of cell death. These prototype RMs, developed in one of 4 genetics centres,  All cells transfected with the NSHL associated GJB2 mutations  are validated in 7 other centres before extensive Üeld trials. The  resulted in reduced keratinocyte cell death compared to wildtype Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 258 GJB2 and dramatically less than the skin disease-associated GJB2  Ý, MCH 26.4-30.2 g/dl), an ŋ /nonŋ ratio of 1.24-1.30 and a light  mutations. increase of Hb A2 level (3.5-3.7%). These data can be superimposed  Increased cell survival may hint towards a cellular mechanism  with the IVS-1 nt 6 T->C haematological heterozygote phenotype.  supporting a putative selective epidermal advantage for hearing loss  The COD 39/IVS 1-7 genetic compound seems to be associated with  associated GJB2 mutations in different populations. Reduced cell  a mild non transfusional Thalassemia Intermedia phenotype. death may extend the keratinocyte terminal differentiation programme  resulting in a slightly thicker epidermis leading to improved barrier  
P0808 . Mutation screening of SL
C26 A4 by D-HPLC analysis: new  function against infection. Current studies are focusing on bacterial  mutations and phenotypic correlations in Pendred syndrome  invasion by promotion of signalling events through various different  and DFNB4 Cx hemichannels in keratinocytes. E. Bieth, D. Deguine, S. Ibos, O. Deguine, Y. Chin, B. Fraysse, P. Calvas;  H\x98pital Purpan, Toulouse, France. 
P0806 . CHILD-syndrome: A metabolic disease with impact on  Recessive mutations of SL
C26 A4 (PDS) gene are a common cause  development of Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic deafness (DFNB4 type).  L. Leveleki1, A. K\x99nig2, D. Bornholdt1, H. Engel1, R. Happle2, K. Grzeschik1;  Pendred syndrome is caracterised by sensorineural deafness,  1Institut f\x9er Allgemeine Humangenetik, Marburg, Germany, 2Klinik f\x9er Dermato- goitre and temporal bone abnormalities including dilated vestibular  logie und Allergologie, Marburg, Germany. acqueduc (DVA) and Mondini dysplasia. DFNB4 is distinct from  CHILD syndrome (Congenital Hemidysplasia with Ichthyosiform  Pendred syndrome by absence of thyreomegaly. We performed by  Nevus and Limb Defects, MIM 308050), is an X-linked dominant,  means of denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (D- male-lethal trait characterized by an inÝammatory nevus that usually  HPLC) and DNA sequencing, molecular analysis of the SL
C26 A4  shows striking lateralization with strict midline demarcation as well  gene in a panel of 61 unrelated patients with phenotype compatible  as ipsilateral hypoplasia of the body. Recently, we were able to  with Pendred syndrome or non-syndromic recessive type deafness.  demonstrate that this trait is caused by mutations in in the gene  To date, we have characterized 12 deafness-causing alleles  NSDHL (NAD(P)H steroid dehydrogenase-like protein) encoding a  of SL
C26 A4. A patient with a typical Pendred syndrome was  3¦-hydroxy-steroid dehydrogenase functioning in the cholesterol  homozygote for the recurrent IV
S8 +1G>A splice mutation. Of patients  biosynthetic pathway. NSDHL maps to Xq28. Mutational analysis in  with Mondini dysplasia or/and DVA but without thyreomegaly, three  30 familial and sporadic cases shows that the phenotype is caused  were compound heterozygotes and four carried only one disease- by loss of function because it can be associated with nonsense- and  causing mutation. In conclusion, we show that D-HPLC is an efÜcient  missense mutations as well as with deletions eliminating several  and cost effective methodology for the rapid screening of mutations  exons or the complete gene. Missense mutations exchanging  in the 21 exons of the SL
C26 A4 gene. We report detailed clinical  conserved amino acids outside the predicted functional domains  data on screened patients with conÜrmed DFNB4 to contribute in  (co-factor binding site, catalytically active site, transmembrane  elucidating genotype-phenotype correlations. helix) identify positions of potential functional importance. Two  human alleles of NSDHL (A105V and G205S), which have been  
P0809 . A novel metal-binding protein in human mitochondria is  observed in four and two unrelated females, respectively, were  involved in the biogenesis of the small Tim proteins investigated for complementation in the erg26ts yeast strain, which  U. Rothbauer1, N. M\x9ehlenbein1, M. F. Bauer2, S. Hofmann1;  is mutated in the orthologous gene, ERG26. Two murine X-linked  1Institute of Diabetes Research, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical Che- dominant male-lethal traits, bare patches (Bpa) and striated (Str) had  mistry, Molecular Diagnostics and Mitochondrial Genetics, Munich, Germany. previously been associated with mutations in Nsdhl. Remarkably,  The human small Tim proteins are soluble components of the  these mutants do not show a lateralization of the ichthyotic nevus.  mitochondrial intermembrane space (IMS), which are involved in  The developmental defects associated with lack of NSDHL suggest  the import and insertion of hydrophobic precursor proteins into the  an impact on the hedgehog signaling pathway during development.  inner membrane. They belong to a family of evolutionary conserved  Immunohistochemical analysis was applied to study this effect  proteins characterised by a common Cys4-zinc binding motif. on determination of left-right asymmetry in Bpa mice during early  Little is known about the biogenesis of the small Tim proteins and  development. how they are transported into the IMS. It has been suggested that  binding of zinc via the Cys4 motif in the IMS might provide the  
P0807 . A New Mutation in the Ȳ -Globin Gene (IVS I-7 Aŗ T)  driving force for the import of the small Tim proteins across the outer  Discovered in two Italian Families. membrane. M. Travi1, M. BafÜco2, M. I. Parodi2, S. Ronzoni3, C. Vimercati3, N. Masera3, A.  We identiÜed a novel mitochondrial protein of the IMS which might  Biasi1, D. A. Coviello1, C. Curcio1, L. Porcaro1, P. Primignani1, G. Ivaldi2;  function as a metal delivery factor during biogenesis of the small Tim  1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Human Genetic Lab - Ospedale  proteins. This protein also contains a metal binding site and is able to  Galliera, Genoa, Italy, 3Pediatric Clinic - Ospedale San Gerardo, Monza (Milan),  bind divalent cations such as Zn2+ and Cu2+. We used the human  Italy. small Tim protein DD
P1  (deafness dystonia peptide 1) as a substrate  Here we describe a novel mutation at nucleotide 7 of the Ürst intron  to analyse the function of this component in more detail. We could  of the Ȳ -globin gene. The new mutation was found in four members  show that the import efÜciency of DD
P1  and its steady state protein  of two different Italian families: two carriers (mother and her child)  level in the IMS is signiÜcantly increased in the presence of this  were identiÜed on the Ürst family while on the second one the A->T  component. We therefore suggest that the new metal-binding protein  substitution at position IVS I -7 was found in a carrier woman and  is involved in the biogenesis of the small Tim proteins by stabilising  in a child with Thalassemia Intermedia phenotype. DNA study in  this proteins the IMS. Thalassemia Intermedia propositus showed a genetic compound  characterized by the presence of the IVS-1 nt 7 A->T and the  
P0810 . High frequency of heterozygous classical CY
P21   CODON 39 C->T mutations. Haematological and haemoglobin data  mutations in women with nonclassical congenital adrenal  were obtained with an automated cell counter, Hb A2 and HbF levels  hyperplasia (CAH) were quantitaded by HPLC analysis and globin chain synthesis was  U. Gro¦, H. Drexler, J. Jacobeit, H. M. Schulte;  performed by the standard methods. Second step of investigation  Endokrinologikum Hamburg, Center for Hormonal and Metabolic Diseases,  (molecular analysis) was performed by direct DNA sequencing.  Reproductive Endocrinology, Hamburg, Germany. To conÜrm the results ASO probes were synthesized for dot-blot  Introduction: DeÜciency of 21-hydroxylase (21-OHD) is an autosomal  hybridazation. recessive disease, caused by mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene  The new mutation can be considered a rare nucleotide defect since  (CY
P21 ). It is the most frequent CAH, characterized by hirsutism  it was not identiÜed among the uncharacterized Ȳ -thalassemic  and prenatal virilization in females, accounting for more than 90% of  chromosomes from Mediterranean area. CAH cases. The syndrome is divided into three groups according to  In all subject whom the mutation is present as carrier state the  severity of phenotype: classical forms (SW, salt-wasting; SV, simple  haematological data exhibit a very mild microcytosis (MCV 79.9-88.2 Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 259 virilizing) and nonclassical (NC). and 23 in relation to diabetes mellitus or psychiatric disorders (http: Patients: Examination for mutations in the CY
P21  gene has  //www.khri.med.umich.edu/research/). been carried out in 67 unrelated female patients with suspected  Five unrelated Danish patients with typical clinical WS presentation  nonclassical 21-OHD, due to phenotype (hirsutism, acne, menstrual  were included in sequencing of the entire gene and intron border  irregularities) and elevated base line and ACTH-stimulated levels of  regions. We identiÜed six different WF
S1  mutations, of which four had  17- hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP). These women were referred to  not been publsihed before. our center with the diagnosis of primary or secondary infertility. Patient 1 and 2 were homozygous for the mutations, F883fsX953  Results: Of those 67 patients evaluated, all patients carry at least  respectively delV415. Both probands had consanquineous parents.  one CY
P21  mutation. 57% of patients carry one classical mutation  Patient 3 was a compound heterozygote for the mutations, A133T  (IV
S2 -13 A/C->G, deletion of 8nt, Q318X, R356W) or in combination  and 
L543 R. The identiÜed mutations segregated in accordance  with one of the nonclassical mutations (
P30 L, V281L, 
P453 S). In two  with autosomal recessive inheritance, as expected for these three  patients we identiÜed novel mutations. patients. Conclusion: CY
P21  mutations causing classical 21-OHD occurred  Patient 4 and 5 were shown to be heterozygous for the mutations,  with high frequency in women suspected for nonclassical CAH  Q194X respectively H313Y. One parent to patient 4 carried the  according to medical history, clinical symptoms and biochemical  expected mutation, whereas in patient 5 the mutation was not found  investigations. in any of the parents and therefore a new mutation. Molecular analysis of CAH due to CY
P21  mutations is one important  In summery, our study contributes to the molecular understanding  step in diagnosis, counseling and treatment of women with signs  of this rare disorder and extends the spectrum of mutations to be  of adrenal hyperandrogenism to prevent genital abnormalities in  associated with this syndrome in order for establishing a speciÜc  affected newborn girls. diagnosis, providing genetic counselling and the possibillity for  Genetic counseling was recommended for all patients and partners.  prenatal diagnosis, whatever wanted by the families. Prenatal therapy -in utero- using dexamethasone was advised in  pregnancies at risk. 
P0813 . Gene dosage analysis of the MEC
P2  gene detects hot  spots deletions in patients with Rett syndrome and duplications  
P0811 . Genomic rearrangements at the IGHMB
P2  gene locus in  in males with complicated mental retardation. patients with SMARD1. F. Laccone, V. Kronz, S. Barnikol, I. J\x9enemann;  U. P. Guenther1, M. Schuelke1, E. Bertini2, A. DÓAmico2, N. Goemans3, K.  Institute of Human Genetics, G\x99ttingen, Germany. Grohmann1, C. H\x9ebner1, R. Varon1;  MEC
P2  mutations are responsible for Rett syndrome (RTT).  1Charit\x8d University Medical School of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Bambino Ges\x9c  Approximately a quarter of classic RTT cases, however, do not have  ChildrenÓs Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3University ChildrenÓs Hospital, Leuven,  an identiÜable mutation. We hypothesised that larger deletions arising  Belgium. from a deletion prone region (DPR) occur commonly and are not  Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress  being routinely detected by the current PCR-mediated strategies.  type 1 (SMARD1) is caused by mutations in the immunoglobulin  We developed and applied a quantitative PCR strategy (qPCR)  ´-binding protein 2 gene (IGHMB
P2 ). Patients affected by the  to samples referred for diagnostic assessment from 140 patients  infantile form of SMARD1 present with early onset respiratory  among whom RTT was strongly suspected and from a second  distress within the Ürst 13 months of life. So far, neither patients with  selected group of 31 girls with classical RTT. The investigation was  juvenile onset nor with larger deletions/ rearrangements in IGHMB
P2   restricted Ürstly to exon 3 and exon 4 and adjacent region of the  have been reported. In this study we investigated one patient with  MEC
P2  gene. We identiÜed 10 large deletions (7.1%) within the  infantile (4 months) and another with juvenile (4.3 years) onset of  Ürst group and 5 deletions in the second group (16.1%). We found  respiratory distress. Direct sequencing of all exons and Ýanking intron  a majority of breakpoints in Alu repeats and in the DPR region that  sequences in both patients had revealed a mutation on only one  contains a perfect chi sequence, known to be recombinogenic in E.  allele. coli. We propose that the chi sequence and Alu repeats are potent  In both patients we identiÜed genomic rearrangements on the  recombinogenic factors. This hypothesis has been validated in an  other allele of IGHMB
P2  by means of Southern blotting. Putative  in vitro-model supporting the interaction between the chi sequence  breakpoints were conÜrmed by PCR on genomic and cDNA. and Alu repeats. Furthermore, we have extended the qPCR to the  The patient with juvenile onset had an Alu/ Alu mediated  complete MEC
P2  gene including the 5Ó UTR and 3Ó UTR regions  rearrangement, which resulted in a loss of ~18.5 kb. On mRNA  and tested 49 females and 71 males. Ongoing experiments are  level this caused an in-frame deletion of exons 3-7. The patient with  suggesting the existence of a possible second hot spot for deletions.  infantile onset had a complex rearrangement with two deletions and  Surprisingly, in two males the qPCR indicates the presence of  an inversion between intron 10 and 14. This rearrangement led to a  a duplication of the MEC
P2  gene and adjacent regions. Further  frameshift on mRNA level. experiments will focus on the characterization of the deletions and  Our results show that SMARD1 can be caused by genomic  duplications. rearrangements at the IGHMB
P2  gene locus. This might be missed  by mere sequence analysis. Additionally, we demonstrated that  
P0814 . Prevalence and Spectrum of Sarcomeric Gene Mutations  juvenile SMARD1 could be caused by mutations in the IGHMB
P2   in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy in an unselected Patient cohort gene. The complex nature of the genomic rearrangement in patient  S. D\x99rr, W. Bekmann, W. Engel, G. Schl\x9eter;  2 with infantile SMARD1 is discussed, and a deletion mechanism is  University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany. proposed. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominat  disease, characterized by myocardial hypertrophy and myoÜbrillar  
P0812 . Molecular characterization of WF
S1  in Üve Danish  disarray. Clinical manifestation range from asymptomatic courses  patients with Wolfram syndrome to chronic progressive heart failure and/or sudden cardiac death.  L. Hansen1, H. Eiberg1, L. Tranebj½rg2,1, T. Rosenberg3;  HCM exhibits substantial inter- and intragenic heterogenity. More  1Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2H:S Bispebjerg Hospital,  than 200 mutations have been identiÜed within 11 genes, ten of  Copenhagen, Denmark, 3National Eye Clinic for the Visually Impaired, Copen- them encoding for cardiac sarcomeric proteines. Screening of HCM  hagen, Denmark. patients for mutations in these genes provides important diagnostic  Wolfram syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, caused  and prognostic information. For HCM diagnostic, we developed an  by mutations in the WF
S1  gene on 4p16.1. The condition is also  mixed strategy with DHPLC analysis of all exons of the TNNT2 gene  called DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy,  and direct sequencing of MYH7 (exon 3-24) and MYBP
C3 . and deafness), and was Ürst described in 1938. After cloning of the  For DHPLC screening of TNNT2 all amplicons were adjusted to one  WF
S1  gene (1998), more than 161 disease mutations are known  common PCR proÜle and fragments were run along with controls  in the gene, 119 of which are associated with Wolfram syndrome,  in one DHPLC run, thus complete analysis of TNNT2 for 6 Patients  19 in connection with low-tone sensorineural hearing impairment,  can be performed in one week. In 92 unrelated index patients with Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 260 a completed analysis of TNNT2, we found 3 patients (3.3%) with a  
P0817 . Demonstration of increased SHP-2 phosphatase activity  mutation, all displaying the same mutation (R92W). in lymphocytes of Noonan-Patients and recombinat SHP-2  62 of these patients were further screened for mutations in MYH7 and  protein and mutation dependant downregulation of STAT-1  MYBP
C3 . In total, 21 mutations were found. 10 mutations were found  pathway in MYBP
C3 , 9 in MYH7 and only 2 patients had TNNT2 mutations. G. Schl\x9eter, R. Ufartes, W. Engel;  Previous reports estimated the frequency of TNNT2 mutations in  University of G\x99ttingen, G\x99ttingen, Germany. HCM patients as 15-20%. In our experience and according to recently  Mutations in the PTPN11-gene, coding for the non-receptor tyrosine  published data, this frequency seems to much lower in the range of  phosphataseSHP-2, are causative for Noonan-Syndrome I (NSI) and  2-5%. for LEOPARD-Syndrom (LS). Based of protein conformation modelling and theoretical  
P0815 . A novel frameshift mutation in the SRY gene detected  considerations it was postulated that Noonan-typical mutation exert  in a family presenting complete gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer  a gain of function by inducing increased or deregulated SHP-2  syndrome) phosphatase activity. D. Heine-Su\x95er1,2, L. Torres-Juan1, A. P\x8drez-Granero1, M. Bernues1, J. Rosell1,  We investigated the biochemical effect of several recurrent and of  N. Govea1;  novel PTPN11 mutations and demonstrate an approximately 2-fold  1Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Departament de  increase of SHP-2 phosphatse activity both in EBV transformed  Biologia; Universitat de les illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. lymphocytes of NS-patients and in recombinant SHP-2 protein (wt vs.  Mutations in the testis-determining gene SRY have been shown to  mutated). result in XY sex reversal with pure gonadal dysgenesis. Most of the  Because SHP-2 is known to dephosphorylize phosphorylated STAT1- mutations that have been described fall into a DNA binding domain  protein, a major signal transduction factor, we sought to demonstrate  termed HMG box. In addition, there are several cases in the literature  the biological effect of deregulated SHP-2 phosphatase activity on  of familial gonadal dysgenesis where the SRY mutation is shared  intracellular signaling pathway. SOCS-1 is an acute phase protein  by several of the siblings within a family. We present here a novel  which acts as a negative feedback regulator of IL-6 and Ifnȳ induced  familial nonsense mutation that is shared by two XY sisters but not by  stimuli and is mainly regulated via the JAK/STAT pathway, namely  their normal brother. The two sisters (28 and 31 years of age) show  STAT1. In a promoter/reporter-assay we showed that cotransfection  complete sex reversal with pure gonadal dysgenesis, and both have  of SOCS-1-promoter/luciferase-plasmid together with mutant SHP-2  developed bilateral gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma that arose  plasmid results in a downregulation SOCS-1 promoter actvity. from their streak gonads. The mutation consists of an insertion of a  Our data for the Ürst time provide experimental evidence that  cytosine at nucleotide position 226, in between position 3 of codon  PTPN11-mutation act via a gain of function mechanism and  76 and position 1 of codon 77 within the HMG box. This insertion  demonstrate a biological effect on intracellular signalling. results in a change of the amino acid sequence from this point on and  a premature stop codon 26 amino acids downstream. Presumably,  
P0818 . Resequencing the whole CFTR gene as a new  the mutation results in a truncated protein with most of the HMG box  microarray-based diagnostic tool missing. Interestingly, although the two sisters present the same  M. Bonin1, C. Mai1, S. Poths1, U. Holzmann-Mau1, D. Gl\x89ser2, O. Rie¦1;  mutation we have not detected it in genomic DNA extracted from  1Institut f\x9er Humangenetik, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Gregor-Mendel-Laboratorien,  peripheral blood of their normal father. This suggests a low frequency  Neu-Ulm, Germany. mosaicism absent in blood but present in the fatherÓs germinal line. Cystic Übrosis (CF) is the most common genetic disease among  Caucasians. The CF gene (27 exons) encodes for a protein that  
P0816 . Alanine-expansions in Hoxd13, causative for  acts as an epithelian membrane channel. Making an accurate, early  Synpolydactyly, lead to protein accumulations in the cytoplasm diagnosis is essential to the management of the disease. The recent  A. N. Albrecht1, K. S\x9ering2, S. Stricker1, A. B\x99ddrich3, E. E. Wanker3, S. Mund- development of a genotypic CFTR mutation screening has greatly  los2;  improved diagnostic accuracy, but the direct sequencing of the whole  1MPI for molecular genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Charite, Institut f\x9er medizinische  CFTR gene is very expensive and time-consuming. Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 3MDC for molecular medicine, Berlin, Germany. Here we report the Ürst microarray-based resequencing analysis  Hox genes are master regulators of development that control  of the complete CFTR gene. For this purpose, we used the  patterning and morphogenesis. They play a major role during limb  oligonucleotide-microarray technology and designed a CustomSeq- development as illustrated by gene inactivation experiments in mice  Array for the whole CFTR gene sequence. The hybridisation analysis  and mutation analysis in human malformations. is a promising new technology which potentially allows rapid and  We have investigated the human synpolydactyly (SPD). The  cost-effective screen for all possible mutations and sequence  phenotype is caused by the expansion of a polyalanine encoding  variations in genomic DNA. repeat in the 5Ò region of the Hoxd13 gene. Different alanine- Twenty-eight unrelated CF patients were analysed. All 27 exons of  expansions from +7 to +14 alanines are found and the penetrance  each sample were ampliÜed by PCR using speciÜc primers, pooled,  and severity of the phenotype increases with the increase of the  labelled, fragmented, and hybridised to the CFTR-CustomSeq array.  expansion. The phenotype consists of central polydactyly, syndactyly  In addition all samples were conÜrmed by conventional sequencing  and brachydactyly. procedure. To investigate wether the alanine-expansion has an effect on the  All analysed CFTR mutations could be detected by the new  distribution of the protein in the cell, we transiently transfected COS- diagnostic system. The CFTR-array provides base calls at more  1 cells with an expression vector containing tagged Hoxd13wt and  than 99.99 accuracy compared to capillary sequencing. Replicate  mutant proteins, with different expansions, from +7 to +21 alanines.  experiments demonstrated a reproducibility of more than 99.99%. The wt protein is always localized in the nucleus. The mutant  Our experiments with a microarray-based sequencing of the CFTR  proteins show localization in the nucleus as well as accumulation  gene demonstrates a new efÜcient and cost effective method for  in the cytoplasm. Interestingly, the number of cells with protein  analyzing large amounts of sequence and opened a new dimension  accumulations increased with the increasing number of alanines. This  of genetic diagnostics. could be an explanation for the increase of penetrance and severity  of the phenotype in SPD patients. 
P0819 . Mutations in SL
C6 A8 (Creatine Transporter) Are  Our results indicate that alanine expansions in Hoxd13 results in  Responsible For About 1% of Mental Retardation in Males misfolding of the protein which cummulates in the cytoplasm, thus  C. E. Schwartz1, E. H. Rosenberg2, L. S. Almeida2, A. J. Clark1, C. Jakobs2, T.  preventing the protein from entering the nucleus. J. DeGrauw3, R. C. Michaelis1, R. E. Stevenson1, G. S. Salomons2;  1JC Self Research Institute, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2VU University  Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Cincinnati ChildrenÓs Hospital  Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 261 Mutations in the creatine transporter gene, SL
C6 A8, located in Xq28,  LGMD phenotype according to established criteria, and with  have been found in families with X-linked mental retardation (XLMR)  transmission compatible with an autosomal recessive mode of  as well as some males with MR. In order to estimate the frequency of  inheritance. mutations in SL
C6 A8 in the MR population, a screening of 501 males  In our serie of 20 patients suffering from LGMD of likely autosomal  with MR of unknown cause was undertaken. All 13 exons of SL
C6 A8  dominant mode of inheritance, we identiÜed only one mutation in the  were sequenced using genomic DNA. Seven causative mutations  gene encoding Caveoline-3. The patient, 71 years old at diagnosis,  were identiÜed: 4 missense, 2 deletions and 1 splice site alteration.  seemingly is the Ürst reported case of late-onset LGMD1C. The  For the missense mutations and the splice site change, testing of  identiÜed mutation (R27Q) has been reported before in patients  500 X chromosomes from normal males failed to detect any of the  suffering from rippling muscle disease, isolated hyperCKaemia  changes. Common clinical Ündings in the patients with missense  or distal myopathy (in one case). Our case report illustrates the  or deletion mutations were the presence of seizures and behavior  implication of this mutation in a fourth phenotype, and the high  problems. Our Ündings of 7 mutations in 501 samples would indicate  phenotypic variablility associated with mutations in the gene encoding  about 1.4% of males with MR might have a SL
C6 A8 mutation. Thus,  Caveolin-3, even for the same mutation. Further studies should lead  DNA sequence analysis might be warranted in any male with MR  to the identiÜcation of genetic or non-genetic factors modulating the  of unknown cause. Alternatively, since mutations in the gene are  phenotype associated with these mutations. associated with an increased creatine/creatinine ratio in urine, a urine  screen in this same population may prove valuable. 
P0822 . Defects in O-glycosylation associated with muscular  dystrophy and lissencephaly 
P0820 . ConÜrmation of complex dystrophin gene mutations  C. Gross1, G. Uyanik2, G. Haliloglu3, T. Willer4, B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz5, M.  applying the MPLA-method Shamdeen6, S. Strahl4, H. Topaloglu3, U. Hehr1, J. Winkler2;  B. Halliger-Keller, M. Werner, W. Kress, C. R. M\x9eller, G. Meng;  1Center for Gynecological Endocrinology, Reproductive Medicine and Human  Institute of Human Genetics, W\x9erzburg, Germany. Genetics, Regensburg, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, University of  Deletions/ insertions of whole exons in carrier women and insertional  Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric Neurology,  mutations in male patients are difÜcult to detect in the large  Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Cell Biology and Plant  dystrophin gene using routine screening methods, e.g. multiplex  Physiology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 5Department of  PCR, Southern blot, FISH analysis and RT-PCR fragment analysis  Human Genetics, University of Saarland, Homburg, Germany, 6Department of  from muscle mRNA. Now a quantitative multiplex ligation dependent  Pediatrics, University of Saarland, Homburg, Germany. probe ampliÜcation assay (MPLA, MRC Holland, Amsterdam) for the  Defects in O-glycosylation have recently been identiÜed as the cause  dystrophin gene is available. Two mixes of 39 or 40 exon-speciÜc  of a spectrum of autosomal recessive congenital disorders, affecting  probe pairs, each, with universal primer sequences were applied  both muscle function and the central nervous system. Mutations in  in two reactions, speciÜcally ligated and multiplex ampliÜed with  the gene for protein O-mannose-beta-1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltrans Ýuorescently labelled universal primers. The multiple fragments were  ferase (POMGnT1, OMIM 606822) cause Muscle-Eye-Brain Disease  visualized on a DNA sequencer (Beckman CEQ 2000) and validated  (MEB, OMIM 253280) and in addition have been reported in patients  by internal controls. with severe forms of Fukuyama-Congenital-Muscular-Dystrophy  Two difÜcult diagnostical cases could be solved. A symptomatic  (FCMD, OMIM 253800) or mild forms of Walker-Warburg-Syndrome  female carrier was suspicious to have an out of frame duplication  (WWS, OMIM 236670). In other probands with WWS mutations in  of exons 6 and 7 of the dystrophin gene. RT-PCR of mRNA isolated  the gene for protein O-mannosyltransferase (POMT1, OMIM 607423)  from muscle tissue gave only a normal sized fragment (apparently  have been identiÜed. nonsense mRNA decay of mutated RNA). The MPLA analysis  In all these different syndromes the clinical features include  conÜrmed an isolated exon 7 duplication. In a male patient with DMD  congenital muscular dystrophy, brain malformations and ocular  phenotype and mental retardation we detected an in frame deletion of  abnormalities. The MRIs or CT scans reveal cobblestone  exons 45-47 by multiplex PCR. But Western blot analysis of muscle  lissencephaly (lissencephaly type II) with pachygyria or  tissue showed no dystrophin protein. Using RT-PCR mRNA analysis  polymicrogyria and sometimes also hydrocephalus. The cerebellum  an aberrant fragment of this region could be directly sequenced. A  can present only with cysts or can be severely hypoplastic. There  tandem duplication of exons 43/44 followed by a deletion of exons  is usually an atrophy of the brain stem. The eyes can show anterior  45-47 was suggested. The complicated mutational pattern was  chamber anomalies with colobomas, glaucoma, or cataracts, myopia  likewise conÜrmed by MPLA method. and retinal dysplasia. The patients are often severely mentally  retarded, present with severe hypotonia and weakness, and very  
P0821 . Molecular analysis of the Alpha-Sarcoglycan, Gamma- often with epileptic seizures. Sarcoglycan and Caveolin-3 genes in a serie of patients with  Here, we report the genetic analysis and clinical data of 3 probands  Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy. with characteristic phenotypic features of WWS or MEB including  M. Krahn1, R. Bernard1, K. NGuyen1, J. Pouget2, V. Labelle1, D. Figarella-Bran- muscular dystrophy and brain malformations, where we have found 3  ger3, N. Levy1;  novel mutations within the POMGnT1 gene. Mutation detection in those probands will not only support genetic  1Laboratoire de Genetique moleculaire, Dept de Genetique medicale, Hopital  counseling of the affected families but also provide new insights into  dÓenfants La Timone, Marseille, France, 2Service des maladies neuromusculai- the importance of O-glycosylation for the proper formation of cortex  res, H\x98pital dÓadultes LaTimone, Marseille, France, 3Service dÓanatomie patho- and cerebellum. logique et de neuropathologie, H\x98pital dÓadultes LaTimone, Marseille, France. Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMD) constitue an  
P0823 . Molecular analysis of Pyruvate Kinase deÜciency using  heterogenous group of autosomal dominant (LGMD1) or recessive  dHPLC : a 3 year study (LGMD2) muscular disorders. S. Pissard1, I. Max-Audit1, M. Tosi2, L. Skopinski3, M. Goossens1;  Among LGMD2, sarcoglycanopathies (LGMD2C-F) are caused by  mutations in the genes encoding Gamma-,Alpha-,Beta- and Delta- 1INSERM U468 -AP-HP, Creteil, France, 2INSERM -EMI 9906, Universit\x8d de  Sarcoglycans respectively. Rouen, France, 3AP-HP, Creteil, France. Among LGMD1, LGMD1C is caused by mutations in the gene  Pyruvate Kinase deÜciency (PKRdef)(OMIM : 266200) is one of the  encoding Caveolin-3. most frequent anomalies of the energetic pathway of erythrocytes.  Our laboratory in Marseille has developed the molecular testing for  It induces a chronic anemia of variable severity from silent carrier  mutations in the Alpha- and Gamma-Sarcoglycan genes (SSCP  to severe alpha thalassemia like disease. Research for molecular  screening followed by direct sequencing of electrophoretic variants)  anomaly of PKLR gene (1q21) has shown that 80% of mutants are of  and in the gene encoding Caveolin-3 (direct sequencing) on a routine  private type located on the 11 exons, with only 3 frequent mutations  basis. : R486W, R510Q and 
E241 X. Using dHPLC, we have screened  In a serie of 11 patients, we identiÜed mutations in the Alpha- or  the PKLR gene in 49 families affected by PKRdef. We founded  Gamma-Sarcoglycan genes for 6 individuals having a caracteristic  a mutation in 65 from the 86 potentially affected alleles including Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 262 R486W (10 alleles), R510Q (7 alleles) and 
E241 X (4 alleles). 25 new  nonsense mutations in cDNA. Some of these mutations in the genes  mutations were described. This result is consistent with the expected  CO
L1 A1, CO
L1 A2, CO
L3 A1 and FBN1 could not be detected by  frequency of private and frequent mutations in PKRdef. In 34 from the  direct sequencing alone, either due to the low level of mosaicism or  49 families, we found a genotype in agreement with the phenotype,  because the causative mutation was located hundreds of bases away  only 1 allele in 7 families, 0 alleles in 8 families (overall sensitivity of  from the exons. 75%). Two hypotheses may explain such result : 1- the existence of  other molecular pathology as deletion. We have designed a QMPSF  
P0826 . The spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 ATTCT repeat is  test to search for deletion in PKLR gene. A deletion removing from  present in Brazilian SCA families, but not in Portuguese subjects  exon 4 to 10 was found . 2- The PKLR gene may not be involved in  affected with ataxia the 8 last families. This hypothesis brings sensitivity up to 92% with  I. Alonso1,2, L. Jardim3, T. Matsuura4, T. Ashizawa5, J. Sequeiros1,2, I. Silveira1,2;  is close to what is expected from dHPLC mutation screening. Since  1UnIGENe, IBMC, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Porto,  enzymatic measurement in erythrocytes is prone to artifact, molecular  Portugal, 3Hosp. Cl\x91nicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Dept. Molec.  screening of the PKLR gene may be a part of the workup for the  Human Genetics, Baylor Col. Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Dept.  etiology of chronic anemia. Neurology, Univ. Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA10) is a rare autosomal dominant  
P0824 . Increased copy number of DAZ genes in subfertile men neurodegenerative disorder mainly characterized by gait and limb  K. Writzl1, B. Zorn2, B. Peterlin1;  ataxia, and seizures. The disease-causing mutation is the unstable  1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Uni- expansion of an ATTCT repeat, located on intron 9 of the SCA10  versity Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Andrology Centre, Department of  gene: the normal range is 10 to 22 pentanucleotide repeats, while  Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia. expanded alleles range from 800 to 4500 units. SCA10 was Ürst  Deletions of the AZFc (azoospermia factor c) region are the most  found in 5 families of Mexican origin and, recently, Brazilian families  common known cause of spermatogenic failure. Different genes map  were also described. to AZFc but the strongest candidate is DAZ (deleted in azoospermia)  We have ascertained and studied 274 unrelated individuals,  gene family, which consists of four nearly identical gene copies.  representing 82 families with autosomal dominant ataxia, 31  Recent studies indicate that a minority (8%) of patients with severe  apparently recessive ataxia kindreds and 161 isolated cases;  oligozoospermia have a DAZ1 and DAZ2 gene deletion that is  234 were of Portuguese origin, while 40 were from Brazil. Clinical  mediated by homologous recombination between duplicons termed  manifestations included progressive gait ataxia, associated with,  gr. The reciprocal products of these deletion events, partial AZFc  seizures, mental retardation or tremor. A modiÜed PCR-based  duplications, have not been reported to date. method was used to detect the repeat expansion, followed by 6%  Therefore, our objectives in this study were: (i) to determine whether  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and hybridization with a 32P  DAZ genes are prone to duplications, (ii) to determine whether DAZ  labelled ATTCT probe. gene duplications are associated with male infertility, (iii) to re- We detected an ATTCT repeat expansion in one family (2 affected  evaluate the importance of partial DAZ gene deletions in subfertile  individuals) with autosomal dominant transmission and in an isolated  men. case, all of Brazilian origin, and presenting with a progressive  Ninety patients with male idiopathic subfertility (44 azoospermics  cerebellar ataxia without seizures. No mutation was found in any of  and 46 oligozoospermic) and forty-seven fertile men controls were  the Portuguese subjects. In conclusion, our results did not show the  analysed using real time PCR. The incidence of two DAZ gene copies  presence of the SCA10 expansion in any of the Portuguese ataxia  was 21,7% (10/46) in oligozoopermic men, 9% (4/44) in azoospermic  families studied, conÜrming that this is a rare form of hereditary  men and 6,4% (3/47) in control group. Six or eight DAZ gene copies  ataxia, conÜned, until now, to the Mexican and Brazilian populations. were only found in oligozoospermic (6,5%; 3/46) and azoospermic  (6,8%; 3/44) men. Increased number of DAZ gene copies could be a  
P0827 . Molecular vs. clinical diagnosis in Bartter and Gitelman  risk factor for spermatogenic failure. Partial DAZ gene deletions are  syndromes common in oligozoospermic but not in azoospermic men. Real -time  S. Tedeschi1, M. L. Syr\x8en2, N. Borsa1, F. Sironi1, C. Mattiello1, D. Coviello1, A.  PCR is a valuable, simple and fast method for the determination of  Edefonti3, M. Travi1, A. Bettinelli4;  number of DAZ gene copies. 1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Lab. of Medical Genetics, Milan, Italy,  2Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Department of Paediatrics and Neonatology,  
P0825 . Comprehensive mutation analysis is not possible by  Univ. of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Department of  direct sequencing alone Paediatric Dialysis, Clinica De Marchi, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Paediatrics,  E. van den Akker, M. Muys, J. F. M. Keek, R. van Schooten, G. Pals;  San Leopoldo Mandic Hospital, Merate, Lecco, Italy., Lecco, Italy. VU medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Gitelman (GS) and Bartter (BS) syndromes are a group of closely  Direct sequencing is often considered the Ðgold standardÑ for  related hereditary tubulopathies, characterised by renal salt wasting,  detection of unknown mutations. Many mutations, hoever, cannot be  hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis, normal blood pressure and  detected by direct sequencing. hyperreninaemic hyperaldosteronism. Loss-of-function mutations  The most common causes are: have been identiÜed in four genes involved in transepithelial transport  - exclusive ampliÜcation of the wild type allele due to a deletion  of sodium chloride in the renal tubules: the SL
C12 A1 and SL
C12 A3  encompassing at least one of the PCR primers genes that encode the NKC
C2  and the NCCT cotransporters,  - asymmetric PCR due to a polymorphism in one of the primer  respectively; the CLCNKB and KCNJ1 genes encoding for the ClC- annealing sites Kb chloride channel and the ROMK potassium channel, respectively.  - somatic mosaicism Ante/neonatal form of Bartter syndrome (type I and II) is caused by  - splice errors due to mutations far away from the exons mutations in NKC
C2  cotransporter or ROMK channel and patients  Comprehensive detection of unknown mutations requires a  present similar characteristic clinical and biochemical data. The  combination of tests. Large deletions and duplications can be readily  ante/neonatal Bartter is easily differentiated from the other two  detected by quantitative methods, such as MLPA (multiplex ligation  forms; Gitelman and classic Bartter (type III) syndromes overlap  dependent probe ampliÜcation), testing all exons of a gene. Proper  phenotypically and it is an expensive and time consuming process  primer design, avoiding polymorphic sites, can solve the problem of  to identify the underlying molecular defects of an increasingly  asymmetric PCR in the sequence analysis of genomic DNA, but does  number of patients. In the past years, the molecular genotyping of  not help in the detection of somatic mosaicism. Splice errors can be  those patients carried out on the SL
C12 A3 and CLCNKB genes  detected by sequencing of cDNA, but this may be insensitive due to  allowed some observations, principally based on the evaluation of  loss of the mutant mRNA by instability or nonsense mediated decay. the initial presentation and laboratory Ündings at the onset. The aim  We have successfully used DHPLC (denaturing high performance  of this study was to elucidate, through a retrospective phenotype- liquid chromatography) as a pre-screening method for the detection  genotype correlation, the parameters constituting the lowest common  of somatic mosaicism in genomic DNA as well as splice errors and  denominator for each syndrome. Consequently, a Ýow chart is Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 263 proposed where this more precise clinical classiÜcation is integrated  ankylosis phenotype. This proves that ANK is able to directly  with a molecular approach focusing those regions of the genes that  inÝuence bone density. are mostly involved in the disease-causative mutations in the Italian  population. 
P0830 . Mutations in the PQBP-1 Gene Cause Renpenning  Syndrome and XLMR in Two Other Families with Microcephaly 
P0828 . MDR3 gene analysis in PFI
C3 /ICP patients and as a  F. Abidi1, C. Lenski2, R. E. Stevenson1, J. Ramser2, A. Gibson3, M. Platzer4, R.  modiÜer gene of liver disease associated with Cystic Fibrosis F. Kooy5, H. A. Lubs6, C. E. Schwartz1, A. Meindl2;  D. Degiorgio1, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, M. Travi1, A. Rocchi2, V. Bennato2, G.  1JC Self Research Institute, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Ludwig-Maximili- Maggiore3, G. Torre4, C. Colombo2, D. A. Coviello1;  ans-University, Munich, Germany, 3Royal University Hospital, Saskatoon, ON,  1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan,  Canada, 4Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, Jena, Germany, 5University of  Italy, 2Centro Fibrosi Cistica, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy,  Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami,  3Dipartimento di Medicina della Procreazione e della Et\x87 Evolutiva, Universit\x87  FL, United States. di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, UO di Pediatria, Centro  Renpenning et al (1962) decribed a family with X-linked mental  Trapianto di Fegato, Bergamo, Italy. retardation (XLMR) in males with microcephaly, short stature and  Human MDR3 gene encodes the class III multidrug resistance P- small testes. The term ÐRenpenning syndromeÑ became a generic  glycoprotein that mediates the translocation of phospholipids across  name for XLMR until the 1980Ós. We had previously mapped the  the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte, a process that is of  syndrome to Xp11.2-p11.4. Recently, mutations in the PQBP-1 gene  crucial importance in protecting cholangiocyte membranes from high  were reported by Kalscheuer et al. (2003) in the Sutherland-Haan  concentrations of detergent bile acids. syndrome and 4 other families with microcephaly. Since the gene  MDR3 mutations are cause of Progressive Familial Intrahepatic  resided in the Renpenning linkage region, it was screened in the  Cholestasis type 3 (PFI
C3 ), characterized by early onset of  family as well as 16 other linked families. We found a truncating  cholestasis that progresses to cirrhosis and liver failure before  mutation in exon 5 (c.641insC) in the Renpenning family as well as  adulthood, with high serum gamma-glutamyltransferase (gGT)  2 other truncating mutations in exon 4 in 2 XLMR families: c.459- activity, and of Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy with high serum  462delAGAG and c.575-576delAG. The c.459-462delAGAG was  gGT activity (ICP). reported previously while the other two are novel mutations. It  Cystic Fibrosis patients with liver disease show some features in  is interesting that all mutations thus far identiÜed in PQBP-1 are  common with patients affected by PFI
C3 : high gGT values, evidence  truncating mutations. However, some affect the DR/ER repeat (PRD)  of inÝammation of the portal tracts, bile duct proliferation and Übrosis  and two (c.641insC and c.575-576delAG) leave the PR-domain  at liver biopsy, cholelitiasis. intact. It is not clear at this time whether the PR-domain in the latter  Our study has two speciÜc aims: - to identify MDR3 gene mutations  two proteins still interacts with other proteins. Nonetheless, all  in PFI
C3  and ICP patients; - to determine whether CF patients  families with PQBP-1 mutations have microcephaly and short stature.  heterozygous for a MDR3 mutations or for a speciÜc MDR3  In a study in South Carolina of 4000 males with MR of unknown  polymorphism may be at higher risk for development of liver disease. cause, 12% (486) had microcephaly, 9% (350) had short stature  We analyzed 9 patients with clinical Ündings of PFI
C3  and identiÜed  and 3% (128) had both. Based on these observations, it seemed  three different mutations. Two new mutations: a heterozygous  appropriate to use these clinical measurements to select males with  Arg149Stop mutation in one patient, a homozygous 2202insG  MR for PQBP-1 testing. mutation in the second patients, and heterozygous mutations in the  consanguineous parents, were found. We also characterize one  
P0831 . Variable phenotype in CADASIL -genetic background or  already known mutation Thr175Ala in the third patient. environmental factors? We analyse also 30 CF patients with hepatic involvement and we  K. Mykk\x89nen1, M. Savontaus1, S. Tuominen1, S. Tuisku2, M. P\x99yh\x99nen3, M.  characterise one known mutation (Thr175Ala), and 16 different  Viitanen4, H. Kalimo5;  nucleotide polymorphisms, but these results are not adequate to get  1Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 2Keski-Pohjanmaa Central Hospital,  statistical correlations. Kokkola, Finland, 3Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 4Karolinska  Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Helsinki University and University Hospital,  
P0829 . Role of the putative pyrophosphate transporter ANK in  Helsinki, Finland. skeletal homeostasis Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts  U. Kornak1, J. Kuehnisch1, M. Lehmann2, H. Thiele2, R. Terkeltaub3, S. Tin- and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an inherited systemic  schert1, S. Mundlos4, P. Nuernberg2;  vascular disorder causing recurrent brain infarcts and leading to  1Charit\x8d, Campus Virchow, Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany, 2Gene Map- subcortical dementia. The disease is caused by missense mutations  ping Center, Max-Delbrueck-Center, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Medicine,  or small deletions in the NOTCH3 gene. At least 97 different disease- Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of California San Diego, San Diego,  causing mutations have been published. The clinical course of the  CA, United States, 4Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Ger- disease can be highly variable in different CADASIL families but also  many. among individual patients in a same family. We describe identical  Missense mutations in ANKH were found to underlie the dominantly  twins, both having the clinical picture of CADASIL and diagnostically  inherited disorder craniometaphyseal dysplasia (CMD), which is  conÜrmed by skin biopsy, show signiÜcant differences in many clinical  characterized by erlenmeyer-Ýask deformity of the distal femur  studies. and sclerosis of the long bones and the skull. In contrast, loss of  In Finland we have almost 100 CADASIL patients sharing the same  function of the orthologous ANK in the mouse mutant ankylosis  ancestral NOTCH3 mutation, R133C. We have studied clinical  (ank) leads to joint destruction due to articular calciÜcations. We  variation in this genetically uniform patient group. Studies include  therefore rather assumed a gain of function effect of CMD mutations.  magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography  Although ANK is a membrane protein that is thought to regulate the  (PET) and neuropsychology. release of pyrophosphate (PPi) in various cell types, no signiÜcant  We selected two groups of patients having the same mutation,  changes could be observed in plasma PPi levels in CMD patients.  R133C: 14 patients with early onset and 13 patients with late onset.  Only subtle differences in subcellular distribution could be detected  We have tested 7 NOTCH3 amino acid changing polymorphisms in  upon transient expression of mutant ANK compared to the wildtype  both of these groups. None of the polymorphisms correlated with the  protein. Hence, missorting or protein instability seems to be only of  phenotype and therefore do not affect the clinical variation. minor importance for the pathogenesis. Detection of ANK in murine  bone tissue by in situ hybridization and RT-PCR clearly demonstrated  expression in osteoblasts and osteoclasts. As an in vivo model for a  loss of ANK function we investigated bone histology and bone density  in the ank mouse mutant. These mice showed a reduction of bone  density between of up to 30% before the onset of the characteristic Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 264 
P0832 . Acid Sphingomyelinase: identiÜcation of nine novel  the most severe of fatty-acid oxidation disorder, is characterized by  mutations among Italian Niemann Pick type B patients and  hypoketotic hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia cardiac abnormalities  characterization of in vivo functional in-frame start codon and early death. Although considerable insight has been gained on  M. G. Pittis1, V. Ricci2, V. I. Guerci1, C. Mar\x8cais3, G. Ciana1, A. Dardis1, F.  the function of the carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase and its gene  Gerin1, M. Stroppiano2, M. T. Vanier4, M. Filocamo2, B. Bembi1;  structure, surprisingly little information is available related to CACT  transcriptional regulation. In this study, we have begun identifying  1Unit\x87 Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio  and functional charactering the CACT regulatory region. Using  Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS G.Gaslini, Genova,  the computer program to search human CACT promoter region,  Italy, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie, Lyon, France, 4Fondation Gillet-M\x8drieux, Lyon,  a putative functional promoter spanning a TATA box from -815 to  France. -811 was recognized. To identify the minimal promoter sequences  Niemann Pick disease (NPD) is an autosomal recessive disorder  and potential positive and negative regulating regions, the series  due to the deÜcit of lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase, which results  of fragments containing the CACT 5Ó UTR controlling the ÜreÝy  in intracellular accumulation of sphingomyelin. In the present work  luciferase reporter gene were cloned in the pG
L3 -Basic plasmid . The  we studied 18 patients with NPD type B, including Üve individuals  promoter-luciferase chimeric plasmids were transiently transfected  who presented an intermediate phenotype characterised by  into human hepartocellular carcinoma cells. The pRL-TK plasmid  different levels of neurological involvement. We identiÜed nine novel  carrying a Renilla luciferase gene driven by the herpes simplex  mutations including six single base changes (M1T, W32X, 
L103 P,  virus thymidine kinase promoter was co-transfected as the internal  
L225 P, W244C, A281T) and three frameshift mutations (G34fsX76,  control. Four independent experiments showed that the highest  
P189 fsX190 and 
P192 fsX206). relative activity localized to a region spanning -916 to -687 of the  The novel M1T mutation inactivates the Ürst in-frame translation start  5Ó Ýanking region. The loss of this 229 bp fragment resulted in  site of the SMPD1 gene and in the homozygous status causes NPD  signiÜcant loss of luciferase expression.The consistent results also  type B indicating that in vivo translation of wild type SMPD1 initiates  suggested that the transcriptional repressors may bind between  from the Ürst in-frame ATG. Moreover, the new W32X introduces a  -686 to -416 bp. IdentiÜcation of the transcription factor important  premature stop codon before the second in-frame ATG (ATG33). As  for CACT gene expression will permit us to examine the phenotypic  a consequence of either M1T or W32X, impaired translation from the  variability in CACT deÜciency. In addition, in our Üve patients with  Ürst in-frame ATG results in a mild NPD-B phenotype instead of the  CACT deÜciency, the correlation of genotype to phenotype was also  severe phenotype expected for a complete deÜciency of the enzyme,  discussed. suggesting that when the Ürst ATG is not functional, the ATG33 still  produces a fairly functional sphingomyelinase. 
P0835 . Presence of elevated lactate, lactate/pyruvate ratio and  Analysis of the patientsÓclinical and molecular data demonstrated that  acylcarnitine proÜle in patients with autism. all Üve patients with the intermediate phenotype carried at least one  S. E. Carlo1, N. Arciniegas1, J. Acevedo2, N. Ramirez3, A. Reis1, A. S. Cornier1;  severe mutation. No association between the onset of pulmonary  symptoms and genotype was observed. Finally, the presence of  1Ponce School of Medicine, Ponce, PR, United States, 2University of Puerto  W32X, the most frequent allele among Italian NPD type B population,  Rico, Arecibo, PR, United States, 3Mayaguez Medical Center, Mayaguez, PR,  and R600P as compound heterozygotes in association with severe  United States. mutations suggested a beneÜcial effect for both mutations. Autism is deÜned behaviorally as a syndrome consisting of abnormal  social skills development, sensorimotor deÜcits, and communication  
P0833 . Screening for ARX gene mutations is indicated for males  problems. The study of this disorder has intensiÜed because  with mental retardation associated with West syndrome and/or  incidence is as high as 6 in 1000 individuals. Although etiology is  dystonia, or in XLMR families linked to Xp22.1 unknown, neuropsychiatry problems, lead poisoning, genetic and  M. Coss\x8de1, H. Hichri1, B. Demeer1, L. Faivre2, C. Philippe3, V. Laugel4, C.  metabolic disorders have been implied in the pathophysiology of the  Weber5, B. Leheup6, A. de Saint-Martin4, D. Devys5, J. Mandel1;  disease. The clinical phenotype is divided according to the level of  functioning of the individual ranging from autism as the most severe;  1Laboratoire de diagnostic g\x8dn\x8dtique, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre de  pervasive developmental disorder; and Asperger syndrome. These  g\x8dn\x8dtique, H\x98pital dÓEnfants, Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire de G\x8dn\x8dtique, CHRU,  patients are usually referred to Genetic clinics for evaluation. Nancy, France, 4Service de P\x8ddiatrie 1, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 5INSERM  65 patients with the diagnosis of autism or pervasive developmental  U184, IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 6Service de M\x8ddecine Infantile III et G\x8dn\x8dti- disorder were evaluated. Thorough past medical history and physical  que clinique, CHRU, Nancy, France. examination was performed and family history was taken via  The ARX gene (X-linked Aristaless Gene), localised in Xp22.1,  pedigree. Laboratory evaluation included plasma amino acid levels,  has recently been implicated in both syndromic form of X linked  plasma lactate, pyruvate and ammonia levels, urine organic acids,  mental retardation (associated with West syndrome and/or dystonia)  plasma carnitine and acylcarnitine proÜles and if dysmorphic features  and in non-speciÜc form. A duplication of 24 bp in exon 2 (428- were identiÜed blood chromosomes were also included. Out of the 65  451dup(24)bp) was found to be a recurrent mutation. This duplication  patients; 49 returned with completed metabolic work up. In this group  leads to an expansion of a polyalanine tract in the ARX protein. of 49 patients 18 had a diagnosis of autism and 31 of PDD, only one  The ARX gene was screened for mutations in Üve males with mental  patient was female, average age was 5.4 years. Sixty percent of the  retardation associated with West syndrome and/or dystonia. The  patients had elevated lactate levels; 37% had decreased pyruvate  recurrent 24 bp mutation in the ARX gene was found in 2 patients.  levels; 60% had elevated lactate/pyruvate ratio and unspeciÜc  We also screened the ARX gene in a large family, in which we had  elevations in acylcarnitine proÜle. Even though these results are not  previously mapped the mental retardation to a 23 cM region in  conclusive this metabolic alterations point toward the possibility of an  Xp22.1, containing the ARX gene. We identiÜed the ARX exon 2  oxidative metabolism disorder or an intra-mitochondrial disorder to be  recurrent mutation in this family. Recent studies seem to indicate that  involved in the expression of the autism phenotype. the contribution of mutations in ARX to isolated mental retardation in  males is not that signiÜcant and therefore do not recommend an ARX  
P0836 . Two new mutations in type 3 von Willebrand Disease:  mutation screening in these cases. On the other hand, our results  association of the mutation 7082-2A>G to very low expression of  show that this mutation screening is indicated both in case of mental  von Willebrand Factor gene. retardation associated with West syndrome and/or dystonia, and in X  N. Cabrera, P. Casa\x95a, A. Cid, S. Haya, V. Cortina, J. A. Aznar;  linked mental retardation families mapped to the Xp22.1 region. Hospital Universitari La Fe, Valencia, Spain. 
P0834 . Characterization of the human carnitine-acylcarnitine  Type 3 von Willebrand disease (VWD) is a severe bleeding  translocase promoter disorder, characterized by very low to undetectable levels of von  J. H. Ding, J. M. Mallory, B. Z. Yang, C. R. Roe;  Willebrand Factor (VWF) in plasma. VWF is expressed in platelets  and endothelial cells. The heredity is recessive. This phenotype is  Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. caused by defects in VWF gene, which is about 178 Kb in length and  The carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) deÜciency, one of  contains 52 exons.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 265 The segregation analysis was carried out with intragenic markers in  ligation-dependent probe ampliÜcation (MLPA). This methodology  nine members from one family. The haplotypes indicated the type 3  allows relatively large sample volumes to be run simultaneously,  VWD patient received different alleles from his parents. Two exonic  signiÜcantly reducing laboratory turnaround times. In this study,  restriction analyses showed the patient was heterozygote in genomic  we have utilized MLPA to identify subtelomeric rearrangements in  DNA, while he showed homozygote patterns in the cDNA, obtained  7/124 (5.6%) individuals with mental retardation. The alterations  by inverse retrotranscriptase from platelet mRNA. This result  detected are as follows: deletions of 22qter (twice), 2qter, 20pter  demonstrated a null allele linked to father branche. and duplications of 4qter, 13qter and 18qter. Two independent MLPA  Mutation screening in coding regions and their boundaries exon/ kits from the same manufacturer with different probe recognition  intron of the VWF gene, realised by SSCP analyses and automatic  sequences conÜrmed these results. Furthermore, FISH and array- sequencing, showed the patient carried the 449T>C (
L150 P)  based CGH analysis to conÜrm the MLPA Ündings are underway and  mutation in the exon 5, linked to mother allele, and the 7082-2A>G  will be presented. One patient with an apparent 3pter deletion was  change affecting the splicing of the exon 42, associated to father  shown to have a mutation in the probe recognition sequence on 3p.  allele. This points to one limitation of the assay and the speciÜcs of this  All theses results allowed us to conclude the patient is a compound  interesting case will also be presented. Overall, MLPA has performed  heterozygote, and his phenotype is caused by a missense mutation  very well and appears to be a valid methodology for testing cases of  in the propeptide and a splicing mutation in the 
C1  domain of VWF  mental retardation with unknown etiology. close to the end of mature protein. These mutations have not been  previously reported. It is the Ürst time the mutation 7082-2A>G,  
P0839 . Familial Mediterranean Fever: 6 new mutations in Pyrin  located in the splice acceptor site, associated to a very low or null  gene some of Dutch origin? expression of VW gene, is described. E. Bakker, M. J. R. van der Wielen, M. H. Breuning;  LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. 
P0837 . Mutational spectrum of ENP
P1  in 23 unrelated patients  Since many people of mediterranean origin live in the Netherlands,  with infantile arterial calciÜcation there is a growing demand for molecular diagnosis of FMF. F. Rutsch1, N. Ruf2, R. Terkeltaub3, P. N\x9ernberg2,4;  In 1998 we started to test for FMF mutations in exon 10 of the  1University ChildrenÒs Hospital, M\x9enster, Germany, 2Gene Mapping Center, Max  Pyrin/ Marenostrin gene. Although this yielded a number of known  Delbr\x9eck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany, 3Department of  mutations, we had to expand the screening to all 10 exons because  Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, UCSD, La Jolla, CA, United States,  the overal yield was to low. Currently we sequence all 10 exons.  4Institute of Medical Genetics, Charit\x8d University Hospital, Humboldt University,  Up to now we have tested patients with complains of abominal pain  Berlin, Germany. and recurrent attacks of fever from over 200 families. In 130 of the  Background: Infantile arterial calciÜcation (IAC) is characterized by  families mutations were detected. FMF was deÜnitely conÜrmed  calciÜcation of the internal elastic lamina of large and medium-sized  in over 60 families, in 17 families homozygosity for a mutation  arteries and stenosis due to myointimal proliferation. Sometimes peri- was detected and more then 40 were compound homozygous for  articular calciÜcation is also observed. Although survival to adulthood  mutations earlier reported. We also detected the 
E167 D-F479L  has been reported, most patients die within the Ürst six months of life.  haplotype in combination with V726A to cause FMF, as a compound  Recently, we identiÜed mutations of the ENP
P1  gene as the cause of  heterozygote. Further we detected the following 5 new (not yet  this recessive genetic defect (OMIM 208000). ENP
P1  encodes ecto- reported) mutations: nucleotide pyrophosphatase/ phosphodiesterase 1. This cell surface  Q97X; G304R; Q440N; K447N; Y688F; enzyme generates inorganic pyrophosphate (PP), a solute that  We will discuss their possible role in FMF. i regulates cell differentiation and serves as an essential physiologic  inhibitor of calciÜcation. Mutations were shown to dramatically  
P0840 . High sensitivity mutation detection in clinical samples  reduce enzyme activity. Methods and results: We evaluated a  using partial denaturation approaches by temperature  total of 23 unrelated patients with typical IAC. All 25 exons including  gradient capillary array electrophoresis and denaturing liquid  their Ýanking splice sites and the promoter region of ENP
P1  were  chromatography (dHPLC) ampliÜed by PCR and sequenced bi-directionally from genomic DNA.  L. Minarikova1, L. Fantova2, M. Hrabikova1, M. Minarik2, M. Minarik1;  We identiÜed 22 different homozygous or compound heterozygous  1Genomac International, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Watrex Praha, s.r.o.,  mutations in 18 of the 23 patients. The mutations, 3 nonsense,  Prague, Czech Republic. 14 missense, 1 single amino acid deletion, 3 frame shift, and 1  We have employed two alternative approaches in separation of  splice mutation, were scattered over the whole coding region. We  mutant homo- and hetero-duplex forms in DNA isolated from bioptic  identiÜed 3 recurrent mutations (7 x 
P305 T, 4 x R774C, 2 x N792S),  and resected tissue of colorectal tumors. The two techniques were  consanguineous families not included. Mutation 
P305 T seemed to  1. Temperature-Gradient Capillary Electrophoresis (TGCE) on a  be the result of a founder effect of British extraction while mutation  multicapillary sequencer and 2. Denaturing High-Performance Liquid  R774C (CpG \x87 TpG mutation) occurred repeatedly as revealed by  Chromatography (dHPLC). The spectrum of samples investigated  haplotype analyses. was ranging from early adenomas to invasive carcinomas and we  Conclusion: Mutation screening in IAC patients should start with  have focused on selected mutant markers in most frequently mutated  ENP
P1  exons 8 and 23, harboring mutations 
P305 T and R774C,  genes: k-ras, APC and p53. The optimized protocol included isolation  respectively. of DNA followed by PCR ampliÜcation and subsequent separation of  mutant forms. Results on selectivity and speciÜcity will be presented  
P0838 . Subtelomere analysis in a cohort of individuals with  for both techniques. mental retardation utilizing multiplex ligation-dependent probe  ampliÜcation (MLPA) 
P0841 . Regulation of Hermansky Pudlak Syndromes Genes in  M. Friez, D. Cohn, J. Jones, B. DuPont;  Human Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States. C. Carmona, C. L. Cadilla;  Chromosome alterations involving the subtelomeric regions have  Department of Biochemistry, University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, San  been found to be the causative genetic factor in 5-7% of individuals  Juan, PR, United States. with mental retardation. The most common method for identifying  Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)[MIM#203300] is the major  these alterations has been Ýuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)  cause of albinism cases in Puerto Rico. HPS is caused by defects in  using a panel of probes on metaphase spreads. Unfortunately, doing  several genes and seven of them have been identiÜed in humans.  cytogenetic FISH-based testing for subtelomere rearrangements  HP
S2  codes for the b3A subunit of the A
P3  adaptor complex and  is expensive and time-consuming. Therefore, alternative testing  HP
S7  codes for dysbindin, a component of the dystrophin associated  methodologies have been pursued in order to expedite laboratory  protein complex (DPC), the rest of the human genes are novel  turnaround times and to reduce costs. One such methodology is  and show no sequence similarity to other proteins and have few  a PCR-based commercially available assay known as multiplex Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 266 known functional domains. The HPS gene products are frequently  
P0844 . SL
C7 A10 in 19q13 is not involved in the aetiology of  undetectable in cells or tissues derived from both human patients and  cystinuria mouse models of HPS. The expression of the HP
S1 , HP
S2 , HP
S3 ,  E. Botzenhart, T. Eggermann, K. Zerres, C. Schmidt;  HP
S4  genes in lymphoblast cell lines were examined by RT-PCR  Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany. and Northern Blot. Analysis of the 5Ó-Ýanking DNA of several HPS  Cystinuria is an inherited metabolic disorder characterised by the  genes using the TESS software showed potential response elements  abnormal urinary excretion of cystine and dibasic amino acids  for glucocorticoid hormones, cAMP and Phorbol esters. Preliminary,  and results in the formation of cystine kidney stones. Two genes  Northern blot analysis show an inductive effect of Dexamethasone,  involved in cystinuria have been identiÜed: Mutations in the SL
C3 A1  cAMP and Insulin on the expression of HP
S2 , HP
S3 , HP
S4  genes.  (2p16) gene cause cystinuria type I, whereas mutations in the  However, treatment with PMA caused a decrease in the mRNAHP
S2   SL
C7 A9 (19q13) gene can be detected in non-type I as well as  levels. Western Blot analysis of lymphoblastoid cells treated with  in type I cystinuria patients. The mutation detection rate for both  PMA indicated a slightly reduction in the expression of HP
S1  and  genes in cystinuric patients does not reach more than 80% and is  HP
S4  proteins in normal Lymphoblastoid cells. Further studies on  inÝuenced by several factors (screening techniques, ethnic origin,  the regulation of HPS genes are necessary to fully understand the  classiÜcation of patients). Therefore, the role of further genes in the  cellular pathways affected in HPS. Grants from NIGMS 
S06 GM08224  aetiology of cystinuria has been postulated. Interestingly, linkage  and R25GM61838 and NCRRG12RR03051 supported this study. analysis in cystinuria families does so far not indicate the existence  of more than the two cystinuria loci in 2p16 and 19q13. Thus,  
P0842 . Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deÜciency the localisation of further genes encoding amino acid transporter  B. Z. Yang;  subunits within these regions is conceivable. One candidate is ASC- Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. 1 (SL
C7 A10) in 19q13 which shows high homology with SL
C7 A9.  Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deÜciency is the  To further elucidate whether SL
C7 A10 is involved in the aetiology  most common inherited defect of fatty acid oxidation, characterized  of cystinuria, we screened for mutations in two non-type I cystinuria  by episodes of illness in early childhood. The disorder may present  families compatible with linkage with 19q13 but without detectable  after fasting with symptoms resembling Reye Syndrome, coma,  mutations in SL
C7 A9. Despite strong evidences for an involvement  hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, fatty liver, and sudden death.  of SL
C7 A10 in the aetiology of cystinuria, we could not identify any  Affected children may have only one episode of illness or multiple  mutation in SL
C7 A10 in the two families. Nevertheless, there remains  recurrences. A common mutation (985A >G) has been identiÜed  the possibility that other genes are involved in cystinuria. Further  among patients with MCAD deÜciency, which was found to have a  molecular studies will clarify the complex nature of this disorder. carrier frequency of approximately 1:80 in the majority of Caucasian  populations. 
P0845 . Inactivation of the spasmolytic trefoil peptide (Tff2) leads  In this study, two unrelated MCAD patients, compound heterozygous  to increased expression of additional gastroprotective factors for the 985A>G mutation, have been investigated. The diagnoses  M. Baus Loncar1, J. Schmid1, J. C. Machado2, G. Stamp3, N. Lalani3, T. Kaya- were based on the dried blood spot acylcarnitine proÜles, which  demir1, N. Blin1;  showed highly elevated octanoyl carnitine and decenoyl carnitine,  1Molecular Genetics, University of T\x9ebingen, T\x9ebingen, Germany, 2IPATIMUP,  indicating MCAD deÜciency. To investigate the unknown mutation  University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Histopathology, Imperial College, Ham- alleles, all twelve MCAD exons from patientsÓ DNA were ampliÜed  mersmith Campus, London, United Kingdom. and sequenced. Sequence analysis revealed two novel mutations,  By deÜning a trefoil domain as a sequence of 38 or 39 amino acid  250C>T and 244T insertion respectively. residues with disulphide links between the intramolecular 6 cysteines  In addition, in our total 41 patients with MCAD deÜciency, including  the trefoil family (TFF) was assembled from several vertebrate  six patients detected by newborn screening using tandem mass  peptides. The three mammalian TFFs are encoded by a three- spectrometry (MS/MS), the correlation of genotype to phenotype was  gene-cluster. Trefoil factor family domain peptides, tissue-speciÜc  also discussed. products of mucin-secreting epithelial cells, are thought to inÝuence  mucosal integrity. While Tff1 and Tff3 knock-out mice show serious  
P0843 . MCDR1 Locus - Screening for candidate genes. functional disturbance in stomach and gut, Tff2-/- constructs do  N. Udar1, M. Chalukya1, R. Silva-Garcia1, J. Yeh1, P. Wong1,2, K. Small1;  not display striking histologic effects. For a more in-detail study,  1UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Department of Biological Sciences,  we analysed possible differences in expression (wt vs. Tff2-/-) by  University of Alberta, Edmonton, Edmonton, AB, Canada. applying a commercial DNA microarray (Affymetrix mouse chip,  MCDR1 is an autosomal dominant nonprogressive disease. It  12000 genes). When the threshold was set to >2, 62 genes were  is characterized by bilaterally symmetrical but highly variable  found up and 30 genes down-regulated. Since such microarray  macular degeneration ranging from drusen to staphylomata. The  studies need to be evaluated with caution, solid conÜrmation of  peripheral retina can be variably abnormal. Light microscopy studies  expression by Northern or quantitative PCR and protein analysis by  have demonstrated a discrete macular lesion characterized by  Western blots or immunohistochemistry are required. Among the  focal absence of photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium  differentially expressed genes, we disregarded for the further study  with attenuation of the Bruch membrane and focal atrophy of the  structural genes and those from the HLA group and concentrated  choriocapillaris. Adjacent to the macular lesion, some lipofuscin were  on genes involved in immunoresponse. When qPCR measurements  also identiÜed in the retinal pigment epithelium. We have carried  were normalised vs. 3 house keeping genes (Gapdh, Gusb, Mhkg)  out a candidate gene screening in families with MCDR1 for the  contradictory data eliminated Timp, Mmp7 and Gdp but conÜrmed  GPR63 gene. GPR63 (belonging to a rodopsin like activity family of  upregulation of three genes connected with the digestive tract: Crip,  genes) is located within the locus for MCDR1 on 6q16 and involved  Muc3 and Tff3. In summary, microarray analysis of the Tff2 knockout  in the pathway for G protein coupled receptors. The G protein  shed new light on the role of Tff2 in maintaining homeostasis in  coupled receptor genes are know to be involved in retinal diseases.  gastrointestinal tract, pointing to its possible role in innate immunity. Interacting transporter proteins like ABCA4 are also known to cause  retinal disease. Direct sequencing of the entire gene coding and  
P0846 . RApidTRAP robot assisted TRAP assay non coding was carried out on more than 12 probands representing  J. P. Jakupciak1, W. Wang2;  different families. Although the gene represents a good candidate we  1Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Standards & Technology, Gaithers- did not observed any changes which segregated with the disease or  burg, MD, United States, 2Cancer Biomarkers Research Group, Rockville, MD,  was absent in control individuals. A 765 A>T change within the coding  United States. region of the gene did not segregate in the families and is considered  Activation of telomerase plays a critical role in unlimited proliferation  a polymorphism. We rule out GPR63 as a candidate gene and  and immortalization of cells. Telomerase activity has been  present evidence to show that it is not directly involved in the etiology  shown to correlate with tumor progression, indicating that tumors  of the disease. expressing this enzyme possess aggressive clinical behavior Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics 267 and that telomerase activity may be a useful biomarker for early  detector, is mixed with a dye solution which is introduced via a pump  detection of cancer. However, measurements of telomerase activity  that provides pulseless delivery. The Ýuorescence detector monitors  by current methods are low-throughput and not robust enough to  the resulting cartridge efÝuent/dye solution mixture. Intercalation  easily accommodate the required statistical analysis to determine if  and grove binding dyes are an attractive solution for increased  telomerase activity is a practical biomarker. sensitivity in Ýuorescent dsDNA analysis since Ýuorescence only  As part of the National Cancer Institute Early Detection Research  occurs when bound to the polynucleotide; therefore, the background  Network, we have developed a robot assisted TRAP assay  noise is minimal. In addition, non-covalent Ýuorescent labeling of  (RApidTRAP) of telomerase. Measurements of human telomerase  DNA using intercalation dyes has an advantage over Ýuorescently  reverse transcriptase catalytic subunit (hTERT) mRNA were  labeled primers since multiple dye molecules can bind to each  performed in concert with measurements of telomerase activity. We  polynucleotide; but, with a Ýuorescently labeled primer, each  determined hTERT mRNA concentration and telomerase activity in  polynucleotide has only a single Ýuorophore. Introducing the dye  human normal (RPE-28) and cancer (A549) cell lines as well as in  solution post cartridge minimizes system/cartridge contamination.  human serum. Telomerase activity measurements were made using  When analyzing dsDNA under non-denaturing conditions, we have  the TRAP/PCR CE method on 50 cells / reaction from cell extracts.  determined that the sensitivity enhancement of the Ýuorescence  Measurement of hTERT mRNA was made using speciÜc primers on a  detection system using WAVE Optimized HS Staining Solution I is  LightCycler in the range of 10 cells / reaction. Using this combination  greater than 200 as compared to direct UV detection. We explore  of telomerase activity and hTERT mRNA measurements, the  linearity and limits of detection as compared to direct UV detection for  automated system improved efÜciency over traditional methods. a variety of DNA sizing assays. Large-scale studies are required before telomerase activity becomes  a practical biomarker for use in clinical decisions regarding patient  
