L1 .3 ESHG Plenary Lectures Life-threatening infectious diseases of childhood: single-gene inborn errors of immunity? J. Casanova; P
L1 .1 New York, NY, United States. Integrating chromosome structure and function during X-chromosome inactivation E. Heard; “The hypothesis that inborn errors of immunity underlie infectious diseases Institut Curie, Unité de Génétique et Biologie du Devéloppement, CNRS UMR3215, is gaining experimental support. However, the apparent modes of inheri- INSERM U934, Paris, France. tance of predisposition or resistance differ considerably between diseases and between studies. A coherent genetic architecture of infectious diseases is lacking. We suggest here that life-threatening infectious diseases in child- Using the mammalian process of X-chromosome inactivation as a model, we hood, occurring in the course of primary infection, result mostly from in- are interested in understanding how the differential treatment of identical dividually rare but collectively diverse single-gene variations of variable DNA sequences in the same nucleus can be achieved during early mamma- clinical penetrance, whereas the genetic component of predisposition to lian development. The establishment of X inactivation involves a complex secondary or reactivation infections in adults is more complex. This model locus, the Xic, which produces the non-coding Xist RNA that is the trigger is consistent with (i) the high incidence of most infectious diseases in ear- for chromosome-wide silencing. X inactivation is also accompanied by nu- ly childhood, followed by a steady decline, (ii) theoretical modeling of the merous epigenetic modifications that ensure stability and heritability of impact of monogenic or polygenic predisposition on the incidence distribu- the inactive state. By investigating the regulatory landscape of the Xic locus tion of infectious diseases before reproductive age, (iii) available molecular using chromosome-conformation capture technologies and super-resoluti- evidence from both monogenic and complex genetics of infectious diseases on microscopy, we recently uncovered a new level of chromosome folding in children and adults, (iv) current knowledge of immunity to primary and into topologically associating chromosome domains (TADs), each spanning secondary or latent infections, (v) the state of the art in the clinical genetics hundreds of kilobases (Nora et al, 2012). TAD organization was shown to of non-infectious pediatric and adult diseases, and (vi) evolutionary data be highly conserved, genome-wide phenomenon in mammals (Dixon et al, for the genes underlying single-gene and complex disease risk. With the re- 2012). Sequences within TADs tend to interact more frequently and may cent advent of new-generation deep resequencing, this model of single-gene thus provide a scaffold for privileged interactions between genes and their variations underlying severe pediatric infectious diseases is experimentally regulatory sequences. We demonstrated that within the Xic, TADs enable testable.” the precise coordination of gene expression dynamics during early differen- P
L2 .1 tiation and also underlie the partitioning of epigenomic landscapes, such Mutations of TCF12, encoding a basic-helix-loop-helix partner of as histone modifications. In oXuicr recent work we have further explored the TWIST1, are a frequent cause of coronal craniosynostosis functional relevance of TADs using physical modeling, as well as genetic en- V. P. Sharma1,2, A. L. Fenwick1, M. S. Brockop3,4, S. J. McGowan5, J. A. C. Goos6, A. J. M. gineering approaches at the locus. We have also investigated the extent Hoogeboom7, A. F. Brady8, O. Jeelani9, S. Lynch10, J. B. Mulliken11, D. J. Murray12, J. M. to which TAD organization is predictive of coordinated gene expression and Phipps1, E. Sweeney13, S. E. Tomkins14, L. C. Wilson15, S. Bennett16, R. J. Cornall16, J. epigenomic dynamics at the genome-wide scale. Broxholme17, A. Kanapin17, D. Johnson2, S. A. Wall2, P. J. van der Spek18, I. M. J. Mathijssen19, R. E. Maxson3, S. R. F. Twigg1, A. O. M. Wilkie1,2; Dixon, J.R., Selvaraj, S., Yue, F., Kim, A., Li, Y., Shen, Y., Hu, M., Liu, J.S., and Ren, 1Clinical Genetics Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of B. (2012). Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analy- Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Craniofacial Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS sis of chromatin interactions. Nature 485, 376-380 Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nora, E.P., Lajoie, B.R., Schulz, E.G., Giorgetti, L., Okamoto, I., Servant, N., Pio- USC/Norris Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, lot, T., van Berkum, N.L., Meisig, J., Sedat, J., Barillot E., Blüthgen N., Dekker J.* France, 5Computational Biology Research Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular and Heard E*. (2012). Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of the Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Department of Plastic and XE-.i nHaecatrivda: tNioonn ec.entre. Nature 485, 381-385. Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Kennedy Galton Centre, North West London Hospitals NHS Trust, London, United P
L1 .2 Kingdom, 9Department of Neurosurgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children Signaling transcription factors explode dogmas in brain development NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 10National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our and disease Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 11Department of Plastic and Oral Surgery, A. Prochiantz1,2; Children‘s Hospital, Boston, United Kingdom, 12National Paediatric Craniofacial Centre, 1Paris, France, 2Collège de France, Paris, France. Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 14Clinical Genetics Department, Musgrove Park Hospital, Taunton, United Kingdom, 15North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS The concept of homeoprotein transduction, first proposed in 1991, is now Trust, London, United Kingdom, 16MRC Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute well established in several biological systems. Because homeoprotein si- of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 17Wellcome Trust gnaling is active in plants and animals it is proposed that it has predated Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 18Department the separation between animals and plants and is thus very ancient. This of Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, United may explain why the basic phenomenon of homeoprotein transduction is Kingdom, 19Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. so minimalist, requiring no specific receptors or specialized transduction pathways. Indeed complexity has been added in the course of evolution and the conservation of homeoprotein transduction can be discussed in the con- Craniosynostosis is the premature fusion of cranial sutures. It is a heteroge- text of its synergy with bona fide signaling mechanism that may have added neous disorder with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 2,200 and in ~22% robustness to this primitive cell communication device. The same synergy of cases, a specific genetic cause can be identified. This includes mutations possibly explains why homeoprotein signaling is important both in embryo- of TWIST1, which encodes a class II basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcrip- nic development and in adult functions fulfilled by signaling entities (e.g. tion factor, causing Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, typically associated with co- growth factors) themselves active throughout development and in the adult. ronal synostosis. We exome sequenced 7 patients with bilateral coronal syn- Several functions have been identified, including morphogenesis, axon and ostosis, identifying loss-of-function mutations in TCF12 in 3 cases. TCF12 cell guidance and plasticity of the cerebral cortex. In addition some homeo- encodes a class I E-protein that heterodimerizes with class II bHLH proteins proteins have been used as therapeutic proteins in animal models of human such as TWIST1. Further sequencing of individuals with craniosynostosis diseases including glaucoma and Parkison disease. Although it is clear that identified a total of 38 heterozygous TCF12 mutations in 347 unrelated many questions are still in want of answers, it appears that the sequences samples. Furthermore, 14 cases arose de novo. The mutations predomi- responsible both for secretion and internalization are in the DNA-binding nantly occurred in patients with coronal synostosis, accounting for 32% and domain and very highly conserved among most homeoproteins. On this ba- 10% of subjects with bilateral and unilateral pathology, respectively. Com- sis, it can be proposed that this signaling pathway is likely to imply as many paring surgical trajectory of TCF12-mutation positive patients with other as 200 proteins that participate in a myriad of developmental and physio- genotypes reveals a favourable post-operative course. 14% had associated logical pathways. learning disability. A significant level of non-penetrance of craniofacial fea- tures (53%) was found in 34 mutation-positive individuals from 23 families also tested. Relevant cephalometric measurements were normal and there was no evidence of somatic mosaicism. TCF12 lies in a region of strong lin- 4 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FR kA agN e dC iE se q| uW iliW briW um.E aS ndH iG ni. tO ialR hG aplotype investigation demonstrates phe-ABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index RB1 notypic variability may be due to genotypes that protect from or predispose deletions are associateRdB 1with low or no tumoral risk . This low pene- to craniosynostosis. TCF12 and TWIST1 act synergistically in a transacti- trance might be exRpBla1ined by the homozygous contiguous deletion of an vation assay, and mice doubly heterozygous for loss-of-function mutations unknown gene adjacent to , essential for survival whReBn1 LOH occurs and have severe coronal synostosis, demonstrating that normal coronal suture without which the -/- cell cannot survive. d Ve.Pv.e Slohpamrmean:t Ncrointiec.a All.yL .d Feepnewndicsk o: nN ohneet.e Mro.dSi.m Beror cdkoospa:g Ne.one. S.J. McGowan: To test this hypothReBs1is, we mapped an entire germline deletion inter- None. J.A.C. Goos: None. A.J.M. Hoogeboom: None. A.F. Brady: None. O. val in an unaffected carrier and extended this analysis to a series of tumors Jeelani: None. S. Lynch: None. J.B. Mulliken: None. D.J. Murray: None. J.M. carrying two full deletions. By comparing the mapped germline and Phipps: None. E. Sweeney: None. S.E. Tomkins: None. L.C. Wilson: None. S. Bennett: None. R.J. Cornall: None. J. Broxholme: None. A. Kanapin: None. D. somatic intervals that NinUcDluTd1e5d or eMxcElDud4ed the gene, respectively, and by Johnson: None. S.A. Wall: None. P.J. van der Spek: None. I.M.J. Mathijssen: eliminating genes with poor eMxEpDre4ssion NinU rDeTti1n5oblastoma cells, we selected None. R.E. Maxson: None. S.R.F. Twigg: None. A.O.M. Wilkie: None. two gene candidates : NUDT a1n5d . We tested our ‘suicide gene’ hy- pMoEtDhe4sis by downregulating and in two retinoblastoma cell lines. Briefly, we ruled out as a candidate gene. In contrast, reduced expression decreased cell proliferation and anchorage iRndBe1pendent P
L2 .2 growth and induced apMopEtDo4sis as measured by FACS analysis using caspase C-terminal deletions of the AUT
S2  locus cause distinct syndromic 3 as a marker. Together ourR rBes1ults suggest that retinoblastoma -/- cells features and cognitive impairment cannot bear the loss of expression, thereby explain the low penetran- E. Voorhoeve1, G. Beunders1, C. Golzio2, L. Pardo1, J. Rosenfeld3, M. Talkowski4, I. Simonic5, A. Lionel6, S. Vergult7, R. Pyatt8, J. van de Kamp1, A. Nieuwint1, M. Weiss1, P. Rizzu1, D. cReB i1n patients with deleted . These new results may offer novel perspec- Posthuma1, L. Verwer1, H. Meijers-Heijboer1, B. Menten7, G. Mortier9, S. Scherer6, E. tives for therapeutic intervention adapted to patients with cancers where Eichler10, S. Girirajan10, N. Katsanis2, A. Groffen1, E. Sistermans1; C. D iesh ianiancatuivlta: tNeodn.e. A. Garancher: None. L. Castéra: None. I. Aerts: None. F. 1VU medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Duke University Medical Center, Doz: None. L. Lumbroso: None. R. Montes-de-Oca: None. G. Almouzni: Durham, NC, United States, 3Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA, United None. D. Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. C. Pouponnot: None. M. Gauthier-Villars: States, 4Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States, 5Cambridge University Hospital, None. C. Houdayer: None. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 7University hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 8Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, United States, 9Antwerp University, Antwerpen, Belgium, 10University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. P
L2 .4 Van Maldergem syndrome is caused by defective cadherin receptor- ligand interactions leading to dysregulation of neuroprogenitor cell proliferation and differentiation Translocations involving 7q21.22 have been associated wAitUh TaSu2t,i sWmB aSnCdR 1in7-, S. Robertson1, S. Cappello2, M. Gray1, S. Lange2, M. Einsiedler2, I. Burtscher2, Z. Jenkins1, tCeAllLeNct1ual disability (ID). Discordant eAvUidTeSn2c e has suggested that these cli- T. Morgan1, N. Preitner1, V. Morrison3, N. DiDonato4, L. van Maldergem5, T. Neuhann6, nical phenotypes might be driven by a number of genes ( R. Newbury-Ecob7, M. Swinkells8, P. Terhal8, L. Wilson9, P. Zwijnenburg10, A. Sutherland- ). Here, we examined whether disruptions are causal for neu- Smith11, D. Markie1, M. Simpson12, S. Mansour13, M. Goetz2; rocognitive defects.AUT
S2  1Dunedin School of Medicine, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2Institute for Stem Cell Research, An international cohort of ~50,000 patients and 16,000 controls was ex- Munich, Germany, 3Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Institut für amined for CNVs in by array CGH and we performed detailed pheno- Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 5Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, typic analyses. 5’RACE experimAeUntTsS w2ere performed to test for alternative 6Medizinisches Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 7St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 8University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9North East Thames transcripts in human brain. A zebrafish knock down model was generated Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 10VUMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, to test the poteAnUtiTaSl 2of different splice isoforms to induce some of the 11Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand, 12King‘s College London School of anatomical phenotypes seen in patients. Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 13St George‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. We found 44 deletions. Microdeletions disrupting the coding se- quence were caAuUsaTlS t2o a complex syndromic ID/autism phenotype incluNdSiDn1g short stature, microcephaly, cerebral palsy and distinct facial dysmorphis- The orchestration of proliferation and differentiation of neuronal stem cells ms. The exonic AUdTeSl2e tions occur with a frequency comparable to prior to their radial migration to the cerebral cortex is central to brain de- deletions causing Sotos syndrome. We also discovered a novel, highly con- velopment in humans. Periventricular neuronal heterotopia (PH), the mis- served, C-terminal isoform in human brain. Clinical and functional localisation of grey matter centrally within the brain, can indicate a failure studies showed this isoform to be aA kUeTyS c2ontributor to the human phenotype of neuronal progenitors to negotiate some aspect of this developmental because (a) patients with C-terminal deletions eaxuhtsib2ited significantly more process. Using combinations of autozygosity mapping and exome sequen- severe and pleiotropic aspects of syndrome, and (b) the significant cing, bi-allelic mutations in genes encoding a pair of giant cadherin proteins microcephaly and craniofacial defects seen in knockdown zebrafish that operate as a receptor-ligand pair are shown to lead to van Maldergem embryos werAeU rTeSs2cu,ed by this C-terminal isoform. syndrome (VMS; MIM 601390) a recessive multiple malformation syndro- We identified a hitherto unappreciated syndromic phenotype caused by me in humans characterized by intellectual disability, craniofacial, auditory, deletions in required for both brain and craniofacial development. renal, skeletal and limb malformations in addition to a partially penetrant The C-terminal portion of the gene contributes significantly to the pheno- PH phenotype. In 6 unrelated families with the disorder both truncating and type, demonstrating how transcriptional complexity can underpin human missense mutations were characterized, indicating a loss of function me- p Ea.t Vhooolorhgyo.eve: None. G. Beunders: None. C. Golzio: None. L. Pardo: None. chanism in the genesis of VMS. To understand the mechanism behind com- J. Rosenfeld: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Perkin Elmer inc.. M. Talkowski: None. I. Simonic: None. A. Lionel: None. S. Vergult: None. R. Pyatt: promised cadherin receptor-ligand engagement in the genesis of impaired None. J. van de Kamp: None. A. Nieuwint: None. M. Weiss: None. P. Rizzu: neuronal migration in the mammalian brain, we employed in utero shRNA None. D. Posthuma: None. L. Verwer: None. H. Meijers-Heijboer: None. B. directed knockdown of both genes in mouse embryos. A reduction in expres- Menten: None. G. Mortier: None. S. Scherer: None. E. Eichler: F. Consultant/ sion of both genes resulted in an increase in neuroprogenitor cell number Advisory Board; Modest; Pacific Biosciences, SynapDx, and DNAnexus. S. combined with a block in differentiation of neuronal precursors, resulting in Girirajan: None. N. Katsanis: None. A. Groffen: None. E. Sistermans: None. the heterotopic accumulation of cells in the subcortex. These findings, which are reminiscent of the human phenotype, underscore the existence of links between neuroepithelial layer integrity and the control of proliferation and P
L2 .3 d Si.f fReroebnetritastoionn: Noof nnee.u Sr.o Cnaapl pperellcou: rNsoonres .d Mu.r Ginrga yh:u Nmoanne .c So.r tLiacnalg dee: vNeolnoep.m Me. nt. Einsiedler: None. I. Burtscher: None. Z. Jenkins: None. T. Morgan: None. N. MED4: a suicide gene to explain low penetrance in retinoblastoma Preitner: None. V. Morrison: None. N. DiDonato: None. L. van Maldergem: patients None. T. Neuhann: None. R. Newbury-Ecob: None. M. Swinkells: None. P. C. Dehainault1, A. Garancher2, L. Castéra1, I. Aerts3, F. Doz3, L. Lumbroso4, R. Montes- Terhal: None. L. Wilson: None. P. Zwijnenburg: None. A. Sutherland-Smith: de-Oca5, G. Almouzni5, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,6, C. Pouponnot2, M. Gauthier-Villars1, C. None. D. Markie: None. M. Simpson: None. S. Mansour: None. M. Goetz: None. Houdayer1,6; 1Institut Curie, service de génétique, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, INSERM U1021, Orsay, France, 3Institut Curie, service de pédiatrie, Paris, France, 4Institut Curie, service d‘ophtalmologie, Paris, France, 5Institut Curie, UMR 218 CNRS, Paris, France, 6université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. RB1 MonoallelicR gBe1rmline loss of function mutations in the gene predispose to a high risk of bilateral retinoblastoma, following loss of heterozygosity of ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 5 the second allele in the tumor. Surprisingly enough, complete germlineABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index P
L2 .5 Berutti: None. M.F. Urru: None. A. Angius: None. C.M. Jones: None. D. BMN111, a CNP analogue, potential novel investigational therapy for Schlessinger: None. G.R. Abecasis: None. S. Sanna: None. F. Cucca: None. achondroplasia L. Legeai-Mallet1, N. Kaci1, J. Peng2, C. Benoist-Lasselin1, T. Oppeneer2, L. Tsuruda2, C. A. O‘ Neill2, F. Di Rocco1, A. Munnich1, F. Lorget2; P
L3 .1 1INSERM U781-Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2BioMarin, Novato, CA, United States. Deciphering Developmental Disorders Project M. Hurles; Cambridge, United Kingdom. Achondroplasia (ACH), the most common form of dwarfism, is an inherited autosomal dominant chondrodysplasia caused by a gain of function mutati- on in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3). Among the possible No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. targets to antagonize FGFR3 signaling, we chose the C-type natriuretic pep- eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. tide (CNP) strategy. CNP acts as a key regulator of longitudinal bone growth P
L3 .2 by down-regulating the MAPK pathway. The constitutive activation of this Duke Fetal and Neonatal Cohort Study same pathway, due to a FGFR3 gain-of-function mutation, is the cause for N. Katsanis; impaired bone growth in ACH patients. Durham, NC, United States. We characterized the pharmacological activity of BMN 111, a CNP analogue peptide that has an extended plasma half-life compared to that of the nati- ve CNP due to its resistance to neutral endopeptidase degradation. In ACH No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. growth plate chondrocytes, we demonstrated that BMN 111 decreased eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. MAPK pathway activation. In Fgfr3Y367C/+ mice mimicking ACH, daily sub- P
L3 .3 cutaneous administration of BMN 111 led to the attenuation of the dwarfism Ethical implications of Whole Genome Sequencing in medicine phenotype. We observed a significant increase in the axial and appendicu- J. Kaye; lar skeleton length with improvements in ACH related clinical features in- Oxford, United Kingdom. cluding flattening of the skull, increase in the size of the paws and digits, straightening of the tibias and femurs. A rescue of the height and architec- ture of the different zones of the growth plate was also observed. BMN 111 No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. treatment led to the largest improvement in skeletal parameters observed eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. to date in an Fgfr3 mouse model. P
L4 .1 Our results support further development of BMN 111 for the treatment for Mendel Lecture: Rett syndrome and MEC
P2  Disorders: From the Clinic A LC. HLe.geai-Mallet: None. N. Kaci: None. J. Peng: A. Employment (full or part- to Genes and Neurobiology time); Significant; BioMarin. C. Benoist-Lasselin: None. T. Oppeneer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioMarin. L. Tsuruda: A. Employment H. Zoghbi; (full or part-time); Significant; BioMarin. C.A. O‘ Neill: A. Employment (full or part- Investigator Howard Hughes Medical Institute Professor, Baylor College of Medicine time); Significant; BioMarin. F. Di Rocco: None. A. Munnich: None. F. Lorget: A. and Director, Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children’s Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioMarin. Hospital, Houston, TX, United States. Rett Syndrome, a postnatal neurological disorder that causes a broad range P
L2 .6 of severe neurological and behavioral disabilities, is fascinating in that its Sequencing-based GWAS on peripheral blood monocyte counts in the symptoms appear after a period of normal development and point to di- SardiNIA cohort sturbances in most brain cells and regions. The quest for the gene revealed M. Steri1, A. Mulas1,2, M. Zoledziewska1,2, C. Sidore1,2,3, G. Pistis1,2,3, F. Danjou1, E. Porcu1,2,3, that the disease is caused by mutations in MEC
P2 . The path from gene dis- M. Marongiu1, F. Busonero1,3, M. G. Piras1, M. Lobina1, F. Reinier4, R. Berutti4, M. F. Urru5, A. Angius5, C. M. Jones4, D. Schlessinger6, G. R. Abecasis3, S. Sanna1, F. Cucca1,2; covery to therapy, however, is not a straightforward one and requires deep 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, CNR, Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento understanding of pathogenic mechanisms and key molecular and anatomi- di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 3Center for Statistical cal determinants of various symptoms and pathologies. We have used gene- Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 4CR
S4 , AGCT group, Parco tic, behavioral, physiological and molecular approaches to interrogate the tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 5CR
S4 , GSP group, Parco tecnologico pathogenesis of Rett and MEC
P2  disorders.Recent discoveries suggest that della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 6Laboratory of Genetics, NIA, Baltimore, MD, United MeC
P2  is critical for many neuronal functions, especially for the ability of States. neurons to respond to change. Moreover, the findings reveal functions of the protein that were not suspected previously. H. Zoghbi: None. Monocytes are a subset of white blood cells belonging to the innate immune system. They can differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells to elicit key functions (phagocytosis and antigen presentation, respectively) at sites of inflammation. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified P
L5 .1 several loci but, in most cases, the specific causal variants and their relative ESHG Award Lecture impact on the immune system remain unknown. F. Mitelman; Lund, Sweden. Here, we measured circulating monocyte counts in 5,894 individuals en- rolled in the SardiNIA project. Samples were genotyped using four diffe- rent Illumina Beadchip arrays: OmniExpress, Cardio-MetaboChip, Immu- noChip and ExomeChip. To increase the genomic resolution, we imputed Immense amounts of data on neoplasia-associated chromosomal aberra- ~17 Million variants from a reference panel of 1,488 unrelated Sardinian tions have been collected during the last three decades. Chromosome ab- samples sequenced at an average of 4x coverage. We searched for additive normalities have been described in more than 60 000 human neoplasms, effects using a mixed association model accounting for population struc- and a substantial number of the cytogenetic changes have now also been ture and samples‘ relatedness, and we observed 5 significantly associated characterized at the molecular genetic level. The most important fact that loci (pvalue<5x10-8), of which 3 are novel. Among the two loci known to has emerged from the cytogenetic studies is the realization that every tu- influence monocyte counts, we replicated the signal at the ITGA4 gene mor type that has been studied in a sufficient number to permit conclusions (r2=0.98 with previously reported SNP); moreover, fine mapping suggests a may be subdivided on the basis of characteristic, often specific, and some- novel variant near LPAR1, which likely regulates the expression levels of the times even pathognomonic, rearrangements. An increasing number of the gene (r2=0.53 with a reported eQTL). Notably, the novel loci include strong recurrent aberrations, in particular balanced changes, are with remarkable biological candidates, such as a variant highly correlated (r2=0.97) with a specificity associated with distinctive morphological and/or clinical disea- missense mutation located in the gene coding for suppressor of activated se characteristics. The identification of these recurrent changes has several monocytes with critical role in inflammation and tumorigenesis. important implications. First, cytogenetics has become an increasingly im- Our results suggest that sequencing-based GWAS contribute to a better un- portant tool in the clinical management of cancer patients to help establish derstanding of the genetic basis of monocyte counts regulation and func- a correct diagnosis, to predict prognosis, and to select the most appropri- tMio.n S.teri: None. A. Mulas: None. M. Zoledziewska: None. C. Sidore: None. G. ate treatment. Second, the cytogenetic information has provided invaluable Pistis: None. F. Danjou: None. E. Porcu: None. M. Marongiu: None. F. help to identify genes of importance in the carcinogenic process by focusing Busonero: None. M.G. Piras: None. M. Lobina: None. F. Reinier: None. R. the attention to chromosomal sites that may harbor genes which when re- 6 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRarAraNnCgeEd |l eWadW toW ne.EopSlaHsiGa. .SOoR faGr, all balanced structural rearrangementsABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index Concurrent Symposia that have been characterized at the molecular level have been found to exert their action through one of two alternative mechanisms: deregulation of a 
S01 .1 seemingly normal gene in one of the breakpoints, or the creation of a hybrid Evolutionary pressures and gene expression regulation gene through fusion of parts of two genes, one in each breakpoint. Presently, Y. Gilad; almost 3,000 recurrent balanced chromosomal rearrangements and more The University of Chicago, Department of Human Genetics, Chicago, IL, United States. than 1,500 gene fusions have been reported, each of potential pathogene- tic and/or clinical significance. It is reasonable to assume that the achieve- ments obtained to date, albeit impressive, probably only represent the tip Changes in gene regulation are thought to play an important role in adap- of the iceberg. tation and speciation, notably in primates. However, the extent to which changes in different regulatory mechanisms underlie gene expression evo- lution is not yet known. To address this gap, we comparatively characterized gene expression (using RNA sequencing) and genetic and epigenetic regu- latory mechanisms in humans, chimpanzees, and rhesus macaques, using LCLs from 8 individuals from each species. Specifically, we used ChIP-seq to obtain genome-wide profiles of H3K4me3, H3K4me1, H3K27me3 and H3K27ac histone modifications, as well as binding of RNA polymerase II. We also collected DNaseI-sequencing from the same LCLs, and by using the CENTIPEDE algorithm we measured the strength of transcription factor bin- ding for over 200 transcription factors in all three species. These data allo- wed us to identify both conserved and species-specific enhancer and repres- sor regulatory elements, as well as characterize similarities and differences across species in transcription factor binding to these regulatory elements. We found that that transcription factor binding and histone modifications in more than 67% of regulatory elements in putative promoter regions is con- served across the three species. In turn, by considering sequence conserva- tion at genomic locations that showed differences in regulatory mechanisms across species we were able to better understand the extent to which chan- ges in transcription factor binding are due to either cis- or trans- differences across species. Finally, we analyzed correlations between inter-species dif- ferences in the genetic and epigenetic regulatory mechanisms and variation in gene expression levels across species using a system of logistic regressi- on models. Assuming that these correlations do imply a causal regulatory relationship, we estimate that up to 50% of inter-species gene expression differences can be accounted for by corresponding changes in transcription f Ya.c Gtoirla bdi:n Ndoinnge .and/or the presence of histone modification marks. 
S01 .2 Chromosomal rearrangements and gene expression A. Reymond; Lausanne, Switzerland. No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. 
S01 .3 Variation in Gene Regulation, Chromatin States and Protein Levels across Human Individuals and Populations M. Kasowski*1, S. Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou*2, F. Grubert*1, J. B. Zaugg*1, A. Kundaje*2,3, L. Wu*1, S. Candille*1, Y. Liu4, L. Jiang*1, D. Xie*1, A. Boyle1, Q. Zhang1, F. Zakharia1, D. V. Spacek1, J. Li1, L. M. Steinmetz1,5, J. B. Hogenesch6, M. Kellis3, S. Batzoglou2, H. Tang1, M. Snyder*1, *contributed equally; 1Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Department of Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Department Of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 5Genome Biology EMBL Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 6Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. The vast majority of disease-associated variants lie outside protein-coding regions, suggesting that variation in regulatory regions may play a major role in disease predisposition. We mapped differences in transcripton factor binding and chromatin states using six histone modifications, cohesin, Pol2 and CTCF in lymphoblastoid lines from 10-19 individuals of diverse ancestry. We find extensive signal variation in regulatory regions as well as switches of chromatin state across individuals, most frequently between active and repressed states. Enhancer activity is particularly diverse among individuals, and is strikingly divergent across populations despite a lack of similar struc- ture in gene expression. Population specific enhancer activity often correlates with genetic divergence and is associated with signals of positive selection. Consistently, transcription factor binding and chromatin marks show strong inheritance in trios. To understand how gene regulation corrlates with pro- tein levels, we also measured protein levels in LCL lines of 90 individual, We found that protein levels are also heritable and the approximately one half of ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEt h| eW loWci tWha.tE cSoHntrGol. OprRotGein levels are independent of those that affect g7eneABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S03 .1 Lynch syndrome as a model of mutations and epimutations in cancer expression Overall, our results provide fundamental insights into molecular P. Peltomäki; d Mif.f eKraesnocwess kini* :h Nuomnaen. sS a. nKdy rhiaozwo ptohueylo aur-eP agneangeitoictos pcoounltoroul*l:e Ndo.ne. F. Grubert*: University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. None. J.B. Zaugg*: None. A. Kundaje*: None. L. Wu*: None. S. Candille*: None. Y. Liu: None. L. Jiang*: None. D. Xie*: None. A. Boyle: None. Q. Zhang: None. F. Zakharia: None. D.V. Spacek: None. J. Li: None. L.M. Steinmetz: None. J.B. Hogenesch: None. M. Kellis: None. S. Batzoglou: None. H. Tang: The DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system is crucial for cancer avoidance None. M. Snyder*: Other; Modest; founder and member of the SAB for Personalis. through the correction of replication errors, DNA damage surveillance, and other functions. Failure to properly accomplish these functions may promo- te cancer development. It is therefore not surprising that inherited defects in the MMR system, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PM
S2  genes, underlie one of 
S02 .1 the most prevalent cancer syndromes in man, Lynch syndrome (LS), pre- The search for bone and joint genes, and what to do with them? viously known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). LS is A. G. Uitterlinden1,2,3; 1Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department estimated to account for 5% of all colorectal cancers in the population and of Clinical Chemistry , Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Departments of possibly a similar share of endometrial, ovarian, and other cancers. LS not Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. only serves as a model for cancers arising through MMR defects and micro- satellite instability, which concerns 10 - 25% of all colorectal, endometrial, and other cancers, but also highlights the significance of the epigenetic com- Height, osteoporosis (OP) and osteoarthritis (OA) have strong genetic influ- ponent in cancer development. ences and efforts try to identify the causal genes. Knowledge of these gene Knudson’s hypothesis postulates that tumor suppressor gene inactivation variants can help in understanding biology of the disease process and be- requires two hits, the first of which may occur either in somatic cells, giving nefit development of interventions, but also have potential for diagnostics. rise to sporadic cancer, or in the germline, giving rise to hereditary cancer. Genome-Wide Association studies (GWAS) builds upon (1) human genetic The second hit is always somatic. Cumulative evidence suggests that, besi- variation, (2) genotyping technology, (3) bio-banks, and (4) collaboration des genetic mutations, either hit may be epigenetic. Increased methylation among researchers in consortia. For height this is the GIANT consortium, for of selected tumor suppressor gene promoters is an acquired property of osteoporosis GEFOS/GENOMOS, and for osteoarthritis TREAT-OA. many tumors developing in LS, and the1 patterns in part mirror changes seen GWAS has proven to be widely successful and for height, OP, OA, and Paget’s in the corresponding sporadic cancers. Hypomethylation of LINE-1 is often Disease several GWAS have been published. For example, 80 loci have been less prominen2t in LS tumors, in accordance with their near-diploid chromo- identified for bone mineral density (BMD), ~600 loci for height, and sever- some content. Like genetic instability phenotypes, epigenetic phenotypes al loci for Paget’s and OA. Please note that a) GWAS identifies DNA variants may be associated with a preferential inactivation or activation of certain rather then genes, and b) the effects per variant are generally modest, e.g., growth-regulatory genes and pathways and thereby influence prognosis with Odds Ratios ranging from 1.1 -1.7, and explained variance of combined and response to therapy. Importantly, inactivation of the susceptibility genes common variants, e.g., for height being 25% and for BMD being 3-7 %. While MLH1 and MSH2 by epigenetic mechanisms may occur already in the germ- dozens of new loci have been discovered in GWAS, translation takes more line. Constitutional epimutations may explain around 10% of LS-suspected time because a) discoveries are recent, b) there are many to choose from, and families which lack MLH1 or MSH2 protein expression in3 tumor tissue and c) the conservative nature of “non-hypothesis-free” scientists.Together with show no genetic mutations in MMR genes in the germline. studies on rare genetic syndromes, the GWAS approach clarifies the genetic Knowledge of genetic and epigenetic alterations associated with cancer sus- architecture of the skeleton and bone and joint disease. GWAS based on SNP ceptibility and tumor development provides the basis for improved diagno- arrays are assessing only a small part, i.e., 0.2%, of the base pairs constituting stics, prevention and therapy in the respective cancers. the human genome. Next Generation Sequencing technology and exome ar- 1. Lotsari JE et al., Breast carcinoma and Lynch syndrome - Molecular analy- rys now allows to asses all coding parts of the genome (~5% of bp) and even sis of tumors arising in mutation carriers, non-carriers, and sporadic cases. the majority of base pairs by full-genome sequencing (~95% of bp). These Breast Cancer Res 14: R90 (2012). approaches are now underway in Mendelian and complex disease, and for 2. Niskakoski et al., unpublished data. t Ah.eG l.a Uttiettre arlginaidne inn:v Noolvnee .association approaches in large consortia. 3. Gylling A et al., Large genomic rearrangements and germline epimutati- o Pn.s P inel tLoymncähki s: yBn. dRreosmeaer.c Ihn tG Jr aCnatn (cperirn c1i2pa4l: i2nv3e3s3ti g- a2to3r4, 0co (l2la0b0o9ra)t.or or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; ERC-F
P7 -232635. 
S02 .2 Inflammatory bowel disease: From genes to clinical impact? C. A. Anderson; The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. 
S03 .2 Epigenetic Programming of the Cancer Phenotype J. Issa; Fels Institute, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 163 independent genomic regions have now been associated with inflamm- atory bowel disease (IBD), an immune-mediated disease that affects the ga- strointestinal tract. I will highlight a series of analyses that, when applied The epigenome is reset during embryogenesis and matures around the end across a large number of disease associated loci for a given trait, allow addi- of development. Large scale genomic studies have now shown considerable tional insights to be drawn regarding disease relevant cell types, pathways proliferation dependent epigenome changes in aging cells (DNA methyla- and evolutionary selective pressures. I will also discuss on-going projects tion instability, chromatin instability). Comparison of rodent, primate and within the International IBD Genetics Consortium to identify genetic loci human aging shows that DNA methylation instability is conserved, depends associated with clinically relevant disease subphenotypes such as disease primarily on chronologic age, and can be predicted to a certain degree by location and severity. I will finish by describing the identification of a non- local genomic features (e.g. retrotransposons). It can therefore be argued coding polymorphism in FOXO3 that is significantly correlated with disease that this epigenomic instability is a necessary result of the evolution of com- severity in IBD and other TNF-alpha driven diseases such as rheumatoid ar- plex genomes that lack reprogramming capabilities in adult cells. Epigenetic thritis and malaria infection. I will show that this locus regulates monocyte instability creates gene expression variation in aging tissues that serve as an production of TNFα and IL-10 through control of TGFβ1 production. This enabler of Darwinian evolution at the tissue level. Selective pressures result work highlights a pathway that could, through improved patient stratifica- in cells with unique epigenetic programs that lead to diseases such as can- tion or targeting with novel agents, contribute to the development of perso- n Ca.l iAsnedde mrseodni:c iNnoen ien. TNFα-driven diseases. cer or atherosclerosis. Importantly, epigenetic variation can be modulated by exposures (inflammation and perhaps diet), providing a mechanistic link between lifestyle and disease. In turn, epigenetic reprogramming could be useful for prevention and treatment of age-related pathology. In leukemi- 
S02 .3 as, reprogramming by DNA methylation inhibitors has gained acceptance From genetics to translation in SCD as effective therapy for myeloid leukemias, and drugs for other epigenetic R. Graham; t aJr. gIsestsa :a rBe. Rraepsiedalryc hp rGorcaenet d(pinrign ctiopwala irndves sctliginaitcoar,l ctorillaalbso.rator or consultant and South San Francisco, CA, United States. pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Astex. F. Consultant/ Advisory Board; Modest; Astex, Janssen. No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. es8hg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updateEsS.HG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S03 .3 
S04 .3 Insights into oncogenesis from cancer predisposition genes Molecular genetics of axon degeneration N. Rahman; J. Gilley1, L. Conforti2, R. Adalbert1, S. Milde1, M. Coleman1; Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom. 1The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom. Over the last 30 years nearly 100 predisposition genes associated with in- creased risks of cancer have been identified. These discoveries have resulted The Slow Wallerian degeneration protein (WldS) is an aberrant protein that in considerable insights into the mechanisms underlying cancer causation arose in mice and protects distal axons after injury. Ectopic expression of and the many, diverse biological pathways that can be involved in oncoge- WldS exerts the same protective effect in transgenic rats, flies and zebrafish, nesis. In this talk I will present an overview of known cancer predisposition and in transfected human neurons. It also preserves axons in some neuro- genes and will consider the current and future clinical and scientific poten- degenerative disease models, including inherited models of peripheral neu- t Nia.l R oaf hthmeainr :d Nisocnoev.ery. ropathy and motor neuron disease. Structure-function studies of WldS show that its intrinsic NAD synthesizing (Nmnat) activity is critical for axon survival. Of the three normal mammalian Nmnat isoforms, only Nmnat2 has been confirmed to be in axons. Nmnat2 
S04 .1 is essential for axon survival and has a short half-life, so axons require its The role of microglia in synaptogenesis C. Gross; constant replenishment by axonal transport. When delivery of Nmnat2 is Monterotondo, Italy. prevented by nerve injury, or by knockdown or knockout of Nmnat2, axons degenerate or fail to grow. WldS can rescue them by replacing the Nmnat enzyme activity and does so for a prolonged period as it has a much longer Microglia are phagocytic cells that infiltrate the brain during development half-life. and play a role in the elimination of synapses during brain maturation. Nmnat2 lies at the head of a signaling pathway regulating axon degenera- Changes in microglia morphology and gene expression have been associated tion, and this pathway implicates several genes in axon survival. Nmnat2 with autism. However, it remains unknown whether these changes are a degradation is at least partially controlled by ubiquitination, and the Dro- primary cause or a secondary consequence of neuronal deficits associated sophila ubiquitin ligase Highwire and its mammalian orthologue Phr1 are with the disorder. Here we tested whether a primary deficit in microglia was candidates for this. Downstream of Nmnat2, we identify a rise in the meta- sufficient to induce autism-related behavioral and functional connectivity bolic intermediate NMN as a key event, and inhibition of Nampt, the enzyme deficits. Mice lacking the microglia chemokine receptor Cx3cr1 showed a catalyzing NMN synthesis, preserves injured axons. Further downstream transient reduction of microglia in the brain during the early postnatal peri- Sarm1, a Toll-like receptor adapter, is necessary for axons to degenerate in od and a consequent deficit in synaptic pruning. Deficient synaptic pruning both Drosophila and mice. Evidence of further genes regulating axon survi- was associated with a failure to strengthen excitatory synaptic transmission, val is emerging from screening in Drosophila and there is a strong likelihood decreased functional connectivity across brain regions, deficits in social in- that these functions will be conserved in mammals. teraction, and increased repetitive behavior, all hallmarks of autism. These Identification of further axon survival proteins, and their organization into findings open the possibility that deficits in microglia function could contri- a pathway, should facilitate rational decisions as to the most promising tar- bute to key features of autism. g Je. tGs iflolery a: xNoonn de.e Lge. nCeornaftoiortni: dNiosnoerd. Rer. sA.dalbert: None. S. Milde: None. M. Coleman: None. 
S04 .2 The role of glia in neurodegenerative diseases D. W. Cleveland; Ludwig Institute, Univ. of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States. 
S05 .1 Analytical challenges of using next-generation sequencing to unlock complex disease The great biologists of the 19th century, especially Virchow and Bernard, M. Daly; established the pivotal idea that individual cells function autonomously, Boston, MA, United States. while being part of the whole organism. Since then many the major neu- rodegenerative diseases have traditionally been considered mechanistically cell autonomous, meaning that damage within a selective population of af- No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. fected neurons alone suffices to produce disease. Most of the genes whose eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. mutation is now known to cause the major neurodegenerative diseases are 
S05 .2 widely or ubiquitously expressed, however, including superoxide dismutase Diagnostic exome sequencing in genetically heterogeneous disease (SOD1) whose mutation causes an inherited form of the fatal, adult motor L. E. L. M. Vissers; neuron disease ALS. Modeling in mice has demonstrated that disease mecha- Dept of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. nism is through an acquired toxicity unrelated to dismutase activity. Selec- tive gene excision has demonstrated that toxicity is non-cell autonomous, with mutant SOD1 within motor neurons and oligodendrocytes driving Exome sequencing is of great use in a diagnostic setting to establish a ge- disease onset, while damage within neighboring astrocytes and microglia netic diagnosis, especially for those diseases where the current diagnostic accelerates disease progression. Non-cell autonomy is a general feature of yield is low due to the genetic heterogeneity of the disease. The analysis and human neurodegenerative disease, including Parkinson’s and frontal tem- interpretation of exome data in a diagnostic setting is however challenging, poral dementia, where disease has been demonstrated to spread from cell and requires methods for quality control, minimizing the possibility of inci- to cell in a prion-like manner, and in Huntington’s disease (HD), an inherited dental findings but simultaneously allowing for easy and flexible interpreta- disease caused by tri-nucleotide expansion. tion of exome sequencing data for diagnosing patients. An approach to therapy is suppression of disease causing genes following During this presentation I will discuss results that were obtained in our dia- infusion of DNA antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) to direct RNase H-depen- ge.ngo.stic lab by analyzing patients with intellectual disability using family- dent destruction of the target mRNA widely within the nervous system. Such based sequencing. Additionally, I will show data obtained in patients with an approach slows disease progression in inherited examples of ALS-like blindness, deafness, ataxias and metabolic disorders that were analyzed disease in rodents. Moreover, infusion of ASOs targeting huntingtin mRNA using “gene packages”, an approach in which exome sequencing is followed effectively lowers huntingtin levels in the striatum and cortex, the primary by a targeted analysis of known disease genes. To further expand the pos- brain targets of HD pathology. Transient infusion into already symptomatic sibilities of diagnostic exome sequencing for mutation detection we have HD mouse models mediates a sustained reversal of disease phenotype that recently validated automatic CNV detection on exome data and compared persists for much longer than the huntingtin knockdown. These findings its performadnec ne otvoo that of high resolution genomic microarrays. This ana- establish a therapeutic strategy for sustained HD disease reversal from a lysis shows that exome sequencing can reliably detect the large majority of “ HDu.Wn.t iCnlgetvinel ahnodli:d Fa.y C” opnrsoudltuacnet/dA dbvyi storrayn Bsioeanrdt ;A MSOod tehset;r aIspisy .Pharmaceuticals. pathogenic CNVs. Together, these data provide further arguments to use exome sequencing as a first tier test for genetically heterogeneous d Li.sEe.aLs.Mes.. Vissers: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 9ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S05 .3 I
L7 R Prioritizing disease-causing variation by genomic data fusion Y. Moreau; torI L(7R ) could exist in malignant T-cells. We evednet unaolvloy found that around University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 9% of T-ALL patients display somatic gain-of-function mutations in exon 6 of . The mutations create, in most cases, a unpaired cysteine in the transmembrane to extracellular juxtamembrane region, resulting in NGS has rapidly increased our ability to discover the cause of many pre- disulfide bond-depeinnd veitnrto homodimerization of twoin m viuvtoant receptors and viously unresolved rare monogenic disorders by sequencing rare exomic consequent constitutive activation of downstream signaling with ensuing variation. However, after standard filtering against nonsynonymous single cell transformation and tumorigenic ability . Is the oncogenic nucleotide variants (nSNVs) and loss-of-function mutations that are not pre- potential of deregulated I
L7 R-mediated signaling restricted to mutated re- sent in healthy populations or unaffected samples, many potential candidate ceptor? Our unpublished studies showing that conditional tetracycline-in- mutations are often retained and we need predictive methods to prioritize ducible I
L7 R transgenic mice eventually develop leukemia upon treatment variants for further validation. Several computational methods have been with doxycline, suggest otherwise and indicate that continued expression proposed that take into account biochemical, evolutionary and structural of the wild type receptor can also display oncogenic potential. Overall, our properties of mutations to assess their potential deleteriousness. However, results reveal that IL-7/IL-7R-mediated signaling is an important oncogenic most of these methods suffer from high false positive rates when predicting a Jx.iTs. Bina Tra-ctae:l lN leounek.emia. the impact of rare nSNVs. A plausible explanation for this poor performance is that many of these predicted variants are mildly deleterious, but in no way specific to the disease of interest. We therefore propose a genomic data fu- 
S06 .3 sion methodology that integrates multiple strategies to detect deleterious- The role of exosomes in cancer-cell communication, dissemination, ness of mutations and prioritizes them in a phenotype-specific manner. A and therapy-resistence key innovation is that we incorporate into our strategy a computational me- L. O‘Driscoll; thod for gene prioritization, which scores mutated genes based on their si- Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. milarity to known disease genes by fusing heterogeneous genomic informa- tion. We also integrate haploinsufficiency prediction scores that predict the probability that the function of a gene is affected if present in a functionally No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. haploid state. To integrate or fuse these data sources, we develop a machi- eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. ne-learning model using the Human Genome Mutation Database (HGMD) of 
S07 .1 human disease-causing mutations compared to three control sets: common iPS and their therapeutic potentiel for keratinizing disorders polymorphisms and two independent sets of rare variation. Benchmarking D. Roop; on HGMD demonstrates that this integrative phenotype-specific variant Aurora, CO, United States. prioritization significantly outperforms state-of-the-art predictors, such as S YIF. TM oorre Paoul:y EP.h Oenw-n2e.rship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Cartagenia n.v.. No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. 
S07 .2 
S06 .1 Netherton syndrome and links to eczema Identification of the gene for mixed polyposis syndrome: the end of a A. Hovnanian1,2,3; 50-year journey 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Department of Genetics, Necker hospital, Paris, France, I. Tomlinson; 3University Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Cite, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare autosomal recessive orphan disease with Hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome (HMPS) was first described in the severe skin inflammation and sScPaIlNinKg5, a specific hair shaft abnormality and early 1960s in a Jewish family from St Mark‘s Hospital, London. Affected in- constan t allergic manifestations with high serum IgE levels. NS results from dividuals develop unusual, large-bowel polyps of several different types and loss-of-function mutations in (serine protease inhibitor of Kazal individual polyps can have more than one morphology. Many individuals type 5)encoding LEKTI-1 (lympho-epInit hveitlrioal Kazianl vtyivpoe related inhibitor have colorectal cancer and disease dominantly inherited. After identifying type 5), a 15-domain protease inhibitor expressed in stratified epithelia and several more HMPS families. all of Ashkenazi origin, we mapped the HMPS in Hassall’s corpuscles in the thymus. and studies in murine gene to a shared haplotype of ~2Mb on chr15q13.3. Sequencing found no models and in NS patients have implicated unopposed activity of kallikrein protein-coding mutations, but we eventually found a constitutional 40kb (KLK) 5, KLK7 and elastase 2 with dual consequences on skin homeosta- copy number gain upstream of Gremlin 1 that is unique to HMPS patients. sis. The skin barrier is severely disrupted secondary to stratum corneum The HMPS duplication affects a genomic control region, leading to massive detachment, increased profilaggrin processing and abnormal lipid lamellae. over-expression of Gremlin and relocation of its expression from the colo- This leads to increased skin permeability, enhanced allergen and microbe rectal mesenchyme to the epithelium. The HMPS mutation provides a very penetration which favor skin allergy and inflammation. Danger signals are rare example of a Mendelian condition caKuRsAedS byB aR AnFo n-coding duplicati- also generated, resulting in the production of IL-1 beta which contributes to on that has profound eAffPeCc ts on gene expression. We have recently shown skin inflammation. In parallel, KLK5 activates PAR2 which leads to the acti- that HMPVS itlul-mGroeumrs1 probably initiate with or mutation that does vation of the NF-kappa B pathway and the production of pro-allergic (Thy- not cause senescence. mutations then follow, leading to dysplasia and mic Stromal Lymphopoietin) and pro-inflammatory (TNF-alpha) cytokines. cancer. A mouse recapitulates the principal aspects of the human These molecules, in concert with TARC and MDC, induce skin allergy and d I.i sTeoamseli.nson: None. inflammation with severe itching and systemic involvement. These results have identified major pathways and therapeutic targets for NS. Importantly, they have also established a link with the frequent and more complex disease atopic dermatitis, which shares several common features 
S06 .2 with NS. These include enhanced proteolytic activies, skin barrier defect The role of I
L7 R in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia through filaggrin mutations, abnormal lipid composition, PAR-2 mediated J. T. Barata; Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisboa, Portugal. allergy and inflammaStPioInN.K R5ecent functional studies reporting defective pro- tease inhibition caused by the frequent 
E420 K LEKTI variant, further sup- port the notion that plays a role in eczema through a complex net- T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive subtype of the work involving multiple genes and/or interactions with the environment, most frequent childhood cancer. Interleukin 7 (IL-7), a cytokine produced w Ait. hH poovnteanntiiaanl :t hBe. rRaepseeuatricch i mGrpalnict a(ptiroinncsip.al investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; in the bone marrow, thymus and other organs, is absolutely essential for GSK. T-cell development. However, there is evidence that IL-7 may also partake in leukemia development. We isnh ovwitreod that IL-7 activates PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaliinng vpivaothway, thereby mediating viability, cell cycle progression and growth of human T-ALL cells and that IL-7 can accelerate human T-ALL . The evidence that IL-7 can impact on leukemia maintenance d1ro0ve us to evaluate whether genetic alterations EinSvHolvGin 2g 0th1e3 IL |- 7P AreRceIpS-, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S07 .3 Artificial Skin M. del Rio1,2,3; and are the likely cause of pathogenicity of CNVs associated with disease. 1Department of Bioengineering. Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, What factors influence dosage sensitivity, be it haploinsufficiency or dosage- 2CIEMAT, Madrid, Spain, 3Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), balance? What biological processes are most likely to be dosage-sensitive? Madrid, Spain. How does gene dosage sensitivity influence evolutionary patterns, and how can evolutionary analyses identify these genes? 
S08 .3 The skin is the subject of more than 400 rare inherited diseases or genoder- Evolution of vision matoses which together represent a significant part of the dermatological D. Arendt; clinical practice. Our group is devoted to diagnostic, modeling and develop- Heidelberg, Germany. ment of advanced therapies for some of the most relevant genodermatoses. Among that group, Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) comprises a set of skin fra- gility disorders characterized by defective adherenCcOeL o7fA t1he epidermis to No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. the underlying connective tissue. We have mainly focused in the recessive eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. dystrophyc form of EB (RDEB) due to mutations in coding for type 
S09 .1 VII collagen. Our studies led us to the disclosure of one of the world’s most Adaptive immunodeficiency and gene therapy treatment recurrent mutation, c.6257insC, affecting nearly half of the Spanish RDEB A. Fischer; population and due to a founder effect. Recent work led us also to demon- INSERM U768 & Unité d’Immunologie Hématologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants strate revertant mosaicism within the RDEB patient population which tends Malades, Université Paris Descartes ; Imagine Institute, Paris, France. to be more common than previously expected. Using optimized skin bioen- gineering approaches we have been able to establish skin humanized mouse models of EB suitable for cell and gene therapy testing. In addition, we have Over the last 20 years, the genetics and pathophyiology of many primary shown the feasibility of using naturally gene revertant EB cells as a source immunodeficiencies (PID) have been unraveled. This offers the opportuni- for autologous skin transplantation. My talk will also cover the use of ana- ty to treat the most severe of these conditions by gene transfer into hema- logous strategies, as those described for EB, to the modeling and treatment topoietic stem cells. Primary T cell immunodeficiencies appear as the best of other genodermatoses including Lamellar Ichtyosis and Xeroderma Pig- therapeutic targets because of the expected selective growth advantage mentosus as paradigmatic examples of epidermal differentiation and DNA conferred by gene expression into T cell precursors combined with the very repair defects, respectively. We hope we can contribute to the goal of having long life span of T lymphocytes. Based on this rationale, ex vivo retroviral 2 M0.0 d neel wRi otr:e Naotmnee.nts for rare genetic diseases by the year 2020. gene transfer into hematopoietic progenitors has been shown to lead to sustained (over 14 years) correction of severe combined immunodeficien- cy (SCID). The advent of genotoxicity events in some patients has initiated 
S08 .1 the development of modified vectors, i.e. “SIN vector” in use over the last 3 Dissecting the effects of selection in the human genome: the case of years with efficacy and safety to treat SCID as well as other PID such as the immunity to infection W A.i sFkiosctth Aerld: Nriocnhe s.yndrome. L. Quintana-Murci; Institut Pasteur-CNRS, Paris, France. 
S09 .2 Antisense therapy in SMA Because infectious diseases have been paramount among the threats to A. Krainer; health and survival throughout human history, natural selection is expec- Cold Spring Harbor, NY, United States. ted to act strongly on host defence genes, particularly on innate immunity genes. Searching for evidence of selection targeting innate immunity repre- sents therefore an indispensable complement to clinical and epidemiolo- No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. gical approaches for identifying functionally important genes involved in eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. host immunity to infection and disease outcome. In the past years, we have 
S09 .3 initiated an evolutionary dissection of genes and pathways involved in in- Stem-cell gene therapy for the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome nate immunity in humans. We focus on major families of innate immunity C. Klein; receptors, such as TLRs, RLRs and NLRs, and other molecules involved in Munich, Germany. the signalling pathways triggered by them, such as adaptors and effectors molecules, such as TIR-containing adaptors and IFNs. Although the biologi- cal role in host defence for some members of these families has been well No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. characterised, the biological function of many others (e.g. most NALP mem- eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. bers of the NLR family) remain poorly understood, with little knowledge 
S10 .1 about their immunological relevance. I will present different cases of how Noninvasive whole genome sequencing some of these genes have been targeted by strong purifying selection, at- S. Quake; testing to their essential and nonredundant functions, while others evolve Stanford, CA, United States. under much relaxed selective constraints, suggesting higher redundancy in host defence. I will also present some examples of molecules (e.g. TLR1, type III IFNs, etc.) that display geographically-restricted signatures of positi- No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. ve selection in specific human populations, indicating that genetic variation eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. at these genes has conferred a selective advantage to the host. Finally, I will 
S10 .2 discuss our most recent findings about population variation in microRNA Advances in embryo selection for optimizing IVF outcome transcriptional responses to infection and the extent to which such variati- D. Wells; on is under genetic control (miR-eQTLs). More generally, I will discuss how Oxford, United Kingdom. adopting an evolutionary, population and cellular genomics approach can provide important insight into immunity genes playing a major role in host survival, and highlight host pathways and mechanisms playing an essential No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. r Lo.l eQ iunin ptaatnhao-Mgeunrc rie: sNisotnaen.ce. eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. 
S10 .3 Newborn screening; what is possible, what do we want? B. Wilcken; 
S08 .2 The Children‘s Hospital at Westmead and University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Gene dosage sensitivity and copy-number evolution A. McLysaght; Dublin, Ireland. The first trial of Guthrie’s test for phenylketonuria was completed in 1963; this year we celebrate 50 years of newborn screening. Mass screening of newborns has been found economically feasible for a wide variety of con- A significant subset of genes in vertebrateE gSeHnoGm 2es0 a1re3 u |n PdeAr RdoISsa,g Fe RcoAnNs-CE d | i tW ionW s wW h. eE rS e H thG er. eO isR G a marker compound detectable in blood. In m1o1st traint. Duplications that disturb their abundance in the cell are deleteriousABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index developed and some less-developed countries all newborns are tested for accumulate upon stress and during aging. Selective turnover of substrate congenital hypothyroidism, plus phenylketonuria and several other condi- proteins is initiated by covalent attachment of the conserved protein ubiqui- tions. With the advent of tandem mass spectrometry in the mid-1990s over tin predominantly to internal lysine residues. This ubiquitylation step is me- 50 disorders are now sought in many jurisdictions. diated by an enzymatic cascade that involves ubiquitin-activating enzymes Problems encountered and not yet completely solved include: developing (
E1 ), ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (
E2 ), and ubiquitin protein ligases (
E3 ). rational systems and criteria for selecting disorders for screening; adequate Deubiquitylation enzymes (DUBs) modulate the size and topology of poly- long-term follow-up to assess benefit, with cessation of programmes where ubiquitin chains, formed by isopeptide bonds between ubiquitin monomers. benefit cannot be shown; development of national data-bases; the detection A chain of four to six ubiquitin moieties efficiently targets a substrate for of mild phenotypes, and development of definitions to enable recognition degradation by the 26S proteasome. The 26S proteasome is a multi-catalytic of which cases need treatment. Poor availability of confirmatory tests and protease complex composed of a barrel-shaped 20S proteolytic core particle treatments are limiting factors in less-well-off countries. (CP) and a 19S regulatory particle (RP) that translocates substrates into the The pressure to include new disorders is driven by new treatments for pre- 20S CP where they are degraded into short peptides. viously untreatable conditions, and advances in technology making scree- It is commonly thought that an age-related impairment of protein degradati- ning feasible. Some of the disorders newly being screened for include seve- on affects general proteostasis networks, causing enhanced accumulation of ral lysosomal storage disorders, severe combined immunodeficiencies and damaged proteins that can be cytotoxic and shortens lifespan (Hoppe, 2010). recently a trial of screening for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. In the futu- The activity of the 26S proteasome progressively declines during the aging re, perhaps quite soon, primary DNA mass testing may become affordable, process although the exact molecular aspects of this regulation have not been which will pose many problems. Already we are poised for a second major addressed. Beside the requirement of proteasomal integrity for normal life- expansion of screening due partly to advances in mutation-specific treat- span, the identification of ubiquitin-dependent degradation pathways that ment of various kinds. This applies particularly to Duchenne muscular dys- specifically control the stability of lifespan regulators further reflects a key trophy. Disorders being actively considered include Rett Syndrome, Fragile role of the UPS in the aging process. For example, different 
E3  ubiquitin liga- X, long QT syndrome, and spinal muscular atrophy. ses regulate the activity of the FOXO transcription factor (TF) DAF-16, which A major problem for the future will be re-defining the aims of newborn is central for insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling (IIS). A screening. There will be pressure to screen for adult-onset disorders and for novel mechanistic link between protein degradation and longevity based on prediction of risk. Development of economical systems to enable effective deubiquitylation of polyubiquitylated substrate proteins will be discussed m Ba. sWsi slcckreenen: Ninogn aet. later ages would be welcome. (Kuhlbrodt et al., 2011). Interestingly, ubiquitin-mediated degradation pa- thways are also involved in muscle myosin assembly and age-related muscle- degeneration (Hoppe et al., 2004; Janiesch et al., 2007; Gazda et al., 2013). 
S11 .1 References: Mousemodels of Down syndrome Gazda, L., Pokrzywa, W., Hellerschmied, D., Löwe, T., Forné, I., Mueller-Planitz, Y. Hérault1,2,3; F., Hoppe, T.*, and Clausen, T. (2013). The myosin chaperone UNC-45 is orga- 1Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS, INSERM, nized in tandem modules to support myofilament formation in C. elegans. Cell Université de Strasbourg, UMR7104, UMR964, Illkirch, France, 2Transgenese et 152, 183-95. Archivage Animaux Modèles, TAAM, CNRS, UP
S44 , Orléans, France, 3Institut Clinique de Kuhlbrodt K., Janiesch P.C., Kevei E., Segref A., Barikbin R., and Hoppe T. (2011). la Souris (ICS), GIE CERBM, Illkirch, France. The Machado-Joseph disease deubiquitylase ATX-3 couples longevity and pro- teostasis. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 273-81. Hoppe T. (2010) Life and destruction: ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis in aging More than 50 years after the discovery of Trisomy 21, the underlying basic and longevity. F1000 Biol Rep 2: 79 genetic of the Down syndrome (DS), is still not completely understood. The Janiesch P.C., Kim J., Mouysset J., Barikbin R., Lochmüller H., Cassata G., Krause current working hypothesis is based on interactions between “dosage sen- S., and Hoppe T. (2007). The ubiquitin-selective chaperone CDC-48/p97 links sitive” genes located along the HSA21 that are responsible for the complex myosin assembly to human myopathy. Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 379-90. features of the pathology.In order to identify the genes involved in Down Hoppe T., Cassata G., Barral J.M., Springer W., Hutagalung A.H., Epstein H.F., and syndrome features, we created new partial trisomies in the mouse for regi- Baumeister R. (2004). Regulation of the Myosin-Directed Chaperone UNC-45 ons homologous to HSA21 contributing to the Aneuploid zoo of DS models. b Ty. Ha oNpopvee:l N
E3 on/eE.4-Multiubiquitylation Complex in C. elegans. Cell 118, 337-49. Here we will report the characterization of new mouse models for various regions of interest with a specific standardized behavioral pipeline and the identification of the cystathionine beta-synthase (Cbs) in learning and 
S11 .3 memory deficits observed in Down syndrome mouse models. Using two From bedside to bench: a Fragile X patient mutation yields insights genetic experiments we evaluated the role of Cbs in the trisomy. First we into the functional specialization of the FXR protein family. reduced the copy number of Cbs using a knock-out allele in the Abcg1-U2af1 Z. Okray, B. Hassan; trisomic model. We found that specific learning and memory phenotypes VIB and University of Leuven Medical School, Leuven, Belgium. were rescued in compound mice showing that Cbs is required for these phenotypes. Then we generated a conditional transgenic mouse line to di- rect the sole overexpression of the human CBS gene in the hippocampus The most prevalent basis for FMR-1 deficiency in Fragile X (FXS) patients and the cortex. These new transgenic mice displayed similar phenotypes to is epigenetic silencing mediated by promoter-proximal CGG repeat expan- the trisomic mouse lines. Thus we conclude that Cbs gain of function in the sions. Other instances of the disease phenotype have been associated with brain is sufficient to induce learning and memory phenotypes in DS. The mutations in the coding regions of the FMR-1 gene, however, only one of data generated are challenging our current knowledge on the role of Cbs in these mutations has been experimentally characterized. the physiopathology of the disease, highlighting cross-talks in drug targets To further investigate how coding mutations in FMR-1 can contribute to and showing the interaction of several loci in DS cognitive traits. We will FXS etiology, we screened a small group of patients who display typical FXS discuss how this new knowledge would reinforce the development of new symptoms, yet do not harbor CGG repeat expansions in the FMR1 locus. In therapeutic approaches to facilitate the life of DS people and might help to one patient, we recovered a mutation - a single base insertion - in exon 14 e Yv.a Hluéarateu lpt:r oNmoniesi.ng strategies. of FMR1. The mutation alters the open reading frame, creating a novel ami- no acid sequence in the C-terminus, followed by a premature stop codon. We find that the novel C-terminus peptide encodes a functional, bipartite 
S11 .2 nuclear localization signal (NLS), which bears a striking resemblance to the Protein Degradation in Health and Disease nucleolar localization signals identified in FMR1 paralogs, referred to as the T. Hoppe; FXR1 and FXR2 proteins. This signal targets the patient FMR1 protein to the CECAD at the Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. nucleolus in cultured human and rat cells. Using the D.melanogaster model, we demonstrate that the presence of the patient NLS motif on FMRP can alter its function in neurons and lead to neomorphic phenotypes in vivo. Cellular differentiation, developmental processes, and environmental factors Taken together, our results provide evidence for novel changes in FMRP challenge the integrity of the proteome in every eukaryotic cell. The main- f Zu.n Octkiroany :c oNnofneer.r Bed. Hbays tshains :c Nlinonicea.lly relevant point mutation tenance of protein homeostasis involves the degradation of misfolded and damaged proteins, and is essential for cellular function, organismal grow- th, and viability. The UPS is one major proteolytic component of the cellular 12 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG proteostasis network regulating the degradation of damaged proteins thatABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S12 .1 The geneticist‘s perspective A. Read; specific pluripotent stem cells capable of differentiation into the various Genetic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. tissues affected in each condition could undoubtedly provide new insights into the pathological mechanisms by permitting analysis in a human system. These new disease-specific cell models are applicable for a wide systemic Genetics has two points of contact with the criminal justice system: DNA mechanistic analysis ranging from functional studies at the cellular level to identification, and the possible role of genetic predisposition in antisocial a large-scale functional genomics screening. behaviour. DNA profiling has brought much-needed objectivity into criminal As a proof of principle, we demonstrated that PGD-derived hES cells and investigation - but it is important to remember that the mere presence of a derivatives which, express the causal mutation implicated in the Myotonic person’s DNA at a crime scene tells us nothing about how or when that DNA Dystrophy type 1 (DM1), may mimic molecular defects associated to the pa- got there or what, if anything, its owner was doing at the time. Scientific que- thology, such as the nuclear aggregation of mutant RNA. stions can arise when techniques are pushed to their limits to analyse small, By taking advantage of this pertinent cellular model, we identified, through mixed and degraded samples, while some feel that investigative techniques a genome-wide analysis, two early developmental defects in genes invol- like familial searching raise specific ethical issues. ved both in myogenesis as well as in neurite formation and establishment Once a case comes to trial geneticists have sometimes been asked to testify of neuromuscular connections. These neuropathological mechanisms may that a genetic variant possessed by the accused predisposes them to crimi- bear clinical significance as related to the functional alteration of neuromu- nal behaviour. Might this make them less responsible for their actions? The scular connections associated with DM1. popular press loves the idea of a ‘criminal gene’ - but how convincing is the In parallel to these functional pathological studies, we developed two dif- evidence that XYY men or men with monoamine oxidase A deficiency are ferent approaches to identify new therapeutic strategies. The first one was ‘born criminals’? Are genetic predispositions any different from the innume- based on a high content screening approach. A pilot drug screening experi- rable other factors that can influence a person’s behaviour? Might it be that ment has been successfully conducted in order to identify new molecules the main reason genetic arguments are introduced into criminal trials is not which, due to their ability to disrupt the nuclear mutant RNA aggregation, to help the court judge criminals appropriately, but to to bamboozle juries might represent new therapeutic strategies. The second strategy used a ge- w Ai.t Rh eimadp: rNeossniev.e-looking science? nomics screening based on gene knockdown approach. This analysis allo- wed the identification of a potentially druggable target protein, inhibition of which tends to normalize molecular defects associated to DM1. 
S12 .2 All this study demonstrated that these PGD hES–derived cell models could Narrowing down the free-will compass? A social and ethical be relevant for wide analysis ranging from the study of the dysfunction of an perspective inter-cellular nerve-muscle system to high-throughput functional genomics M. Levitt; screening. Altogether, our results indicate that disease-specific hES cell lines Lancaster, United Kingdom. could be used for resources driven large-scale analysis, in complement to classical approach based on the analysis of candidate gene, that could high- lCig.h Mt athrtein daet:v eNloonpem. Sen. Nt oédf neleewc: tNhoenraep. Ye.u Mtica usrtyra: tNeogniees. .J. Come: None. M. Peschanski: None. Assumptions and outcomes of behavioural genetics have consequences for attributing responsibility and blame. These are not only central elements in the justice system but are also rooted in social and moral reasoning. In most legal cases so far genetic evidence on levels of MAOA expression has 
S13 .3 been assumed by defence lawyers to be of potential benefit to their clients, IPS cells to model genetic diseases and individual variability. however, it could also be used against them. Notions of human agency, free- M. Brimpari1, F. Rouhani2, N. Kumasaka2, a. Bradley2, D. Gaffney2, L. Vallier3; will and determinism, choice and control are discussed in relation to genetic 1Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Cambridge University and Wellcome Trust Institute, and environmental defences for violent and antisocial behaviour. The impli- Cambridge, United Kingdom. cations of determinist accounts of violent crime for victims,offenders, the justice system and society as a whole are considered. The lecture will draw on both public and expert understandings. The public’s understandings of Human induced pluripotent stem cells are generated from somatic cells the causes of criminal behaviour and attachment of blame, fairness and re- reprogrammed by overexressing transcription factors. Their pluripotency sponsibility are critical to their acceptance of policy and practice in this area status confers upon them the capacity to proliferate indefinitely in vitro and to their role as lay jurors. while maintaining their capacity to differentiate into a broad number of cell types. hIPSCs represent an unique opportunity for regenerative medicine 
S12 .3 since they could enable the production of patient specific cell types which Narrowing down the free-will compass? A legal perspective are fully immuno-compatible with the original donor thereby avoiding the A. Santosuosso; use of immune suppressive treatment during personal cell based therapy. In Pavia, Italy. addition, hIPSCs can be generated from somatic cells isolated from patients suffering from diverse diseases. Then, the resulting “diseased” hIPSCs can be differentiated into the cell type targeted by the disease and thus provide in No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. vitro models to perform large scale studies impossible with primary cell cul- eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. ture or with biopsy material. However, hIPSC lines appear to strongly vary 
S13 .1 in their capacity of differentiation and the origin of this variability remains Human pluripotent stem cells for modeling genetic diseases unclear. Here we derived a panel of hIPSC lines from a diversity of healthy O. Brüstle; individuals and then defined their capacity to differentiate into the three Bonn, Germany. germ layers endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm from which all the adult organs are derived. This analysis revealed that most of hIPSC lines can dif- ferentiate efficiently into these primary tissues. However, a limited number No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. of lines were resistant to specific type of differentiation. We then performed eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. functional experiments associated with genome wide analysed to uncover 
S13 .2 the mechanisms involved. We observed that several aspect influence the ca- iPS for modelling diseases and drug screening : the example of pacity of individual hIPSC line to differentiate into specific tissues including Steinertmyotonic dystrophy the method of reprogramming, epigenetic memory but more importantly C. Martinat, S. Nédelec, Y. Maury, J. Come, M. Peschanski; genetic variability. Therefore, these results suggest that hIPSCs could repre- INSERM/UEVE UMR 861, I-STEM, AFM, Evry, France. s Men. Bt arinm upnairqi:u Neo snyes.t Fe.m R toou mhaondi:e Nl ionndei.v Nid. uKaul mphaseankoat:y pNiocn vea. rAia. bBirlaitdyl einy: v itro. None. D. Gaffney: None. L. Vallier: None. The lack of existing models of pathologic tissues has rendered many impor- tant questions in disease pathogenesis inaccessible. Human embryonic stem cells derived from affected embryos during a pre-implantation diagnostic (PGD), as well as the technical development to obtain human induced plu- ripotent stem cells generated from patients, offer the unique opportunity to have access to a large spectrum of disEeaSseH-sGpe 2ci0fic1 c3e l|l PmAodReIlSs. ,D FisReaAsNe-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 13ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S14 .1 
S14 .3 DNA repair and microcephaly Post-zygotic mosaicism for large scale chromosomal aberrations M. O’Driscoll; among elderly people; What does it mean? Brighton, United Kingdom. J. P. Dumanski; Dept. of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Mammalian embryonic neurogenesis is exquisitely sensitive to perturbati- ons in cell cycle dynamics. The origins of these perturbations are multif- Post-zygotic, acquired with age mutations in normal cells represent under- actorial and often interconnected. Severe microcephaly can occur as a con- studied aspect of genome biology. Human post-zygotic mosaicism has been sequence of reduced cell division and/or elevated apoptosis in the develo- studied in embryos, aborted fetuses, children with developmental defects ping neuroepithelium. Interestingly, defects in genes encoding centrosome, and in cancer. However, little is still known about the type and frequency centrosomal-associated and spindle pole proteins are currently the most of acquired genetic aberrations in normal cells from subjects in the gene- frequent cause of Primary Microcephaly (PM) and Microcephalic Primordial ral population, especially from cohorts that are well stratified by age. Our Dwarfism (MPD) syndromes in humans. The centrosome is an important recent analyses suggest that such mosaicism is surprisingly common, with microtubule-organizing centre essential for coordinating G2-M progression the highest estimate of 3.5% for elderly/old subjects being affected by va- and normal mitotic cell division as well as the DNA damage response. Mito- rious large-scale aberrations. We have now extended the above analyses and tic progression and segregation defects, microtubule spindle abnormalities studied 1153 men using blood collected at the ages of 70.7-83.6 years from and impaired DNA damage-induced G2-M cell cycle checkpoint proficiency the Swedish ULSAM population-based cohort that was clinically followed for have all been ArTeRp-oArTteRdIP i nS etchkeesle s ygnednreotmicaelly heterogeneous patient-derived more than 20 years. We applied 2.5M-Omni Illumina chip with strict selec- cell lines. InteMreeisetri-nGgolyr,l icno nsgynendritoaml deefects in the ATR-dependent DNA dama- tion by genotyping quality and these 1153 samples were selected out 1217 ge response ( vice versa ) and in DNA replication licensing samples originally submitted as a single batch to the genotyping facility. We machinery ( ) are also associated with centrosome used the following size of cut-offs for scoring of aberrations: gains - > 250 kb; abnormalities and , suggestive of a multifactorial but interconnec- deletions and CNNLOH - > 10 kb. Overall, we observed a very high frequency ted underlying pathobiology of MPD. I will present a brief overview of these of post-zygotic mosaicim; 42.7% of people displayed at least one aberration defects, specifically focusing on mechanisms of genomic instability but also with gains as the most common type of aberration. Our results illustrate the highlighting some unanticipated impacts of some of these defects upon si- high frequency and importance of post-zygotic mosaicism in normal cells, gnal transduction. Collectively, these findings help contribute to our evol- w J.hPi.c Dhu smhoaunlsdk ib: eN sotnued.ied further for associations with various diseases. ving understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships. 
S14 .2 Apparently balanced chromosome rearrangements in human 
S15 .1 development Drugs and genes - an overview C. C. Morton1, J. Rosenfeld2, A. M. Lindgren3, S. Pereira3, I. Blumenthal4, C. Chiang4, L. G. A. K. Daly; Shaffer5, J. F. Gusella6, M. E. Talkowski6; Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. 1Brigham and Women‘s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 2Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA, United States, 3Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Genetic Veterinary Sciences, Spokane, WA, United States, 6Massachusetts General Individual genetic profiles affect both efficacy of prescribed drugs and sus- Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. ceptibility to adverse drug reactions. Serious adverse drug reactions are generally rare but occur with a range of different prescribed drugs. These reactions can affect a number of different physiological systems and tissues Apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangements are an invaluable bio- in the body. Progress has been made recently in understanding both their logical resource for annotation of the human genome and the foundation genetic basis and underlying mechanisms. During drug development, idio- of the Developmental Genome Anatomy Project (DGAP, dgap.harvard.edu). syncratic adverse reactions affecting the liver are a major reason for drug Implementation of next-generation sequencing of rearrangements has faci- attrition during the later stages of development. They are also a rare but litated rapid gene discovery for structural and neurodevelopmental (NDD) serious complication of treatment with a number of commonly prescribed disorders. Structural disorders elucidated include those from subjects with drugs, especially antimicrobial agents. Highly significant associations with various craniofacial abnormalities and brain, ocular, auditory, kidney, and particular HLA class I and class II genotypes have been reported for drug- bone aberrations, with validation in subjects with overlapping phenotypes induced liver injury with several specific drugs, for example flucloxacillin or in animal models. Validation of genes in subjects with NDD has been dif- and co-amoxiclav. Examples of these associations and possible underlying ficult historically but is now feasible taking advantage of convergent geno- mechanisms, including how this may relate to reported HLA associations mic evidence. Rearrangement breakpoints were sequenced in 38 subjects for other types of adverse drug reactions, will be considered. Not all forms with NDD and validatSiAoTnB p2erformed uMsiBnDg 5copy number vaErHiaMnTts1 (CNVs) in of idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury reactions show HLA gene associa- 19,556 cases and 13,991 controls. Genes disrupted within microdeletion tions. Genes relevant to the innate immune system and to drug disposition syndromes included (2q33.1), (2q23.1) and (9q34.3), appear to represent additional risk factors for drug-induced liver injury but, all of which are transcription and epigenetic regulators. MInB aD f5ollow-up study as with the adaptive immune system associations involving HLA, risk factors among an international network of investigators, 65 independent 2q23.1 will be drug or, in some cases, drug class dependent. Overall understanding microdeletions were ascertained, defining the role of as necessary of the genetic basis of drug-induced liver injury remains limited and our and sufficient in the 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome. Disrupted loci in some ongoing studies, which are concerned with increasing case numbers and subjects associate with a spectrum of developmental and psychiatric disor- performing further genome-wide association studies combined with exome ders, including mental retardation, autism, language delay, schizophrenia, s Ae.qKu. eDnacliyn:g N, owniell. be discussed. psychosis, cognitive impairment, and bipolar disorder, bridging phenotypes with genetic etiologies. Genes at breakpoints novel for correla. tion with NDD have diverse functions from methylation and transcriptional regulation to 
S15 .2 cell signaling, cell adhesion, and nonsense-mediated decay In addition, a An immunological basis for pharmacogenetic associations in the MHC number of observations were made from the sequence analysis concerning J. McCluskey, Patricia T. Illing, Julian P. Vivian, NadineL. Dudek, Lyudmila Kostenko, genomic architecture of constitutional rearrangements including complex Zhenjun Chen,, Mandvi Bharadwaj, John J. Miles, Lars Kjer-Nielsen, Stephanie Gras, Nicholas A. Williamson,, Scott R. Burrows, Anthony W. Purcell, Jamie Rossjohn,, Monash events akin to chromothripsis in neoplasms, nonhomologous end joining University and QIMR, QLD; as a predominant mechanism and the presence of inversions in derivative The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. chromosomes at sites of rearrangement. Nucleotide level resolution of ap- parently balanced rearrangements through next-generation sequencing can contribute to diagnostic precision in abnormal human phenotypes leading Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA) are highly polymorphic proteins that to improved genetic counseling, and can illuminate underlying genomic initiate immunity by presenting pathogen-derived peptides to T cells. HLA m Co.Cle. cMuolartro mn:e Nchoanne.i sJm. Rs.osenfeld: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Signature Genomic Laboratories. A.M. Lindgren: None. S. Pereira: None. I. polymorphisms mostly map to the antigen (Ag)-binding cleft, thereby diver- Blumenthal: None. C. Chiang: None. L.G. Shaffer: A. Employment (full or sifying the repertoire of self- and pathogen-derived peptide Ags selected by part-time); Significant; Genetic Veterinary Services. J.F. Gusella: None. M.E. different HLA allotypes. A growing number of immunologically-based drug Talkowski: None. reactions, including abacavir hypersensitivity syndrome (AHS) and carb- amazepine-induced Steven-Johnson’s syndrome (SJS), are associated with specific HLA alleles. However, little is known about the underlying mechanis- 14 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG ms of these associations, including AHS, a prototypical HLA-associated drugABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index Educational Sessions HLA-B*57:01, reaction occurring exclusively in individuals with the common histocompa- tibility molecule, and with a relative risk of >1000. We show E
S1 .1 that unmodified abacavir binds non-covalently to HLA-B*57:01, lying across Sequencing at The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in the year 2013 the bottom of the Ag-binding cleft and reaching into the F-pocket where a M. Quail; C-terminal tryptophan typically anchors peptides bound to HLA-B*57:01. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Abacavir binds with exquisite specificity to HLA-B*57:01, changing the sha- pe and chemistry of the Ag-binding cleft, thereby altering the repertoire of endogenous peptides that can bind HLA-B*57:01. In this way, abacavir gui- The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute is powered by sequencing. What are des selection of new endogenous peptides, inducing a dramatic alteration we using all this sequencing for? How is sequencing changing? How do we in ‘immunological self’. The resultant peptide-centric ‘a+ltered self’ activates manage and process the many thousands of samples that we sequence? abacavir-specific T-cells, thereby driving polyclonal CD8 T cell activation and What technologies are we employing for different applications? What are aH LsyAs-tBe*m15ic:0 r2e action manifesting as AHS. We also show that carbamazepine, a we developing in our R&D group? In my talk I will describe our sequencing widely used anti-epileptic drug associated with hypersensitivity reactions in pipelines, optimisations and new protocols for Illumina library preparation individuals, binds to this allotype, producing alterations in the and describe our progress, experiences and optimisation of semiconductor repertoire of presented self-peptides. These findings simultaneously high- a Mn.d Q tuhairidl: gNeonneer.ation sequencing platforms. light the importance of HLA polymorphism in the evolution of pharmaco- genomics, perhaps providing a general mechanism for some of the growing number of HLA-linked hypersensitivities that involve small molecule drugs, bJu. tM aclsColu ssukgegye:s Ntionnge n.ovel pathway for induction of autoimmunity. E
S1 .2 Performance and Improvements in Analyzing Next Generation Sequencing Technologies H. Tilgner1, D. Sharon1, D. Xie1, V. Kuleshov2,3, R. Chen1, D. Pushkarev3, K. Karczewski1, A. 
S15 .3 P. Boyle1, T. Blauwkamp3, M. Kertesz3, R. Chen4, H. Lam4, M. Pratt4, G. Bartha4, J. Harris4, J. Genetic risk mirrors outcome of anti-TNF therapy in Multiple West4, M. Snyder1; Sclerosis 1Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United L. Fugger; States, 2Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United Oxford, United Kingdom. States, 3Illumina, Inc., 5200 Illumina Way, San Diego, CA, United States, 4Personalis Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States. No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. We have explored different high throughput sequencing technologies for 
S16 .1 analyzing human genomes, exomes and transcriptomes. For genomes and Extreme ciliary phenotypes exomes we have compared different sequencing technologies and capture T. Attie; methods respectively and evaluated their performance. Limitations of the Paris, France. different platforms were discovered and managed to improve sequence accuracy and coverage, particularly in regions of high clinical relevance. We have also utilized and evaluated new long sequence technologies (e.g. No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. Moleculo/Illumina) for accurate phasing of genome variants and calling of eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. structural variants. 
S16 .2 In addition to genome and exome analyses, we have explored different long Primary cilia -kidney disease - DNA Repair reads technologies (PacBio, 454) for accurate mapping of transcriptomes. T. Benzing; These studies have revealed that many full length transcripts can be re- Cologne, Germany. vealed using long read sequencing and resulting in accurate and novel tran- script definition. Together the different technologies produce more accurate and comprehen- No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. sive genomes, exome and transcriptome sequences. An example of using an eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. a Hc.c Tuirlagtnee pr:h Naosende. gDe.n Sohmaero fno:r Naonnaely. zDin. Xg ime:e Nthoynleo. mV.e Ks uwleilslh boev p: rNeosneen.t Red. . Chen: None. D. Pushkarev: None. K. Karczewski: None. A.P. Boyle: None. T. 
S16 .3 Blauwkamp: None. M. Kertesz: None. R. Chen: None. H. Lam: None. M. Pratt: Moving into and inside cilia: the awesome power of diffusion None. G. Bartha: None. J. Harris: None. J. West: None. M. Snyder: Other; D. K. Breslow1, F. Ye1,2, E. F. Koslover3, A. J. Spakowitz3, W. Nelson1,2, M. V. Nachury1; Modest; founder and member of the SAB for Personalis. 1Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States. E
S2 .1 Integration of Microarray Technology into Prenatal Diagnosis The primary cilium is a signaling organelle with a distinct complement of mem- R. Wapner; brane and soluble proteins. How specific proteins are concentrated within cilia Columbia University, New York, NY, United States. while others remain excluded is a major unanswered question. We have now established a method for selective permeabilization of the plasma membra- ne that leaves the ciliary membrane intact, thus enabling a quantitative and New genetic technologies have quickly entered obstetrical care providing mechanistic analysis of protein entry into primary cilia. Using a diffusion-to- an ever-increasing amount of information about the fetus. Less than 5 years capture assay, we find that soluble proteins larger than 75 kDa fail to enter cilia ago, karyotyping was the predominant tool for genetic evaluation of the fe- and that the ciliary permeability barrier is mechanistically distinct from the tus and was used predominately for aneuploidy detection and the identifica- nuclear pore complex. Applying a mass transport model to this system reveals tion of relatively large genomic changes of 7-10 million base pairs or larger. diffusion coefficients for soluble proteins that are compatible with a rapid ex- More recently, microarray technology has been introduced into prenatal ploration of the ciliary space in the absence of active transport. evaluation and has the ability to identify much smaller genomic changes We extend our conclusions to membrane protein by conducting single mole- (microdeletions and duplications). With this increased resolution has come cule imaging of signaling receptors inside cilia. Here, we find that membrane the knowledge that smaller findings also have significant clinical implicati- proteins move along primary cilia by a combination of diffusion and motor- ons and are not infrequent in routine prenatal testing. driven transport. Perturbation of either diffusion or active transport shows This genetic knowledge has allowed improved counseling for pregnancies that cargo movements can be uncoupled from movements of the intraflagellar identified with fetal structural anomalies, in which approximately 6% of transport (IFT) machinery, and that diffusion is sufficient for membrane pro- such cases with a normal karyotype will have a genomic cause identified teins to explore the ciliary surface. Taken together, our results indicate that by microarray testing. Approximately 1% or more of structurally normal signaling within cilia need not be entirely reliant on active transport and poses pregnancies also have clinically relevant genomic findings, suggesting that t Dh.eK q. uBersetsiloonw o: fN tohnee t. rFu. eY efu: nNcotnioen. Eo.fF I. FKTo.slover: None. A.J. Spakowitz: None. W. all pregnant couples should consider invasive testing with microarray ana- Nelson: None. M.V. Nachury: None. lysis. This increasing ability to evaluate the fetal genome comes with significant ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEr |e sWpoWnsiWbil.iEtyS fHorG c.lOiniRciGans. These technologic advances have rapidly 1o5ut-ABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index paced our ability to thoughtfully and appropriately use the information. regulatory factors acting in trans. Recurrence risks, clinical phenotype and Pretest and post-test counseling must be adapted so they are informative, tumor location and frequencies associated with different type of molecular prepare patients for the reproductive decisions they must make, and still be defect will be described. New advances are expected soon from the wide a Rb.l eW taop bnee ra: cNcoonmep.lished within a feasible and timely period. application of next generation sequencing technologies to the analysis of the genome and epigenome of OGS patients. Likely, these will turn out in even larger impact in clinical medicine through the development of gene-specific E
S2 .2 fAol.l Rowic-cuiop: pNroontoe.cols and therapies. New approaches in preimplantation screening S. Munné; Livingston, NJ, United States. E
S4 .2 Cancer risk in RASopathies K. Gripp; No abstract received as per date of production. Please check http://www. Wilmington, DE, United States. eshg.org/abstracts2013.0.html for possible updates. E
S3 .1 Understanding Genomics. Trends in Science Communication Rasopathies are syndromic conditions resulting from germline mutations A. M. Dijkstra; affecting the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway. Dysregulation of this pathway’s University of Twente, Science Communication, Enschede, Netherlands. key role in cell growth and differentiation during embryogenesis gives rise to a recognizable phenotype affecting multiple organ systems, also referred to as “neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes”. Postnatal pathway dysregu- Nowadays, publics are becoming more critical towards new technologies, lation through somatic mutations similarly affects cell growth and differen- as has been shown with biotechnology and genomics. The relationship tiation and occurs during carcinogenesis. Given this transforming activity of between science, technology and society is changing. Society changes and RAS/MAPK pathway mutations, it is not surprising that syndromes resulting publics are articulating their opinions more often and are expressing more from germline mutations entail an increased malignancy risk. The relative critical thoughts about new developments. At the same time, science and risk, cancer type and age are syndrome specific. Neurofibromatosis type 1 is technology are changing as well. As a result, due to related uncertainties and a common rasopathy, and its increased risk for optic gliomata and malignant unknown risks, not all of these new developments are welcomed anymo- peripheral nerve sheath tumors is addressed in surveillance recommenda- re. In this changing society, both politicians and researchers agree that for tions. The hPeTtePrNo1ge1neous Noonan syndrome is also common, and its asso- developing (new) technologies public acceptance and trust is vital. Current ciated increased risk for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) varies insights in literature, therefore, emphasize public engagement processes, by specific or other gene mutation. A JMML-like myelodysplastic involving publics in two-way communication and dialogue instead of edu- syndrome in early childhood can have a benign course. Cardio-facio-cuta- cating and persuading publics. However, is more engagement really the key? neous (CFC) syndrome may be associated with an increase in acute lympho- How should publics understand, for example, genomics? And, what role is blastic leukemia. For Noonan and CFC syndrome, with a low absolute cancer there for social media? Based on insights from research, trends in science risk, and malignanciesH wRhAiSch are not likely to show improved outcome after communication are discussed. early detection, few screening recommendations exist. In contrast, Costello A.M. Dijkstra: None. syndrome, caused by missense mutations, is associated with a higher tumor risk, approaching 15%. Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma accounts for about 60% of these malignancies, followed by neuroblastoma and transitio- nal cell carcinoma of the bladder. While screening suggestions for Costello E
S3 .2 syndrome were published, their benefit remains unknown. In conclusion, Science in the media. Lost in translation while the cancer risk is increased overall in rasopathies, the specific risk va- D. M. Secko; Department of Journalism, Concordia University, Montréal, Québec, QC, Canada. ries greatly by syndrome, and often by specific causal mutation. Awareness for the risk increase, education of patients and families, prompt evaluation and standard treatment for malignancies constitute best medical practice. A recurring and recalcitrant theme in the discussion of science in the me- E
S5 .1 dia concerns what is “lost” when a scientific paper becomes a news article. Spectrum of monogenic forms and clinical importance of de novo While some critics acknowledge the existence of great science communica- mutations tion, they also fiercely point to a number of broader issues, including: uncri- S. Baulac; ICM, Hôpital Pitié-Salpetrière, Paris, France. tical and over-simplistic science reporting, narrow frames of scientific pro- gress and economic prospect, a limited range of expert opinion, preferences toward positive messages, unrealistic time lines, and media professionals Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorder. It encompasses a engaging in cycles of hype. Some media professionals acknowledge various large group of syndromes, diverse in terms of age, etiology, clinical types of critiques as well, but also question whether the goals and norms of their seizures, disabilities and prognosis. Genetic factors play a predominant role profession in choosing what to include and what to exclude is sufficiently in about 40% of all epilepsies. Rare MCeHnRdNelAia4n CfoHrRmNsA o2f eCpHiRleNpBsy2 aKreC NnQow2 understood. In the communication of a complex and rapidly evolving tar- KwCeNllQ r3ecKoCgnNiTz1edS. CSNin1cAe 1S
C9 N952,A faSmCNily1-BbaGseAdB RliGn2kaGgeA BsRtuAd1i,e Ps RhRaTv2e PreCvDeHal1e9d get such as genomics, some things will inevitably be lost. This presentation LnGuIm1,e DroEuPsD cCa5u..s.ative epilepsy genes ( , , , , will explore these inclusions and exclusions, attempting to highlight what r De.mMa. iSnesc ikno e: xNaomnpe.les of inspiring science communication. , , , , , , , , ). To date, the majority of known epilepsy genes encode neu- ronal ion channel subunits or neurotransmitter receptor subunits leading many of the genetic epilepsies to be considered as channelopathies. Mole- E
S4 .1 cular approaches have revealed great genetic heterogeneity, with the vast Cancer risk in overgrowth syndromes majority of genes remaining to be identified. This presentation will review A. Riccio1,2; 1DiSTABiF, University of Naples 2, Naples, Italy, 2IGB-CNR, Naples, Italy. recent findings on the dper ongorveoss in gene discovery in monogenic epilepsies, with particular focus on genes harboring inherited variants involved in large mSuClNti1pAlex families and mutations responsible for sporadic cases. The gSCenNe1 Aencoding the α1 subunit of neuronal voltage-gated sodium channels Overgrowth syndromes (OGS) are a heterogenous group of disorders cha- ( ) is the most frequently mutated gene in edpeil enpovsyo so far. Inherited racterized by global or regional excess of growth. Many of them show in- mutations are found in autosomal dominant families with Genetic creased risk of tumors requiring specific protocols for tumor surveillance. EpilepsyS CwNit1hA Febrile Seizures Plus (GEFS+), while mutations cause This lecture will focus on recent advances in disease gene identification a severe epileptic encephalopathy named the Dravet syndrome. Genetic te- which resulted in improvement of our understanding in the molecular sting of may preveKnCtN tTh1e need for unnecessary clinical investigations mechanisms of childhood overgrowth. Molecular defects include both con- and provide genetic counseling for families. Mutations in the sodium-gated stitutional and somatic single gene defects as well as genomic imprinting abnormalities. These in turn may result from either mutations of imprinting potassium channel gene de nov woere found in two epileptic disorders: inhe- rited mutations are responsible for severe autosomal dominant nocturnal control regions (ICR) acting in cis or arise de novo as epigenetic mutations p1os6sibly caused by stochastic events, environmentEaSl fHacGto r2s 0or1 m3u |t aPtiAonRsI oSf, FRfrAonNtaCl Elo b| eW epWileWps.yE aSnHd G.ORG mutations for malignant migrating partialABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index seizures of infancy, an early inDfaEnPtDilCe5 epileptic encephalopathy. One of the se and synonymous variants, and to register all IRD variants in well-curated most recent advances in the field of epilepsy genetics is the discovery that databases, such as the Leiden Open Variation Databases. As the most fre- loss-of-function mutations of (DEP domain containing protein 5) quently mutated IRD genes have already been identified, there is an increa- are a frequent cause for a broad spectrum of familial focal epilepsies. The sing need for large cohorts of patients. To this end, the European Retinal Di- implication of a DEP domain (Dishevelled, Egl-10 and Pleckstrin domain)- sease Consortium was established, which encompasses 12 research groups containing protein that may be involved in membrane trafficking and/or G- iFn. 
P1 .1M .c oCurenmtreierss:, aNnodn eh.as ascertained >8.000 IRD families. p Sr.o Bteaiunl ascig: nNaolnineg., opens new avenues for research. E
S6 .2 E
S5 .2 Inherited retinal disease - management and therapies The role of genetic susceptibility factors in epilepsy and their clinical A. R. Webster1,2; relevance 1Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, I. Helbig; London, United Kingdom. Kiel, Germany. Inherited retinal diseases comprise a large and varied group of disorders While there has been exceptional progress in the identification of mono- that adversely affect vision due to the perturbation of genes expressed in the genic forms of epilepsy, the discovery of genetic susceptibility factors for specialised cells of the retina. Vast genetic and allelic heterogeneity confound seizure disorders has lagged behind, even in comparison to other neurode- accurate molecular diagnosis, a challenge now, to a degree, surmountable velopmental disorders. Genes identified in familial epilepsies only play a mi- using high-throughput nucleotide sequencing technology. The identification nor role in common, non-familial epilepsies, a finding that has long puzzled of causative genes, and the molecular diagnosis in patients and families has scientists and has held back progress in understanding the genetic basis of an impact on clinical management in a number of ways. Some disorders are common epilepsies. Further burdened with the phenotypic heterogeneity phenotypically distinct and immediately suggest a causative gene, and gene- of the epilepsies, the field was reluctant to adapt to large-scale associati- tic segregation. However, others, such as retinitis pigmentosa, are heteroge- on studies. Epilepsy genetics is currently emerging from the “dark ages” of neous, and require a molecular diagnosis before segregation and accurate small and underpowered association studies with few sufficiently powered counselling can be offered to patients and relatives. Once a group of patients association studies published. Finally, in 2012, a large-scale genome-wide with retinal degeneration has been molecularly defined, then this allows the association study identified the first common risk factors for epilepsies in- acquisition of data delineating the age-related changes in retinal function cluding variants at the VRK, PNPO and SCN1A loci. In addition, the unexpec- and structure, important to determine effective treatment strategies, and for ted discovery of copy number variants including microdeletions at 15q13.3, chosing metrics to measure the efficacy of treatment in a short a time as pos- 16p13.11 and 15q11.2 has pioneered the research into the role of rare gene- sible. Preliminary data on gene-replacement for disease due to mutation of tic variants. Investigations of these risk factors both in case-control studies RE
P1 , causative of choroideraemia, will be presented, this being a paradigm and family studies have emphasized relevant issues including incomplete for treatments aimed at preserving function of the fovea. This retinal region, penetrance, phenotypic heterogeneity and incomplete segregration in fami- 400-500µm in diameter, is packed exclusively with cone photoreceptors, de- lies. Equipped with the early experiences relating to the role of common and signed specifically to allow fine visual discrimination. Data from our group rare susceptibility factors, the field of epilepsy genetics is currently embar- on the effect on this structure, in vivo, of mutations in the ABCA4 gene, king on a journey to discover risk factors with massive parallel sequencing shows significant differences in degeneration, which are important in the technologies. While there is some emerging evidence for de novo mutations consideration of therapies. Examples of diseases in which simple modifica- particularly in epileptic encephalopathies, the full impact of de novo ver- tions might help sustain vision, based on knowledge of molecular pathology, sus inherited risk factors remains to be determined. In parallel, the field of include disorders due to mutation in ABCA4, GUCA1A and EFEM
P1 . Finally, epilepsy pharmacogenomics is evolving rapidly and variants such as HLA the accessibility of the retina makes it tractable to approaches that attempt B*1502 are established risk factors for adverse reactions to certain antiepi- to restore vision. Data from our group and others show that retinal prosthe- leptic drugs that may already have clinical consequences. ses can deliver useful visual percepts in those with disease causing none, or In this presentation, we will discuss the emerging role of common and rare vague, light perception. Furthermore, strategies involving cell transplantati- genetic susceptibility factors in the epilepsies, highlight current controver- o An. Ra.n Wd eobpstotegre: nNeotnices. show promise in the future. sies and discuss the clinical implications of these findings. E
S6 .1 Inherited retinal dystrophies: insights & challenges behind the E
S7 .1 rainbow Introducing next generation technology to clinical scientists F. P. M. Cremers; C. Wright; Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Nijmegen, Netherlands. High resolution genomic technologies are increasingly being used in clinical In the last 25 years ~100 genes have been implicated in inherited retinal research to identify the genetic causes of a variety of human diseases. The dystrophies (IRDs). X-linked RD genes were identified using linkage and UK-wide Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) project uses exon- deletion mapping. Linkage and homozygosity mapping facilitated IRD gene enriched aCGH coupled with trio exome sequencing to identify the under- identification on autosomes. Many IRD genes encode proteins of the visual lying genetic aetiology in children with severe undiagnosed developmental cycle and phototransduction cascade, or are orthologs of CgHenMesS mNRuNtaPt2ed00 in disorders. Where likely causal variants are identified, they are fed-back to animal models. One-third of the IRD-associated genes encode ciliary pro- Regional Genetics Services for validation and discussion with the family. At teins. Several IRD genes are ubiquitously eBxBpSr1e, sCsEedP 2(9e0.g. MV, K ). the half-way point of this 5-year project, we have recruited over 5000 fa- Many genes mutated in syndromes, are also involved in non-syndromic IRDs. milies to the study, processed over 1000 trio exomes, and fed-back ~200 Using IRDs associated with mutations in , or (encoding potential diagnoses. mevalonate kinase), I will illustrate our (lack of) understanding regarding In this talk I will outline the interaction with clinical teams in DDD through genotype-phecnisotype tcroarnrselations. To shed further light on this matter, we DECIPHER, creation of a scalable automated analysis and variant filtering need additional insights in the transcriptional variation of IRD-associated pipeline for prioritising likely causal variants, and the use of multidiscipli- genes due to - and -acting factors, but also must further explore the nary clinical reporting meetings for final sign-off. I will also discuss the po- interplay between retinal proteins. tential for DDD to act as a prototype for clinical translation of whole genome Based on genetic analyses of consanguineous PakisCt8anori fI3R7D famRilAieBs2, 8>80% technology in rare diseases in the NHS, and some of the issues around inci- of the underlying genes are known. Massive parallel sequencindge i nn orveocent d Ce.n Wtarli gfihntd: iNnognse a.nd opportunistic genome screening. years identified rarely mutated IRD genes such as and , and enabled comprehensive diagnostics. Surprisingly, we identified va- riants in 14% of isolated cases with retinitis pigmentosa. A shortcoming in current diagnostics is the absence of a cheap sequencing method to ana- lyse individual patients suffering from genetically heterogeneous diseases. Challenges for the future will also be to explore non-coding regions through ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 17 transcriptome and whole genome sequencing, to make sense of rare missen-ABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index E
S7 .2 Bioinformatic challenges of applying NGS in the clinic C. Gilissen; via large number of genetic markers or via specifically ascertained ancestry- UMC St Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands. informative DNA markers, which can be relevant in medical, anthropological and forensic studies and is important for mapping disease and other genes. The geographic resolution available with DNA ancestry testing varies bet- The advent of massive parallel sequencing is rapidly changing the strategies ween worldwide regions but in general larger geographic regions such as employed for the genetic diagnosis and research of diseases that involve a continents can be inferred from genetic data more reliably than subregions large number of genes. The implementation of NGS in routine diagnostics within continents. For some geographic regions the use of Y-chromosomal is a challenging process in which bioinformatics plays an increasingly im- or mitochondrial DNA markers allows subregional paternal or maternal portant role. These challenges vary from data management issues, and au- ancestry inference not easily provided with autosomal DNA markers. Mo- tomation to the choice and implementation of basic analysis steps such as reover, genomic signatures shaped by evolutionary forces in combination alignment of reads and variant calling. Specifically important considering with migration history allow a better understanding how phenotypic di- diagnostic guidelines are bioinformatic methods for quality control, inter- versity such as appearance observed in humans around the world arose. pretation of variants and the prevention of incidental findings. Recent progress in the genetics of human appearance phenotypes not only We implemented exome sequencing as a diagnostic test for five genetically delivered numerous genes, some of which show clear signatures of positive heterogeneous diseases and have tried to resolve these specific challenges: selection, but also allows to predict certain appearance traits solely from we are able to automatically detect sample mix-up, poor sample quality, and genetic data, which can be relevant in anthropological, historical and foren- limit the number of variants that require manual follow-up. Thorough com- sic studies. This talk will provide an overview on genetic population sub- parison of the performance of our traditional Sanger based sequencing ap- structure around the world and how this knowledge can be used to infer the proach to our exome sequencing approach for these 5 different conditions bio-geographic ancestry from a person’s DNA. Furthermore, this talk will showed that exome sequencing has a higher diagnostic yield than Sanger highlight the genetic basis of human appearance traits, their evolutionary sequencing. Even if all genes that could have been ordered by physicians had history and how this knowledge can be used to predict appearance from a been tested, the larger number of genes captured by the exome would still pMe.r sKoany’sse Dr:N NAo.ne. h Ca.v Ge illeisds eton :a Nn oimnep.roved diagnostic yield. E
S8 .1 How to get published in the European Journal of Human Genetics G. van Ommen; Leiden, Netherlands. The practice of publishing research in peer-reviewed journals is crucial to the advance of science and medicine. Often researchers receive no direct instruction on how to go about this, buGt einrstJtaena dB a. vrae ne xOpmemcteend to pick up the correct pEroucroedpeuarens J ofruormna sl uopf eHruvmisaonrs G aennde tcicoslleagues. We propose bringing together a panel of experts made up of , the long term Editor of „Genetic testing a ,s J opearrgt Socfh hmeaidltthke c, aDrierector of the Institute of Human Genetics at Hannover Medical SchoNoalt, upraest president of ESHG and member of the “ unit of EuroGentest and Magdalena Skipper, Senior Editor from . This panel will describe the whole process of publishing, from drafting a manuscript to the peer review process through to publication. As such, it will be of interest to the range of participants in the publishing process: from less experienced authors to those undertaking peer review. E
S9 .1 A genetics history of our species E. Heyer; National Museum of Natural History, Paris, France. I will start by presenting recent works on the history of our species based on genetic data. I will present our recent origin out of Africa, the admixture with Neandertal and Denisova. Then I will focus my talk on different evo- lutionary forces that have shaped our genetic diversity: natural selection, population expansions, migration. In particular, I will present some examp- les on the impact of cultural behaviors and their transmission on genetic diversity. This second part includes ecological inheritance through Niche construction: there are now several documented cases where, by changing our environment, we create new selective pressure. Transmission of cultu- ral traits can also impact our genetic diversity by limiting gene flow among populations, or shaping intra-population genetic diversity. In conclusion, cultural transmission interacts with biological evolution in shaping our ge- n Ee.t Hice dyievre: rNsoitnye.. E
S9 .2 Tracing back geographic origine and phenotypes using genetic data M. Kayser; Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Human migration history out of Africa into (almost) all worldwide regions left various genetic footprints that can be detected in modern populations and individuals around the world. For instance, genomic signatures allow tr1a8cing back the bio-geographic origin of a populaEtSioHn Gan d2 0a 1pe3r s|o Pn AeiRthIeSr, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C01 .3 Concurrent Sessions De novo mutations in the autophagy gene encoding WDR45 (WIPI4) cause static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood 
C01 .1 N. Matsumoto1, T. Nishimura2, K. Muramatsu3, H. Kodera1, S. Kumada4, K. Sugai5, De novo mutations in the Genome of the Netherlands E. Kasai-Yoshida4, N. Sawaura3, H. Nishida6, A. Hoshino6, F. Ryujin7, S. Yoshioka7, H. L. C. Francioli1, P. Polak2,3, W. Kloosterman1, S. Sunyaev2,3, P. I. W. de Bakker1,2,3; Arakawa3, M. Kato8, N. Mizushima9, H. Saitsu1; 1Departments of Medical Genetics and Epidemiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 1Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 2Department Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, Women‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Program in The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, Gunma University Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma, Japan, 4Department of Neuropediatrics, Tokyo United States. Metropolitan Neurological Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 5Department of Child Neurology, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, 6Department of Pediatrics, Background: National Rehabilitation Center for Children with Disabilities, Tokyo, Japan, 7Department Genome of the Netherlands Consortium of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan, 8Department of The Genome of the Netherlands (GoNL) is a national effort to Pediatrics, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan, 9Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo Medical characterize genomic variation in the Dutch population through whole-ge- and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. nome sequencing of 250 families (231 trios, 19de t wnoinvo quartets) at 12x using Illumina HiSeq. Sequencing was performed by BGI (China). The design of Mouert shtoudd:y allowed us to investigate the role of mudtea tnioonvos in random Static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood individuals at an unprecedented scale. (SENDA) is a recently established subtype of neurodegeneration with brain We developed a Bayesian algorithm to detect de n movuotations iron accumulation (NBIA)1-3. By exome sequencing, we found de novo he- from pedigree data and implemented it as the PhaseByTransmission moddue- terozygous mutations in WDR45 at Xp11.23 in two individuals with SENDA, nleo ivno the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK). We validated >550 muta- and three additional WDR45 mutations in three other subjects by Sanger se- tion calls (Sanger, MiSeq) to estimate the false positive rate. We simulated quencing. Using lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from the subjects, mutations by random injection in our sequence data to assess our false aberrant splicing was confirmed in two subjects, and protein expression nReegsautlitvse: rate while preserving the chadrea nctoevroistics and intrinsic biases of our was observed to be severely impaired in all five subjects. WDR45 encodes data. We used machine-learning techniques to correct for these effects. WD repeat protein interacting with phosphoinoside 4 (WIPI4), one of the We called more than 19,600 mutations, of which 44% were four mammalian homologs of yeast Atg18, which plays an important role in called with high confidence. Validation results showedd eth naotv >o60% of all calls autophagy4,5. Decreased autophagic activity and accumulation of aberrant and >92% of high-confidence calls were true positives. Through simulati- early autophagic structures were demonstrated in the LCLs of the subjects. ons,d we en eosvtoimated that we were able to call 70% of all mutatiodne sn. oWvoe These findings provide the direct evidence that an autophagy defect is inde- observed a strong correlation between the father’s age at conception and e Nd. aMsastoscuiamtoedto w: Nitohn ae .n Te. uNriosdheimgeunrae:r aNtoivnee .d Kis. oMrduerarm ina thsuum: Naonnse.. H. Kodera: the de novo mutation load in the offspring (r > 0.4). We report that None. S. Kumada: None. K. Sugai: None. E. Kasai-Yoshida: None. N. Sawaura: mutation properties vary throughout the genome. These results illustrate None. H. Nishida: None. A. Hoshino: None. F. Ryujin: None. S. Yoshioka: that mutation detection and analysis of their functional relevance None. H. Arakawa: None. M. Kato: None. N. Mizushima: None. H. Saitsu: None. c La.nC .b Fer panercfioorlim: Neodn oen. Pm. Pedoiluakm: -Ncoonvee.r aWg.e K sleoqousetenrcminagn.: None. S. Sunyaev: None. P.I.W. de Bakker: None. 
C01 .4 Mapping of two human genomes with a single molecule nanochannel 
C01 .2 array platform for genome-wide structural variation analysis and de Type 2 Diabetes strongly increases risk for the pre-cancerous state of novo sequence assembly clonal mosaicism P. Y. Kwok1, Y. Y. Y. Lai1, A. C. Y. Mak1, E. T. Lam2, J. Silbert3, T. P. Kwok4, J. W. Li4, A. K. A. Bonnefond1, B. Skrobek1, S. Lobbens1, E. Eury1, S. Cauchi1, O. Lantieri2, B. Balkau3, E. Y. Leung4, J. J. K. Wu5, A. K. Y. Yim4, A. Poon1, C. Chu1, C. Lin1, M. Requa2, A. Hastie2, T. Riboli4, M. Marre5, G. Charpentier6, L. Yengo1, P. Froguel1; Anantharaman2, H. VanSteenhouse2, H. Dai2, F. Trintchouk2, M. Saghbini2, M. Austin2, K. 1CNRS, Lille, France, 2IRSA, La Riche, France, 3Inserm, Villejuif, France, 4Imperial College Haden2, H. Cao2, S. M. Yiu5, K. Y. Yip4, T. F. Chan4, M. Xiao3; London, London, United Kingdom, 5Inserm, Paris, France, 6Corbeil-Essonnes Hospital, 1University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2BioNano Corbeil-Essonnes, France. Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States, 3Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, 5University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Large chromosomal clonal mosaic events (CMEs), i.e. the co-existence of cells with two or more distinct karyotypes within an individual, have re- cently been suggested to be linked with aging and to predict the subsequent Despite recent advances in base-calling accuracy and read length, de novo development of cancer. Type 2 diabetes (T2D) has been conceptualized as genome assembly and structural variant analysis using ‘short read’ shotgun an accelerated ageing disease, and is associated with a higher prevalence sequencing remain challenging. We have developed a new approach that (and mortality) of cancers. Here, we aimed to assess the impact of T2D on utilizes highly parallel nanochannel arrays in which many thousands of very CME occurrence in blood. long single DNA molecules are linearized and imaged. This novel approach We assessed the presence of large CME (≥5Mb) in 7,437 individuals (2,208 is automated on the Irys System and can scan the entire genome rapidly T2D patients; 5,229 controls) using Metabochip DNA arrays (Illumina). The to generate physical maps that provide a more comprehensive view of the effect of T2D on the occurrence of detectable CME was assessed using lo- genome. Here we describe the genome maps of the first two diploid human gistic regression adjusted for age, gender, body mass index and population genomes constructed using this approach. Two members of a CEPH-CEU stratification. trio (father and daughter, NA12891 and NA12878, respectively) genotyped We found a strong effect of T2D on the risk of detectable CMEs (OR=5.4; and sequenced extensively as part of the International HapMap and 1000 P<5×10-5). The association was even stronger when we analysed non-obese Genomes Projects were mapped to 50X coverage with long (150 kb to >500 T2D patients (OR=5.9; P<5×10-5). Importantly, T2D patients carrying CME kb) DNA fragments fluorescently labeled at Nt.BspQI (GCTCTTCN/) sites. had a higher prevalence of vascular complications than T2D non-carriers The resultant sequence motif maps are used to resolve haplotypes, identify (71.4% versus 37.1%; P=5.0×10-4). The size of CMEs in blood and the per- structural variations, and assist in de novo sequence assembly of these two centage of abnormal cells were stable over a 6-year follow-up period. individuals. Particularly complex genomic loci, such as the major histocom- We propose that the most severe forms of T2D can favor the development patibility (MHC) region are well characterized with these maps. Our results of CMEs which may contribute to the higher risk for cancer in the T2D po- show that the DNA sequence of these two individuals differ significantly pulation. The present study may have profound clinical implications: given from the reference human genome sequence and confirm the majority of the modest cost of Metabochip and the medical interest of detecting pre- the structural variants identified previously. In addition, new structural va- cancerous states, a CME genetic testing may be proposed in diabetic patients riants not detected by next-generation sequencing are easily identified. The w Ai.t Bh oenanrleyf-oonnds:e Nt oconem. pBl.i cSaktrioobnes.k: None. S. Lobbens: None. E. Eury: None. S. genome mapping approach is simple and can be performed in any modern Cauchi: None. O. Lantieri: None. B. Balkau: None. E. Riboli: None. M. Marre: m Po.Yle. cKuwlaork :g eBn. eRteics elaabrcohr aGtroarnyt. (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant None. G. Charpentier: None. L. Yengo: None. P. Froguel: None. and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; BioNano Genomics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BioNano Genomics. Y.Y.Y. Lai: None. A.C.Y. Mak: None. E.T. Lam: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. J. Silbert: None. T.P. Kwok: None. J.W. Li: ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 19ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index None. A.K.Y. Leung: None. J.J.K. Wu: None. A.K.Y. Yim: None. A. Poon: None. C. Chu: None. C. Lin: None. M. Requa: A. Employment (full or part- time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. A. Hastie: A. Employment (full or part- insertions and translocations. time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. T. Anantharaman: A. Employment (full or Short indels and structural variants (SVs). Using the consensus of 4 callers part-time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. H. VanSteenhouse: A. Employment (GATK_UG, PINDEL, CLEVER and SOAPdenovo assembly) we predicted (full or part-time); Modest; BIoNano Genomics. H. Dai: A. Employment (full or 1,196,767 small indels of which 1,413 are causing premature stop codons part-time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. F. Trintchouk: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. M. Saghbini: A. Employment (full or and frameshifts in 1,285 genes. On average, we observed 134 frameshift and part-time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. M. Austin: A. Employment (full or part- 19 splice site mutations per individual genome. By combining different stra- time); Modest; BioNano Genomics. K. Haden: A. Employment (full or part-time); tegies: read depth (CNVnator, DWAC-Seq, Facade), read pair (123SV, Break- Modest; BioNano Genomics. H. Cao: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Dancer), combined approaches (PINDEL, GenomeSTRiP, CLEVER), de novo BioNano Genomics. S.M. Yiu: None. K.Y. Yip: None. T.F. Chan: None. M. Xiao: assembly (SOAPdenovo) we predicted over 10 thousand variants represen- B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending ting different SV types and size ranges. grants as well as grants already received); Modest; BioNano Genomics. F. Validation of structural variant sets. We performed targeted resequencing Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BioNano Genomics. to: i) determine the false-positive rate for different approaches/tools; ii) va- lidate loss-of-function variants; iii) confirm novel genomic segments, absent in the current genome reference; iv) verify de novo structural events 
C01 .5 Significance. In combination with GoNL SNP set (reported separately) these Exome sequencing in sporadic cases of schizophrenia identifies de results comprehensively describe common genetic variants in individuals of novo protein-altering mutation in candidate genes Dutch origin. This variation catalogue is essential for understanding mecha- M. Guipponi1, F. Santoni2, C. Gehrig1, M. Rotharmel3, M. Cuenca3, O. Guilin3, D. Dikeos4, nisms of SV formation, their population dynamics and history. It provides an G. Papadimitriou4, A. Méary5, F. Schürhoff5, S. Jamain5, M. Leboyer5, D. Rujescu6, D. essential resource for the interpretation of GWAS results and the genomes of Campion3, A. Malafosse1, S. E. Antonarakis2; oVt.h Geur rWyeevs:t -NEounreo.p Wea. nK lionodsivteidrmuaalns: wNiotnhe c. oLn.Cst. iFturatinocnioalli :o Nr oancqe.u Jir.Ye.d H deihsoirr-Kdewras:. 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2University of Geneva Medical None. T. Marschall: None. A. Schoenhuth: None. M. Moed: None. E. Lameijer: School, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 3Centre Hospitalier du Rouvray, INSERM U1079, Sotteville None. A. Abdellaoui: None. S. Koval: None. F. Hormozdiari: None. J. de Ligt: les Rouen, France, 4Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece, 5Inserm U955, None. N. Amin: None. F. van Dijk: None. L. Karssen: None. H. Mei: None. E.E. Psychiatrie Génétique, Université Paris Est, Faculté de Médecine, Chenevier - H. Mondor, Eichler: None. K. Ye: None. Pôle de Psychiatrie, Créteil, France, 6Molecular and Clinical Neurobiology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
C02 .1 Schizophrenia has a strong genetic component, yet in most cases the under- From acrodysotosis to acroscyphodysplasia : phenotypic spectrum of lying causes are unknown. To identify additional genetic risk factors, we have PD
E4 D and PRKAR1A mutations through the study of 26 cases. assessed the contribution of de novo mutations by sequencing the exomes C. Michot1, C. Le Goff1, Y. Alanay2, G. Baujat1, E. Blair3, O. Boute4, B. Gilbert-Dussardier5, A. Goldenberg6, B. Isidor7, H. Kayserili8, E. Kinning9, M. Le Merrer1, M. Simon10, B. Tuysuz11, of sporadic cases of schizophrenia and their healthy parents (n=54 trios). A. Verloes12, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; Whole exomes were captured and sequenced using the Agilent and Illumina 1INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, technologies, respectively and genetic variants were called using our ana- France, 2Acibadem University School of Medicine, Acibadem Maslak Hospital, Istanbul, lytical pipeline. We identified 51 validated de novo mutations, 36 of which Turkey, 3Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LE, United Kingdom, 4C.H.R.U. de Lille, Hôpital were predicted to alter protein structure/function including 31 missense, 2 Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 5C.H.U. La Milétrie, Poitiers, France, 6C.H.U. de Rouen, conserved splice site, 2 nonsense mutations and 1 frameshift deletion. The Rouen, France, 7C.H.U. de Nantes, Nantes, France, 8Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty observed point mutation rate of 0.94 events per trio or 1.8 x 10-8 per base of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 9The Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 10Erasmus MC University Medical per generation and the nonsynonymous to synonymous ratio of 2.19 did not Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 11Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, differ significantly from neutral expectations. A gene ontology analysis on Istanbul, Turkey, 12INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. the genes with protein-altering de novo mutations revealed an enrichment for biological processes involved in chromatin regulation and organization, although not statistically significant probably owing to the limited number Acrodysostosis (MIM101800) is a dominantly inherited condition associa- of genes analyzed. Remarkably, we found a damaging de novo mutation in ting 1) a skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature, facial dysostosis RG
S12  (R54L), a gene already reported as severely mutated in a similar stu- and severe brachydactyly with cone-shaped epiphyses 2) resistance to mu- dy (Xu et al. 2012) suggesting strong candidacy as a risk factor. We currently tiple hormones 3) moderate to mild intellectual disability. Acroscyphodys- investigate the burden and disequilibrium transmission test of damaging plasia (MIM250215) is rare and characterized by lower femoral and upper mutations in the candidate genes for schizophrenia, defined here. Our and tibial epiphyses embedded in cup-shaped, large metaphyses, associated to other studies indicate extensive genetic heterogeneity in schizophrenia and p Mro. Gviudiep pao linsit: oNfo gneen. eFs. Spaontetonntii:a lNlyo ninev. oCl.v Gede hinri gd:i sNeoansee. sMu.s Rceopthtiabrimliteyl.: severe growth retardation and brachydactyly. None. M. Cuenca: None. O. Guilin: None. D. Dikeos: None. G. Papadimitriou: Studying 22 unrelated acrodysostosis cases, we identified heterozygous None. A. Méary: None. F. Schürhoff: None. S. Jamain: None. M. Leboyer: de novo PRKAR1A mutations in 8 cases and heterozygous de novo PD
E4 D None. D. Rujescu: None. D. Campion: None. A. Malafosse: None. S.E. mutations in 6. Neither PD
E4 D nor PRKAR1A mutations were found in four Antonarakis: None. patients with characteristic clinical features. The molecular screening is in progress for the four remaining cases. In 4 cases of acroscyphodysplasia, we identified PD
E4 D mutations. 
C01 .6 Splitting our series based on the disease causing gene confirmed genotype- The genome structure of the Dutch population phenotype correlations. Hormone resistance was consistently observed in V. Guryev1,2, W. Kloosterman3, L. C. Francioli3, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa4, T. Marschall5, A. the patients carrying PRKAR1A mutations while no hormone resistance was Schoenhuth5, M. Moed6, E. Lameijer6, A. Abdellaoui7, S. Koval8, F. Hormozdiari9, J. de Ligt4, observed in 5/6 patients with PD
E4 D mutations. Moreover, all patients with N. Amin8, F. van Dijk10, L. Karssen8, H. Mei6,11, E. E. Eichler9, K. Ye6,12; PD
E4 D mutations shared characteristic facial features (midface hypoplasia 1European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing, University Medical Center, with the canonical nasal hypoplasia) and some degree of intellectual disa- Groningen, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute, University Medical Center, Utrecht, bility. Finally, our findings of PD
E4 D mutations in 4 cases of acroscyphodys- Netherlands, 3University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Radboud University plasia support also that PD
E4 D is responsible for a severe skeletal dysplasia, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Leids University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 7VU University w Ci.t Mh imchaojot:r Neopnipeh. Cys. eLoe- mGoeftfa:p Nhoynsee.a Yl .c Ahlaanngaeys:. None. G. Baujat: None. E. Blair: None. O. Boute: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. A. Goldenberg: None. B. Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Isidor: None. H. Kayserili: None. E. Kinning: None. M. Le Merrer: None. M. Netherlands, 9University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 10University Simon: None. B. Tuysuz: None. A. Verloes: None. A. Munnich: None. V. Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 11Netherlands Bioinformatic Centre, Nijmegen, Cormier-Daire: None. Netherlands, 12Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States. On behalf of GONL consortium The Genome of the Netherlands project (GoNL, http://nlgenome.nl) aims to create a map of genetic variants through whole genome-sequencing of 250 families representing 11 Dutch provinces. Here we report results from the analysis of structural variation employing several complementary approa- ches. We detected a wide spectrum of genetic variants including short in- d2el0s, deletions, insertions, tandem duplications, inEvSerHsioGn s2, 0m1ob3il e| PelAemReInSt, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C02 .2 d‘Hématologie, Université Paris Diderot, UMR-
S946 , Paris, France. Broadening the clinical spectrum to be ascribed to EFTUD2 haploinsufficiency J. Amiel1, F. Petit2, M. Oufadem3, V. Malan4, J. Andrieux5, G. Goudefroye6, J. Alessandri7, G. Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type I (MOPD I, OMIM Baujat1, C. Baumann8, O. Boute5, R. Caumes1, C. Decaestecker5, B. Delobel9, K. Dieterich10, 210710) was initially described in 1967 by Taybi and Linder in two siblings L. Faivre11, D. Gaillard12, A. Goldenberg13, M. Gonzales14, D. Lacombe15, S. Marlin14, M. with intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, dwarfism, a skeletal Mathieu-Dramard16, S. Mehta17, L. Pasquier18, I. Simonic17, A. Verloes8, M. Vekemans1, A. dysplasia, severe microcephaly with developmental brain malformations Munnich1, M. Holder-Espinasse19, L. de Pontual1, S. Lyonnet1, T. Attie-Bitach1, C. Gordon3; 1INSERM U781, AP-HP, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Jeanne de and early death. Our team and others have identified mutations in a small Flandre, Centre de Biologie Pathologie, CHRU, Lille, France, 3INSERM U781, Université nuclear non-coding RNA, named U4atac snRNA, a critical component of Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, the minor spliceosome (Edery P et al, Science 2011 and He H et al, Science 5Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 6AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Hôpital Felix Guyon, La 2011). We have also provided evidences that MOPD I syndrome is associated Réunion, France, 8Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 9Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, with abnormal splicing of a restricted subgroup of introns of the genome, Lille, France, 10Hôpital Couple Enfant, Grenoble, France, 11CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, named U12 introns, which are recognized by the minor spliceosomal machi- 12Hôpital Maison Blanche, Reims, France, 13CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 14Hôpital nery through non-consensus U12-intron recognition sites. We are currently Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 15CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 16CHR Amiens, Amiens, France, 17Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 18CHU de perfoming whole transcriptome analysis in fibroblasts derived from MOPD Rennes, Rennes, France, 19Guys Hospital, London, United Kingdom. I patients to identify deregRuNlaUt4eAdT gAeCnes/signalling pathways responsible for the phenotype. Here, we provide further delineation of the clinical spectrum of MOPD I syndrome and molecular data in 14 patients from our Mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) is the consequence of an abnormal de- series (article in preparation) and we review data on 10 other patients and a velopment of the first and second branchial arches. The core phenotype is large Amish family reported since the discovery of the causative gene. To our represented by malar and mandibular hypoplasia and dysplastic ears. Con- knowledge, this is the largest and most comprehensive clinical and molecu- ductive hearing loss, lower lid anomalies and/or cleft palate are frequent l Pa.r Esdtuedryy: aNvoanilea.b Ele. Ainli xM: ONPonDe I. sMy.n Bd.r Bomobee.r: None. A. Labalme: None. R. Touraine: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. I. Borg: None. P. Jouk: None. S. associated features. Recently, EFTUD2 heterozygous loss-of-function muta- Berland: None. A. Toutain: None. E. Steichen: None. J. Attia: None. F. Dijoud: tions have been identified in patients with MFD and microcephaly (MFDM, None. A. Vasilijevic: None. A. Fournier: None. C. Poizat: None. C. Marcaillou: Guion-Almeida type, MIM610536), EFTUD2 being a protein of the spliceo- None. C. A. Wise: None. L. Guibaud: None. D. Sanlaville: None. F. Rousseau: some complex. None. F. Clerget-Darpoux: None. A. Leutenegger: None. Here we report 27 patients harbouring a deletion encompassing EFTUD2 or a heterozygous mutation. This series allows us to broaden the spectrum of features ascribed to EFTUD2 loss of function and includes esophageal atre- 
C02 .4 sia, semi circular canal anomalies, olfactory bulb agenesis, toe syndactyly Baraitser-Winter syndrome due to ACTB/G1 mutations: delineation of and vertebral anomalies. Until now, no syndrome featuring both MFD and the spectrum in 34 cases EA has been clearly delineated although EA is reported in about 5% of pati- A. Verloes1,2, J. Masliah-Planchon1, N. Di Donato3, J. Allanson4, M. Baraitser5, H. Brunner6, ents diagnosed with oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (OAVS, MIM 164210). N. Chassaing7, A. David8, K. Devriendt9, V. Drouin-Garraud10, F. Faravelli11, F. Juliano12, Thus, we define a novel syndromic EA entity, for which a locus at 17q had M. Kempers6, D. Lacombe13, A. Lin14, G. Mancini15, C. Marques Lourenço16, G. Morin17, M. previously been suggested, and emphasize that MFDM syndrome should be Nezarati18, M. Nowaczyk19, J. Ramer20, S. Osimani1, N. Philip21, M. Pierpont22, M. Rossi23, considered as a differential diagnosis for phenotypic variants of CHARGE, C. Rusu24, Y. Sznajer25, N. Templin21, V. Uliana11, B. Van bon6, C. Van Ravenswaaij26, J. Rivière27, A. Fry28, A. Hoischen6, W. B. Dobyns29, D. Pilz28; Feingold, VACTERL syndromes, and Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral spectrum. 1Department of Genetics, R DEBRE Hospital, PARIS, France, 2INSERM U676, Paris, Nager (MIM154400), Taybi-Linder (MIM210710) and MFDM syndromes France, 3Institute for Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, emphasize the necessity of mRNA maturation through the spliceosome Germany, 4Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, AB, Canada, 5LMD, London, complex not only for global growth but also within specific developmental United Kingdom, 6Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, f Jie. lAdms.iel: None. F. Petit: None. M. Oufadem: None. V. Malan: None. J. 7Service de Génétique Médicale, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France, 8Service Andrieux: None. G. Goudefroye: None. J. Alessandri: None. G. Baujat: de Génétique Médicale, University Hospital, Nantes, France, 9Department of Genetics, None. C. Baumann: None. O. Boute: None. R. Caumes: None. C. University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 10Service de Génétique Médicale, Decaestecker: None. B. Delobel: None. K. Dieterich: None. L. Faivre: None. D. University Hospital, Rouen, France, 11Dipartimento di Genetica Medica, Ospedale Gaillard: None. A. Goldenberg: None. M. Gonzales: None. D. Lacombe: Galliera, Genova, Italy, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, University Hospital, Nice, France, None. S. Marlin: None. M. Mathieu-Dramard: None. S. Mehta: None. L. 13Service de Génétique Médicale, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 14Massachusetts Pasquier: None. I. Simonic: None. A. Verloes: None. M. Vekemans: None. A. General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 15Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Munnich: None. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. L. de Pontual: None. S. Lyonnet: Netherlands, 16Clinics Hospital of Ribeirao Preto, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 17Service de None. T. Attie-Bitach: None. C. Gordon: None. Génétique Médicale, University Hospital, Amiens, France, 18North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 19McMasters University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 20Department of Pediatrics, Pennsylvania State University, Herschey, PA, United States, 21Service de Génétique Médicale, University Hospital, Marseille, France, 22Genetic Department, 
C02 .3 Children’s Hospital and Clinics, Saint Paul, MN, United States, 23Service de Génétique Delineation of the clinical spectrum of RNU4ATAC-related Médicale, University Hospital, Lyon, France, 24Department of Genetics,University microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type I syndrome: Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 25Service de Génétique Médicale, St Luc University Hospital, an international cohort Brussels, Belgium, 26Department of Genetics,University Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands, P. Edery1,2,3, E. Alix1,2,3, M. B. Bober4, A. Labalme1, R. Touraine5, S. Nampoothiri6, I. Borg7, 27Service de Génétique Médicale, University Hospital, Dijon, Fran P. Jouk8,9, S. Berland10,11, A. Toutain12,13, E. Steichen14, J. Attia15, F. Dijoud16, A. Vasilijevic17, A. Fournier1,2,3, C. Poizat1,2,3, C. Marcaillou18, C. A. Wise19, L. Guibaud20, D. Sanlaville1,2,3, F. Rousseau18, F. Clerget-Darpoux21,22, A. Leutenegger23,24; Baraitser-Winter (BRWS), a dominant MCA disorder, was shown to result 1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Génétique, Lyon, France, 2Inserm U1028; CNRS, from heterozygous gain of function mutations in one of the two ubiquitous UMR5292. TIGER Team, Lyon, France, 3Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, cytoplasmic actin-encoding genes ACTB and ACTG1 (Rivière, Nat Genet NC, United States, 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU)-Hôpital Nord, Service de 2012, 44: 440) which are the structural components of filamentous actin Génétique, Saint-Etienne, France, 6Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of (F-actin), which, together with myosin motors and actin-binding proteins, Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, India, 7Department of Medical Genetics, forms a thin, cross-linked network lying immediately beneath the plasma University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8CHU membrane. ACTB and ACTG1 are important for basic cellular processes Grenoble, Département de Génétique et Procréation, Grenoble, France, 9Université such as cytokinesis, cell migration, and embryogenesis.. We present detailed Joseph Fourier-Grenoble 1, CNRS UMR 5525, Techniques de l‘Ingénierie Médicale et de phenotypic description and neuroimaging of 34 patients with molecularly la Complexité, Grenoble, France, 10Section of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pathology, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 11Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular proven BRWS, emphasizing the clinical variability of the syndrome, which Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 12Service de Génétique, Centre also encompass Fryns-Aftimos syndrome. The major clinical anomalies are Hospitalier Régional Universitaire (CHRU), Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 13Inserm striking facial dysmorphism (present in all cases) with hypertelorism, broad U930, Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 14Department of Pediatrics, University nose with large tip, congenital ptosis, ridged metopic suture, and highly ar- Hospital Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 15Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Diagnostic ched eyebrows. Microcephaly may develop with time. Iris or retinal colo- Prénatal, Lyon, France, 16Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service d‘Anatomopathologie, Lyon, boma is present in many cases, as does sensorineural deafness. Cleft lip and France, 17Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de neuropathologie, Lyon, France, 18IntegraGen, palate, and hallux duplex may be present. Pachygyria with antero-posterior Evry, France, 19Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, TX, United States, 20Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service d‘Imagerie gradient is present in almost all cases. Progressive joint stiffness is observed Anténatale, Lyon, France, 21Inserm, U669, Villejuif, France, 22Université Paris Sud, in elder patients, although early muscular involvement with even congenital UMR-
S669 , Villejuif, France, 23Inserm, U946, Paris, France, 24Institut Universitaire arthrogryposis may be present in some. Intellectual disability and epilepsy are variable and correlate with CNS anomalies. Facial dysmorphism appears ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE t o| W be W theW m. oE sS t H relG ia. bO leR crG iteria to evoke BRWS. 21ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index A. Verloes: None. J. Masliah-Planchon: None. N. Di Donato: None. J. Allanson: None. M. Baraitser: None. H. Brunner: None. N. Chassaing: None. A. David: None. K. Devriendt: None. V. Drouin-Garraud: None. F. genes have been identified in TCFS namely TCOF1, POLR1D and POLR1C. Faravelli: None. F. Juliano: None. M. Kempers: None. D. Lacombe: None. A. Here we report a clinical and extensive molecular study in a series of 135 Lin: None. G. Mancini: None. C. Marques Lourenço: None. G. Morin: TCFS patients. All the patients were screened for TCOF1. In absence of mu- None. M. Nezarati: None. M. Nowaczyk: None. J. Ramer: None. S. Osimani: tation, POLR1D and POLR1C were studied and array-CGH as well as EFTUD2 None. N. Philip: None. M. Pierpont: None. M. Rossi: None. C. Rusu: None. Y. Sznajer: None. N. Templin: None. V. Uliana: None. B. Van bon: None. C. Van screening was performed in the remaining negative patients. We have ana- Ravenswaaij: None. J. Rivière: None. A. Fry: None. A. Hoischen: None. W.B. lysed the molecular results from this series in two subsets, namely typical Dobyns: None. D. Pilz: None. and atypical TCFS, based on clinical features. In typical TCFS, we identified 79% of patients with a molecular anomaly in TCOF1, 6% in POLR1D and 0% in POLR1C. Deletion, nonsense, duplication/insertion, splice site, missense, indels mutations were found respectively in 43 (51%), 17 (20%), 10 (12%), 
C02 .5 6 (7%), 3 (3.5%) and 2 (3%) patients. Among the atypical patients (with A comprehensive analysis of a cohort of Cornelia de Lange syndrome intellectual disability or microcephaly), we identified 2 patients with a mu- cases. tation in EFTUD2, and 2 patients with a 5q32 deletion encompassing TCOF1 M. Ansari1, R. Aldridge1, G. V. Poke2, K. Williamson1, T. Homfray3, R. C. M. Hennekam4, D. R. FitzPatrick1; and CAMK2A, but no mutation in TCOF1, POLR1D or POLR1C. 1Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2South Phenotype/genotype correlations were investigated for 20 clinical features East of Scotland Clinical Genetic Service, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3St George‘s including choanal atresia, cleft palate and hearing loss. We also compared Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the type of mutation in TCOF1 and its localization in the gene, in an attempt Netherlands. to associate degrees of severity or peculiar clinical features to a specific part oCf .T CCoOllFe1t:. None. M. Vincent: None. S. Marlin: None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. C. Coubes: None. A. David: None. S. Lyonnet: None. C. Vilain: None. A. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a multiple congenital malformation Dieux-Coeslier: None. M. Holder: None. B. Isidor: None. M. Jacquemont: None. S. Julia: None. D. Lacombe: None. V. Layet: None. S. Naudion: syndrome characterised by mdeildn otvoo severe developmental delay, growth re- None. S. Odent: None. L. Pasquier: None. S. Pelras: None. N. Philip: None. G. tardation, limb abnormalities and prominent facial feNaItPuBreLs.S AMpCp1rAoxiHmDaAtCel8y Pierquin: None. F. Prieur: None. N. Aboussair: None. T. Attié-Bitach: R65A%D2 1of typiScMalC c3ases carry heterozygous loss-of-function mutati- None. G. Baujat: None. H. Dollfus: None. B. Doray: None. P. Edery: None. F. ons in genes involved in sister chromatid cohesion; , , , Giuliano: None. A. Goldenberg: None. C. Goizet: None. A. Guichet: None. L. and . W. e developed an AmpliSeq PCR assay providing a tem- Lambert: None. B. Le Heup: None. J. Martinovic: None. S. Mercier: None. C. plate for IonTorrent sequencing to enable rapid parallel sequencing of all Mignot: None. M. Moutard: None. M. Perez: None. H. Randrianaivo: None. K. known CdLS genes Of the N1I5
P8 B LCdSLMS Ca1nAd HCdDLASC-8like caSsMesC 3in the MRC HGU Szakszon: None. A. Toutain: None. A. Verloes: None. J. Vigneron: None. E. Sanchez: None. J. Puechberty: None. J. Laplanche: None. P. Sarda: None. D. CdLS Expanded PhenotypSeM CCo1hAort, 148 have been screened revealing 34, 6, Geneviève: None. 3 and 1 with mutations in , , and respectively. In one male case a mosaic mutation was detected at significantly dif- ferent levels in two separatEeS DPLN1A samCpDleKs1, 513A%/B and 10%. Array-CGH was performed on 104/148 cases and in two cases this identified plausibleN nIoPvBeLl 
C03 .1 candidate genes for CdLS, and . DNA from six mutation- Highly multiplexed targeted single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) negative cases was then used for exome sequencing. In oneA cNaKseR Da1 1 amplification and sequencing as a method for identifying fetal mosaic nonsense mutation was identified at 15% of reads in a patient wNiItPh- chromosomal disorders from maternal cell-free DNA tByLpical CdLS. In a second case a heterozygous frameshift in was B. Zimmermann1, M. Banjevic1, M. Hill1, P. Lacroute1, M. Dodd1, S. Sigurjonsson1, P. Lau1, D. Prosen1, N. Chopra1, A. Ryan1, M. Hall1, S. McAdoo1, Z. Demko1, B. Levy2, M. Rabinowitz1; identified in a patient with a CdLS-like phenotype. These data confirm 1Research and Development, Natera Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States, 2Department of as the most commonly detectable cause of CdLS even in a cohort with Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NJ, United States. broad ascertainment criteria. Genetic heterogeneity is marked within CdLS and CdLS-like cases and molecular analysis is showing significant phenoty- p Mic. Aovnesralrai:p N wointeh. oRt.h Aelrd driydsgme:o Nrpohniec. sGy.nVd. Proomkee:s N sounceh. aKs. KWBilGlia.mson: None. T. Homfray: None. R.C.M. Hennekam: None. D.R. FitzPatrick: None. Most multiplex PCR reports describe at most 100-200 assays in a single reaction, as increasing probe number increases probe-probe interactions. This is problematic when sequencing amplified DNA, as resulting uninfor- mative reads are costly. We previously reported multiplexing 11,000 single- 
C02 .6 nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs); because increasing analyzed hetero- Treacher Collins Syndrome: clinical and molecular study based on a zygous SNPs increases test power, we expanded this to 19,488 SNPs, with series of 135 patients >98% of sequence reads mapping to targeted regions. This massively mul- C. Collet1, M. Vincent2, S. Marlin3, D. Martin-Coignard4, C. Coubes2, A. David5, S. tiplexed PCR assay targets SNPs to accurately determine fetal chromosomal Lyonnet6, C. Vilain7, A. Dieux-Coeslier8, M. Holder8, B. Isidor5, M. Jacquemont9, S. Julia10, D. Lacombe11, V. Layet12, S. Naudion11, S. Odent13, L. Pasquier13, S. Pelras11, N. Philip14, copy number from cell-free DNA (cfDNA). This massively multiplexed PCR G. Pierquin15, F. Prieur16, N. Aboussair17, T. Attié-Bitach6, G. Baujat6, H. Dollfus18, B. assay targets single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to non-invasively de- Doray18, P. Edery19, F. Giuliano20, A. Goldenberg21, C. Goizet11, A. Guichet22, L. Lambert23, tect fetal chromosomal copy number from cfDNA. As part of an institutional B. Le Heup23, J. Martinovic24, S. Mercier13, C. Mignot25, M. Moutard25, M. Perez2, H. review board-approved study to validate our Next-generation Aneuploidy Randrianaivo9, K. Szakszon26, A. Toutain27, A. Verloes28, J. Vigneron29, E. Sanchez2, J. Test Using SNPs (NATUS) algorithm, cfDNA was isolated from maternal plas- Puechberty2, J. Laplanche1, P. Sarda2, D. Geneviève2; ma and subjected to a multi-stage, multiplex PCR amplification at Natera’s 1Service de Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 2Service de laboratory. Specifically, primers were designed using an informatics-based génétique médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Service de génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 4Service de génétique, CHU Le Mans, Le approach, minimizing primer-primer interactions. Targets included highly Mans, France, 5Service de génétique, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 6Service de génétique, heterozygous SNPs from chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, and Y. Cell-free and ge- Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 7Service de génétique, Hôpital Erasme, Bruxelles, Belgium, nomic DNA samples were pre-amplified for 15 cycles using PCR with 19,488 8Service de génétique, CHU Lille, Lille, France, 9Service de génétique, CHU La Réunion, St target-specific assays in a single reaction. An aliquot was transferred to a Pierre de La Réunion, France, 10Service de génétique, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, second 15-cycle PCR reaction. Finally, a 12-cycle PCR reaction added bar- 11Service de génétique, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 12Service de génétique, CHU La coded tags, and amplicons were sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq 2000. Havre, Le Havre, France, 13Service de génétique, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 14Service This approach accurately detected fetal chromosomal copy number at all de génétique, CHU Marseille, Marseille, France, 15Service de génétique, CHU Liège, Liége, Belgium, 16Service de génétique, CHU St Etienne, St Etienne, France, 17Servivce five targeted chromosomes from cfDNA isolated from maternal plasma. By de génétique, Hôpital de Marrakech, Marrakech, Morocco, 18Service de génétique, CHU targeting SNPs, this approach identifies parental origin of fetal chromoso- Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 19Service de génétique, CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, 20Service mes and uniparental disomy, and will allow detection of triploidy, microde- de génétique, CHU Nice, Nice, France, 21SService de génétique, CHU Rouen, Rouen, l eBti. oZnims/mmeircmroadnunp: lAic. aEtmiopnlosy, amnedn th (afuplll ootry ppaer tr-teimcoen);s Striguncitfiicoann.t; Natera, France, 22Service de génétique, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 23Service de Génétique, Inc. M. Banjevic: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. M. CHRU de Nancy-Brabois, Nancy, France, 24Service de génétique, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Hill: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. P. Lacroute: A. Clamart, France, 25Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 26Klinikai Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. M. Dodd: A. Employment Genetikai Kô (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. S. Sigurjonsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc,. P. Lau: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. D. Prosen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. N. Chopra: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Treacher-Collins/Franceschetti syndrome (TCFS, MIM 154500) is a disorder Inc. A. Ryan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. M. of craniofacial development belonging to the heterogeneous group of man- Hall: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. S. McAdoo: A. dibulofacial dysostosis. TCFS is characterized by bilateral mandibular and 22 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG malar hypoplasia, down slanted palpebral fissures, and microtia. To date 3ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. Z. Demko: A. Employment Results (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc. B. Levy: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; Natera, Inc. M. Rabinowitz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Natera, Inc.. Study population consisted of 1,949 pregnant women. Median maternal age was 31.8 years (IQR range: (27.7–35.4) Median gestational age was 12.6 weeks (IQR range: 12.3-13.0). 80 (4.1%) underwent invasive testing(CVS 
C03 .2 or amniocentesis). All eight fetal trisomy 21 and two fetal trisomy 18 cases Diagnostic accuracy for the non-invasive prenatal detection of were detected by both Harmony and first-trimester combined screening and common autosomal aneuploidies confirmed by invasive testing. False-positive rate for Harmony was 0.1% (2 S. Groemminger1, M. Stumm2, M. Entezami2, K. Haug3, C. Blank3, M. Wüstemann4, B. of 1,939) over all risk cut-off ranges whereas false-positive rate for first- Schulze5, G. Raabe-Meyer5, M. Hempel6, M. Schelling7, E. Ostermayer8, S. Langer-Freitag6, tCroimncelsutseiro sncsreening at risk cut-offs of 1/100, 1/300, and 1/1,000 was 2.8%, T. Burkardt9, R. Zimmermann9, T. Schleicher10, B. Weil1, U. Schöck1, Y. Kumar10, W. 6.7%, and 18.4% respectively. Hofmann1; 1LifeCodexx AG, Konstanz, Germany, 2Zentrum für Pränataldiagnostik und Harmony Prenatal Test demonstrates a reduction in false-positive test re- Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 3Pränatal-Medizin und Genetik, Düsseldorf, Germany, sults compared to first- trimester combined screening in a general pregnan- 4Zentrum für Pränatalmedizin, Hannover, Germany, 5Praxis für Humangenetik, Hannover, Germany, 6Institut für Humangenetik, Technische Universität München, cy population. Use of NIPT as a first-line test for aneuploidy screening could Munich, Germany, 7Praxis für Pränatale Diagnostik, Munich, Germany, 8Abteilung für rKe.d Nuicceo mlaaidteesrn: aNlo annex. iAe.t yS yanngde ilnavkai:s Nivoen per. oGc.e Adsuhroeso.r: None. T. Musci: A. Gynäkologie und Geburtshilfe, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ariosa Diagnostics, Inc. E. Wang: A. 9Universitätsspital Zürich, Klinik für Geburtshilfe, Zürich, Switzerland, 10GATC Biotech Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ariosa Diagnostics, Inc. K. Song: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ariosa Diagnostics, Inc.. AG, Konstanz, Germany. Recent advances in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis show that massively 
C03 .4 parallel sequencing (MPS) of maternal plasma DNA allows accurate detec- Comprehensive Chromosome Screening in PGD and PGS - Ethical tion of common foetal aneuploidies. Here, we describe the results of a col- Challenges laborative clinical study with the aim to validate the diagnostic accuracy of K. Hens, W. Dondorp, G. de Wert; our non-invasive protocol based on MPS for detecting common autosomal Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. aneuploidies and first clinical application experiences. In the study maternal blood samples were collected from 522 pregnant wo- men with risk for aneuploidies. Extracted cell-free plasma DNA was analysed Microarray technology allows for comprehensive screening of chromo- using Illumina sequencing platform HiSeq2000 in a multiplexed fashion. somes of in vitro embryos. Such screening can give information about the Fetal aneuploidies were identified using a Median Absolut Deviation based health status of the potential future child revealing chromosomal abnorma- z-score equation (DAP.21). After unblinding study data, a new bioinforma- lities leading to conditions with variable prognosis, such as sex chromosome tics algorithm based on GC normalization (DAP.plus) was applied. Results of aneuploidies. MPS based technique were compared with those from invasive procedures. Ethical questions regarding selection and transfer of embryos are often 40/41 samples were correctly classified as trisomy 21-positive (sensitivity: tackled using different arguments that do not necessarily yield the same 97,6 %; one-sided confidence interval: 88.9 %) and 427/427 samples were answer. Arguments related to the welfare of the potential child try to set correctly classified as trisomy 21-negative (specificity: 100%; one-sided a minimum threshold, such as the requirement to avoid serious harm. The confidence interval: 99.3%). Furthermore, 5/5 T13 cases and 8/8 T18 cases principle of procreative beneficence states that couples have the duty to were correctly identified using DAP.plus. The overall detection rate of triso- select the embryo with the best chances to lead a healthy life. In assisted mies 13, 18 and 21 is 98.1% (53/54). reproduction, professionals are actively involved in the creation of the em- Due to the high accuracy, our DAP.plus algorithm allows detection of com- bryo, and are considered by some to be co-responsible for the outcome of mon autosomal trisomies and has the potential to decrease the use of inva- the procedure and the welfare of the potential child. A parental duty may sive procedures. The test is especially suitable for women at risk in addition be interpreted as a duty to select the best embryo, but also as a duty (or a to first trimester screening to reduce the false-postive-rate. However, future right) to accept children as they are. The principle of procreative liberty as clinical studies are required to validate MPS for the detection further fetal stated by John Robertson dictates that prospective parents have the right c hSr. oGmrooesmommainl gaebrn: oAr.m Eamlpitlioeysm aenndt (ffeutlal ol rg epanrot-mtimice i)m; Sbiaglnaifinccaenst.; LifeCodexx to choose the offspring they want, even if this includes having a child with AG. M. Stumm: None. M. Entezami: None. K. Haug: None. C. Blank: None. M. a chromosomal abnormality. Conflicts between professionals and couples Wüstemann: None. B. Schulze: None. G. Raabe-Meyer: None. M. Hempel: can become apparent when a decision whether to transfer an embryo with None. M. Schelling: None. E. Ostermayer: None. S. Langer-Freitag: None. T. a chromosomal abnormality needs to be taken. This paper tackles these po- Burkardt: None. R. Zimmermann: None. T. Schleicher: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; GATC Biotech AG. B. Weil: A. Employment (full or tential conflicts assessing the different normative frameworks and suggests part-time); Significant; LifeCodexx AG. U. Schöck: A. Employment (full or part- h Ko.w H eannsd: wNhoniceh. Wde. cDisoinodnosr apr:e N eotnhei.c aGl.l yd seo Wunerdt.: None. time); Significant; LifeCodexx AG. Y. Kumar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; GATC Biotech AG. W. Hofmann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; LifeCodexx AG. 
C03 .5 The challenge of preconceptional, preimplantation, and prenatal genetic diagnoses of mitochondrial DNA disorders 
C03 .3 s. monnot1, N. Gigarel1, P. Vachin1, E. Herzog2, P. Burlet1, N. Frydman3, A. Benachi3, G. Clinical Performance Comparison of the Harmony(TM) Prenatal Test Chalouhi1, Y. Ville1, R. Frydman1, A. Lebre1, A. Rotig4, D. C. Samuels5, C. Elie1, A. Munnich1, J. Bonnefont1, J. Steffann1; and First Trimester Combined Screening in a General Pregnancy 1hopital necker, paris, France, 2inserm U781, hôpital antoine béclère, Clamart, paris, Population France, 3hopital antoine beclere, clamart, France, 4inserm U781, paris, France, K. Nicolaides1, A. Syngelaki1, G. Ashoor1, T. Musci2, E. Wang2, K. Song2; 5Vanderbilt university medical center, nashville, TN, United States. 1King‘s College, London, United Kingdom, 2Ariosa Diagnostics, San Jose, CA, United States. Objective Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations cause a wide range of serious gene- tic diseases with no efficient therapy and high transmission risk, due to their TM maternal inheritance. Thus, “at risk” couples often ask for preconceptional Compare clinical accuracy of Harmony Prenatal Test, a NIPT based on (PCD), preimplantation (PGD) or prenatal diagnosis (PND). All these proce- cMfDetNhAo dasnalysis, to first- trimester combined screening using serum markers dures are based on mutant load assessment in polar bodies (PCD), blasto- and nuchal-translucency (NT) measurement. meres (PGD), or fetal tissues (PND). Here we report our 10-year experience in PCD, PGD and PND for mtDNA A general screening population of pregnant women presenting in their first mutations in MT-AT
P6  (m.8993T>G, m.9185T>C, NARP/ Leigh), MT-ND3 trimester (11 weeks 0 days to 13 weeks 6 days) underwent screening for (m.10197G>A), MT-ND4 (m.14459G>A), MT-T
L1  (m.3243A>G, MELAS), fetal trisomy 21 and 18 using free β-hCG, PAPP-A, and NT. Pregnancy out- and MT-TK (m.8344A>G, MERRF). Mutant loads were quantified in 46 polar come was determined by invasive testing or phenotypic evaluation of the bodies, 19 oocytes, 52 preimplantation embryos, 35 fetuses, and 10 whole newborn. An archived aliquot of plasma at the same time of serum screening placentas from carrier females. was available which underwent blinded analysis with Harmony. Risk score PCD was not a relevant approach, due to common mutant load discrepancies results at various risk cut-offs from 1 in 100 (1%) to 1 in 1,000 (0.1%) from ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEb |e WtweWenW fir.EstS pHolGar. bOoRdiGes and their counterparts. Conversely, mutant lo2a3ds both test modalities were compared.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index were constantly stable among blastomeres from 42 embryos, making PGD tations in the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex subunit, SMARC
E1 . an appropriate procedure. Mutant loads were stable across various tissues Sequencing of SMARC
E1  in six additional individuals with spinal menin- including amniocytes in 9 fetuses. However, intra-placental mutant load va- giomas identified two further novel heterozygous loss of function mutati- riations up to 55% were found. Such results preclude the use of chorionic ons. Tumours from individuals with SMARC
E1  mutations were of clear cell villous sampling for PND. No temporal variation of mutant load was obser- histological subtype and all demonstrated loss of SMARC
E1  protein consi- ved throughout pregnancy (21 fetuses). These data support analysis of a stent with a tumour suppressor mechanism. single amniocyte sample as the best PND approach. Conclusion Finally, 22 children were born from PGD/PND procedures and are healthy Our findings define multiple spinal meningioma disease as a novel discrete with a 4 months - 12 years follow-up. Preimplantation and prenatal hetero- entity and establish the key role of the SWI/SNF complex in the pathogene- plasmy assessments are thus valuable tools to prevent the recurrence of the sWis. Gof. bNoetwhm maenn: iNnognioem. Ma.sJ a. nSdm tituhm: Nouonrse .w Ji.t Oh ‘cSlueallriv caenl:l Nhiosnteo.l oSg.Sy.. Bhaskar: d Si.s emaosne nino tf:a Nmoinliee.s N w. Gheigraer ae lm: NtDonNeA. Pm. uVtaacthioinn: sNeognree.g Ea.t eHse.rzog: None. P. None. K.D. Hadfield: None. G. Poke: None. J. Caird: None. S. Sharif: None. D. Burlet: None. N. Frydman: None. A. Benachi: None. G. Chalouhi: None. Y. Eccles: None. D. Fitzpatrick: None. D. Rawluk: None. D. DuPlessis: None. D.G. Ville: None. R. Frydman: None. A. Lebre: None. A. Rotig: None. D.C. Samuels: Evans: None. None. C. Elie: None. A. Munnich: None. J. Bonnefont: None. J. Steffann: None. 
C04 .2 
C03 .6 Mosaic PPM1D mutations are associated with predisposition to breast Exome sequencing of 27 trios to identify genetic causes of fetal and ovarian cancer abnormalities K. M. Snape1, E. Ruark1, P. Humburg2, T. Breast Ovarian Cancer Susceptibility K. J. Carss1, S. Hillman2, E. Maher2, P. Vijayarangakannan1, D. Stemple1, M. Kilby2, M. Collaboration3, T. Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium3, C. Turnbull1, J. Reis-Filho1, A. Hurles1; Ashworth1, A. Antoniou4, C. J. Lord1, P. Donnelly5, N. Rahman1; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, 1Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2The wellcome Trust Centre 2Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Multiple, Multiple, United Kingdom, 4University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. Fetal abnormalities, as revealed by ultrasound, are a relatively common oc- currence and the cause is often genetic. The method used to investigate the- se cases is usually a combination of karyotyping and aCGH, which in many BreastB aRnCdA o1v, BarRiCanA 2c,a AnTcMer, BaRreI Pe1x,e CmHpElKar2s, PoAf LtBhe2 , rRaAreD 5v1arCi ant -R cAoDm5m1Do n di- sease hypothesis, with the identification of rare mutations in the DNA repair cases does not yield a diagnosis. We propose that exome sequencing of trios genes and con- in such cases may substantially increase the diagnostic rate, which will im- ferring susceptibility to one, or both, diseases. By undertaking targeted re- prove understanding of the biological basis of abnormal development, and sequencing of 507 genes implicated in DNA repair pathways in 1150 women inform the reproductive decisions of affected families. with breast +/- ovarian cancer, and a large scale replication caPsPeM-c1oDntrol Therefore, we have exome sequenced a cohort of 27 fetuses with diverse experiment in 13,642 individuals, we have shown that rare proPtePiMn 1trDunca- structural abnormalities including cardiac, musculoskeletal and nervous ting variants (PTVs) in the p53-inducible protePin phosphatase are system defects, along with their parents. Additionally, we have performed associated with both breast and ovarian cancer. We Pid entified mu- aCGH on a subset of this cohort. We have identified rare functional SNPs, tations in 25/7781 cases vs 1/5861 controls; ( =1.12x
P1  0-5), including 18 indels and CNVs, a subset of which are highly likely to be causal, on the basis mPPuMta1tDions in 6,912 individuals with breast cancer; ( = 2.42x10-4) and 12 of prior knowledge of candidate gene function. These include a de novo SNP mutations in 1,121 individuals with ovarian cancer; ( = 3.10x10-9). The in FGFR3 in a fetus with features of thanatophoric dysplasia, and a de novo PTVs cluster within a 370bp region of the final exon of the gene, and 16.8 kb deletion that includes most of the gene OFD1 in a female fetus with are predicted to avoid nonsense mediated decay, resulting in a truncated ventriculomegaly and agenesis of the corpus callosum. protein product. Functional studies show that mutant PPM1D isoforms de- Thus far, our data suggest that exome sequencing trios may increase the dia- monstrate enhanced suppression of p53 in response to ionising radiation, gnostic rate in fetuses with structural abnormalities over that achieved by suggesting a gain-of-function mechanism of action. Deep resequencing of aCGH alone. Further work will include expanding this cohort and functional- a subset of samples confirmed that the PTVs were mosaic in lymphocyte ly validating a subset of our candidate genes using animal models. This is, to DNA and intriguingly absent from tumour tissue, suggesting a novel mecha- our knowledge, the largest such cohort of structurally abnormal fetuses to h Ka.vJe. Cbaeresns e: xNoomnee. sSe.q Huiellnmcaend:. None. E. Maher: None. P. Vijayarangakannan: nism of cancer association, which is genetic but not hereditary. This data None. D. Stemple: None. M. Kilby: None. M. Hurles: None. has clinical implications for the detection and management of women with susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer, and provides new insights into t Kh.eM r.o Slen aopf era: rNeo anne.d E m. Rosuaairck v: aNroianne.t sP .i nH ucommbmurogn: Ndoisneea. sTe. .Breast Ovarian Cancer Susceptibility Collaboration: None. T. Wellcome Trust Case Control 
C04 .1 Consortium: None. C. Turnbull: None. J. Reis-Filho: None. A. Ashworth: Mutations in SMARC
E1  cause a novel disorder of multiple spinal None. A. Antoniou: None. C.J. Lord: None. P. Donnelly: None. N. Rahman: meningiomas None. W. G. Newman1, M. J. Smith2, J. O‘Sullivan2, S. S. Bhaskar2, K. D. Hadfield2, G. Poke3, J. Caird4, S. Sharif5, D. Eccles6, D. Fitzpatrick7, D. Rawluk4, D. DuPlessis8, D. G. Evans2; 1Genetic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3South East Scotland Genetic Service, Western 
C04 .3 General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Beaumont Germline mutations of inhibin in early-onset ovarian cancer Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, West Midlands Regional I. Tournier1, R. Marlin1, K. Walton2, F. Charbonnier1, S. Coutant1, C. Spurrell3, M. Vezain1, Genetics Unit,, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6University of Southampton, Southampton, H. Roman4, J. Tinat1,5, J. Sabourin6, D. Vaur1,7, M. King3, C. Harrison2, T. Frebourg1,5; United Kingdom, 7MRC Human Genetics Unit MRC IGMM, University of Edinburgh, 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 8Department of Cellular Pathology & Greater Manchester Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Growth Factor Signalling Laboratory, Prince Henry‘s Neurosciences Centre, Salford Royal Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, United Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Australia, 3Department of Medicine and Genome Kingdom. Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital,, Rouen, France, 5Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 6Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 7Department of Cancer Genetics, Comprehensive Meningiomas comprise one third of all primary central nervous system Cancer Centre, Caen, France. tumours in adults. When they occur at multiple sites or in multiple family members, they are usually associated with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) disease or familial schwannomatosis. In a subset of individuals, multiple The development of sporadic early-onset cancers, in patients without de- meningioma disease occurs as an autosomal dominant manner without NF2 tectable germline mutations within known genes involved in Mendelian or SMARCB1 mutations. We sought to identify novel genes associated with cancer predisposition, might be explained by rare de novo mutations under meningioma development. strong negative selection. We considered, as a paradigm, early-onset epithe- Method lial ovarian cancer and performed comparative index case-parents exome We sequenced the exomes of three unrelated individuals with familial mul- sequencing in a patient who presented, at 21 years of age, large bilateral tiple spinal meningiomas without NF2 or SMARCB1 mutations. serous ovarian adenocarcinoma. We identified a heterozygous de novo mu- Results tation (c.1157A>G p.Asn386Ser) within the INHBA gene encoding the betaA W2e4 identified two individuals with heterozygous nEoSvHel Glos 2s 0of1 fu3n |c tPioAnR mIuS-, FR suA bN unC itE f| W inhW ibiW ns/.E acS tiH viG ns. ,O wR hiG o ch are members of the TGF-beta superfa-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C04 .5 Loss of a Regulatory Element May Determine Endometrial Cancer mily secreted by granulosa cells and play a key role in ovarian development. Risk in EPCAM Deletion Carriers Functional analyses performed in vitro showed that the INHBA p.Asn386Ser R. M. de Voer, E. Verwiel, M. Donna, E. van Wijk, L. Vreede, R. Freixas, K. Wu, I. mutation results in an increase of inhibin A and a concomitant decrease of Nagtegaal, N. Hoogerbrugge, A. Geurts van Kessel, M. Ligtenberg, R. Kuiper; activin A and, therefore, favours dimerisation of the inhibin betaA-subunit Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. with the inhibin alpha-subunit. Screening for inhibin mutations in 19 other cases of early-onset ovarian epithelial tumours led us to identify within MLH1 MH
S2  MSH6 PM
S2  the INHA gene encoding the inhibin alpha-subunit, a germline mutation Lynch syndrome is caused by germline mutations in the mismatch-repair (c.179G>T, p.Arg60Leu) affecting the secondary furin cleavage site of the in- genes , , and . Mutation carErPieCrAs Mexhibit a high risk hibin alpha -prodomain and functional analysis showed that this mutation is of developinMg ScHol2orecEtaPlC cAaMncer (CRC) and endometrial cancer (EC). We re- disruptive for both inhibin A and B biosynthesis. These results suggest that cently found that constitEuPtCioAnMal 3’end deletions of cause epigenetic germline mutations of inhibins might be oncogenic in ovaries by altering sMilSeHn2cing of in 1 -expressing tissues, thus providing a new cau- the inhibin/activin ratio and, therefore, the crosstalk between granulosa se of Lynch syndrome. MS dHe2letion carriers have a similar CRC risk as a I.n Tdo euprnitiheer:l iNalo cneel.l sR.. Marlin: None. K. Walton: None. F. Charbonnier: None. S. mutation carriers, but ECs were onlyM o
S2 bHse2rved in patients with dele- Coutant: None. C. Spurrell: None. M. Vezain: None. H. Roman: None. J. Tinat: tions extending close to the promoter. Therefore, we hypothesized None. J. Sabourin: None. D. Vaur: None. M. King: None. C. Harrison: None. T. that in endometrial cancer precursoMrS cHe2lls inactivation is not caused Frebourg: None. by read through-mediated silencing, but by loss of a regulatory element. In- deed, a 5.5-kb region upstream of , shows a site with H3K4Me1 and H3K4Me2 in the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2, suggesting the 
C04 .4 presence of a regulatory element. We generated and tested luMcSifHer2ase repor- Parkinson’s disease and melanoma: a common genetic pathway ter constructs containing segments of the 5.5-kb region in a panel of cancer linked to PARKIN inactivation cell lines. A fragment of 1.5-kb, located 4.8-kb upstream of , revealed H. HU1,2, N. Dumaz1,2, S. Lesage3, L. Michel1,2, V. Descamps1,2,4, S. Mourah5, C. Lebbé1,2,6, N. enha innc veirv oactivity in the CRC cell line HCT11
E6 P.C CAuMrr ently we are studying this Basset Seguin1,2,6, M. Bagot1,2,6, A. Bensussan1,2,6, L. Deschamps2,7, M. Leccia8, A. Tsalamlal9, region in Ma SzeHb2rafish model for determining its cell type-specific regulatory R. Sivaramakrishna10, S. Klebe11, R. Kumar10, C. Kannengiesser2,9, A. Couvelard2,7, B. role . Our data suggest that through deleEtiPoCnAsM th at extend clo- Grandchamp2,9, T. Luc12, A. Brice3,13, N. Soufir1,2,9; 1INSERM U976 Centre de recherche de la peau, Paris, France, 2Université Paris 7, se to the proMmSoHte2r an enhancer element is lost. This loss may cause Paris, France, 3Université Paris 6, Inserm UMR_
S975 , Centre de Recherche de l’Institut an increased risk for endometrial cancer in carriers of deletions that du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 1extend close to the prom2 oter. 4Dermatology Department, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, AP-HP, Paris, France, RN.aMt .G deen Veot.e 2r:0 N09on;4e1. :
E1 .1 V2e-r1w1i7el:L Nanoncee.t OMn. cDool n2n0a1:1 N;1o2ne:4. 9E-.5 v5an Wijk: None. L. 5Inserm U940, Laboratoire de Pharmacologie, Hôpital Saint Louis, AP-HP, Paris, France, Vreede: None. R. Freixas: None. K. Wu: None. I. Nagtegaal: None. N. 6Dermatology Department, Hôpital Saint Louis, AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Inserm CRB3, Hoogerbrugge: None. A. Geurts van Kessel: None. M. Ligtenberg: None. R. Département de Pathologie, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP, Paris, France, 8Dermatology Kuiper: None. Department, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 9Department of Genetic, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, AP-HP, Paris, France, 10Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany, 11Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 12Dermatology 
C04 .6 Department Hôpital de l’Hôtel-Dieu, Lyon, France, 13Département de Génétique, Suppressor-tRNA Restores Functional E-Cadherin Expression in Cdh1 Cytogénétique et Embryologie, Groupe Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France. Mutant Cancer Cells: A Potential Approach to Treat Hereditary Diffuse Background: Gastric Cancer R. Bordeira-Carriço1, D. Ferreira1, D. Mateus1, H. Pinheiro1, A. Pêgo2,3, R. Seruca1,4, M. Parkinson‘s diPsAeaRsKeI N(P DP)A, RaK n2e)urodegenerative disease of lo- Santos5, C. Oliveira1,4; 1IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of sing melanin-positive dopaminergic neurons, is epidemiologically linked to Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2INEB - Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica da Universidade cutaneous melanoma (CM). ( , an important genetPicA RprKe2dis- do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Faculty of Engineering of the University of Porto, Porto, position to PD encoding an 
E3  ubiquitin ligase involved in cyclin E degrada- Portugal, 4Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5University of tPiaotni,e ins tasl saon ad t mumeothr osdusp:p ressor gene. We investigated the role of on Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal. melanoma susceptibility and oncogenesis. Introduction: We recruited 500 CM patients (familial, multiple, CDH1 or <25 year), 320 healthy controls, 31 tumors, and 24P mAReKla2noma cell lines. Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) is a highly pene- Point mutations and copy number variations (CNVs) were investigated by trant autosomal dominant disease caused by (E-cadherin encoding sequencing and MLPA, qPCR, and CGH, respectively. abnormalities gene) germline mutations, often originating premature termination codons were collected for 2060 additional controls from ten publications. PARKIN (PTC). HDGC arises at early age, with multifocal tumors frequently miss- eRxepsruelstssi:o n and cell proliferation in mePlAaRnKom2a cell lines were also investi- detected by endoscopy. Prophylactic gastrectomy is the onlyC tDhHe1rapeutic ap- gated. proach for asymp tomatic mutation carriers. We hypothesize that suppres- We identified 15 inactivatPed alleles leading to a trunPAcaRtKed2 sMoar-tteRrNiaAl sa cnodu lMd ertehpoladcse: PTCs by the correct aminoacid in nonsense- protein (2 splicing, 1 frameshift, and 12 exonic CNVs) in 16 CM patients mutation carriersand delayC cDaHnc1er development. (3.2%) and in 0.6% of controls ( <0.0001;OR=5.56[2.49-12.55]). We established a cell line model expressing wild- CNVs were present in 60% of cell lines and in 50% of tuPmARoKrs2, and LOH was tCyDpHe1 and nonsense mutant mini-genes (full-length cDNA enclosing a detected in 50% of cell lines. PARKIN was absent in 90% of cell lines whe- minimal intron before the last exon - CDH1_WT and CDH1_1003) to study Creoansc pluressioennt: Win melanocytes. Transfection of wild type cDNA marke- truncating mutations and its reversion. A suppressor-tRNA was desi- dly inhibits cell proliferation in three cell lines. PARK2 gned to recognize the nonsense codon in AGS, MDA-MB-231 and CHO cells e point out a common genetic pathway that could explain the lRinees umltosd:els. CDH1 mRNA expression was analysed by RT-PCR and protein epidemiological association between PD and CM, by showing that in- expression by western blot, immunocytochemistry and flow citometry. activation plays an important role in melanoma predisposition and oncoge- CDH1_WT originates correctly spliced mRNA and full-length E- nesis. This provides new insights in CM oncogenesis that could help targeted cadherin, correctly localized at the membrane, rescuing cell-adhesion and t Hh.e Hraup:y N doensei.g Nn., aDnudm maza:y N hoanvee. Sd.e Lrmesaatgoelo: gNiocanle c. lLin. Miciaclh ieml:p Nliocnaeti.o Vn. s in PD. suppressing invasion, unlike CDH1_1003. Expression of a suppressor-tRNA Descamps: None. S. Mourah: None. C. Lebbé: None. N. Basset Seguin: rCeosncculeuds imonems:branoinu sv iatrnod potentially functional E-cadherin expression in None. M. Bagot: None. A. Bensussan: None. L. Deschamps: None. M. Leccia: None. A. Tsalamlal: None. R. Sivaramakrishna: None. S. Klebe: None. R. CDH1_1003 mutant cells to levels resembling those of CDH1_WT cells. Kumar: None. C. Kannengiesser: None. A. Couvelard: None. B. Grandchamp: The recovery of membranous E-cadherin expression None. T. Luc: None. A. Brice: None. N. Soufir: None. in cells expressing a nonsense mutation, through tRNA-nonsense suppres- sion, may constitute the basis for a novel gene therapy aiming at reverting t Rru. nBcoartdienigr am-Cuatrartiiçoon:s N ionn cea. nDc.e Fre-arrsesioraci:a Nteodn es.y Dn.d Mroamteeuss.: None. H. Pinheiro: None. A. Pêgo: None. R. Seruca: None. M. Santos: None. C. Oliveira: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 25ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C05 .1 Post GWAS analysis of a BC
L11 A intronic region to define its role in regulating HbF levels. widespread regulatory variation, with genetic variants associating to gene F. Anedda1, S. Sanna1, I. Asunis1, G. Usala1, D. Fabrice2, C. A. Caria1, L. Perseu1, A. Loi1, A. expression levels of 7825 genes, transcript structure of 639 genes, as well Cabriolu1, L. Porcu1, M. G. Marini1, M. F. Marongiu1, C. Sidore3,4, R. Berutti3,5, M. Pala3, A. as expression of 60 miRNAs. Allele-specific transcription analysis allowed Angius1,5, F. Busonero1, A. Maschio1,4, S. Satta2, F. Demartis2, L. Maccioni2, R. Nagaraja6, G. us to characterize rare regulatory effects and underlying genetic variants. Abecasis4, D. Schlessinger6, M. S. Ristaldi1, R. Galanello2, P. Moi2,3, F. Cucca1, S. Sanna1, M. Importantly, genome sequencing data combined with functional annota- Uda1; tion of the genome allowed us to infer putative causal regulatory variants 1IRGB-CNR, Monserrato, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica 2a, Dipartimento di Scienze for 57-75% of eQTL genes. We apply this to predict causal variants for 91 Biomediche e Biotecnologie - Università di Cagliari, Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie AS
L8 , Cagliari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, Sassari, disease-associated loci, and also characterize transcriptome effects of loss- Italy, 4Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, of-function variants, thus linking our discoveries to genetic associations to Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 5Center for Advanced Studies, Research, and Development human disease. Altogether, the integration of genome sequencing and func- in Sardinia (CR
S4 ), AGCT Program, Parco Scientifico e tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, tional genomics data in this study takes us towards understanding and pre- Italy, 6Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States. dicting molecular genomic effects of causal functional variants in the human gTe. nLoamppea.lainen: None. M. Sammeth: None. M.R. Friedlander: None. P.A.C. ‚t Hoen: None. J. Monlong: None. M.A. Rivas: None. M. Gonzàlez-Porta: Association studies identified BC
L11 A transcription factor as the master None. N. Kurbatova: None. T. Griebel: None. P.G. Ferreira: None. M. Barann: None. T. Wieland: None. L. Greger: None. M. van Iterson: None. J. Almlof: regulator of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) expression as well as a key modifier None. P. Ribeca: None. I. Pulyakhina: None. D. Esser: None. T. Giger: of both β-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia (SCA) phenotypes. Recently, None. A. Tikhonov: None. M. Sultan: None. G. Bertier: None. D.G. MacArthur: we refined the association signal at this locus by GWAS on 5903 individuals None. M. Lek: None. E. Lizano: None. H.P.J. Buermans: None. H. Kilpinen: from the SardiNIA project, integrating, with imputation procedure, DNA mi- None. I. Padioleau: None. T. Schwarzmayr: None. O. Karlberg: None. H. croarray data and low pass whole-genome sequencing of 2120 Sardinians. Ongen: None. S.B. Montgomery: None. M.I. McCarthy: None. T. Strom: Our results revealed two independent SNPs within intron 2 of the BC
L11 A None. T. Geuvadis Consortium: None. H. Lehrach: None. S. Schreiber: gene, leading the strongest haplotypic signals and fully accounting for the None. R. Sudbrak: None. A. Carracedo: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. R. Haesler: None. A. Syvanen: None. G. van Ommen: None. A. Brazma: None. T. association observed at this locus. Given that intron 2 shows chromatin si- Meitinger: None. P. Rosenstiel: None. R. Guigo: None. I.G. Gut: None. X. gnatures of genomic elements with a potential regulatory activity, we car- Estivill: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: None. ried out functional and expression analysis to asses the specific impact of associated variants in gene action. Preliminary luciferase reporter assays on erythroleukemia cell lines (K562, HEL) have shown a promoter/enhancer activity embedded in the regions encompassing two of them. Notably for 
C05 .3 one SNP, EMSA on human primary erythroid cells (BFUe) also detected a Genetic regulation of lincRNA and protein-coding genes expression differential binding pattern showing developmental stage and allele specifi- variation - similarities and differences city. Furthermore, RT-qPCR and allelic specific expression assays (ASE) con- K. Popadin1, M. Gutierrez-Arcelus1, T. Lappalainen1,2, E. Dermitzakis1, S. E. Antonarakis1; 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department ducted on BFUe cells derived from β-thalassemia patients suggest that the of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. associated SNPs, might function as cis-acting regulatory variants, affecting its expression in a temporal and tissue specific manner. Overall our results support that genetic variants at intron 2 of BC
L11 A play a crucial role in mo- We have investigated by RNA-seq the gene expression variation in the Gen- dulating its function controlling HbF levels with consequent amelioration of β F-.t Ahnaleadsdsae:m Niao nsee.v Se.r iStya.nna: None. I. Asunis: None. G. Usala: None. D. Cord collection: three cell types (fibroblasts - F, lymphoblastoid cell lines Fabrice: None. C.A. Caria: None. L. Perseu: None. A. Loi: None. A. Cabriolu: - L and T-cells - T) from umbilical cord of 195 unrelated European indivi- None. L. Porcu: None. M.G. Marini: None. M.F. Marongiu: None. C. Sidore: duals. We have observed expression of 392, 553 and 546 large intergenic None. R. Berutti: None. M. Pala: None. A. Angius: None. F. Busonero: None. A. non-coding RNA genes (lincRNAs) in F,L and T respectively. LincRNAs are Maschio: None. S. Satta: None. F. Demartis: None. L. Maccioni: None. R. lowly expressed, highly-tissue specific and located close to protein-coding Nagaraja: None. G. Abecasis: None. D. Schlessinger: None. M.S. Ristaldi: genes involved in regulation of transcription. LincRNAs‘ gene size negative- None. R. Galanello: None. P. Moi: None. F. Cucca: None. S. Sanna: None. M. ly correlates with expression level, as it is known for protein-coding genes, Uda: None. thus demonstrating similar evolutionary constraints between lincRNA and protein-coding genes. Among expressed lincRNAs we have found 54, 102 and 65 genes from F,L and T correspondingly with cis expression Quantita- 
C05 .2 tive Trait Loci (cis-eQTL). Comparison of regulation patterns of lincRNA and Transcriptome and genome sequencing uncovers functional variation protein-coding genes has revealed two characteristic features of lincRNAs: in human populations (i) they have excess of cis-eQTLs and (ii) lincRNAs‘ eQTLs are located closer T. Lappalainen1,2,3, M. Sammeth4,5, M. R. Friedlander5,6, P. A. C. ‚t Hoen7, J. Monlong5, M. to transcription start sites (TSS). Our analysis of protein-coding genes has A. Rivas8, M. Gonzàlez-Porta9, N. Kurbatova9, T. Griebel4, P. G. Ferreira5,6, M. Barann10, T. shown that both excess of cis-eQTLs and close location of cis-eQTLs to TSS Wieland11, L. Greger9, M. van Iterson7, J. Almlof12, P. Ribeca4, I. Pulyakhina7, D. Esser10, are specific also for evolutionary young (primate-specific) protein-coding T. Giger1, A. Tikhonov9, M. Sultan13, G. Bertier5,6, D. G. MacArthur14, M. Lek14, E. Lizano5,6, H. P. J. Buermans7, H. Kilpinen1,2,3, I. Padioleau1,2,3, T. Schwarzmayr11, O. Karlberg12, H. genes. We conclude that lincRNAs and young protein-coding genes have si- Ongen1,2,3, S. B. Montgomery1, M. I. McCarthy8, T. Strom11,15, T. Geuvadis Consortium5, H. m Ki.l Paro pevaodliun:t iNononaery. M la. nGdustciearpree zo-fA rrecgeululast:i oNno.ne. T. Lappalainen: None. E. Lehrach13, S. Schreiber10, R. Sudbrak13, A. Carracedo16, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, R. Haesler10, Dermitzakis: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. A. Syvanen12, G. van Ommen7, A. Brazma9, T. Meitinger11,15, P. Rosenstiel10, R. Guigo5,6, I. G. Gut4, X. Estivill5,6, E. T. Dermitzakis1,2,3; 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute for Genetics and 
C05 .4 Genomics in Geneva (1G3), Geneva, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Centro Nacional d‘Anàlisi Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 5Center Coordinated effects of sequence variation on DNA binding, chromatin for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 6Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain, structure, and transcription 7Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 8Wellcome Trust Centre for A. R. Gschwind1,2, H. Kilpinen3,2,4, S. M. Waszak5, S. K. Raghav5, R. M. Witwicki1, A. Orioli1, Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, E. Migliavacca1,2, M. Wiederkehr1, M. Gutierrez-Arcelus3,2,4, N. Panousis3,2,4, A. Yurovsky3,2,4, United Kingdom, 10Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University T. Lappalainen3,2,4, L. Romano-Palumbo3, A. Planchon3, D. Bielser3, J. Bryois3,2,4, I. Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, Munich, Padioleau3,2,4, G. Udin5, S. Turnheer6, D. Hacker6, L. J. Core7, J. T. Lis7, N. Hernandez1, B. Germany, 12Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Deplancke5, A. Reymond1, E. T. Dermitzakis3,2,4; Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 13Max Planck Institute for Molecular 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 14Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Boston, MA, Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genetic Medicine United States, 15Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universitat Munchen, Munich, and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Institute Germany, 16Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Laboratory of Systems Biology and Genetics, Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Protein Expression Core Facility, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale Understanding functional effects of genetic variants is one of the biggest de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, challenges in human genomics. Towards this goal, we sequenced mRNA and Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States. small RNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines of 465 individuals from 5 popu- lations of the 1000 Genomes Project. Population comparisons showed spli- cing rather than expression dominating continental differences (75-85% Recent advances in genome-wide profiling of transcription factor (TF) bin- differentially splices genes EUR-ARF vs 6-40% EUR-EUR), putatively sug- ding and histone modifications have identified specific chromatin signatu- g2es6ting a special role of splicing in human adaptaEtiSonH. WGe 2 fo0u1n3d e| xPtrAemReISly, FR reA s N reC laE te d| W to W varW io. uE s S clH asG se. sO oR f fG unctional elements in different cell types.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C05 .6 Novel genetic variants associated with alternative polyadenylation However, their genetic basis and degree of variability across individuals and expression of noncoding transcripts remain largely unknown. We generated genome-wide enrichment profiles D. V. Zhernakova1, H. Westra1, E. de Klerk2, A. Mastrokolias2, S. Amini2, Y. Ariyurek2,3, R. of TF binding, chromatin marks, and different measures of transcription Jansen4, B. W. Penninx4, J. J. Hottenga5, G. Willemsen5, E. J. de Geus5, D. I. Boomsma5, J. H. in lymphoblastoid cell lines from two trios and 8 unrelated individuals se- Veldink6, L. H. van den Berg6, C. Wijmenga1, J. T. den Dunnen2,3, G. B. van Ommen2, P. A. C. quenced in high depth as part of the 1000 Genomes project. Inter-individual ‘t Hoen2, L. Franke1; 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, variability of these phenotypes was quantified to understand both DNA Groningen, Netherlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University sequence dependent and independent variation on transcription, TF bin- Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Leiden Genome Technology Center, Leiden, ding, chromatin state, and their interplay in an allele-specific framework. Netherlands, 4Department of Psychiatry, Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety, Different organizational layers of the genome show abundant allelic effects VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Biological and strong allelic coordination between layers, with the genetic control of psychology, Netherlands Twin Registry, VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, this coordination acting primarily through transcription factor binding. Our 6Department of Neurology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University Medical findings support the notion of transcription factors being the primary de- Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. terminants of gene expression programs, with the overall chromatin state reflecting, but not necessarily driving gene expression activity. We extended our analysis to 54 unrelated individuals for most assays to identify genetic Many disease-associated variants affect gene expression levels (expression effects affecting chromatin properties on a population level, and continue quantitative trait loci, eQTLs). Expression profiling using next generation se- exploring the combinatorial patterns of all assays to further dissect the quencing (NGS) technology is very powerful to detect these eQTLs. components of the general transcriptional state of the cells. This study will Here we analyzed 94 total blood samples from healthy volunteers with De- significantly improve our understanding of the biological landscape around epSAGE to gain specific insight how genetic variants affect the expression regulatory and other functional elements of the genome, and provide better of genes and and lengths of 3’-untranslated regions (3’-UTRs). We detected means to interpret the heritability and molecular basis of phenotypic diver- previously unknown cis-eQTL effects for GWAS hits in disease- and physio- s Ait.yR, .s Gucshc haws idnids:e Nasoen esu. Hsc. eKpitlpibinileitny:, Nino hneu.m Sa.Mns. .Waszak: None. S.K. Raghav: logy-associated traits. Apart from cis-eQTLs that are typically well identi- None. R.M. Witwicki: None. A. Orioli: None. E. Migliavacca: None. M. fiable using microarrays or RNA-seq, DeepSAGE revealed many cis-eQTLs Wiederkehr: None. M. Gutierrez-Arcelus: None. N. Panousis: None. A. for antisense and other non-coding transcripts, often in genomic regions Yurovsky: None. T. Lappalainen: None. L. Romano-Palumbo: None. A. containing retrotransposon-derived elements. Furthermore, we identified Planchon: None. D. Bielser: None. J. Bryois: None. I. Padioleau: None. G. and confirmed SNPs that affect the usage of alternative polyadenylation si- Udin: None. S. Turnheer: None. D. Hacker: None. L.J. Core: None. J.T. Lis: None. N. Hernandez: None. B. Deplancke: None. A. Reymond: None. E.T. tes, thereby potentially influencing the stability of mRNAs. Dermitzakis: None. We subsequently combined the power of RNA-seq with DeepSAGE by per- forming a meta-analysis of three datasets, resulting in the identification of a substantially increased number of cis-eQTLs. Our results indicate that DeepSAGE data is useful for eQTL mapping of 
C05 .5 known and unknown transcripts, and identification of SNPs that affect al- Deciphering vertebrate regulatory grammar using high-throughput in ternative polyadenylation. Because of the inherent differences between vivo functional assays DeepSAGE and RNA-seq, the complementary integrative approach that we R. P. Smith1,2, L. Taher3,4, S. J. Riesenfeld5, R. P. Patwardhan6, I. Ovcharenko3, K. S. Pollard5,2,7, J. Shendure6, N. Ahituv1,2; describe here helps to gain better insight in the molecular consequences of 1Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California San m Da.Vn.y Z dhiesrenaaskeo-vaass: oNcoiantee. dH v. aWreiasntrtas:. None. E. de Klerk: None. A. Mastrokolias: None. S. Amini: None. Y. Ariyurek: None. R. Jansen: None. B.W. Penninx: Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Institute for Human Genetics, University None. J.J. Hottenga: None. G. Willemsen: None. E.J. de Geus: None. D.I. of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3National Center for Boomsma: None. J.H. Veldink: None. L.H. van den Berg: None. C. Wijmenga: Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, None. J.T. den Dunnen: None. G.B. van Ommen: None. P.A.C. ‘t Hoen: None. L. Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Institute for Biostatistics and Informatics in Medicine Franke: None. and Ageing Research, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 5Gladstone Institutes, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 6Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 7Division of Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. 
C06 .1 The disease mechanisms of FSHD1 and FSHD2 converge at the level of somatic expression of DUX4 Despite continual progress in the cataloging of vertebrate regulatory ele- S. M. van der Maarel1, R. Lemmers1, B. Bakker1, R. Tawil2, S. Sacconi3, D. Miller4, S. ments, little is known about the grammatical rules that govern their inten- Tapscott5; sity and spatio-temporal extent. Deciphering these rules will enable high- 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2University of Rochester Medical resolution mapping of regulatory elements, accurate interpretation of nu- Center, Rochester, NY, United States, 3Nice University Hospital, Nice, France, 4University cleotide variation within them, and the design of sequences that can deliver of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States. molecules for therapeutic purposes in a spatio-temporal manner. Here, we describe two novel approaches that we have developed to systematically improve our understanding of regulatory grammar. In the first approach, mathematical theory and computational methods were developed to con- Facioscapulohumeral dystDroUpXh4y (FSHD) is caused by decreased epigenetic struct an ultra-compact collection of DNA oligomers encompassing all pos- suppression of the D4Z4 repeat array on chromosome 4 resulting in exDpUreXs4- sible 6bp sequences, which were screened in 15 tissues and two time points sion of the D4Z4-encoded gene in skeletal mDusUcXle4. using zebrafish transgenesis. Twenty-seven (from 184) of these constructs Two variants of chromosome 4 exist of which only one is pDeUrmX4issive to produced consistent expression patterns, many of which were tissue-speci- expression due to the presence of a polymorphic polyadenylation si- fic and were further used to design robust, tissue-specific enhancers. Using gnal. In most patients, loss of epigenetic suppression of is caused by a second approach, we systematically decoded the rules governing TFBS contraction of the D4Z4 array (FSHD1) on a permissive allele and is inheri- arrangement and combination by testing ~5,000 synthetically designed se- ted as a dominant trait. However, in some patients the decrease in epigenetic quences using a massively parallel reporter assay in the mouse liver. We find suppression occurs on normal-sized arrays (FSHD2) and shows a complex that certain transcription factors act as direct drivers of gene expression in inheritance pattern. We discovered that mutations in the chromatin modi- homotypic clusters, independent of spacing, whereas others function only fier SMCHD1 on chromosome 18 segregate with genome-wide D4Z4 CpG synergistically. Heterotypic enhancers are stronger than their homotypic hypomethylation in FSHD2 DfaUmX4ilies. In FSHD2 patients the disease is thus analogs, and favor specific TFBS combinations, mimicking putative native causeSdM CbHy Dd1igenic inheriStaMnCcHe Do1f a SMCHD1 mutation and a normal-sized enhancers. Finally, exhaustive testing of binding site permutations sup- D4Z4 array permissive for expression. Currently, we have identified ported a model with flexibility in binding site order. This work provides a >50 SMC HmDu1tations explaining 80% of FSHD2. The mutation unique catalog of tissue-specific synthetic enhancers as well as a massively spectrum provides new insights in the disease mechanism and we obser- p Ra.rPa. lSleml ivtihe:w N oonf eth. Le .b Taashice rp: rNinocniep. lSes.J o. fR rieegsuenlafteoldry: Nfuonncet. iRon.P .i nP avtiwvoa.rdhan: ved that mutations can also aggravate disease severity in FSHD1 None. I. Ovcharenko: None. K.S. Pollard: None. J. Shendure: None. N. Ahituv: families. None. SMCHD1 is a chromatin modifier that binds directly to the D4Z4 repeat. In FSHD2 patients there is reduced DbUinXd4ing of SMCHD1 to D4Z4 and knock down of SMCHD1 in normal myoblasts containing a permissive chromo- some 4 leads to the activation of . DOUuXr4 data thus suggest FSHD1 that the disease mechanisms of FSHD1 and FSHD2 converge at the level of D4Z4 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 27 chromatin decondensation and somatic expression.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index S.M. van der Maarel: None. R. Lemmers: None. B. Bakker: None. R. Tawil: 
C06 .4 None. S. Sacconi: None. D. Miller: None. S. Tapscott: None. Constitutive activation of STIM1 causes tubular aggregate myopathy J. Laporte1, F. Chevessier2, A. Maues De Paula3, S. Attarian4, D. Hantaï5, K. Ghorab6, N. Levy3, M. Krahn3, B. Eymard5, M. Bartoli3, J. Böhm1; 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 3Faculté 
C06 .2 de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France, 4Hôpital d‘Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, Plastin 3 ameliorates spinal muscular atrophy via delayed axon France, 5Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6CHU de Limoges, Limoges, pruning and improves neuromuscular junction functionality France. B. Ackermann1, S. Kröber1, L. Torres-Benito2, A. Borgmann3, M. Peters1, S. Hosseini Barkooie1, R. Tejero2, M. Jakubik1, J. Schreml1, J. Milbradt1, T. F. Wunderlich4, M. Riessland1, L. Tabares2, B. Wirth1; In skeletal muscle, Ca2+ is mainly stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Departament of Medical Physiology and Biophysics Ca2+ is released to the cytoplasm upon stimulation, where it triggers muscle University of Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain, 3Institute for Zoology, University of Cologne, Cologne, contraction and acts as a second messenger controlling growth and diffe- Germany, 4Institute of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne and Cologne rentiation. Ca2+ stores are refilled through a process called store-operated Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases University Ca2+ entry (SOCE). Stromal interaction molecule 1 (STIM1) is the main of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Ca2+ sensor in the endoplasmic reticulum. We identified STIM1 mutations as the genetic cause of tubular aggregate myopathy (TAM), characterized by regular arrays of membrane tubules on muscle biopsies. All nine heterozy- F-actin bundling plastin 3 (PL
S3 ) is a fully protective modifier of the neuro- gous mutations (including 5 novel) were found in the highly conserved in- muscular disease spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), the most common genetic traluminal EF-hands, sensing and binding Ca2+. Upon Ca2+ store depletion, cause of infant death. The generation of a conditional PL
S3  over-expressing wild-type STIM1 oligomerizes and thereby triggers extracellular Ca2+ ent- mouse and its breeding into an SMA background allowed us to decipher the ry. In contrast, myoblasts transfected with the mutant constructs displayed exact biological mechanism underlying PL
S3 -mediated SMA protection. We constitutive STIM1 clustering, indicating that Ca2+ sensing was lost. We show that PL
S3  is a key regulator that restores main processes depending investigated the pathological mechanism underlying the disease and moni- on actin dynamics in SMA motor neurons (MN). MN soma size significantly tored the calcium response of patient myoblasts to SOCE. We found a signi- increased and a higher number of afferent proprioceptive inputs were coun- ficantly higher basal Ca2+ level in patient cells as compared to the control. ted in SMAPL
S3  compared to SMA mice. PL
S3  increased presynaptic F-actin Addition of high [Ca2+] medium induced a sudden and massive Ca2+ influx amount, rescued synaptic vesicle and active zones content, restored the or- in the patient myoblasts, as compared to low gradual increase in control ganization of readily releasable pool vesicles and increased quantal content cell lines. These data demonstrate that dominant STIM1 mutations induce a at the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs). Most remarkably, stabilized axons constitutive activation of the Ca2+ entry channels in muscle cells. Recessive by PL
S3  over-expression delayed axon pruning, counteracting poor axonal loss-of-function mutations in STIM1 have been associated with severe im- connectivity at SMA NMJs. These findings together with the observation mune deficiency, demonstrating that a tight regulation of STIM1-dependent of increased endplate and muscle fiber size upon MN-specific PL
S3  over- SOCE plays an essential role in T-cell activation as well as in normal skeletal expression suggest that PL
S3  significantly improves neurotransmission. m J.u Lsacpleo srtteru: Nctounree. aFn. dC hfuenvectsisoine.r: None. A. Maues De Paula: None. S. Attarian: Indeed, ubiquitous over-expression improves survival and motor function None. D. Hantaï: None. K. Ghorab: None. N. Levy: None. M. Krahn: None. B. in SMA mice. As PL
S3  seems to act independently of Smn, PL
S3  might be a Eymard: None. M. Bartoli: None. J. Böhm: None. pBo.t Aencktiearlm thaenrna:p Neounteic. tSa.r Kgreöt bneort: oNnolnye i.n L S. MToArr beus-tB aelsnoit oo:t hNeorn Me. NA .d Bisoeragsmesa.nn: None. M. Peters: None. S. Hosseini Barkooie: None. R. Tejero: None. M. Jakubik: None. J. Schreml: None. J. Milbradt: None. T.F. Wunderlich: None. M. 
C06 .5 Riessland: None. L. Tabares: None. B. Wirth: None. Myotonic dystrophy CTG expansion affects synaptic vesicle proteins, neurotransmission and mouse behavior O. Hernández-Hernández1, C. Guiraud-Dogan1,2, G. Sicot1, A. Huguet1, S. Luilier3, E. 
C06 .3 Steidl4, S. Saenger5, C. Chevarin6, A. Nicole1, B. Buisson4, J. Bizot3, M. Hamon6, S. Humez7, The neuronal endopeptidase ECE
L1  is associated with autosomal G. Bassez2,8, F. Metzger5, L. Buée7, A. Munnich1, N. Sergeant7, G. Gourdon1, M. Gomes- recessive distal arthrogryposis Pereira1; K. Dieterich1,2,3, S. Quijrano-Roy4, N. Monnier1, J. Zhou5, J. Fauré1, D. Avila Smirnow4, R. 1Inserm U781; Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Departement de Carlier4, C. Laroche6, P. Marcorelles7, S. Mercier8, A. Mégarbané9, S. Odent10, N. Romero11, Patologie, CHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 3Key-Obs, Orléans, France, 4Neuroservice, D. Sternberg11, I. Marty2, B. Estournet12, P. Jouk1, J. Melki5, J. Lunardi1,2; Aix en Provence, France, 5F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland, 6Inserm U894; 1CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 2INSERM U836 Grenoble Institut des Neurosciences, Faculté de Médecine Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7Inserm UMR 837-1; Université Lille Grenoble, France, 3Université de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 4CHU Garches, Garches, Nord de France, Lille, France, 8Inserm U955; Université Paris Est, Créteil, France. France, 5INSERM U788, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 6CHU Limoges, Limoges, France, 7CHU Brest, Brest, France, 8CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 9University of Beirouth, Beirouth, Lebanon, 10CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 11CHU Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a complex multisystemic disorder, 12CHU Garches, Grenoble, France. which displays multiple debilitating neurological manifestations. Despite recent progress in the understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of DM1 in skeletal muscle and heart, the pathways affected in the central nervous Distal arthrogryposis (DA) is a subgroup of arthrogryposis multiplex con- system (CNS) require further investigation. genita (AMC) characterized by multiple congenital joint limitations. Using a In our studies we have used DMSXL transgenic mice expressing large CTG pangenomic approach in 2 consanguin eEoCuEsL fa1milies with DA, we identified a trinucleotide repeats within the human DM1 locus, notably in the CNS. The- common morbid locus that mapped to chromosome 2q37 and harbored the se mice recreate molecular features of RNA toxicity in brain, such as RNA Endothelin Converting Enzyme Like 1( ) gene. We screened a panel of foci accumulation and dysregulation of alternative splicing, in association 20 DA families and identified 7 different mutations in six familieEsC. EALll1 mu- with the sequestration of MBNL splicing regulators and upregulation of tations resulted either in the absence of the protein or in the synthesis of a CELF proteins. non-functional protein, suggesting a loss of function mechanism. en- Detailed phenotyping revealed relevant cognitive deficits and behavioural codes a neuronal endopeptidase expressed in the peripheral (PNS) and cen- abnormalities, altered short-term synaptic plasticity, as well as changes in tral nervous system during fetal life and plays a major role in intramuscu- neurochemical levels. To decipher the molecular bases behind these phe- lar branching of motoneurons in skeletal muscle.Patients presented with a notypes, a global proteomics approach revealed RAB3A upregulation and homogeneous phenotype characterized by limited knee flexion, flexed third abnormal synapsin 1 hyperphosphorylation in the CNS of transgenic mice. to fifth fingers and relatively spared index finger, severe muscle atrophy in These abnormalities were confirmed in transfected cells and validated in lower limbs and tongue. Muscle imaging showed a recognizable pattern of post-mortem DM1 brains. Using complimentary DM1 mouse models, we the thigh muscles. No dysfunction of the neuromuscular transmission was showed that RAB3A upregulation results from the sequestration of MBN
L1  evidenced.On the wholEe,C cEliLn1ical features point towards a disorder involving in RNA foci, while synapsin 1 hyperphosphorylation is mediated by the the PNS. A developmental dysfunction is suggested by the predominantly upregulation of CELF proteins. Interestingly, synaptic protein defects were prenatal expression of , the non-progressive course of the disease and associated with altered spontaneous neurosecretion in cell culture and are K K.O. D. mieoteursiceh d: aNtoan.e. S. Quijrano-Roy: None. N. Monnier: None. J. Zhou: likely to contribute to the electrophysiological and behavioural deficits of None. J. Fauré: None. D. Avila Smirnow: None. R. Carlier: None. C. Laroche: None. P. Marcorelles: None. S. Mercier: None. A. Mégarbané: None. S. Odent: DM1 transgenic mice. None. N. Romero: None. D. Sternberg: None. I. Marty: None. B. Estournet: The novel connection between physiological phenotypes and synaptic pro- None. P. Jouk: None. J. Melki: None. J. Lunardi: None. t Oei.n H deernreágnudleazt-iHoner rneávnedaelsz :s Nynoanpe.t iCc .d Gyusfiruanucdt-iDono gina nD: MN1on ber.a Gin. Spiactohto: lNoognye.. A. Huguet: None. S. Luilier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Key-Obs. 28 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index E. Steidl: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Neuroservice. S. Saenger: None. C. Chevarin: None. A. Nicole: None. B. Buisson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Neuroservice. J. Bizot: A. Employment (full or part-time); et al., Nat. Genet. 2013). Most notably, it is also possible to detect mutati- Significant; Key-Obs. M. Hamon: None. S. Humez: None. G. Bassez: None. F. ons in genes which are not predicted candidates for being a mitochondrial Metzger: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; F. Hoffmann-La Roche protein but which cause a clear mitochondriopathy phenotype e.g. muta- Ltd. L. Buée: None. A. Munnich: None. N. Sergeant: None. G. Gourdon: tions in the riboflavin transporter encoding gene SL
C52 A2. The challenge None. M. Gomes-Pereira: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; now is, apart from improving sequencing technology, to annotate variants Prosensa, The Netherlands. in non-coding regions, to identify indels and copy number variants, as well as considering how to tackle diseases caused by di- or oligogenic mutations exerting a synergistic effect. Till then, each gene newly identified by exome sequencing holds the promise for new treatment options, as for example 
C06 .6 riboflavin supplementation in the case of mutations in SL
C52 A2, and helps Nanoparticles as delivery systems for antisense oligoribonucleotides: tLo. Ssh. eKdre mmoerre: Nliognhet .o Tn.B m. Hitoaachcko:n Ndorinael. pCh.yAs. iBolioaggoy.sch: None. R. Kopajtich: biodistribution studies and definition of the release kinetic in None. B. Haberberger: None. T. Wieland: None. T. Schwarzmayr: None. A. intraperitoneally and orally treated mdx mice Walther: None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Klopstock: None. M. Zeviani: None. R. M. Falzarano1, C. Passarelli1, K. Sparnacci2, M. Laus2, P. Bonaldo3, P. Braghetta3, J. Taylor: None. A. Rötig: None. A. Munnich: None. J. Smeitink: None. P. vanDeutekom4, A. Ferlini1; Freisinger: None. T. Meitinger: None. H. Prokisch: None. 1Department of Medical Sciences, Ferrara, Italy, 2Environmental and Life Sciences INSTM, University of Eastern Piedmont, Alessandria, Italy, 3Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 4Prosensa Therapeutics, Leiden, Netherlands. 
C07 .2 ER Mannosidase I deficiency: An unexpected CDG-II with intellectual disability and dysmorphic features Antisense-mediated exon skipping is a very promising therapeutic option G. Matthijs1, D. Rymen1, R. Peanne1, V. Race1, L. Sturiale2, D. Garozzo2, P. Mills3, P. Clayton3, J. Jaeken4, F. Foulquier5; for Duchenne muscular dystrophy and other diseases susceptible of splicing 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Institute of Chemistry and Technology correction. We have tested different types of polymeric cationic core-shell of Polymers CNR, Catania, Italy, 3Institute of Child Health, University College and Great nanoparticles (NPs) for delivering 2-O-methyl-phosphorothioate antisense Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Center for oligoribonucleotides (AONs), in mdx mice. Both T1 and ZM2 NP bind and Metabolic Diseases, Leuven, Belgium, 5University of Lille 1 - UMR CNRS/USTL 8576, Lille, convey AONs: intraperitoneal (IP) injections of low doses (52.5mg/kg) of France. NP-AON complex restored dystrophin protein synthesis in skeletal and car- diac muscles, allowing protein localization in up to 40% of muscle fibers with skipping level up to 20%. We have administered NP-AON complexes Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) are a group of rare metabolic orally and tested in vivo (mdx) the tissue biodistribution and elimination diseases, caused by impaired protein or lipid glycosylation. To date, over 50 timing of NPs by Odyssey, using an infrared dye conjugated ZM2 NP. The NP- distinct disorders have been described. In the last two years, the discovery AON formulations passes the gastric barrier and induce a limited dystrophin of new CDG genes has occurred faster than ever thanks to massive paral- rescue in the intestinal smooth muscles as well as in the diaphragm. WE lel sequencing. We identified MAN1B1 as the culprit gene in a patient with have also identified a novel NP (ZM5) able to pass the intestinal barrier. In CDG-II by means of exome sequencing. Subsequently, six additional cases order to get insight about the release kinetic of the AON from NPs, we have were identified from a cohort of unsolved CDG-II. All patients presented in- performed ELISA assay to dose the antisense in the all mice muscles , both IP tellectual disability, facial dysmorphism and truncal obesity. Thus, we de- and oral treated. We demonstrated that AON are rapidly released from NPs scribe MAN1B1 deficiency as a relatively frequent cause of CDG. (with no depot effect) but those AON reaching tissues and exerting the func- MAN1B1 is believed to be an ER resident α(1,2)-mannosidase acting as a tional effect are well protected from degradation. Defining the kinetic of NP- key enzyme in the glycoprotein quality control system. It targets misfolded AON complexes is crucial in order to further proceed with other NP studies glycoproteins for ER associated degradation (ERAD) by cleaving a termi- f Mol.l oFwaliznagra nnoon: Ninovnaes.i vCe. aPdamssianriesltlri:a tNioonne r.o Ku.t Sesp,a arsn aocracli: a Nnodn sek. iMn. a Ldasuosr:p tion. nal mannose residue from the asparagine-linked Man9GlcNAc2, forming None. P. Bonaldo: None. P. Braghetta: None. J. vanDeutekom: A. Employment Man8GlcNAc2 isomer B. Biochemical analysis indeed confirmed a delay in (full or part-time); Modest; Prosensa Therapeutics, The Netherlands. A. Ferlini: the trimming of Man9GlcNAc2 to Man8GlcNAc2 in patients’ cells. Interestin- B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; EU grants (Neuromics, Bio- gly, Golgi morphology was altered in all patients, with marked dilation and NMD). Other; Modest; PI of ongoing Prosensa and GSK trials on exon skipping. fragmentation. We infer from this observation that part of the phenotype is linked to Golgi disruption. Moreover, we showed that the endogenous MAN1B1 is localized to the Golgi apparatus, instead of the ER where quality control is supposed to occur. Hence, our results challenge the current view 
C07 .1 on glycoprotein quality control, even though more work is needed to propo- New diagnostic paradigms for mitochondriopathies s Ge .a M naetwth irjso:l eN foonre M. DA.N R1yBm1e ann: dN oton ee.x Rp.l aPiena tnhnee p: aNtohnoep. hVy. sRioacloeg: yN.one. L. L. S. Kremer1, T. B. Haack1,2, C. A. Biagosch1, R. Kopajtich1, B. Haberberger1,2, T. Wieland1,2, Sturiale: None. D. Garozzo: None. P. Mills: None. P. Clayton: None. J. Jaeken: T. Schwarzmayr1,2, A. Walther1,2, T. M. Strom1,2, T. Klopstock3, M. Zeviani4, R. Taylor5, A. None. F. Foulquier: None. Rötig6, A. Munnich6,7, J. Smeitink8, P. Freisinger9, T. Meitinger1,2, H. Prokisch1,2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur- 
C07 .3 Institute, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany, 4Unit of Mutations in nuclear-encoded components of mitochondrial Molecular Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS (Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere respiratory chain complex III and IV cause apoptosis-driven Scientifico) Istituto Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Milan, Italy, 5Mitochondrial Research developmental defects, a new mitochondrial phenotype in vertebrates Group, Institute for Ageing and Health, The Medical School, Newcastle University, A. Indrieri1, V. van Rahden2, V. Tiranti3, I. Conte1, M. Morleo1, D. Iaconis1, G. Chesi1, A. Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Romano1, R. Tate4, I. D‘Amato3, I. Maystadt5, S. Demuth6, A. Zvulunov7, I. Ferrero8, P. Institut Imagine and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U781, Goffrini8, P. Bovolenta9, K. Kutsche2, M. Zeviani3, B. Franco1; Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine -TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Universitätsklinikum Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 8Nijmegen Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 3The Foundation „Carlo Besta“ Institute of Neurology, for Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Milan, Italy, 4Institute of Genetics and Biophysics „Adriano Buzzati Traverso“, CNR, Netherlands, 9Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany. Naples, Italy, 5Institut de Pathologie et de Genetique, Gosselies (Charleroi), Belgium, 6Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Erfurt, Germany, 7University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 8University of Parma, Parma, Italy, 9Centro de Biología Molecular Mitochondrial disorders present as a genetically and clinically extreme- “Severo Ochoa”, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. ly heterogeneous disease. Up to now 250 mitochondrial genes have been identified, whereas more than 1000 genes are predicted to encode for mito- chondrial proteins. To identify disease causing mutations, we applied exo- Mitochondrial-dependent programmed cell death (PCD), plays an essenti- me sequencing in combination with stepwise filtering of gene variants and al homoeostatic role, by selecting bioenergetically proficient cells suitable functional complementation for 120 unrelated individuals with juvenile-on- for normal tissue and organ development. Despite intensive investigation, set mitochondrial disorders without pathogenic variants in the mtDNA. We the impact of this crucial process in human diseases remains poorly under- were able to detect mutations in known disease genes in 40% of cases, whe- stood. In particular, the link between apoptosis and mitochondrial disorders, reas in 10% novel disease causing genes were identified. The list of such ne- i.e. primary defects of oxidative phosphorylation, has not been persuasively wly identified genes increases steadily: most recently we identified MGM
E1  demonstrated. to be the first exonuclease involved in mitE oS chH onG d r2 ia0 l 1 re3 p l| ic P atA ioR n I (S K, o F rnR bA lumN CE W | eW dW emW on. sE trS aH teG d . tO haR t G activation of non-canonical mitochondrial-de2 pe9 n-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C07 .5 Exome sequencing Reveals Mutated NUBPL in Patients with Complex I dent PCD causes the Microphthalmia with Linear Skin lesions (MLS), a de- Deficiency and a Distinct MRI Pattern velopmental disorder associated to mutations in HCCS, encoding the Holo- S. H. Kevelam1, R. J. Rodenburg2, N. I. Wolf1, P. Ferreira3, R. J. Lunsing4, L. G. Nijtmans2, A. Cytochrome c-type synthase, which incorporates the heme-c moieties in the Mitchell5, H. A. Arroyo6, D. Rating7, A. Vanderver8, C. G. M. van Berkel1, T. E. M. Abbink1, P. mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC). By generating a Medakafish model Heutink1, M. S. van der Knaap1; that recapitulates the MLS phenotype, we demonstrate that hccs downregu- 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, lation, induced PCD in the central nervous system (CNS) via an apoptosome- 4University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Hutt Valley Hospital, independent caspase-9 activation triggered by MRC impairment and over- Lower Hutt, New Zealand, 6Hospital de Pediatria, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7University production of reactive oxygen species. Children‘s Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Children‘s National Medical Center, We then screened MRC-related genes in HCCS-negative MLS patients, and Washington, DC, United States. found deleterious de novo mutations in two simplex cases and a nonsense mutation, which segregates with the disease in a familial case, in COX7B en- coding a poorly characterized subunit of Cytochrome c oxidase (COX), the There are many rare childhood leukoencephalopathies and till this day a MRC complex IV. We demonstrated that COX7B is indispensable for COX high percentage of cases remain without a specific diagnosis. We used MRI- assembly, COX activity and mitochondrial respiration. Finally downregula- pattern recognition analysis to select a group of patients with a similar, tion of cox7B in medaka resulted in microcephaly and microphthalmia that novel MRI-pattern and subsequently performed whole-exome-sequencing recapitulated the MLS phenotype and demonstrated an essential function of to identify the mutated gene. Patients’ fibroblasts were examined for bio- complex IV activity in vertebrate CNS development. chemical consequences of the mutant protein. Six patients from five unre- These data indicate an evolutionary conserved role for MRC in organogene- lated families were identified with a similar MRI-pattern showing predo- sis and uncover a group of mitochondrial diseases hallmarked by an apopto- minant abnormalities of the cerebellar cortex, deep cerebral white mNatUtBer- s Ais o. - rId ln erd oirv :i ee Nnr oi :a Nb eno n Doer .m aVa c. l ov d nae in sv :Re Nlao ohp ndm ee .n e G:n .Nt . Co hne e. V i:. NT oir na en .t Ai: .N Ro on me. I n. oC :o Nn ote n: N Ron e T. M te. aPnLd, corpus callosum. The four tested patients had a complex І deficiency. M n . . I s a e . . a : Exome-sequencing performed in two patients revealed mutations in None. I. D‘Amato: None. I. Maystadt: None. S. Demuth: None. A. Zvulunov: None. I. Ferrero: None. P. Goffrini: None. P. Bovolenta: None. K. Kutsche: encoding an iron-sulfur cluster assembly factor for NcoUmBPpLlex І. In one of None. M. Zeviani: None. B. Franco: None. the two patients only one heterozygous missense mutation was detected. Sanger sequencing revealed theN sUeBcoPnLd mutation, and mutations in all other patients. Upon identification of the mutated gene, the MRI of the previously published case with mutations was analyzed, which sho- 
C07 .4 wed exactly the same pattern. A decreased amount of NUBPL protein and Mutation of the iron-sulfur cluster assembly IBA57 gene causes lethal fully assembled complex I was found in patients’ fibroblasts. Analysis of the myopathy and encephalopathy. effect of mutated NUBPL on the assembly of the periphNeUraBlP aLrm of complex I N. Ajit Bolar1, A. V. Vanlander2, C. Wilbrecht3, N. Van der Aa1, J. Smet2, B. De Paepe2, G. Vandeweyer1, F. Kooy1, F. Eyskens4, E. De Latter2, G. Delanghe5, P. Govaert5, J. G. Leroy2, R. indicated that NUBPL is involved in assembly of ir,o n-sulfur clusters early in Lill3,6,7, R. Van Coster2, L. Van Laer1, B. Loeys1; the complex I assembly pathway. Our data show that mutations are 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Antwerp associated with a unique, consistent MRI-pattern which facilitates fast dia- University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of gnosis and obviates the need for other tests. Whole-exome sequencing can Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, University Hospital Ghent, provide a quick diagnosis, however, caution is warranted because certain Ghent, Belgium, 3Institut für Zytobiologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, m Su.Hta. tKioenvse lcaamn: b Be. mReissseeadrc.h Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Germany, 4Provinciaal Centrum voor de Opsporing van Metabole Aandoeningen (PCMA), consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Department of Pediatrics/Metabolic Diseases, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, ZonMw TOP grant 91211005. R.J. Rodenburg: None. N.I. Wolf: None. P. Antwerp University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Department Ferreira: None. R.J. Lunsing: None. L.G. Nijtmans: None. A. Mitchell: of Neonatology, Paola Children’s Hospital ZNA Middelheim, Antwerp, Belgium, 6Max- None. H.A. Arroyo: None. D. Rating: None. A. Vanderver: None. C.G.M. van Planck-Institut für terrestrische Mikrobiologie, Marburg, Germany, 7LOEWE Zentrum für Berkel: None. T.E.M. Abbink: None. P. Heutink: None. M.S. van der Knaap: Synthetische Mikrobiologie SynMikro, Marburg, Germany. None. The iron sulphur [Fe-S] proteins play an important role in redox reactions 
C07 .6 of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. In this study, we have identi- Pioglitazone prevents mitochondria dysfunction and halts axonal fied two siblings from consanguineous parents, who died perinatally from a degeneration in a mouse model of X-adrenoleukodystrophy condition characterised by generalised hypotonia, respiratory insufficiency, A. Pujol1, L. Morato1, J. Galino1, M. Ruiz1, M. Portero-Otin2, R. Pamplona3, I. Ferrer4; anthrogryposis, microcephaly, congenital brain malformations and hyper- 1IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 2University of Lleida, Barcelona, Spain, 3University of Lleida, glycinemia. Analysis of the catalytic activities of the mitochondrial respira- Lleida, Spain, 4Institute of Neuropathology of Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. tory complexes I and II indicated deficiency in sIkBeAle5t7al muscle, suggestive of an inborn error in the mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) biosynthesis pathway. Homozygosity mapping revealed the gene, which is known Accumulating evidence shows that oxidative stress and mitochondria dys- to be involved in the biosIyBnAth5e7sis of mitochondrial [4Fe-4S] proteins and function play a major role in the pathogenesis of axonal degeneration in present in the largest homozygous region on chromosome 1, as a candidate multifactorial conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson disease or gene. Mutation analysis of identified a c.941 A>C transversion causing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. We have addressed the interplay of both no- the aminoacid change p.Gln314Pro. Biochemical analysis of skeletal musc- xious factors in adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD, OMIM: 300100), a peroxiso- le and skin fibroblasts of affected individuals indicated severely decreased mal disorder caused by loss of function of the ABCD1 transporter, leading to amounts of IBA57 and a decrease in various 4Fe-4S proteins and in proteins accumulation of very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA) in organs and plasma. covalently linked to lipoic acid. IBA57 depleted HIeBLAa5 c7ells reflected bioche- The mouse model for X-ALD exhibits a late-onset neurological phenotype micaIl BdAe5fe7cts consistent with observations in patient derived cells. Defects with locomotor disability and axonopathy in spinal cords resembling the could be rescued by the introduction of wildtype and partially by mu- most common phenotype of adrenomyeloneuropathy patients. Recently, tant . Further functional analysis revealed an increased sensitivity of we identified oxidative damage and energetic failure as an early event in mutant IBA57 to degradation via proteolysis. Our findings suggest that the life, and the excess of VLCFA as a generator of radical oxygen species (ROS) mutation leads to functional impairment and degradation below physiolo- and oxidative damage in X-ALD. Here, we uncover a mitochondrial impair- gically critical levels, resulting in the condition observed in the patients. In ment and depletion due to an impairment of mitochondria biogenesis via conclusion, we have identified a novel metabolic disorder presenting with a the PPARγ/PGC-1α pathway, which is also observed in brain white matter of lethal complex biochemical phenotype caused by defective assembly of the X-ALD patients. We thus investigated the therapeutic effect of pioglitazone, INSC. A pjrito Bteoilna,r I:B NAo5n7e.. A.V. Vanlander: None. C. Wilbrecht: None. N. Van der an antidiabetic drug and a PPARγ agonist, in a preclinical test. Oral admini- Aa: None. J. Smet: None. B. De Paepe: None. G. Vandeweyer: None. F. Kooy: stration of pioglitazone restored mitochondria DNA and protein contents None. F. Eyskens: None. E. De Latter: None. G. Delanghe: None. P. Govaert: None. J.G. Leroy: None. R. Lill: None. R. Van Coster: None. L. Van Laer: and expression of master regulators of biogenesis, neutralized oxidative da- None. B. Loeys: None. mage to pro+teins and DNA, and reversed bioenergetic failure in terms of ATP levels, NAD/NADH ratios, and pyruvate kinase activities. Most importantly, the treatment halted locomotor disability and axonal damage in X-ALD mice. These results constitute a strong rationale for a phase II multicentric clinical tAri.a Pl ufojor la: dNroenneo. mL.y Meloornaetou:r oNpoanteh. yJ .p Gataileinnots: .None. M. Ruiz: None. M. Portero- Otin: None. R. Pamplona: None. I. Ferrer: None. 30 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C08 .1 Mutations in the microtubule-associated protein EM
L1 /Eml1 lead to DEAF1 ectopic progenitors during cortical development and heterotopia in ted gene in three patients with non-syndromic ID with severe speech im- mouse and human pairment and we provide supportive functional evidence that links F. Phan Dinh Tuy1, M. Kielar2, C. Lebrand2, K. Poirier3, R. Olaso4, S. Bizzotto1, K. to the patients phenotype. Boutourlinsky1, N. Bahi-Buisson5, A. Le Moing6, C. de Juan7, V. Borrell7, P. Berquin6, W. R1eferences Carpentier8, E. Welker2, J. Chelly3, A. Croquelois2, F. Francis1; 2Vissers et al, 2010, Nat Genet 1Institut du Fer à Moulin, INSERM UMR-S 839, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, 3Ligt et al, 2012, N Engl J Med France, 2Department Clinical Neuroscience, Department Cell Biology and Morphology, AR.aTu. cVhu letot -avla, 2n0 
S1 il2fh, Loaunt:c Netone. B. Nijhof: None. P.J. Jensik: None. C. Zweier: Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, None. J. de Ligt: None. B.W.M. van Bon: None. D. Lugtenberg: None. J.A. Switzerland, 3INSERM U1016, Université René Descartes, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, Veltman: None. H. van Bokhoven: None. H.G. Brunner: None. A. Rauch: 4Plateforme de Transcriptomique, Laboratoire de Recherche Translationnelle, CEA/ None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. M.W. Collard: None. A. Schenck: None. B. DSV/IG-Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 5Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Menten: None. B.B.A. de Vries: None. Neurologie Pédiatrique, APHP, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 6CHU Amiens- Nord, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Amiens, France, 7Instituto de Neurociencias, CSIC and Universidad Miguel Hernandez, Alicante, Spain, 8Plateforme postgénomique Pitié- Salpêtrière, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France. 
C08 .3 Mutations in TTI2 reveal a role for Triple T complex in human brain development Cortical malformations, such as lissencephaly and subcortical band hete- M. Langouët1, A. Saadi2, G. Rieunier3, S. Moutton1, K. Siquier-Pernet1, M. Fernet4, P. rDootuobplieac o(rStBinH)D, CarXe aLsISsociateda lpwhiath1 -tinutbeulllienc tuTaUl BdAi1saAbility and pharmaco- Nitschke5, A. Munnich1, M. Stern3, M. Chaouch2, L. Colleaux1; resistant epilepsy. Mouse mutant models for three genes mutated in SBH, 1INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut IMAGINE, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Département de Neurologie, ( ), 1 and HeC(o ), do not show abnor- Etablissement Hospitalier Spécialisé de Benaknoun, Algers, Algeria, 3Centre de mally positioned heterotopic neurons in the neocortical white matter. On Recherche, Institut Curie et INSERM U830, Paris, France, 4Centre de Recherche, Institut the other hEamnld, the spontaneously ariseHne Co mouse mutant displays this Curie et INSERM U612, Centre Universitaire, 91405 Orsay Cedex, Orsay, France, phenotype. By whole genome genotyping and gene expression studies, we 5Plateforme de Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut identified 1 as the mutated gene in E MmLice. A retrotransposon inser- IMAGINE, Paris, France. tion disrupts the gene, creating abEemrrlant transcripts. Compound heterozy- gous mutations were identified in human 1 in one family showing an atypical form of giant heterotopia. 1 codes for a microtuHbeuCleo-associated Tel2-interacting proteins 1 and 2 (TTI1 and TTI2) physically interact with protein, not previously studied in cortical development. We show its ex- TE
L2  (telomere maintenance 2) to form a conserved trimeric complex called pression in proliferation zones and the cortical plate, and mice have the Triple T complex. This complex is a master regulator of phosphoinosi- ectopic proliferation, which seems to be the primary cause of heterotopia in tide-3-kinase-related protein kinase (PIKKs) abundance and DNA damage this model. Eml1 shows a punctate labeling, partially associated with micro- response signaling. Using a combination of autTozTyI2g osity mapping and high- tubules in both progenitors and post-mitotic neurons. A patient missense throughput sequencing in a large Algerian consanguineous multiplex family, mutation affects the microtubule association. In neuronal progenitors, Eml1 we found that a missense p.I436N mutation in causes a human autoso- shows a cell cycle- dHepeCeondent localization, enriched in the midbody region mal recessive condition characterized by severe cognitive impairment, mi- during late mitosis. We thus identify a new corticogenesis gene, and stu- crocephaly, behavioral troubles, short stature, skeletal anomalies and facial dy of Eml1 and the phenotype reveal novel insights into heterotopia dysmorphic features in three affected sibs. Immunoblotting experiment sho- formation. Eml1 plays a role in neuronal progenitors and our data makes a wed a drastically impaired stability of each subunit of the Triple T complex link between ectopic progenitors in the developing cortical wall and severe in patient skin fibroblasts. Consistently, a significantly reduced steady-state h Fe. tPehroanto Dpiinah in T uhyu:m Naonn.e. M. Kielar: None. C. Lebrand: None. K. Poirier: level of the two PIKKs tested, ATM and DNA-PKcs were observed in patient None. R. Olaso: None. S. Bizzotto: None. K. Boutourlinsky: None. N. Bahi- cells. Likewise, testing the serum dependant p70-
S6 Kinase phosphorylation Buisson: None. A. Le Moing: None. C. de Juan: None. V. Borrell: None. P. we also found a defective mTOR signaling in patient cells. Combined with Berquin: None. W. Carpentier: None. E. Welker: None. J. Chelly: None. A. Croquelois: None. F. Francis: None. previous observations, these findings assess the role of the TTI2 gene in the aKeetyio wloogyrd osf intellectual disability and further support the hypothesis of a crucial role of PIKK signaling in brain development and functioning. : Intellectual disability, autozygosity mapping, exome sequen- 
C08 .2 c Min. gL, aDnNgAou dëat:m Naognee r. eAp.a Siraadi: None. G. Rieunier: None. S. Moutton: None. K. Mutations in DEAF1 cause intellectual disability with severe speech Siquier-Pernet: None. M. Fernet: None. P. Nitschke: None. A. Munnich: impairment None. M. Stern: None. M. Chaouch: None. L. Colleaux: None. A. T. Vulto-van Silfhout1, B. Nijhof1, P. J. Jensik2, C. Zweier3, J. de Ligt1, B. W. M. van Bon1, D. Lugtenberg1, J. A. Veltman1, H. van Bokhoven1,4, H. G. Brunner1, A. Rauch5,6,7, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, M. W. Collard2, A. Schenck1, B. Menten8, B. B. A. de Vries1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
C08 .4 Netherlands, 2Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Involvement of kinesin family members KIF4A and KIF5C in Carbondale, IL, United States, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen- intellectual disability and synaptic function Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Department of Cognitive Neurosciences, Radboud M. H. Willemsen1, W. Ba2, K. Poirier3, W. M. Wissink-Lindhout1, L. E. L. M. Peart-Vissers1,4, University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, A. P. M. de Brouwer1,4, H. van Bokhoven1,5,6, J. Chelly3, V. Kalscheuer2, N. Nadif-Kasri6,5, T. University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, 6Neuroscience Center Zurich, Kleefstra1,4,6; University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, 7Zurich Center of Integrative 1Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Max Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, 8Center for Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Institut Cochin, Inserm, Paris, Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. France, 4Institute of Genetic and Metabolic Disorders, RUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, RUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, RUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands. de novo Intellectual disability (IDd) ei sn oav ogenetically highly heterogeneous disorder that is frequently caused by mutations. Recently, we showed that in about 30-50%d eo fn p1o,2av,3toients mutations in known or candidate ID genes KIF genes encode different motor proteins that are supposed to have fun- can be identified. For candidate ID genes, it is often difficult to ascertain damental roles in brain functioning, development, survival and plasticity, whether the mutation is causative for the patients phenotype. To by regulating transport of cargoes along microtubules within the axons, objectively determine the association of a novel candidate gene with the dendrites and synapses of neurons. Studies in mouse models support the patients phenotype, the most important criterion is the identification of re- important functions of KIF genes in the nervous system. Reports that relate current mutations in patients with an overlapping phDeEnAoFty1pe. Therefore, wdee KIF genes to human Intellectual disability (ID) phenotypes are rare. nteosvtoed an additionaDlE cAoFh1o rt of 765 patients with unexplained ID for mutati- We report the clinical characteristics of individuals with mutations in the ons in 8 of these novel candidate ID genes, including . We identified kinesin superfamily (KIF) genes KIF4A and KIF5C identified by next gene- mutations in in three patients. All three patients showed severe ration sequencing approaches. Four males from an X-linked family with a ID with a disproportionally severely affected spDeEecAhF.1 W e used functional mutation in KIF4A (c.1489-8_1490delins10; p.?- exon skipping) showed assays to determine the impact of the mutations on the protein function. mild to moderate intellectual disability (ID) and epilepsy. Furthermore, we In addition, we performed functional studies DofE AF1 in the fruit fly and identified one familial form and one sporadic patient with de novo dominant zebrafish to further implicate this gene in the phenotype of the patient. In missense mutations in KIF5C who presented with severe ID, epilepsy and conclusion, we show that transcription faEcStoHr G 201 is3 a |r ePcAurRreISnt,l yF mRuAtNa-CEm | i Wcro Wcep Wha .Ely S. I Hnt Ger .e Ost Rin Ggly, cerebral MRIs in these cases revealed cor 3ti 1cal malformation indicative for a role of KIF5C in neuronal migration. To findABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index further supportive evidence of the involvement of KIF4A and KIF5C in ob- binding sites for Sim2. Importantly, as opposed to other regions, the promo- served ID phenotypes, we studied the effects on synaptic function of knock- ters were significantly over-represented in the list of Sim2 binding sites (p- down of these genes in rat primary neurons. At the functional level we found value 9.3E-12). A gene ontology analysis on the nearby genes revealed en- that both, Kif4a and Kif5c altered the balance between excitatory and inhi- richment for biological processes potentially related to Sim2 functions such bitory synaptic efficacy leading to changed neuronal excitability. Therefore, as transmission of nerve impulse or ectoderm development. The RNA-Seq we believe that distortion of the balance between excitatory and inhibitory transcriptome of the Sim2 expressing and non-expressing mESC is currently excitability at the synapse by KIF4A and KIF5C is a major mechanism in pa- under investigation in order to correlate the Sim2 binding sites with putati- t Mho.Hp.h Wysililoelmogsye no:f Nthoen ep.h Wen. Botay: pNeo onbe.s eKr.v Peodi riine ro: uNro cnaes.e Ws..M. Wissink- ve target genes. All together, those results suggest the role of a Sim2-related Lindhout: None. L.E.L.M. Peart-Vissers: None. A.P.M. de Brouwer: None. H. gene network in DS neuronal features and emphasize the importance of the van Bokhoven: None. J. Chelly: None. V. Kalscheuer: None. N. Nadif-Kasri: fAun. Lcteitoonuarln cehaaur:a Ncotenrei.z Gat.i Cono boef lHlisS:A N2o1n ter.a En.s Fcarilpcotinonne fta: cNtoonrse.. A. Vannier: None. T. Kleefstra: None. None. F. Santoni: None. M. Guipponi: None. C. Borel: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. 
C08 .5 Abnormal expression of sex biased genes in PCDH19-female limited 
C09 .1 epilepsy and intellectual disability (PCDH19-FLE) suggests a role for Exome sequencing of 2,000 Danish individuals and the role of rare neurosteroid hormones. coding variants in type 2 diabetes C. Tan1, C. Shard1, K. Hynes1, E. Douglas2, L. S. Nguyen1, M. Corbett1, G. Buchanan1, E. T. Sparso1, K. Lohmueller2, Q. Li3, E. Andersson1, T. Korneliussen4, A. Albrechtsen4, K. Ranieri2, R. Guerrini3, C. Marini3, S. F. Berkovic4, I. E. Scheffer4, J. Gecz1,2; Banasik1, N. Grarup1, I. Hallgrimsdottir5, K. ´Kiil1, T. Kilpeläinen1, N. Krarup1, T. Pers6, G. 1The University of Adelaide, North Adelaide, Australia, 2SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Sanchez5, T. Jørgensen7,8,9, A. Sandbæk10, T. Lauritzen10, K. Kristiansen11, S. Brunak6, Y. Li3, Australia, 3University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 4The University of Melbourne, T. Hansen1,12, J. Wang1,3,11, R. Nielsen2,4,13, O. Pedersen1,14,15; Melbourne, Australia. 1The Novo Nordisk Foundation center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, United States, 3BGI-Shenzhen, Yantian District, Shenzhen, PCDH19-Female-Limited-Epilepsy (PCDH19-FLE) is an unusual X-linked China, 4Center for Bioinformatics, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Center for Theoretical Evolutionary Genomics, University disorder that primarily affects females. PCDH19-FLE encompasses a broad of California, Berkeley, CA, United States, 6Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, clinical spectrum from early infantile epileptic encephalopathy resembling Dept. of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, 7Faculty Dravet syndrome to epilepsy with or without intellectual disability and be- of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, havioural problems, including autism. PCDH19-FLE is highly but not fully 8Faculty of Medicine, University of Aalborg, Aalborg, Denmark, 9Research Center for penetrant. We have tackled the questions of molecular pathogenesis of Prevention and Health, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 10Department PCDH19-FLE by examining the transcriptomes of primary skin fibroblasts of General Practice, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 11Department of Biology, of PCDH19-FLE females (n=12 and n=3 age and passage matched normal Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 12Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 13Department of Statistics, controls) and unaffected transmitting males (n=3 and n=3 age and passa- University of California, Berkeley, CA, United States, 14Institute of Biomedical Sciences, ge matched control males). We found that the expression of genes, which Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, normally show sex (male/female) biased expression in this cell type, was Denmark, 15Faculty of Health Sciences, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. significantly altered (observed = 43/94 vs expected = 223/19223, p=1.09 x 10-55, two-tail Fisher’s exact test). Followup studies (including additional skin fibroblast cell lines) validated at least ~60% of selected genes. From It has been hypothesized that low-frequency genetic variants in coding re- among several plausible biological candidates we focused our attention on gions of genes, in aggregate, explain a substantial fraction of the heritability the aldo-keto reductase family 1, member 
C1 -3 (AKR1
C1 -3) genes, which of common diseases. We sequence2d the exomes of 1,000 Danish cases with play crucial role in neurosteroid hormone metabolism (which skin is endo- type 2 diabetes, BMI > 27.5 kg/m, and hypertension and 1,000 controls to wed with). Additional support for steroid and neurosteroid hormone role an average depth of 56x. Simulations suggest our study has substantial sta- in the pathology of PCDH19-FLE came from the age of onset (mean ~10 tistical power to detect at least one causal gene if the heritability of these months) and offset (mean ~12.5 years) of epilepsy (n=100 patients), both of common diseases is explained by rare variants in the coding regions of a which coincide with dramatically varying sex hormone levels (onset - after limited number of genes. We applied a series of gene-based tests to detect ‘minipuberty’ and offset - with the advent of puberty). This led us to postula- such susceptibility genes. However, no gene showed a significant associati- te the neurosteroid hypothesis, which may explain PCDH19-FLE and opens on to disease risk after correcting for the number of genes analyzed. Thus, r Ce.a Tliasnti:c N oopnpeo. rCtu. Snhitaierds :f oNro tnaer.g Ke.t eHdy ntheesr: aNpoenuet.i cE i. nDtoeruvgelansti:o Nnosn.e. L.S. we can reject a model for the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes, obesity Nguyen: None. M. Corbett: None. G. Buchanan: None. E. Ranieri: None. R. Guerrini: None. C. Marini: None. S.F. Berkovic: None. I.E. Scheffer: None. J. and hypertension, where much of the missing heritability is explained by Gecz: None. r Ta.r Sep naornso-s:y Nnoonney. mKo. Luos hvmaruiaenlletsr :c Nluosntee.r Qed. Lini: aN somnea.l lE n. Aumndbeerrs soof ng:e nNeosn.e. T. Korneliussen: None. A. Albrechtsen: None. K. Banasik: None. N. Grarup: None. I. Hallgrimsdottir: None. K. ´Kiil: None. T. Kilpeläinen: None. N. Krarup: None. T. Pers: None. G. Sanchez: None. T. Jørgensen: None. A. Sandbæk: 
C08 .6 None. T. Lauritzen: None. K. Kristiansen: None. S. Brunak: None. Y. Li: None. T. Hansen: None. J. Wang: None. R. Nielsen: None. O. Pedersen: None. Identification of Single-minded 2 (Sim2) binding sites by ChIP- Seq; understanding of the regulatory network of chromosome 21 transcription factors A. Letourneau1, G. Cobellis2, E. Falconnet1, A. Vannier1, F. Santoni1, M. Guipponi1, C. 
C09 .2 Borel1, S. E. Antonarakis1,3; Haplotype sharing reveals fine-scale demographic history 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, P. Palamara1, T. Lencz2, A. Darvasi3, I. Pe‘er1, The Genome of the Netherlands Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry and General Pathology, Consortium; Seconda Università di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 3iG
E3  Institute of Genetics and Genomics of 1Columbia University, New York City, NY, United States, 2The Zucker Hillside Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Division of the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, New York City, NY, United States, 3Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Down syndrome (DS) results from trisomy of chromosome 21 (HSA21). Some DS phenotypes may be directly or indirectly related to the increased Identical-by-descent (IBD) chromosomal segments shared by pairs of indi- expression of specific HSA21 genes, in particular transcription factors. The viduals can now be reliably detected in large genomic datasets of purported- HSA21 Single-minded 2 (SIM2) transcription factor has key neurological ly unrelated samples, and summary statistics of IBD sharing were recently functions and appears therefore as a good candidate for some DS features, shown to convey information about population-level features such as de- in particular mental retardation. In order to identify the DNA binding sites mography, natural selection and heritability of common traits. We present and downstream targets of SIM2, we performed three independent chroma- analytical results for the relationship between haplotype sharing and de- tin immunoprecipitations and high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq) on a mography, and show how IBD sharing can be used to infer the demographic mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) line that stably overexpresses a Flag- history of the recent millennia, where classical methods are typically under- tagged mouse Sim2 under the control of a Tet-off system. ChIP and input powered. We analyzed 500 Ashkenazi Jewish samples, finding evidence for DNAs were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000. Reads uniquely mapped two periods of expansion, separated by a strong bottleneck. In the recon- with BWA were submitted to HOMER for the identification of Sim2 targets structed model, an effective population of tens of thousands of individuals is a3nd2 the discovery of binding site motifs. We obtainEeSdH a Glis t2 o0f 21337 3| PpuAtaRtiIvSe, FR fiA rsN t dC raE s t| i cW allW y reW du.E ceS dH toG ~.O 30R 0G founders in the 12th century A.D, then ra-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index pidly expands (exponential rate ≈ .28) to a modern population of millions of riants, 91% rare (MAF<0.5%),p 5% LF, and 4% common. In covariate-CadEjTuP- individuals. Analyzing IBD sharing in 56 Kenyan Masai, high levels of cryptic spted, single-variant LfiIxPeCd-epffects meta--8analyses , TwOeM hMav4e0 dpetected genome- relatedness are pervasive. While this may suggest a strong recent bottleneck wPVidReL 2sigpnifi-c1a0nt associations ( <A5Px1O-80A5) wpithin known GWAS signals-1:4 (exponential rate ≈ -.14), we show that a model of multiple small-sized de- ( =1.03x10 ) an-d8 ( =1.9x10AP)O fAo5r HpDL, -19 (L=
P6 L.6px10 ) and mes interacting through high migration rates, consistent with the social ( =1.7AxD1A0M)T fSoLr3 LDpL, and ( =7.8x10 -)8 for triglycerides. Th-e7- structure of this population, results in a compatible pattern of haplotype re were suggestive associations at -6 ( =9.9x10 ) and ( =4.9x10 ) sharing. We finally analyzed 498 individuals from several Dutch provinces for HDL, and ( =1.6x10 ) for LDL. LF var iCaEnTt Panaplysis employing (the Genome of Netherlands dataset) finding evidence for population grow- AagPgOrAe5gatpe tests with SKAT across aPllC iSnKd9ivipduals identified association-7s with t Ph. aPnadla smuabrsat:a Nnotinael .m T.i gLreantciozn: Nacornoes. sA t.h Deasrev garsoi:u Nposn ien. tIh. Pe er‘eecre: nNto mnei.llennia. the several pArCePviPo-6upsly-implicated genesZ NinFc6lu2d6inpg-6 ( =1.4x10 ) and MY B(P=
C21 .7 px10 ) for HDL, -a6nd c 2(or=f31.96x1p0 ) for LDL-4. NovTeMl sEiMgn1a7l1s wpere seen at ( = 3-.51x10 ) for HDL, ( =1.47x1-50 ) for choleste- 
C09 .3 rol, -5 ( =3.7x10 ) for LDL, and ( =5.9x10 ) and Signatures of selection in the Genome of the Netherlands Project ( =6.5x10 ) for triglycerides. Whole exome sequencing of a multiethnic C. C. Elbers*, S. L. Pulit*, L. C. Francioli, A. Menelaou, P. I. W. de Bakker, Genome of the sample allows evaluation of effects across the full allele frequency spectrum Netherlands Consortium, * these authors contributed equally; in coding regions and identification of novel variants contribution to lipid Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, tIr. aPitr ovkaoripaebniklioty: .None. H.M. Highland: None. X. Sim: None. A. Mahajan: Netherlands. None. A. Manning: None. M. Rivas: None. G. Atzmon: None. S. Choi: None. B.K. Cornes: None. A. Locke: None. J.C. Florez: None. P. Fontanillas: None. N. Palmer: None. E.R. Gamazon: None. I. Huh: None. H.K. Im: None. J. Kim: None. Y.J. Kim: None. C.M. Lindgren: None. T.M. Teslovich: None. T.M. The Genome of the Netherlands Project (GoNL) sequenced 250 pedigrees Frayling: None. J. Dupuis: None. J.B. Meigs: None. A.P. Morris: None. of Dutch ancestry at 12x coverage in collaboration with BGI (Shenzhen, Chi- na). Using all unrelated samples (N=498), we sought to identify regions in the Dutch genome that show unusual allele frequency spectra, which could in- 
C09 .5 dicate evidence of selection. Therefore, we calculated Tajima’s D values in Exome sequence analysis of type 2 diabetes in over 10,000 samples 100-kb windows across the genome, stratifying variants by function. from five ancestry groups: the T2D-GENES Consortium. Our results show that the mean Tajima‘s D val-u19e is lower for exonic regions, M. A. Rivas1, T. M. Teslovich2, A. Morris1, P. Fontanillas3, A. Mahajan1, X. Sim4, J. Flannick3, N. P. Burtt3; compared to non-exonic regions (p=3.6x10 ). This observation reflects 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Biostatistics and Center allele frequency distributions that are shifted toward rare variants in the- for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Broad se exonic regions, a pattern that can be explained by purifying selection. Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Department of Biostatistics and Center for Furthermore, we studied the regions showing the 5% lowest and highest Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan,, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. Tajima’s D values by looking for significant overrepresentation of sequence features, pathways and diseases genes. 1603 genes map to the 5% of regions with the lowest Tajima’s D. This group o-1f3 genes is enriched for genes wi-6th We have undertaken whole-exome sequencing of >10,000 type 2 diabetes alternative splicing products (p=4.1x10 ) and height genes (p=5.6x10 ). (T2D) cases and controls from five major ancestry groups: African American 853 genes map to the 5% regions with the highest Tajima’s D and here we (AA), East Asian (EA), European (EU), Hispanic American, and South Asi- found an o-2v5errepresentation of genes involved in olfactory transduction an (SA). The unique study design will yield a catalogue of coding variation (p=3.3x10 ) and various immune traits (P<0.001). Unsurprisingly, the across diverse populations, enabling us to: 1) identify novel T2D associati- MHC region mainly drove results in immune traits. on signals; 2) assess evidence for heterogeneity in genetic effects between Overall, we conclude that our analysis demonstrates evidence for purifying ancestries; and 3) localize causal variants for T2D. selection in exonic regions of the Dutch genome. Furthermore, our results Sequencing of the first 5,334 individuals (50% cases) of AA (N=1069), EA suggest signatures of selection for regions containing height, smell and im- (N=2163), EU (N=962), and SA (N=1140) ancestry has identified ~1.8M sin- munity genes. We are currently pursuing alternative methods for detecting gle nucleotide variants (SNVs). Only 81k (5%) are present in all four ance- g Ce.nCo. mElibce rresg*i:o Nnosn uen. dSe.Lr. ePvuolliut*t:i oNnoanrey. Ls.eCle. cFtriaonnc.ioli: None. A. Menelaou: stry groups, 81% of which have minor allele frequency (MAF) >5%. Conver- None. P.I.W. de Bakker: None. sely, the 28%, 31%, 4% and 21% of variants unique to AA, EA, EU and SA ancestries are largely rare (MAF <1%). Using fixed-effects meta-analysis of single variant association results we 
C09 .4 identified rs2233580 (p.R192H) to be associated with T2D at genome- The impact of genetic variation on lipid traits from whole exome wide significance. The association was specific to the EA samples: Korean sequences of 10,000 individuals: the T2D-GENES Consortium (p=1.4x10-4, 8% MAF) and Singapore Chinese (p=7.4x10-6, 13% MAF). The I. Prokopenko1,2, H. M. Highland3, X. Sim4, A. Mahajan2, A. Manning5,6,7, M. Rivas2, G. variant was monomorphic in AA and EU samples. It was recently shown that Atzmon8, S. Choi9, B. K. Cornes6,7, A. Locke4, J. C. Florez6,10,5, P. Fontanillas5, N. Palmer11, E. p.R192H impairs PAX4’s ability to repress transcription of insulin and glu- R. Gamazon12, I. Huh9, H. K. Im12, J. Kim9, Y. J. Kim13, C. M. Lindgren2, T. M. Teslovich4, T. M. cagon. In 5,334 samples, no low-frequency or rare causal variants have been Frayling14, J. Dupuis15,10, J. B. Meigs6, A. P. Morris2; identified using single marker or gene-level tests. 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2WTCHG, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX, United We anticipate that analysis of all 10,000 exomes (early 2013) may identify States, 4University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 5Broad Institute of MIT additional association signals for T2D and provide functional insights into and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, t Mhe.A p. aRtihvoagse: nNeosnise .a Tn.Md .g Teenseltoivc iacrhc:h Nitoencet.u Are. Mofo Trr2isD:. None. P. Fontanillas: MA, United States, 7Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 8Albert Einstein None. A. Mahajan: None. X. Sim: None. J. Flannick: None. N.P. Burtt: None. College of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 9Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 10University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 11Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem, NC, United States, 12The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 13Center for Genome Science National Institute 
C09 .6 of Health, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 14University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, Lessons learned from the NHLBI-Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) 15National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute‘s Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, S. M. Leal, on behalf of NHLB-ESP; MA, United States. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. The T2D-GENES consortium aims to identify cosmopolitan and population- The NHLBI-Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) was conceived to identify rare, specific variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and related traits. putatively functional coding variants associated with heart, lung, and blood To do this, we undertook whole-exome sequencing of >10,000 individuals related complex traits. To this end, exome sequence data was generated from five ethnic backgrounds, including African-Americans, Mexican-Ame- on 4,420 European Americans and 2,312 African Americans who are par- ricans, Europeans (Finnish and Ashkenazim), South Asians (Indian Asians ticipants in several large cohort studies. Sequenced individuals included a from London and Singapore), and East Asians (Chinese in Singapore and deeply phenotyped random sample, quantitative trait extremes of intere- Koreans), half of whom were diagnosed with T2D. We present here initial sting phenotypes (e.g., low-density lipoprotein and blood pressure) and results from 5,334 individuals (African-American, East and South Asian) for disease cases (e.g., early onset myocardial infarction or stroke). Over 80 lipids. We tested the hypothesis that low frequency (LF, MAF<5%) variants heart, lung, and blood phenotypes were available for analysis. Given that contribute to variation in lipid levels. WEe SidHenGti f2ie0d 113.8 |m PilAlioRnI Sex, oFmReA vNa-CEt h | i Ws i Ws o Wne . Eof S t Hhe G l .a Org Res Gt medical sequencing studies ever undertake 3n 3, it was necessary to develop efficient methods and pipelines for variant cal-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index ling, data quality control, analysis, and interpretation of millions of single are facing an increasing proportion of morbidity and mortality due to con- nucleotide variants from thousands of samples across multiple phenotypes. genital and genetic conditions, a rising need for genetic services to impro- These methods allowed us to identify novel associations. For instance, we ve patient outcomes and overall population health and the challenge how: discovered and validated an association between variants in the DCTN4 (i) to ensure the successful translation of genetic/genomics laboratory and gene and risk of pseudomonas infection in individuals with cystic fibrosis academic research into quality assured pathways, (ii) to develop a service (n=91, p<2.5x10-6). We also replicated several known associations across delivery infrastructure that leads to equitable and affordable access to high a number of traits [e.g., variants in the APOB gene are associated with LDL quality genetic/genomic testing services. (p<2.5 x 10-6, n=3342) and the LEPR gene is associated with C-reactive Objectives: To document and compare current practices and the state of protein (p<2.5x10-6, n=1791)]. The ability to detect associations was very genetic service provision in: Argentina, Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Oman, dependent on the genetic architecture. NHLBI-ESP not only provides novel Philippines and South Africa and to identify current knowledge gaps and information on the genetic etiology of several heart, lung, and blood related unmet service needs. traits, but also offers guidance on using exome sequencing to identify rare Methods: A standardized survey that is the first of its kind worldwide that v Sa.rMia. nLtesa al:s Nsoocniea.ted with complex traits. allows comparison of services across a number of key dimensions by using a core set of indicators selected by the GenTEE consortium for their rele- vance. 
C10 .1 Results: Underfunded fragmented public services, increasing out-of-pocket From personal genetic counseling to public health screening: The expenses for genetic testing services, concentration of services in main cities BRCA Opportunity and skill gaps result in inequitable services or delayed access. The develop- S. Lieberman1, A. Tomer1, A. Ben-Chetrit2, O. Olsha3, T. Zalut4, A. Lahad5, E. Levy-Lahad1; ment of services in the private sector is opportunistic and mostly technology 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2IVf unit, and market driven. There is a marked lack of standard operating procedures Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Surgery Department, Shaare Zedek and agreed quality assessment processes for new technologies. Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Emergency Unit, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Discussion: International collaborative networks can provide support for Jerusalem, Israel, 5Public Health Department, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, capacity building and help to strengthen the provision of quality genetic/ Jerusalem, Israel. gI.e Nnoipmpiecr ts:e Nrvoincee.s A i.n C ehmriesrtigainnsgo enc:o Nnoonmei. eDs..D.G. Horovitz: None. R. Kamal BRCA1/2 Raouf: None. C.D. Padilla: None. V. Penchaszadeh: None. A. Rajab: None. I.C. Verma: None. N. Zhong: None. L. Gribaldo: None. U. Kristoffersson: None. J. carriers have increased breast/ovarian cancer risks and are iden- Schmidtke: None. tified based on personal/familial historyB, RthCrAo1u/g2h Cancer Genetics clinics providing both pre- and post-test counseling. Among Ashkenazi Jews (AJ) there is a high frequency (2.5%) of three mutations, and ~40% of 
C10 .3 carriers have no significant family history. These exceptional characteristics Incidental findings in research: National Health Service Research suggest that in AJ, BRCA screening fulfills WHO screening criteria. However, Ethics Committee member perspectives. the traditional counseling process is difficult to implement on a large scale. L. M. Jackson, L. Goldsmith, A. O‘Connor, H. Skirton; We aimed to examine the feasibility of BRCA screening in Israel, using an Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom. alternate counseling model. Screening was offered to healthy AJ, age >30, in various medical settings, without pre-test counseling. Risk assessment was based on a self-reported Genetic healthcare is in the midst of a transition towards genome-wide tech- family history questionnaire. Only carriers and high risk participants recei- nologies, driven by the increasing availability of affordable sequencing. The ved post-test counseling. Feelings, knowledge and attitudes toward testing possibility of discovering genetic and genomic incidental findings, outside were examined using questionnaires at 2 weeks and 6 months. the scope of the initial objective but with potential health implications, is 1,561/2600 (60%) individuals agreed to be screened, and 28 carriers significant when utilising such an approach. (1.8%) were identified. Over 90% were satisfied with participation. Mean Issues concerning the obligations to search for and report these findings are knowledge score was 70%. Post-test stress was reported by 1.5% at time 2 extensively discussed in opinion articles, commentaries and ethical discus- weeks but resolved in all by 6 months. Only 1% opposed BRCA population sions. However there is a paucity of primary research data available for ana- screening. Screening led to counseling in 423 (27%) high risk participants lysis as evidenced by a recent systematic review of empirical research that who had not been previously referred. 39% of carriers had non-suggestive included only four relevant studies. family history and would not have been identified without screening. Following on from our work with members of the public and genetic coun- Lack of pre-test counseling is unorthodox, but our results suggest high le- sellors, in this phase of the study we sought the opinions of United Kingdom vels of satisfaction and coping with this process. These results will inform National Health Service Research Ethics Committee members (n=30) who f Su.t uLrieeb iemrmplaenm: eNnotnaeti.o An. oTfo gmeenre: tNico naed.v Aan. Bceesn i-nCthoe tthriet: pNuobnleic. Ohe. aOlltshh aar:e na. are responsible for approving protocols for research studies. Semi-struc- None. T. Zalut: None. A. Lahad: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None. tured telephone interviews were conducted and transcripts were analysed using thematic analysis to identify common themes. Participants discussed the requirement for extensive information and ap- 
C10 .2 propriate consent forms to facilitate informed decision making, support for Drivers, barriers and opportunities for genetic testing services in return of clinically actionable findings and the need for the researcher to emerging economies: the GenTEE (Genetic Testing in Emerging take responsibility for disclosure decisions, although there was no consen- Economies) project sus on any one issue. Participants were divided on whether patient autono- I. Nippert1, A. Christianson2, D. D. G. Horovitz3, R. Kamal Raouf4, C. D. Padilla5, V. my or patient wellbeing should take precedence. Penchaszadeh6, A. Rajab7, I. C. Verma8, N. Zhong9, L. Gribaldo10, U. Kristoffersson11, J. This study provided a useful insight into the opinions of the ethics commit- Schmidtke12; tee members. However it is clear that guidelines on the issue are essential to 1Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany, 2Division of Human Genetics, e Ln.Msu. rJea ecqkusoitna:b Nleo rnees. eLa. rGcho ledtshmicisth d: eNcoisnieo.n As. aOc‘rCoossn nthoer: U NKo.ne. H. Skirton: National Health Laboratory Service & University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, None. South Africa, 3Instituto Nacional de Saúde da Mulher, Criança e Adolescente - Instituto Fernandes Figueira/Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 4Institute of Postgraduate Childhood Studies, Ain-Shams University, Cairo, Egypt, 5Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine and Philippine General Hospital; Institute of Human 
C10 .4 Genetics, National Institutes of Health, University of the Philippines Manila, Manila, Preferences for priority setting criteria in genetic testing: a discrete Philippines, 6Centre of Genetics and Public Health. Department of Health Sciences, choice experiment Universidad Nacional de La Matanza, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7Genetic Unit, Directorate F. Severin1, W. Hess2, J. Schmidtke3, A. Mühlbacher4, P. Meyer5, W. Rogowski1,6; General of Health Affairs, Ministry of Health, Muscat, Oman, 8Centre of Medical Genetics, 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Rajender Nagar, New Delhi, India, 9Peking University Center Institute of Health Economics and Health Care Management (IGM), Neuherberg, of Medical Genetics, Beijing, China, 10Institute for Health and Consumer Protection, Germany, 2Lund University, Sweden, Department of Economics and Centre for Economic European Commission Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy, 11Department of Clinical Demography, Lund, Sweden, 3Hannover Medical School, Institute for Human Genetics, Genetics, University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden, 12Institute of Human Genetics, Hanover, Germany, 4Hochschule Neubrandenburg, IGM - Institut Gesundheitsökonomie Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. und Medizinmanagement, Neubrandenburg, Germany, 5University Medicine Rostock, Institute of Medical Genetics, Rostock, Germany, 6Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Background: Due to the epidemiological transition, the emerging economies o3f 
C4 hina, East Asia, India, Latin America, the MiddElSe HEaGst 2an0d1 
S3 o u| tPh AARfriIcSa, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Clinical Center, Munich, Germany. E.J.F. Houwink: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; part-time work as a general practitioner. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; This article is the result of a research project of the Centre for Society and the Life Given the need of many European health care systems to contain costs of Sciences in The Netherlands, funded by the Netherlands Genomics Initiative.. L. public health care, decisions about prioritizing genetic tests may have to be Henneman: None. A.M. Muijtjens: None. S.R. van Teeffelen: None. J. Rethans: made. Different criteria have been proposed to guide the process of priority None. L. van der Jagt: None. G. Dinant: None. C. van der Vleuten: None. C.T. setting, but little is known about the relative weights that should be assigned Schrander-Stumpel: None. H. Meijers-Heijboer: None. M.C. Cornel: None. to them in decision making. This study assesses stakeholder preferences for weighting these criteria in order to support priority setting decision making throughout Europe. In a discrete choice experiment respondents made bi- 
C10 .6 nary choices between testing options that were described by medical and The psychological impact of cryptic chromosomal abnormalities non-medical criteria. Attributes considered included severity of the disease, diagnosis announcement. risk for the disease, aim of the test, medical benefit of the test, and costs of F. Houdayer1, M. Gargiulo2,3, M. Frischmann4, A. Labalme1, E. Decullier5,6,7, M. Cordier1, S. the test. Responses from 594 participants (including 171 clinical geneticists, Dupuis-Girod1, G. Lesca1,6,8, M. Till1, D. Sanlaville1,6,8, P. Edery1,6,8, M. Rossi1; 151 laboratory scientists, 83 academic researchers, and 98 patient repre- 1Service de Génétique, Centre de référence des Anomalies du Développement, Hospices sentatives) were analysed. The most valued attribute levels were a proven Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 2Institut de myologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, medical benefit of the test, high risk for having the disease, and low costs of Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire de psychologie the test. Some preferences differed between clinicians, patients, and other clinique, psychopathologie et psychanalyse (EA 4056) Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Association Française contre les myopathies, Evry, genetic experts. While clinicians attached greater value on attribute levels France, 5Unité de méthodologie en recherche clinique, Pôle IMER, Hospices Civils de Lyon, referring to risk for having the disease and proven medical benefit of the Lyon, France, 6Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 7Université de Lyon, EA santé-individus- tests, patients and other stakeholders had increased preferences for testing société, Lyon, France, 8INSERM, U1028; CNRS, UMR5292; TIGER Team., Lyon, France. highly severe conditions. Priority weights determined by scientific methods may help to improve the consistency of priority setting in genetics. Limita- tions include that the weights might vary by context, and that evidence for The aim of this qualitative study was to describe the psychological impact of o Fp. eSreavteiorinna: lNizoinneg. tWhe. Hcreistesr: iNa oisn eli.m J.i tSecdh fmorid mtkoes:t N goennee.t Aic. tMesüthsl.bacher: the diagnosis announcement of pathogenic Copy Number Variations (pCN- None. P. Meyer: None. W. Rogowski: None. Vs). We performed semi-structured interviews of 60 parents of 41 affected children and 5 clinical geneticists who announced the diagnoses. Medical doctors emphasized their difficulties in announcing diagnoses made 
C10 .5 by Chromosomal Microarray (CMA). The diagnosis of the best characterized Effects of multifaceted oncogenetics training for general practitioners microdeletion syndromes, defined by patronymic names, is generally clini- E. J. F. Houwink1,2, L. Henneman1, A. M. Muijtjens3, S. R. van Teeffelen1, J. Rethans4, L. van cally suspected and confirmed by Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization analy- der Jagt5, G. Dinant2, C. van der Vleuten3, C. T. Schrander-Stumpel6, H. Meijers-Heijboer7, sis. The pCNVs diagnosed by CMA, often named after cytogenetic formulas, M. C. Cornel1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Community Genetics, EMGO Institute for are overall rarer and their phenotype and prognosis are less characterized: Health and Care Rese, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2School for Public Health and Primary this can make doctors feel less confident in the diagnosis announcement. Care, Department of General Practice, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, In the presence of a patronymic name, 83% of parents were able to define 3Department of Educational Development and Research, Faculty of Health, Medicine their child’s disease. The announcement of pCNVs named after cytogenetic and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Skillslab, Faculty formulas, on the contrary, did not appear to facilitate a mental representa- of Health, Medicine & Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, tion of the disease, and the majority of parents found it difficult to provide 5The Dutch College of General practitioners (NHG), Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department a clear description of the disease. For 13% of them, the genetic diagnosis of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht UMC GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology Governor Kremers Centre, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, had “no meaning”; in some cases, the genotype-phenotype correlation was 7Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center and Department of called into question. de novo Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The announcement of inherited pCNVs can increase the feeling of parental guilt. The disclosure of pCNVs can induce a feeling of “breakage” in the mental representation of the parent-child vertical transmission. Context In conclusion, our study shows that the disclosure of pCNVs has a signi- Identification of patients at risk for hereditary cancers is essential to inform ficant psychological impact: a multidisciplinary approach to the diagnosis decisions about early screening, genetic testing, and pre-symptomatic risk announcement, including psychological support, should be systematically reducing options. However, if non-genetic specialists (e.g. general practitio- wF.a Hrroaundtaeyde.r: None. M. Gargiulo: None. M. Frischmann: None. A. Labalme: None. E. Decullier: None. M. Cordier: None. S. Dupuis-Girod: None. G. Lesca: ners (GPs)) are to make an effective contribution in this area, competencies None. M. Till: None. D. Sanlaville: None. P. Edery: None. M. Rossi: None. need to be upgraded. Objective To investigate whether multifaceted oncogenetics training for GPs sustai- nably improves knowledge and consultation skills, and to evaluate partici- 
C11 .1 pants’ satisfaction with the training and perceived applicability learned. The 3D topographic mapping of genetic variations in treatment naïve Interventions advanced ovarian cancer 1) Genetics e-learning Continuing Professional Development (G-eCPD) mo- M. S. de Pagter1, M. Hoogstraat1, G. A. Cirkel1, J. Kreeftmeijer1, C. C. Lee2, E. Levandowsky2, T. Guy1, K. Duran1, R. van ‚t Slot1, G. N. Jonges1, S. van Lieshout1, M. P. J. dule aimed at improving GPs’ oncogenetics knowledge Lolkema1, P. O. Witteveen1, R. P. Zweemer1, M. J. Koudijs1, I. J. Nijman1, E. E. Voest1, T. T. 2) Four-hour interactive live training module covering oncogenetic clinical Harkins2, E. Cuppen1, W. P. Kloosterman1; skills (family history, risk assessment, and efficient referral). 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States. Evaluation Methods Two parallel-group pre-post-retention (6-month follow-up for G-eCPD, 3-month follow-up for live module) controlled group intervention trials Ovarian cancer (OC) is a leading cause of death from gynaecological malig- (standardized patients, checklists and validated questionnaires) were con- nancies, with approximately 225,000 new cases and 140,000 deaths repor- ducted. 168 GPs working in the Dutch primary care setting responded to ted worldwide yearly. OC has a unique intra-abdominal metastatic spread an email invitation and were randomly assigned to intervention or control and is associated with high morbidity, over 70% of patients present with groups, evaluating the G-eCPD module (n=80, 44 GPs completed all measu- advanced disease at diagnosis. Advances in genome sequencing have expan- rements) or the live module (n=88, 56 GPs completed all measurements). ded our understanding of the complexity of carcinogenesis and have given Results insight into inter- and intra-individual heterogeneity of cancer genomes. There was a significant follow-up improvement in oncogenetic knowledge Here, we present the first systematic and comprehensive study on 3D topo- (G-eCPD) and consultation skills (live module) after the intervention. Satisf- graphy of structural variations, point mutations and RNA expression within action and self-perceived applicability was high. tumours. We obtained tissue from 8-20 primary and metastatic sites per Conclusions patient from three treatment-naïve stage III/IV OC patients. Structural- and The training proved to be a feasible and satisfactory method to achieve su- copy number variations and their effect on gene expression are detected stained with high sensitivity by a combination of next-generation sequencing tech- improvement of oncogenetic knowledge and consultation skills. This educa- niques. Bioinformatic cross-sample analysis reveals extensive heterogeneity tional framework can inform future training activities for GPs and potential- on multiple levels between primary and metastatic lesions within one pati- ly other medical professionals to enhance genetics-related consultation and E imS pH roG i2 ng0 m1 e3 i| P alA caR reIS , FRANCEe |n Wt. PWhyWlog.eEnSeHticG a.nOalRysGis further revealed two very distinct evolutio 3na 5ry decision making with the ultimate aim of v d c .ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index None. A. Rosenwald: None. M. Rosolowski: None. M. Schilhabel: None. S. Schreiber: None. P.F. Stadler: None. M. Szczepanowski: None. L. Trümper: paths: a more linear evolution in one patient and a parallel evolution pattern None. M. Weniger: None. R. Siebert: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, in the other two. In the latter, a branching event occurring very early in tu- collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (support codes mour development has led to highly diverge metastatic clones differing both 01KU1002A to 01KU1002J). in structural variation and point mutation content. This finding was surpri- sing, as these genetic differences were not expected based upon the histo- logical profiles. Our study provides a foundation of experimental methods able to generate evolutionary models for cancer, leading to the identification 
C11 .3 o Mf .gSe.n deet iPca dgrtievre:r Ns ofoner .t Mum. Hoouor gfostrrmaaatt:i oNno naen.d G m.Ae. tCasirtkaetil:c Nsponreea. dJ.. FAS/FASL pathways is impaired in chordoma and is involved in Kreeftmeijer: None. C.C. Lee: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life notochord development and regression Technologies. E. Levandowsky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; L. Ferrari1, A. Pistocchi1,2, A. Calastretti1, L. Libera1, N. Boari3, G. Canti1, P. Mortini3, F. Life Technologies. T. Guy: None. K. Duran: None. R. van ‚t Slot: None. G.N. Cotelli2, P. Riva1; Jonges: None. S. van Lieshout: None. M.P.J. Lolkema: None. P.O. Witteveen: 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli Studi None. R.P. Zweemer: None. M.J. Koudijs: None. I.J. Nijman: None. E.E. di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Voest: None. T.T. Harkins: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Neurochirurgia, Istituto Scientifico e Università Vita Technologies. E. Cuppen: None. W.P. Kloosterman: None. Salute, IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy. 
C11 .2 Chordoma, a malignant bone tumor arising from notochord remnants, is The Genomic Landscape of Somatic Mutations in Subtypes of characterized by unforeseeable prognosis and chemoresistance. Since the Germinal-Center derived B-cell Lymphomas apoptotic pathway mediated by FAS-FASL was found to be involved in no- M. Schlesner1, J. Richter2, O. Ammerpohl2, S. H. Bernhart3, A. Borkhardt4, B. Brors1, tochord regression, we studied their expression in 31 chordomas and in B. Burkhardt5,6, A. Claviez7, M. Dreyling8, S. Eberth9, J. Eils1, R. Eils1,10, S. Haas11, M. the U-CH1 cell line. The lack of FASL expression in most of the chordomas Hansmann12, K. Hezaveh4, J. Hoell4, S. Hoffmann3, M. Hummel13, D. Karsch14, W. Klapper15, and the detection of FAS anti-apoptotic, besides the pro-apoptotic isoform, J. Korbel16, U. Kostezka17, M. Kreuz18, D. Kube9, R. Küppers19, D. Langenberger3, C. in both tumors and U-CH1 cells, are consistent with Fas/Fasl pathway in- Lawerenz1, E. Leich20, D. Lenze13, P. Lichter1, M. Loeffler18, P. Moeller21, B. Radlwimmer1, S. Radomski1, M. Rohde6, P. Rosenstiel22, A. Rosenwald20, M. Rosolowski18, M. Schilhabel22, S. activation, also supported by the prevalent detection of the Caspase 3 and Schreiber23, P. F. Stadler24, M. Szczepanowski15, L. Trümper9, M. Weniger19, R. Siebert2; Caspase 8 inactive forms. Moreover, we observed that apoptosis was indu- 1German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 2Inst. of Human ced in U-CH1 cells following treatments with soluble Fasl, besides the in- Genetics, University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 3Transcriptome Bioinformatics, Leipzig, creasing of active Caspase 8. To elucidate the role of FAS/FASL pathway in Germany, 4Dpt. of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology a. Clinical Immunology, H.-Heine- chordoma development, we started in vivo studies on zebrafish. fas and fasl University, Duesseldorf, Germany, 5University Hosp. Münster - Pediatric Hematology homologue genes were found to be maternally expressed during develop- a. Oncology, Muenster, Germany, 6University Hosp. Giessen - Pediatric Hematology ment and fas in all zygotic stages, while fasl from 48 hours post fertilization. a. Oncology, Giessen, Germany, 7Dpt. of Pediatrics, Univ. Med. Centre, Kiel, Germany, 8Dpt. of Medicine III , University Hosp., Munich, Germany, 9Dpt. of Hematology a. We then detected fasl expression in notochord, muscles and central nervous Oncology, University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 10Dpt. for Bioinformatics a. system at 5 days post fertilization by immunohistochemistry. Following fas Functional Genomics, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 11F.-Ebert-Hospital, and fasl knock down by morpholino oligos, we observed notochord anoma- Neumuenster, Germany, 12Senckenberg Inst. of Pathology, University of Frankfurt, lies such as packed notochordal cells, curved bodies and bent tail. Moreover, Frankfurt a. M., Germany, 13Inst. of Pathology, Charité, Berlin, Germany, 14Dpt. of Int. the notochord morphology was characterized by bigger notochordal cells Medicine II, Univ. Med. Centre, Kiel, Germany, 15Hematopathology Sect., University compared to the control and the perinotochordal sheath showed an anoma- Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 16EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany, 17CCCU, University Hosp. Ulm, Ulm, lous wavy strand. The obtained results strongly suggest the implication of Germany, 18Inst. for Med. Informatics Statistics and Epidemiology, Leipzig, Germany, 19Inst. of Cell Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 20Inst. of Pathology, FAS/FASL in chordoma tumorigenesis, providing new insights on notochord University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 21Inst. of Pathology, Ulm University, Ulm, development/regression and helping to address the identification of chor- Germany, 22Inst. of Clin. Mol. Biology, University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 23Dpt. of General Int. d Lo. mFear rpahrai:r Nmoanceo. lAog. iPciaslt otacrcgheit: sN.one. A. Calastretti: None. L. Libera: None. N. Medicine, University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 24Dpt. of Computer Science a. Interdiscip. Center Boari: None. G. Canti: None. P. Mortini: None. F. Cotelli: None. P. Riva: None. of Bioinformatics, Leipzig, Germany. 
C11 .4 Germinal-center B-cell derived lymphomas (GCB-lymphomas) are the most SDHB mutations link pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma mailgnancy common B-cell lymphomas. They include follicular (FL), diffuse large B-cell to epithelial to mesenchymal transition, both in human tumors and in (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphomas (BL), as well as intermediate DLBCL/BL SDHB-/- chromaffin cells (IL). In the framework of International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) C. Loriot1,2, M. Domingues3,2, A. Berger4,5, N. Burnichon1,2,6, C. Martinelli1,2, L. Vescovo7, E. the ICGC MMML-Seq-Project funded by the German Federal Ministry of Edu- Letouzé7, J. Sael4,5, L. Larue3,2, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1,2,6, J. Favier1,2; cation and Research (01KU1002A-J) explores whole genome sequencing 1Inserm U970, Paris Cardiovascular research center, Paris, France, 2Université Paris data of currently 29 GCB-lymphomas and paired normal controls. Geno- Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de médecine, Paris, France, 3CNRS UMR3347, INSERM U1021, Institut Curie, Orsay, France, 4Inserm 
S968 , Institut de la vision, Paris, mic sequencing is complemented by transcriptome, miRNAome and whole France, 5Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 6AP-HP, Hôpital Européen methylome sequencing. In the 23 yet finished whole genomes (>30x) we Georges Pompidou, Service de Génétique, Paris, France, 7Programme Carte d‘identité des identified a median of 35 potentially protein-changing mutations in BL, 58 tumeurs, Ligue nationale contre le cancer, Paris, France. in DLBCL/IL, and 40 in FL. Recurrently mutated genes include T
P53 , MYC, SMARCA4, CCND3, ML
L2  and ID3, the latter being a novel hallmark of BL (Richter et al., Nat Genet 2012). On the genome-wide level, we identified a Pheochromocytomas (PCC) and paragangliomas (PGL) are neuroendocri- median of 4221 small variants in BL, 10782 in DLBCL/IL, and 6705 in FL. ne tumors derived from chromaffin cells, genetically determined in 35% of Regional clustering of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) was observed which cases. It is well established that SDHB gene mutations are associated with particularly affected regions undergoing somatic hypermutation in B-cells. increased invasiveness and poor prognosis. The link between mutations Investigation of SNV mutation types in the context of the neighboring bases in this subunit of a mitochondrial enzyme (succinate dehydrogenase) and provided evidence for different mutational mechanisms. Structural variants PCC/PGL malignancy is still missing. The aim of our study was to address point to novel fusion genes which in part were supported by fusion tran- the role of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in SDHB-mediated scripts. Patterns of SNVs, structural variants and transcriptional profiles oncogenesis. differed between BL and the other GCB-lymphomas. Our ongoing complete The unsupervised classification of transcriptome data of 188 PCC/PGL, genomic and transcriptomic sequencing efforts within the ICGC, thus, pro- based on 94 EMT-associated genes revealed that SDHB-malignant samples vide insights into the different mutational mechanisms and driving genes displayed the same pattern of gene expression, reflecting EMT activation: aMct. iSvec hinle tshnee rv:a Nrioonues. Jsu. Rbticyhpteesr :o Nf GonCeB. -Oly.m Apmhmoemrpaos.hl: None. S.H. Bernhart: up regulation of LOX
L2 , TWIST1, TCF3, MM
P1  and MM
P2 ; down regulation None. A. Borkhardt: None. B. Brors: None. B. Burkhardt: None. A. Claviez: None. M. Dreyling: None. S. Eberth: None. J. Eils: None. R. Eils: None. S. of CDH2 (N-cadherin) and KRT19. At protein level, we demonstrated that all Haas: None. M. Hansmann: None. K. Hezaveh: None. J. Hoell: None. S. SDHB-malignant samples presented a nuclear translocation of SNAIL (a key Hoffmann: None. M. Hummel: None. D. Karsch: None. W. Klapper: None. J. EMT inducer transcription factor). Korbel: None. U. Kostezka: None. M. Kreuz: None. D. Kube: None. R. Using a Cre-Lox strategy, we generated an immortalized mouse chromaffin Küppers: None. D. Langenberger: None. C. Lawerenz: None. E. Leich: cell (imCC) line harboring an Sdhb gene knock-out that recapitulates most None. D. Lenze: None. P. Lichter: None. M. Loeffler: None. P. Moeller: None. B. hallmarks of SDH-related PCC/PGL. Immunofluorescence and/or RTqPCR Radlwimmer: None. S. Radomski: None. M. Rohde: None. P. Rosenstiel: found the same type of variations in Sdhb-/- cells than in SDHB-mutated 36 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRtuAmNorCs.E W |e W stuWdiWed. cEeSll HmGigr.aOtiRonG by single cell tracking, wound scratch andABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Dkk1 invasion assays, which revealed that Sdhb-/- cells had higher individual cell This together with the methylation and expression data indicates that the speed, global migration and invasiveness abilities. The functional validation inactivation of , a secreted antagonist of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling of two EMT associated genes (KRT19 and SNAIL) with these processes is pathway, is a remarkably prominent and early marker for colon oncogene- currently being investigated. We will further investigate the tumoral poten- sMis.. Pussila: None. L. Sarantaus: None. D. Dermadi Bebek: None. S. Valo: tial of Sdhb-/- cellular models using a renal capsule xenograft strategy, in None. N. Reyhani: None. S. Ollila: None. E. Päivärinta: None. P. Peltomäki: o Cr.d Leor rtioo td: eNvoenloe.p M p.r Decolminiincgaul estsu: dNioens et.e Ast.i nBge rignenro: vNaotinvee. tNh.e Brauprnieicsh.on: None. M. Mutanen: None. M. Nyström: None. None. C. Martinelli: None. L. Vescovo: None. E. Letouzé: None. J. Sael: None. L. Larue: None. A. Gimenez-Roqueplo: None. J. Favier: None. 
C12 .1 Congenital poikiloderma, fatty infiltration of muscles and pulmonary 
C11 .5 fibrosis: a new syndrome caused by a new gene MicroRNAs as possible initiators and drivers for microsatellite S. Mercier1,2,3, S. Küry4, N. Khumalo5, D. Houniet6,7, E. Salort-Campana8, N. Bodak9, V. unstable colorectal tumours Cormier-Daire10, G. Shaboodien11, J. Mussini12,2, A. David1, S. Barbarot13, B. Keavney6,7, B. N. El-Murr1,2, M. Svrcek1,2,3, K. Wanherdrick1,2, T. Lesuffleur1,2, A. Duval1,2; Mayosi11, S. Bézieau4; 1INSERM, UMR S 938 - Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Equipe « Instabilité des 1Department of Medical Genetics, Clinical genetic unit, CHU, Nantes, France, 2Reference Microsatellites et Cancers » - Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Paris, France, Center for Neuromuscular diseases Nantes-Angers, CHU, Nantes, France, 3INSERM 2UPMC – Université Pierre et Marie Curie – Paris 6, Paris, France, 3Service d’Anatomie UMR1089, Atlantic Gene Therapy Institute, University of Nantes, Nantes, France, et Cytologie Pathologiques, AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Est Parisien, Hôpital Saint- 4Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular genetic unit, CHU, Nantes, France, 5Division Antoine, Paris, France. of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital and University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 6Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 7Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 8Department of Neurology, Mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient human tumours develop through a par- Reference Center for Neuromuscular diseases, Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, ticular molecular pathway characterized by the genetic instability of nu- 9Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, merous microsatellite-type DNA repeats dispersed throughout the genome. 10Department of Genetics, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Fondation Imagine, To date, their pathogenesis is mainly attributed to truncating mutations Hopital Necker-Enfants malades, AP-HP, U781, Paris, France, 11Division of Cardiology, occurring at coding repeats in cancer-related genes. Meanwhile, altered ex- Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital and University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 12Laboratory of Pathologic anatomy A, CHU, Nantes, France, pression of microRNAs is being increasingly considered as a key event in 13Department of Dermatology, CHU, Nantes, France. carcinogenesis. This work sums up the studies we recently performed to investigate the possibility that 1. Deregulation of some microRNA targeting MMR proteins might constitute a pre-neoplastic event that promotes the Congenital poikiloderma eats asol.ciated with tendon contracture and pulmona- emergence of MMR-deficient tumours and 2. Somatic mutations in MSI- ry fibrosis was described in a South-African family with autosomal dominant targeted microRNA genes might help the MSI-driven tumourigenic process. inheritance by Khumalo in 2006. Here, we report four sporadic cases MSI tumour initiation: miR-155 and miR-21 are two inflammation-related affected with this syndrome in two males and two females (ages 6-30). Key microRNAs that target core MMR proteins. Their overexpression was obser- features consist of: (i) congenital poikiloderma, hypotrichosis, hypohidro- ved in the non-neoplastic mucosa (field-defect) of patients suffering from sis; (ii) progressive muscular weakness with feet varus deformation and (iii) inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Interestingly, the emergence of MSI in pulmonary fibrosis. Muscle MRI shows diffuse fatty infiltration confirmed these rare clinical entities doesne’tt sael.em to be dependent on germline inac- by muscle biopsy. Microscopy of the skin reveals elastic tissue degeneration tivation or promoter methylation of MMR proteins but is likely to be a mi- with alterations of the elastic network. croRNA-driven process (Svrcek , 2013). MSI tumour progression: Our Whole exome sequencing performed in the South African family and in the results provide evidence that DNA repeats contained in precursor or matu- trio of one sporadic case led to the identification of a very strong candidate re sequence of microRNAs are relatively rare and geneetr aall.ly preserved from gene, unreported to date. The involvement of this gene has been confirmed mutations, but can sometimes be highly mutated in MMR-deficient cancer by the detection of variations in the other cases. Taken together, three unre- cells (e.g. miR-1303, miR-567, miR-1273c) (El-Murr , 2012). Based on lated patients share exactly the same missense mutation; one other patient both reports, we propose a model in which microRNA field-defects and MSI- and the South-African family members carry two very close mutations. We targeted microRNA genes may act first, as initiators and second as drivers f Nor. EMl-SMI-udrrri:v Neonn ter.a Mns. fSovrrmceakti:o Nno onfe t.h Ke. cWoalonnhiecr mdruiccko:s Nao.ne. T. Lesuffleur: suggest that these three mutations are involved in the same putative func- None. A. Duval: None. tional domain of the protein. In conclusion, we report a phenotypically recognisable syndrome linked to a new gene. Functional studies are ongoing to better understand the patho- p Sh. yMsieorlcoiegry: oNfo tnhei.s Se.n Ktiütyry.: None. N. Khumalo: None. D. Houniet: None. E. 
C11 .6 Salort-Campana: None. N. Bodak: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. G. Western diet and Mlh1 mutation predispose colonic mucosa to early Shaboodien: None. J. Mussini: None. A. David: None. S. Barbarot: None. B. inactivation of the Wnt signaling antagonist Dickkopf-1 Keavney: None. B. Mayosi: None. S. Bézieau: None. M. Pussila1, L. Sarantaus1, D. Dermadi Bebek1, S. Valo1, N. Reyhani2, S. Ollila1, E. Päivärinta1, P. Peltomäki1, M. Mutanen1, M. Nyström1; 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland. 
C12 .2 TBX4 mutations (small patella syndrome) are associated with childhood-onset pulmonary arterial hypertension Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cause of cancer-related W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, E. M. H. F. Bongers2, M. T. R. Roofthooft3, E. M. Leter4, J. deaths in the Western world and interactions between genetic and environ- M. Douwes5, A. Van Dijk6, A. Vonk-Noordegraaf7, K. K. Dijk-Bos1, L. H. Hoefsloot2, E. S. mental factors, including diet, are suggested to play a critical role in its etio- Hoendermis8, J. J. P. Gille4, B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, R. M. W. Hofstra1,9, R. M. F. Berger10; logy. We conducted a long-term feeding experiment in the mouse to address 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of epigenetic changes arising in normal colonic mucosa and their functional Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Medical Centre, Department of consequences as putative cancer-predisposing events available for early Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3University of Groningen, University Medical detection. The expression of 94 growth-regulatory genes previously Mlinlhk1e+d/- Center Groningen, Center for Congenital Heart Diaseases, Beatrix Children‘s Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands, 4VU Medical Center, Department of Genetics, Amsterdam, to human colorectal cancer and aberrant hypermethylation was Mstluhd1i+e/+d at Netherlands, 5University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Center two time points (5 weeks and 12 months of age) in the heterozygote for Congenital Heart Diseases, Beatrix Children‘s Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands, mice anaMlolgho1us to human Lynch syndrome (LS), and wild type lit- 6Radboud University Medical Centre,Department of Cardiology, Nijmegen, Netherlands, termates, fed by either Western-style (WD) or AIN-93G control diet. In mice 7VU Medical Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Amsterdam, Netherlands, carrying mutation and/or fed with WD, histologically normDkakl 1p,r Solxci5maa8l, 8University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of cHoolxodn1ic muc Sooscas, 1the predominant site of cancer formation in LS, exhibited Cardiology, Groningen, Netherlands, 9Erasmus University, Erasmus Medical Center, a significant expression decrease in tumor suppressor genes, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, National Referral Center for Pediatric Pulmonary , and Dk. kt1he reduced expression was associated with age-related Hypertension, Center for Congenital Heart Diseases, Beatrix Children‘s Hospital, promoter hypermDekthky1l ation in theseM glehn1e s. As evidence of early epigenetic Groningen, Netherlands. inactivation of in partMicluhl1a+r/, -mostM mlhic1e+ /s+howing high methylation no Background lonDgkekr1 e xpressed mRNA, while showing only modest methylation was still expressed in both and mice. Furthermore, changes in seem to predispose to neoplasia/EhSypHerGpl a2s0ia1 in3 t |h eP pArRoxIiSm,a Fl cRoAloNn. CEC |h WildWhooWd-.oEnSseHt Gpu.lOmRonGary arterial hypertension (PAH) is rare and di3ffe7rsABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C12 .4 Gain-of-function mutations in the mechanically activated ion channel from adult-onset diseBaMseP Rin2, clinical presentation, with often unexplained PIEZO2 cause distal arthrogryposis type 5 developmental retardation and dysmorphic features (DR/DF). Mutations in G. Houge1, B. Coste2, R. L. Maas3, A. Hoischen4, S. R. Sunyaev3, A. Patapoutian2; the major PAH gene, was reported to cause PAH in only 10-16% of 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience cMheiltdhhoodosd-onset patients. We aimed to identify other genes associated with Department, Dorris Neuroscience Center, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, childhood-onset PAH. United States, 3Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. We studied 20 children with PAH. Six patients with unexplained accompa- nying DR/DF were selected for array-comparative genomic hybrTidBiXz2ation TanBaXl4ysis, with the aim of finding deletion regions containing candidate ge- Mechanotransduction, the pathway by which mechanical forces are trans- nes for PAH. Three patients hadT BoXv4erlapping deletions of 17q23.2. and lated to biological signals, plays important but poorly characterized roles in were selected TfrBoXm4 this area as candidate genes and sequenced TinB Xal4l physiology. PIEZOs are recently identified widely-expressed mechanically- 20 children. After identifying mutations in these children, we subse- activated ion channels that are hypothesized to play a role in mechanotrans- quently sequenced in a cohort of 49 adults with PAHT. BBXe4cause duction in mammals. mutations are known to cause small patella syndrome (SPS), a lower limb Here, we describe two distinct PIEZO2 mutations in patients with Distal Ar- malformation syndrome, all patients with newly detected mutations throgryposis Type 5 (DA5), a generalized autosomal dominant contracture wReesrue lstscreened for features of SPS. We also screened a third cohort of 23 syndrome with limited eye movements, restrictive lung disease and variable pTaBtXie4nts with SPS for PAH.TBX4 absence of cruciate knee ligaments. Electrophysiological studies reveal that the two PIEZO2 mutations affect biophysical properties related to channel T mBXu4tations (n=3) or -containing deletions (n=3) were detected inactivation: both del2727E and I802F mutations cause the PIEZO2-depen- in 6 out of 20 children TwBitXh4 P AH (30%). All living patients and two parents dent mechanically-activated currents to recover faster from inactivation, with mutations appeared to have previously unrecognized SPS. In the while del2727E also causes a slowing of inactivation. Both types of changes aCdounlct lPuAsiHo-ncsohort, one mutation (2%) was detected. Screening in the in kinetics result in increased channel activity in response to a given mecha- cohort of (predominantly aTdBuXl4t) SPS patients revealed no PAH. nical stimulus, indicating that DA5 is caused by gain-of-function mutations TBX4 in PIEZO2. We further show that overexpression of mutated PIEZO2 cDNAs These data indicate that mutations are associated with childhood- does not cause constitutive activity or toxicity to cells, arguing that the ob- onset PAH, although the expressivity of PAH in adult mutation carriers iWs l.oSw. K.erstjens-Frederikse: None. E.M.H.F. Bongers: None. M.T.R. Roofthooft: served phenotype is likely to be a mechanotransduction defect. None. E.M. Leter: None. J.M. Douwes: None. A. Van Dijk: None. A. Vonk- Our studies identify a new type of channelopathy and link the dysfunction Noordegraaf: None. K.K. Dijk-Bos: None. L.H. Hoefsloot: None. E.S. of mechanically activated ion channels to developmental malformations and Hoendermis: None. J.J.P. Gille: None. B. Sikkema-Raddatz: None. R.M.W. joint contractures. We are presently sequencing PIEZO2 in other patients Hofstra: None. R.M.F. Berger: None. w Gi.t hH osupgoera: dNiocn oer. fBa.m Ciolisatre a: rNtohnreo.g Rry.Lp.o Msiasa osf: aN coonme. pAa.t Hibolies pchheenn:o Ntyopnee.. S.R. Sunyaev: None. A. Patapoutian: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Novartis. 
C12 .3 Mutations in SNRPE, which encodes a core protein of the spliceosome, cause autosomal-dominant hypotrichosis simplex 
C12 .5 S. M. Pasternack1, M. Refke1, E. Paknia2, H. Hennies3, T. Franz4, N. Schäfer1, A. Fryer5, M. Defective initiation of glycosaminoglycan synthesis due to mutations van Steensel6, E. Sweeney5, M. Just7, C. Grimm2, R. Kruse8, C. Ferrándiz7, M. M. Nöthen1, U. in B3GALT6 causes a pleiotropic connective tissue disorder Fischer2, R. C. Betz1; with severe alterations in proteoglycan assembly and collagen 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department fibrillogenesis of Biochemistry, Theodor Boveri-Institute, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, F. Malfait1, A. Kariminejad2, T. Van Damme1, C. Gauche3, D. Syx1, F. Mehri-Soussi3, S. Germany, 3Center for Dermatogenetics, Division of Human Genetics and Department Gulberti3, S. Symoens1, S. Van Hauwaert1, B. Bozorgmehr2, M. Kariminejad2, I. Hausser4, A. of Dermatology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Department of Huysseune5, S. Fournel-Gigleux3, A. De Paepe1; Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Cheshire and Merseyside Genetics 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Kariminejad- Service, Alder Hey Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 68 Department of Dermatology, Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3UMR Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Service of Dermatology, 7365 CNRS-Université de Lorraine (IMoPA) MolCelTEG Team, Biopôle UL - Faculté Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona, de Médecine, Campus Biologie-Santé, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 4Department of Badalona, Spain, 8Dermatological Practice, Paderborn, Germany. Dermatology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Biology Department, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Hypotrichosis simplex (HS) comprises a group of hereditary isolated alope- cias that are characterized by a diffuse and progressive loss of hair starting Proteoglycans are very important components of cell plasma membranes in childhood and shows a wide phenotypic variability. We mapped an auto- and extracellular matrices of connective tissues. They consist of glycosami- somal-dominant form of HS to chromosome 1q31.3-1q41 in a Spanish fa- noglycan chains attached to a core protein via a tetrasaccharide linkage, mily. By direct sequencing, we identified the heterozygous mutation c.1A>G whereby the addition of the third residue is catalyzed by galactosyltransfera- (p.Met1?) in SNRPE that results in loss of the start codon of the transcript. se II (β3GalT6), encoded by B3GALT6. We identified biallelic B3GALT6 mu- We identified the same mutation in a simplex HS case from the UK and an tations in three families presenting a severe autosomal recessive connective additional mutation (c.133G>A [p.Gly45Ser]) in a simplex HS case origina- tissue disorder, characterized by skin fragility, delayed wound healing, joint ting from Tunisia. SNRPE encodes a core protein of U snRNPs, the key factors hyperlaxity and contractures, muscle hypotonia, mental retardation and a of the pre-mRNA processing spliceosome. The missense mutation c.133G>A spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with bone fragility and severe kyphosco- leads to a glycine to serine substitution and is predicted to disrupt the struc- liosis. The phenotype strongly overlaps with several recessive Ehlers-Dan- ture of SNRPE. Western blot analyses of HEK293T cells expressing SNRPE los variants and spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint hyperlaxity. c.1A>G revealed an N-terminally truncated protein, and therefore the muta- Homozygosity mapping and candidate gene sequence analysis identified tion might result in use of an alternative in-frame downstream start codon. homozygous B3GALT6 missense mutations in Family 1 (p.(Asp207His) and Subcellular localization of mutant SNRPE by immunofluorescence analyses Family 3 (p.(Gly217Ser)), and compound heterozygous mutations in Family as well as incorporation of mutant SNRPE proteins into U snRNPs was found 2 (p.(Ala108Glyfs*163) and p.(Asp207His)). A strong decrease in ability to to be normal, suggesting that the function of U snRNPs in splicing, rather prime glycosaminoglycan synthesis was observed in patient’s fibroblasts, than their biogenesis, is affected. In this report we link a core component of confirming β3GalT6 loss-of-function together with impaired synthesis and the spliceosome to hair loss, thus adding another specific factor in the com- glycanation of the small chondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycan deco- plexity of hair growth. Furthermore, our findings extend the range of human rin. Dermal electron microcopy disclosed abnormal collagen fibril organi- p Sh.Men. oPtayspteesrn tahcakt :a Nreo nlien. kMe.d R teof kthee: Nspolnieci. nEg. mPaakcnhiian: eNroy.ne. H. Hennies: zation, in line with the important regulatory role of decorin in this process. None. T. Franz: None. N. Schäfer: None. A. Fryer: None. M. van Steensel: A strong reduction in heparan sulfate was also observed, indicating that None. E. Sweeney: None. M. Just: None. C. Grimm: None. R. Kruse: None. C. Ferrándiz: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. U. Fischer: None. R.C. Betz: None. β3GalT6 deficiency impairs synthesis of both types of glycosaminoglycans. In vitro wound healing assay revealed significant delay, pointing to a role for glycosaminoglycan defect in impaired wound repair in vivo. Our findings un- cover a novel genetic deficiency affecting glycosaminoglycan synthesis and emphasize a crucial role for β3GalT6 in a wide range of developmental and 38 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRbAiolNogCicEa l| p WrocWesWses..ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index F. Malfait: None. A. Kariminejad: None. T. Van Damme: None. C. Gauche: None. D. Syx: None. F. Mehri-Soussi: None. S. Gulberti: None. S. Symoens: None. S. Van Hauwaert: None. B. Bozorgmehr: None. M. Kariminejad: None. I. two linked kindreds and from 3 other autosomal recessive HSP families with Hausser: None. A. Huysseune: None. S. Fournel-Gigleux: None. A. De Paepe: German, Portuguese and Brazilian origins. Focused analysis to the SPG26 None. candidate region, identified 3 truncating and 2 missense mutations segrega- ting at the homozygous state in patients from all families in a gene encoding an enzyme of the lipid metabolism. Three additional truncating mutations 
C12 .6 were then found in two French isolated cases by direct Sanger sequencing Identification of INPP
L1  mutations in Opsismodysplasia of all coding exons of this novel HSP-related gene. All mutations were absent C. HUBER1, E. Faqeih2, D. Bartholdi3, C. Bole-Feysot4, Z. Borochowitz5, D. P. Cavalcanti6, in large series of healthy unrelated controls. Patients (n=18) presented with A. Frigo1, P. Nitschke7, J. Roume8, H. G. Santos9, S. A. Shalev10, A. Superti-Furga11, A. an early onset spastic paraplegia preceded by mental impairment in most Delezoide12, K. M. Girisha13, M. Wright14, M. Le Merrer1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; cases and complicated by the association of cerebellar ataxia and peripheral 1Département de Génétique Unité INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne neuropathy with cortical atrophy at brain MRI. These findings highlight lipid Paris Cité, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 2. Medical Genetics, King metabolism in HSP, paving the way for a better understanding of the mecha- Fahad medical city, Children’s Hospital, Pediatric deparment, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, nEi.s mMus nindvwoilllveerd: Nino nthe.e Ase. Bdiosuekahseriss.: None. R. Schule: None. J.L. Loureiro: 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zuerich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, None. C. Marques Lourenço: None. I. Rekik: None. M.A. Gonzalez: None. P. 4Plateforme de génomique, Institut IMAGINE, PARIS, France, 5The Simon Winter Institute Charles: None. J. Gauthier: None. A. Ferbert: None. M. Gaussen: None. A. for Human Genetics, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Caballero Oteyza: None. S. Forlani: None. C. Mhiri: None. L. Schols: None. G. Research Institute, Technion-Israeli Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 6Genética Rouleau: None. W. Marques Junior: None. C. Depienne: None. A. Brice: B. Perinatal, Depto Genética Médica, FCM,Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP) Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending ersité Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Campinas, grants as well as grants already received); Modest; 7th PCRD (European Brazil, 7Plateforme de Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, PARIS, France, 8Unité Union). F. Darios: None. A. Durr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, de Génétique Médicale, Service de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Reproduction, CHI collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Poissy - St Germain - en- Laye, St Germain - en- Laye, France, 9Serviço Genética Médica, Modest; French National Agency for Research. S. Zuchner: None. G. Stevanin: Hospital Universitário S. Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 10Ha‘Emek Medical Center, Afula B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending 18101, and the Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technionersité Paris Descartes-Sorbonne grants as well as grants already received); Modest; ANR, ASL. Paris Cité, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Haifa, Israel, 11University of Lausanne, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 12Service de Biologie de Développement, Université Paris Diderot, Hôpital, Robert Debré, PARIS, France, 13Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, 
C13 .2 Manipal, India, 14Institute of Human genetics, International Center for lofe, Newcastle, WDR45 de novo mutations cause of a clinically distinct, X-linked United Kingdom. subtype of NBIA T. B. Haack1,2, P. Horgath3, A. Gregory4, M. C. Kruer5, T. Wieland2, T. Schwarzmayr2, A. Walther2, L. Sanford4, M. A. Kurian6, B. Garavalgia7, N. Nardocci8, V. Tiranti9, T. M. Opsismodysplasia (OPS) is a severe autosomal-recessive chondrodysplasia Strom10,11, T. Meitinger1,12, S. J. Hayflick4,3, H. Prokisch1,11; characterized by pre- and postnatal micromelia and extremely short hands 1TU Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Insititute of Human and feet. The main radiological features are severe platyspondyly, squared Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, metacarpals, delayed skeletal ossification, and metaphyseal cupping. In or- Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, United States, 4Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, United der to identify mutations causing OPS, a total of 19 cases from 12 unrelated States, 5Sanford Children’s Hospital, Sioux Falls, SD, United States, 6Neurosciences families were included in this study. We performed exome sequencing in Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom, three cases from three unrelated families and only one gene was found to 7nit of Molecular Neurogenetics, IRCCS „Carla Besta“, Milan, Italy, 8Unit of Child harbor mutations in all three cases, namely INPP
L1  (inositol polyphospha- Neurology, Department of Pediatric Neuroscience, IRCCS „Carlo Besta“, Milan, Italy, te phosphatase-like 1). Screening INPP
L1  in the remaining cases identified 9Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, IRCCS „Carlo Besta“, Milan, Italy, 10Institute of Human a total of 16 distinct mutations. Among the 19 cases, prenatal findings led Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 11Institute of Human to early termination of pregnancies (especially in recurrent sibs) in 10/19 Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Munich, Germany. cases and hygroma, short long bones, short extremities and narrow thorax were consistently observed. Four children died early (stillborn 30 WG- 15 months of age). The five remaining cases (3 to 19 years old), had normal cognitive development, severe short stature (below- 4 SDS), lower limb de- Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) comprises a group formity and severe scoliosis with atlanto axial instability. Most mutations of monogenic disorders characterized by extensive iron deposition in the (8/16) resulted in premature stop codons, located in the catalytic domain, basal ganglia. Several subtypes can be distinguished based on clinical fin- 5-phosphatase. INPP
L1  belongs to the inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phos- dings and neuroimaging fdeea tnuorveos . WDR45 phatase family, that govern a plethora of cellular functions by regulating the An exome sequencing approach applied to a clinically preselected group of levels of specific phosphoinositides. 14 index cases identified mutations in X-chromosomal in 13 Our finding of INPP
L1  mutations in OPS, a severe spondylodysplastic dys- of them. The associated phenotype includes early-onset global developmen- plasia with major growth plate disorganization, supports a key and specific tal delay and neurological deterioration in adulthood with parkinsonism, r Co.l eH oufb tehri:s N eonnzey. mE.e F inaq eenihd:o Nchoonen.d Dra. lB oasrsthifoicldati:i oNno.ne. C. Bole-Feysot: dystonia, and dementia. Brain MRI demonstrated marked iron deposition None. Z. Borochowitz: None. D.P. Cavalcanti: None. A. Frigo: None. P. in the substantia nigra and globus pallidus. Of note, the phenotype of males Nitschke: None. J. Roume: None. H.G. Santos: None. S.A. Shalev: None. A. and females is similar, an observation not yet fully understood but potenti- Superti-Furga: None. A. Delezoide: None. K.M. Girisha: None. M. Wright: ally explained by somatic mosaicism in males or patterns of skewed X chro- None. M. Le Merrer: None. A. Munnich: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. mosome inactivation in females. WDR45 is a beta-propeller scaffold protein and plays a putative role in auto- phagy, possibly via interaction with ATG2A and ATG2B. 
C13 .1 Histopathological and cellular studies are ongoing to further substantiate Alteration of lipid metabolism in hereditary spastic paraplegia 26 t Th.iBs. hHyapaoctkh:e Nsiosn.e. P. Horgath: None. A. Gregory: None. M.C. Kruer: None. T. E. Mundwiller1, A. Boukhris2, R. Schule3, J. L. Loureiro4, C. Marques Lourenço5, I. Rekik2, Wieland: None. T. Schwarzmayr: None. A. Walther: None. L. Sanford: M. A. Gonzalez6, P. Charles7, J. Gauthier8, A. Ferbert3, M. Gaussen1, A. Caballero Oteyza3, S. None. M.A. Kurian: None. B. Garavalgia: None. N. Nardocci: None. V. Tiranti: Forlani1, C. Mhiri2, L. Schols3, G. Rouleau8, W. Marques Junior5, C. Depienne1, A. Brice1,7, F. None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. S.J. Hayflick: None. H. Prokisch: Darios1, A. Durr1,7, S. Zuchner6, G. Stevanin1,9; None. 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, NEB, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Universitaire Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research and Center for Neurology, Tuebingen, Germany, 4UnIGENe, Porto, Portugal, 5Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto da Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 6University of Miami, 
C13 .3 Miami, FL, United States, 7APHP, Fédération de Génétique, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, A stop mutation in WDR81 causes microcephaly with variable Paris, France, 8Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 9Ecole Pratique des Hautes penetrance. Etudes, Paris, France. S. Cirak1, B. Peterson2, Y. Chang3, A. ElSharawy2, P. Alexandre4, K. Schoner5, A. Pagenstecher6, G. Gestri7, S. Suren8, D. Gerrelli8, A. Volk9, P. Nurnberg10, S. Wilson7, J. Clarke4, B. Albrecht11, W. Huttner3, D. Morris-Rosendahl12, G. Uyanik13, A. Franke2, T. Voit14; 1Childrens National Medical Centre, Washington, DC, United States, 2Christian-Albrechts- Hereditary spastic paraplegias are heterogeneous neurological disorders. At University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and least 50 loci and 30 genes can account for these diseases. Whole genome lin- Genetics, Dresden, Germany, 4MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King’s kage mapping in 2 HSP families originating from Spain and Tunisia allowed College London, London, United Kingdom, 5University of Marburg, Department of us to restrict the candidate interval of the SPG26 locus from 34 to 9 Mb. Cap- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 39 ture and whole exome sequencing were then performed in patients from theABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Pathology, Marburg, Germany, 6University of Marburg, Department of Neuropathology, 
C13 .5 Marburg, Germany, 7UCL Research Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, A large genomic deletion upstream of the lamin B1 gene (LMNB1) London, United Kingdom, 8UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, likely causes adult-onset autosomal dominant leukodystrophy due to 9Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Institut für Humangenetik, Ulm, Germany, 10Cologne Center alteration of the regulatory landscape of LMNB1. for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Cologne, Germany, E. Giorgio1, D. Robyr2, E. Di Gregorio1,3, D. Lacerenza1, G. Vaula4, D. Imperiale5, C. Atzori5, 11Universitäty Duisburg-Essen, Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 12University A. Brusco1,3, S. Antonarakis2, A. Brussino1; Clinic Freiburg, Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, United Kingdom, 13Zentrum für 1University of Torino-Dep Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, 2University of Geneva Medical Medizinische Genetik Hanusch-Krankenhaus der Wiener Gebietskrankenkasse, Wien, School, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneve, Switzerland, 3A.O. Austria, 14Institut de Myologie, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UM 76, INSERM U 974, Città della Salute e della Scienza, S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Torino, Italy, 4A.O. Città CNRS UMR, Paris, France. della Salute e della Scienza, Department of Neurology, Torino, Italy, 5Centro Regionale Malattie Da Prioni - Domp (Aslto2), Torino, Italy. Severe congenital primary microcephaly is a clinically and genetically he- terogeneous disorder. Currently, 10 disease causing genes have been de- We report a position effect mutation in the lamin B1 locus mimicking Adult- scribed. These genes alter three main pathways leading to microcephaly: onset AutosoLmMNalB D1ominant LeukoDystrophy (ADLD). centrosome function, DNA repair and cell cycle regulation. Whole exome ADLD is a rare central nervous system demyelinating disease presently as- sequencing identified a novel co-segregating truncating mutation c.5335 sociated to gene duplication. We collected a large Italian pedigree C->T, p.R1779* towards the C-terminus of WDR81 in 5 affected siblings of a segregatinLgM aNnB a1u tosom al dominant form of leukodystrophy clinLMicaNlBly1 over- large consanguineous Turkish family with primary microcephaly. The same lapping ADLD. Linkage analysis mapped the disease to the LMNB1 locus, stop mutation in WDR81 was identified in another Turkish case with micro- although was not duplicated or mutated. However, was cephaly. A missense mutation in WDR81 was described by (Gulsuner et al., overexpressed in fibroblasts both at mRNA and pLrMotNeiBn1 l evel as in reported 2011) to cause cerebellar hypoplasia only. We observed marked variability ADLD patienGtsR. AUMsiDn3g aArLrDayH-7CAG1H ana PlyHsAisX, .w e identified a 660 kb deletion of the phenotype. All four females had extreme microcephaly with enlarged located approximateLlMy N66B 1k b centromeric to the gene andspanned extra-axial spaces and ponto-cerebellar hypoplasia (MICaxPCH). One male three genes: , and shRNA silencing assays of these had a simplified gyral pattern and cerebellar hypoplasia and another male genes did not affect expression. To search for non-coding regulatory fetus with hydrops fetalis had not yet developed late microcephaly (at 21 elements, we performed circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) weeks of gestation). We created a zebrafish morpholino knock-out model on fibroblasts from a patient and a control, using lamin B1 promoter as a of WDR81 which resembled the observed human microcephaly phenotype. bait. We identified four potential regulatory regions: one (region A) located Moreover, we observed in the zebrafish morpholino enlarged ventricles within the deletion and shared by case and control, and three patient speci- which are in analogy to the enlarged ventricles in the patients. WDR81 was fic interactors (regions B, C and D) located upstream of the deletion. A dual- highly expressed in the neocortex of human and mouse embryos by in situ luciferase assay showed that regions A and B acted as enhancers (luciferase hybridization and immunofluorescence. WDR81 was localised to the nu- signal changes fromLM 2N.8B t1o 3.4 fold vs. control, respectively). Therefore, the cleus as shown by immunofluorescence and confirmed by western-blot of presence of the deletion takes away region A and moves the cryptic enhan- subcellular fractions. In summary, WDR81 mutations can cause microce- cer B closer to the gene in one allele, resulting in its overexpression phaly with variable penetrance. We propose that WDR81, as a nucleoplas- and mimicking ADLD. Our results confirms that mutations in regulatory ele- mic protein, would be the first primary microcephaly protein not directly m E.e Gntiso rmgiaoy: bNeo nime.p Do.r Rtaonbty dr:e Nteornmei. nEa. nDtis Gorfe Mgoenridoe: lNiaonn ep.h De.n Loatcyepreesn.za: a Ss.s Cociriaakte: dN ownieth. B th. eP ecteenrstroons:o Nmoen.e. Y. Chang: None. A. ElSharawy: None. P. None. G. Vaula: None. D. Imperiale: None. C. Atzori: None. A. Brusco: None. S. Alexandre: None. K. Schoner: None. A. Pagenstecher: None. G. Gestri: Antonarakis: None. A. Brussino: None. None. S. Suren: None. D. Gerrelli: None. A. Volk: None. P. Nurnberg: None. S. Wilson: None. J. Clarke: None. B. Albrecht: None. W. Huttner: None. D. Morris- Rosendahl: None. G. Uyanik: None. A. Franke: None. T. Voit: None. 
C13 .6 Interferon-beta induces clearance of mutant ataxin-7 and improves locomotion in SCA7 knock-in mice 
C13 .4 A. SITTLER1, A. Chort1, S. Alves1, M. Marinello1, B. Dufresnois1, J. Dornbierer1, C. Tesson1, Chromatin structure, transcription and CAG instability in M. Latouche1, D. P. Baker2, M. Barkats3, K. El Hachimi1, M. Ruberg1, A. Janer1, G. Stevanin1, Huntington’s disease A. Brice1; A. Goula1, A. Stys1, J. Chan2, Y. Trottier1, R. Festenstein2, K. Merienne1; 1CRICM_INSERM U975,CNRS 7225, UPMC, PARIS, France, 2Biogen Idec, Cambrigde, MA, 1IGBMC, UMR 7104, Strasbourg, France, 2Imperial college London, London, United United States, 3INSERM U 974, CNRS UMR 7215, UPMC, Myology inst., PARIS, France. Kingdom. We showed previously, in a cell model of spinocerebellar ataxia SCA7 that Expansion of CAG/CTG repeats is the causative mutation of many diseases, interferon-beta induces the expression of promyelocytic leukemia prote- including Huntington’s disease (HD) and myotonic dystrophy 1. These mu- in (PML) and the formation of PML nuclear bodies that degrade mutant tations are unstable in selective somatic tissues, which accelerates disea- ataxin-7, suggesting that the cytokine, used to treat multiple sclerosis, se progression. The mechanisms underlying CAG/CTG repeat instability might have therapeutic value in SCA7. We now show that interferon-beta remain elusive. Here we investigated the relationship between chromatin also induces PML-dependent clearance of ataxin-7 in a preclinical model, structure, transcription and somatic CAG/CTG instability. We examined this SCA7266Q/5Q knock-in mice, and improves motor function. Interferon- hypothesis using the R6/1 and R6/2 HD mouse lines, which express a simi- beta, administered intraperitoneally three times a week, was internalized lar HD transgene. These mice present a similar HD-like pathology, though with its receptor in Purkinje and other cells and translocated to the nucleus. progression of the disease is fastest in R6/2 mice as compared to R6/1 mice. The treatment induced PML expression and the formation of PML nuclear In the two mice, as in HD patients, somatic instability is high in the striatum, bodies and decreased mutant ataxin-7 in neuronal intranuclear inclusions, the tissue that preferentially degenerates, and low in the cerebellum, a tis- the hallmark of the disease. No reactive gliosis or other signs of toxicity were sue spared by the disease. However, the rate of CAG instability is increased observed in the brain or internal organs. The treatment also significantly in R6/2 tissues when compared to R6/1 matched-tissues. Our data indica- improved the performance of the SCA7266Q/5Q knock-in mice on two be- te that an accessible chromatin structure and high transgene transcription havioral tests sensitive to cerebellar function: the Locotronic test of loco- underlie the high instability rates seen in R6/2 mice in comparison to R6/1 motor function and the beam-walking test of balance, motor coordination mice, but are not sufficient to explain tissue specificity of instability. Intere- and fine movements, which are affected in patients with SCA7. Finally, since stingly, the levels of RNA Pol II and histone mark associated with transcrip- neuronal death does not occur in the cerebellum of SCA7266Q/5Q mice, we tion elongation correlate with tissue-selective somatic CAG instability. Our showed in primary cell cultures expressing mutant ataxin-7 that interferon- data suggest that the dynamics of transcription at the HTT gene is differently beta treatment improves Purkinje cell survival. This treatment might apply regulated between the striatum and cerebellum, despite similar bulk levels to all polyglutamine diseases in which PML associates, in cell nuclei, with the of transgenic transcripts in the two tissues. We propose that the regulation m Au. Staitnttle pr:r oNtoenines. Are. sCphoonrst:i bNloen feo.r S t.h Ae ldveisse:a Nseo.ne. M. Marinello: None. B. of the transition from transcription initiation to transcription elongation is a Dufresnois: None. J. Dornbierer: None. C. Tesson: None. M. Latouche: m Ae. cGhoaunlais:m N ocnoen.t Ari.b Suttyins:g Ntoo nteis. sJu. eC-shealne:c tNivoen eC. AYG. T irnostttaiebri:l iNtyo nine .H RD. . None. D.P. Baker: None. M. Barkats: None. K. El Hachimi: None. M. Ruberg: Festenstein: None. K. Merienne: None. None. A. Janer: None. G. Stevanin: None. A. Brice: None. 40 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C14 .1 ALDH1A3 mutations cause recessive anophthalmia and microphthalmia cleotide adenyltransferases. In addition to its NAD+ synthesizing activity, L. Fares Taie1, S. Gerber1, N. Chassaing2, J. Clayton-Smith3, S. Hanein1, E. Silva4, M. NMNAT1 acts as a chaperone that protects against neuronal activity-indu- Serey1, V. Serre1, X. Gerard1, C. Baumann5, G. Plessis6, B. Demeer7, D. Bremond-Gignac7, L. ced degeneration. Brétillon8, C. Bole-Feyssot9, P. Nitschke10, P. Nitschke10, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1, P. Calvas2, The review of ophthalmological data indicated that NMNAT1 mutations con- J. Kaplan1, N. Ragge11, J. Rozet1; sistently caused LCA with a particular phenotype characterized by neonatal 1INSERMU781, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 2Medical severe atrophy of the central retina leading to a posterior pole coloboma Genetics, CHU Toulouse & Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France, 3Genetic aspect and early-onset optic nerve atrophy. Medecine, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Center, St Mary Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4IBILI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Department of These findings add further complexity to the physiopathological bases of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, the most common cause of blindness in childhood by giving support to the 5Genetics, CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Medical Genetics, CHU Caen, Hôpital de la vCioenwc ltuhsaito nne: uroprotection against light-induced stress is required to allow Côte de Nacre, Caen, France, 7Pediatrics, CHU Amiens, Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, maintaining photoreceptor cells. 8UMR1324 CSGA Centre des Sciences du Goût et de l‘Alimentation, Dijon, France, In summary, we report NMNAT1 mutations in 22 LCA families 9Genomics Paltform, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, clinically recognizable by the existence of a neonatal macular atrophy and 10Bioinformatics, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 11Wessex Clinical Genetics eSa.r Hlya-noenisne:t N oopnteic. Ia. tProerprhayu.lt: None. X. Zanlonghi: None. V. Serre: None. M. Service, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Nicouleau: None. S. Defoort-Delhemmes: None. N. Delphin: None. L. Fares Taie: None. S. Gerber: None. O. Xerri: None. C. Edelson: None. A. Glodenberg: None. A. Duncombe: None. G. LeMeur: None. C. Hamel: None. E. Purpose: Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (A/M) are early eye develop- Silva: None. P. Nitschke: None. P. Calvas: None. A. Munnich: None. O. Roche: ment anomalies resulting in absent or small ocular globes, respectively. A/ None. H. Dollfus: None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: None. Ms occur as syndromic or nonsyndromic forms. They are genetically hetero- genous with some mutations in some genes responsible for both anophthal- mia and microphthalmia. The purpose of this study was to identify the di- 
C14 .3 sease gene involved in A/M in an inbreed Pakistani Family. Identification of new genes for Hereditary Hearing Loss (HHL) using Methods: A combination of homozygosity mapping, exome sequencing and linkage studies and Whole Exome Sequencing analysis SAaLnDgeHr1 sAe3quencing, was used to identify the disease mutation in the Paki- D. Vozzi1, G. Girotto1, F. Faletra1, K. Abdulhadi2, D. Vuckovic1, A. D‘Eustacchio1, M. Khalifa stani family and to screen the A3 isoform of the aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 Alkowari3, R. Badii4, P. Gasparini1; ( ) encoding gene for mutations in additional unrelateAdL AD/HM1 Ap3ati- 1IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo Children Hospital, Univ-Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2ENT Division HMC, ents. DOHA, Qatar, 3Mol. Gen. Lab., Doha, Qatar, 4Mol. Gen. Lab, Doha, Qatar. Results: We identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in in the Pakistani family. The screening of the gene is a cohort of A/M patients excluding known A/M genes allowed identifyiAnLgD twH1oA a3dditional homozygote Despite the presence of some major player genes for HHL, still there is a mutations including another missense change and a splice-site mutation in need to search for new causative mutations/genes. Whole Exome Sequen- two consanguineous families. Patients with mutations had A/M cing (WES) coupled with linkage data (even if only suggestive loci) proved with occasional orbital cystic, neurological and cardiac anomalies. to be very useful in identifying 3 new HHL genes in a series of ItalianI na nsid- Discussion and conclusion: ALDH1A3 is a key enAzLyDmHe1 iAn3 the formation of Qlicaot”a ri families. WES nucleotide variants were called by Samtools V0.1.18 a retinoic acid gradient along the dorso-ventral axis during the early eye and filtered comparing with in-house, dbSNP and 1000G databases. “ development. Transitory expression of mutant cDNAs showed functional prediction analysis of variants was done. Gene 1: in a re- that both missense mutations reduce the accumulation of the enzyme, po- cessive family from Qatar, linkage analysis identified 1 locus with a LOD of tentially leading to altered retinoic acid synthesis. While the role of retinoic 3.8 on chromosome 5q13 subsequently confirmed by NGS with the pres- acid signaling in eye development is well established, our findings provide ence of a mutation elongating the protein and segregating within the family genetic evidence of a direct link between retinoic acid synthesis dysfunction (p.*2625Gluext*11) in BD
P1  gene. This gene was also found as expressed aLn. dF aeraersly T eayiee: dNeovneelo. Spm. Geenrtb ienr :h Nuomnaen. .N. Chassaing: None. J. Clayton-Smith: in the mouse cochlea. Gene 2: linkage analysis in an Italian dominant family None. S. Hanein: None. E. Silva: None. M. Serey: None. V. Serre: None. X. showed a LOD of 3.3 on chromosome 12q24. WES data of the region con- Gerard: None. C. Baumann: None. G. Plessis: None. B. Demeer: None. D. firmed the presence of a missense mutation (c.1057G>C; pG353R) in 
P2 X2 Bremond-Gignac: None. L. Brétillon: None. C. Bole-Feyssot: None. P. gene. A three-dimensional model of this protein, has also suggested that the Nitschke: None. P. Nitschke: None. A. Munnich: None. S. Lyonnet: None. P. substitution would destabilize the fold. Gene 3: an Italian Y-linked family Calvas: None. J. Kaplan: None. N. Ragge: None. J. Rozet: None. was enirno lvlietdro. Linkage analysis excluded autosomal loci while WES led to the identification of a missense mutation in a gene within DFNY1 locus. Func- tional studies are now in progress. Additional new HHL genes are 
C14 .2 under final validation steps in the remaining families. These findings increa- Mutations in the Nuclear NAD+ synthesising enzyme NMNAT1 cause se our knowledge on molecular bases of HHL suggesting new targets for Leber congenital amaurosis with early-onset severe macular atrophy t Dre. aVtomzzein: tN aonnde .p Gre. vGeinrotitoton: None. F. Faletra: None. K. Abdulhadi: None. D. and optic atrophy Vuckovic: None. A. D‘Eustacchio: None. M. Khalifa Alkowari: None. R. Badii: S. Hanein1, I. Perrault1, X. Zanlonghi2, V. Serre1, M. Nicouleau1, S. Defoort-Delhemmes3, N. None. P. Gasparini: None. Delphin1, L. Fares Taie1, S. Gerber1, O. Xerri1, C. Edelson4, A. Glodenberg5, A. Duncombe5, G. LeMeur6, C. Hamel7, E. Silva8, P. Nitschke9, P. Calvas10, A. Munnich1, O. Roche11, H. Dollfus12, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1; 1INSERMU781, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 
C14 .4 2Department of Vision Functional Exploration, Clinique Sourdille, Nantes, France, A founder mutation in ULFIN, a new gene on chromosome 16q22.1, in 3Department of Exploration of Vision and Neuro-Ophthalmology, Hôpital Roger patients with spinocerebellar ataxia type 4 (SCA4) Salengro, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Régional, Lille, France, 4Department of D. Braunholz1, F. Kählitz1, I. Braenne2, Y. Hellenbroich1, S. Tennstedt2, P. Buse2, P. Seibler3, Ophthalmology, Fondation Ophtalmologique Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, France, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, J. Erdmann2, C. Zühlke1, F. Kaiser1; 5Genetics, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 6Ophthalmology, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 1Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Integrative und 7Neurosciences Institute, Hôpital Saint Eloi, Montpellier, France, 8IBILI, Faculty of Experimentelle Genomik, Lübeck, Germany, 3Institut für Neurogenetik, Lübeck, Germany. Medecine, University of Coimbra, Department of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar Universitario de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 9Bioinformatics, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 10Department of Medical Genetics, Purpan Hospital, CHU SCA4 is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder with autosomal domi- Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 11Ophthalmology, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 12Department of Clinical Genetics, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France. nant inheritance, progressive ataxia, dysarthria and peripheral sensory neu- ropathy. The candidate region was mapped to an 8 Mb interval on chromo- Introduction: some 16q22.1 in two large families from Northern Germany. Since classical sequencing approaches of about 140 protein coding genes within this region Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest and most could not reveal any obvious disease causing mutation, we performed whole severe retinal dystrophy, responsible for neonatal blindness. In an effort to genome sequencing analyses of one patient from each family. identify the yet unknown molecular bases of the disease, we subjected to By this, about 17500 variants were detected. After exclusion of known SNPs wMheothleo edxso maned r eRseesquuletns:c ing (WER) the DNA of five unrelated families exclu- and selection based on conservation and putative regulatory function by ding known geNnMeNs.AT1 NMNAT1 using the public ENCODE-database, one variant was located within a tran- Through WER combined with Sanger sequencing, scription unit. This variant segregates with disease in both pedigrees and we identified mutations in 22 unrelated LCA cases. codes was found in another five unrelated patients with ataxia but excluded in for the ubiquitously expressed nuclear iEsoSfHorGm 2of0 n1ic3o t|i nPaAmRidIeS m, FonRoAnuN-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 41 >2500 controls from Northern Germany.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index in silico M. Hubeau: None. G. Vogt: None. F. Conti: None. A. Grant: None. L. Abel: None. P. Gros: None. M. Cellier: None. C. Picard: None. J. Bustamante: InterUeLstFiInNg ly, detailed analyses as well as RNA analyses identified a None. J. Casanova: None. hitherto unknown cDNA of 1712 bp encoding a 346 aa protein we named UL- FIN. codes for a WD40-repeat protein and is preferentially expressed in fetal and adult brain. The SCA4-variant identified causes the exchange of 
C15 .1 a highly conserved amino acid within a WD40 repeat domain. Protein mo- FGFR related anomalies of foramen magnum : phenotypic-genotypic deling analysis demonstrated a significant conformational change caused by correlation this missense mutation within this conserved structure. F. DI ROCCO1, C. Collet2, M. Duplan-Biosse3, M. Zerah4, C. Sainte-Rose4, V. Cormier-Daire3, In summary we identified a missense mutation in a so far unknown gene in A. Munnich3, L. Legeai-Mallet3, E. Arnaud5; two families and five unrelated patients with ataxia from Northern Germa- 1Craniofacial Unit Dep. Neurosurgery Necker Hospital Paris and INSERM U781, Paris, ny. Our results indicate a founder effect as genetic cause of SCA4, a likewise France, 2Dep Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Lariboisiere Hospital, Paris, France, f Dre. qBureanutn hatoalzx:i aN woniteh. Fa.n Kcäehstlirtyz :i nN oNnoer.t Ih. eBrrna eEnunreo:p Neo.ne. Y. Hellenbroich: 3INSERM U781, Paris, France, 4Dep. Neurosurgery Necker Hospital Paris, Paris, France, None. S. Tennstedt: None. P. Buse: None. P. Seibler: None. G. Gillessen- 5Craniofacial Unit Dep. Neurosurgery Necker Hospital Paris, Paris, France. Kaesbach: None. J. Erdmann: None. C. Zühlke: None. F. Kaiser: None. Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor (FGFR) mutations are associated either 
C14 .5 to chondrodysplasia and craniosynostosis. In both conditions the growth of U1 snRNP interference with polyadenylation - a new pathomechanism the skull base is altered. We analysed the extent of such alterations by CT for unclassified 3’UTR mutations scan in infants with a genetically confirmed mutation in FGFR and correla- J. Langemeier1, M. Radtke1, C. Klein2, J. Bohne1; ted them to the clinical phenotype. 1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Dr. von Haunersches Hospital, Munich, The area of the Foramen Magnum (FM) was measured on CT scan obtai- Germany. ned prior to any surgery in infants with FGFR mutation: Crouzon syndrome (FGFR2) n: 7, (mean age: 4.3m, 1 to 9), Pfeiffer syndrome (FGFR2) n:6 (mean age: 5.3 m; 3 to 11), Apert syndrome (FGFR2) n:9 (mean age: 5.8m, 3 to 7), While most point mutations occurring in coding regions affpe1ct4 p/rroobteldin3 func- Muenke-Lajeunie (FGFR3)n:16 (mean age: 5.6m, 3 to 8) , and achondropla- tion or stability, mutations in regulatory regions are poorly understood. A sia (FGFR3) n: 4 (mean age 4.4m, 1-8) and compared to 30 controls (mean point mutation in the 3’ untranslated region (UTR) of the gene age: 4.7m, 0-12 ). leads to a complex immunodeficiency syndrome characterized by albinism, The FM size was reduced in all FGFR-related anomalies compared to con- short stature and a severe congenital neutropenia due to decreased prote- trols (489.77 mm2) except for Apert syndrome (Crouzon: 346.39 mm2, in and mRNA levels of the lysosomal scaffold protein p14. Investigation of p<0.001, Muenke-Lajeunie: 426.13mm2, p<0.04, Achondroplasia: 125.27 the molecular pathomechanism revealed that the point mutation creates a mm2, p<0.001, Pfeiffer: 383.78 mm2, p<0.02, Apert: 422.02 mm2, p=0.07). functional 5’ splice site (SS). Recognition by the spliceosomal component U1 However, the extent of such alterations was extremely variable. The higher snRNP, suppresses p14 mRNA expression in the absence of splicing. The ex- degree of reduction was found in achondroplasia whereas the milder degree tent of suppression correlates with the complementarity to U1 snRNA. 
P14  was that of Apert patients. Smaller FM were associated to cerebrospinal flu- expression can be rescued by blocking U1 snRNP with modified antisense id disorders (Subarachnoid or ventricular dilatations). oligonucleotides.Although the precise mechanism of U1 snRNP-mediated In conclusion, the large spectrum of FM alterations associated to FGFR mu- suppression is not identified, we showed that U1 affects poly(A) site reco- tations is associated to the type of gene mutation. The size of the FM seems gnition. In our tandem poly(A) site (PAS) reporter system the 3’ end proces- t Fo. pDlia ryo ac croo:l eN ionn teh. eC o. Cccoullrerte: nNcoen oef. cMe.r Deburpolasnp-iBnaiol sflsuei:d N doinseo.r dMe. rZse draisho:r ders. sing machinery switches to the downstream PAS in the presence of the p14 None. C. Sainte-Rose: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. A. Munnich: None. L. Legeai-Mallet: None. E. Arnaud: None. mutation and in addition a substantial amount of read-through is produced indicating that U1 snRNP can inhibit two consecutive PAS. A similar 3’UTR mutation is also found in the factor IX gene resulting in hemophila B. We are currently investigating if this mutation found in 8 patients acts via the same 
C15 .2 pathomechanism as p14. Thus, 5’SS created by point mutations within 3’ New genes in epilepsy and its co-morbidities: a linkage and whole UTRs illustrate not only a novel mechanism for a primary immunodeficien- exome sequencing approach. cy, but may also be at the base for other disorders characterized by defective L. M. Dibbens1, B. de Vries2, S. Donatello3, K. R. Smith4, M. Bahlo4, B. L. Hodgson1, m J.R LNaAn gbeiomgeeinere:s Niso.ne. M. Radtke: None. C. Klein: None. J. Bohne: None. S. Chintawar3, J. Serratosa5, F. Andermann6, E. Andermann6, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg7, M. Pandolfo3, S. F. Berkovic8, I. E. Scheffer8, S. E. Heron1; 1University of South Australia, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Adelaide, Australia, 2Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
C14 .6 Netherlands, 3Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 4The Walter and Eliza Ion transporter deficiency predisposes to pyogenic bacterial infection Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 5Hospital Universitario by partial oxidative burst defect in granulocytes Fundación Jiménez Diaz and CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 6University of Montreal, Montreal, M. Hubeau1,2, G. Vogt1,2, F. Conti1,2,3, A. Grant1,2, L. Abel1,2, P. Gros4, M. Cellier5, C. Picard1,2, J. QC, Canada, 7Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 8Epilepsy Research Bustamante1,2, J. Casanova1,2; Centre, Melbourne, Australia. 1INSERM U980, PARIS, France, 2Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 3University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 4Department of Biochemistry McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique INRS-Institut Purpose: The majority of epilepsies are focal in origin, with seizures arising Armand-Frappier 531, LAVAL, QC, Canada. in one region of the brain. The aetiology of most cases of focal epilepsy re- mains unknown and has not generally been thought to be genetic. We stu- died large pedigrees with forms of focal epilepsy (NFLE and FFEVF) which Staphylococcal infections are the cause of various diseases associated with a showed autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance to identify the genes respon- wide spectrum of symptoms and could range from benign to poor prognosis. sible and then studied their broader contribution to the focal epilepsies. S.epidermidis is an opportunist pathogen essentially responsible of noso- Method: We used a strategy of whole genome linkage analysis followed by comial infections and has rarely been described as implicated in primary whole exome sequencing in two families with FFEVF mapping to Chromoso- immunodeficiencies (PID). me 22q12 and one large family with ADNFLE mapping to 9q34.3. We studied a patient from a consanguineous Indian family who suffered Results: We detected mutations in DEPD
C5  in the two families and sub- from upper respiratory tract infection and recurrent cellulitis to S. epider- sequently in 5/6 additional families with FFEVF. Furthermore, we found midis, suggesting immune susceptibility. To identify the genetic defect, we DEPD
C5  mutations in approximately 12% (10/82) of families with non- associated genetic linkage analysis, exome sequencing, and a candidate gene lesional focal epilepsy. A mutation in the potassium channel gene KCNT1 approach. We identified an unreported homozygous variation in the pati- was identified in the family with NFLE and subsequently in three other fami- ent. The gene encodes for a divalent cation/proton (Fe2+, Zn2+ and Mn2+) lies with NFLE. Mutation-positive family members were also affected with transporter. This mutation impairs protein expression in patient’s granulo- psychiatric features, intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorders. cytes and induces a loss of function in terms of oxidative burst and Staphy- Conclusions: Mutations in DEPD
C5  account for approximately 12% of cases lococcus killing ability. Identical results were obtained using the PLB-985 of non-lesional familial focal epilepsy, becoming the most common known granulocytes knock out for this protein. Thus, we identified a new genetic cause of familial focal epilepsy. KCNT1 mutations contribute to nocturnal defect responsible of susceptibility to pyogenic bacterial infection, this help frontal lobe epilepsy (NFLE) as well as to psychiatric features. Genetic fac- to delineate the important role of the NADPH pathway in bacterial immunity tors therefore play an increasing role in the focal epilepsies. These findings re4s2ponses in granulocytes. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRenAaNblCe iEm |p rWovWedW pa.tEieSnHt dGia.gOnoRseGs and reveal new pathways involved in theABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index p La.tMho. gDeibnbeesniss o: fE t.h Oew foncearsl heipp iIlnetpesreiesst (asntodc kre, lsatotecdk odpistioorndse, rpsa.tent or notypes suggestive of AR inheritance. DNA was taken from the patient(s), all other intellectual property); Modest; ITEK Ventures. B. de Vries: None. S. unaffected siblings and parents. All samples were genotyped with 720K SNP Donatello: None. K.R. Smith: None. M. Bahlo: None. B.L. Hodgson: None. S. array to identify Runs of Homozygosity, allowing the definition of identical- Chintawar: None. J. Serratosa: None. F. Andermann: None. E. Andermann: None. A.M.J.M. van den Maagdenberg: None. M. Pandolfo: None. S.F. by-descent chromosomal regions likely to contain the responsible pathoge- Berkovic: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual nic variants. Exome sequencing was performed on one affected individual property); Modest; ITEK Ventures. I.E. Scheffer: E. Ownership Interest (stock, per family. Variants within the identified target areas were called and filte- stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; ITEK Ventures. S.E. red for various criteria for pathogenicity. Samples from one affected indivi- Heron: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual dual per family were also examined by aCGH to detect homozygous deletions property); Modest; ITEK Ventures. and duplications. On average, 21,719 variants were identified per patient. The putative pathogenic variant was found in known disease-causing ge- nes (VLDLR, DM
P1 , FKTN, SEPSECS, GUCY2D, BB
S4 , SYN
E1  and POMGNT1) 
C15 .3 in 8 families. In two families, strong candidate mutations were identified Targeted sequencing of GPI anchor synthesis pathway genes identifies and in a further 16 families, variants of likely pathogenicity were found. In mutations in PGA
P2  as a new cause of hyperphosphatasia with mental 6 families, no plausible candidates were identified. Consanguineous fami- retardation lies provide a unique opportunity to identify pathogenic variants in both P. M. Krawitz1, Y. Murakami2, A. Rieß3, M. Hietala4, U. Krüger1, Z. Na1, T. Kinoshita2, S. known and candidate genes responsible for recessive phenotypes in order Mundlos1, P. N. Robinson1, J. Hecht1, D. Horn1; to populate the missing space of genotype-to-phenotype links. We identified 1Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of a putative causative variant in 25% of families tested. High-throughput se- Immunoregulation, Osaka, Japan, 3Human Genetics, Tübingen, Germany, 4Medical quencing represents a substantial improvement in our ability to diagnose Biochemistry, Turku, Finland. rPe.c Mesaskirvyetlhya innahseirsi:t eNdo ndeis. oMr.d Neersli.s: None. F.A. Santoni: None. M. Guipponi: None. A. Vannier: None. F. Béna: None. S. Gimelli: None. E. Stathaki: None. S. Temtamy: None. A. Mégarbané: None. A. Masri: None. M.S. Aglan: None. M.S. Recently, mutations in genes involved in the biosynthesis of the glycosyl- Zaki: None. A. Bottani: None. S. Fokstuen: None. L. Gwanmesia: None. K. phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor have been identified in a new subclass Aliferis: None. M.E. Bustamante: None. G. Stamoulis: None. S. Psoni: None. S. Kitsiou-Tzeli: None. H. Frissyra: None. E. Kanavakis: None. N. of congenital disorders of glycosylation with a distinct spectrum of clinical Al-Allawi: None. A. Sefiani: None. S. Al-Hait: None. S.C. Elalaoui: None. N. features. To date mutations have been identified in six genes of the GPI-an- Jalkh: None. L. Al-Gazali: None. F. Al-Jasmi: None. H. Chaabouni Bouhamed: chor synthesis pathway, PIGA, PIGL, PIGM, PIGN, PIGO, and PIGV in patients None. E. Abdalla: None. D.N. Cooper: None. H. Hamamy: None. S.E. with severe neurological features including seizures, muscular hypotonia, Antonarakis: None. and intellectual disability. We developed a diagnostic gene panel for targe- ting all known genes of the GPI-anchor synthesis pathway to screen patients matching these features, and detected three missense mutations in PGA
P2 , 
C15 .5 c.46C>T, c.380T>C, and c.479C>T, in two unrelated patients with hyperphos- Exome Sequencing in the Diagnostics of non-motile Ciliopathies (113 phatasia mental retardation syndrome (HPMRS). The mutations cosegrega- cases) ted in the investigated families. PGA
P2  is a gene involved in fatty acid remo- M. Schmidts1, E. Chanudet2, V. Plagnol3, F. Lescai2, H. Jungbluth4, G. Haliloglu5, H. deling of the GPI-anchor, which occurs in the Golgi apparatus and is required Kayserili6, M. E. Hurles7, P. J. Scambler1, U. Consortium8, P. L. Beales1,2, H. M. Mitchison1; for stable association of GPI-anchored proteins with the cell surface mem- 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Birth Defect Research Center, Institute of Child Health, brane rafts. Transfection of the mutant constructs p.Arg16Trp, p.Leu127Ser, University College London (UCL), London, United Kingdom, 2GOSgene-Center for and p.Thr160Ile into PGA
P2 -null cells showed only partial restoration of Translational Genomics, Institute of Child Health, University College London (UCL), GPI-anchored marker proteins, CD55 and CD59, on the cell surface. In this London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Genetics, Environment and Evolution, UCL work we show that also an impairment of GPI-anchor remodeling causes Genetics Institute (UGI), University College London (UCL), London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Paediatric Neurology, Evelina Children’s Hospital, Guy’s and St Thomas’ HPMRS and conclude that targeted sequencing of the GPI-anchor pathway National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Department genes is an effective diagnostic approach for this subclass of congenital dis- of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe University Children‘s Hos, Ankara, Turkey, 6Medical o Pr.dMe. rKsr oafw gitlyz:c oNsoynlea.t iYo.n M.urakami: None. A. Rieß: None. M. Hietala: None. U. Genetics Department, Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Wellcome Krüger: None. Z. Na: None. T. Kinoshita: None. S. Mundlos: None. P.N. Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 8www.uk10k.org, Rare Disease Robinson: None. J. Hecht: None. D. Horn: None. Working Group, United Kingdom. Background: 
C15 .4 Non-motilecilia are hair like structures extending from the Diagnostic exome sequencing to elucidate the genetic basis of likely surface of most cells in mammalian organisms. Mutations in genes encoding recessive disorders in consanguineous families for cilia associated proteins lead to complex developmental defects and alt- P. Makrythanasis1, M. Nelis1,2, F. A. Santoni1, M. Guipponi3, A. Vannier1, F. Béna3, S. hough individual ciliopathy diseases are very rare, together they represent a Gimelli3, E. Stathaki3, S. Temtamy4, A. Mégarbané5,6, A. Masri7, M. S. Aglan4, M. S. Zaki4, significant disease burden. Due to extensive genetic heterogeneity and phe- A. Bottani3, S. Fokstuen3, L. Gwanmesia3, K. Aliferis3, M. E. Bustamante1, G. Stamoulis1, notypic as well as genetic overlap, molecular diagnosis using Sanger sequen- S. Psoni8, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli8, H. Frissyra8, E. Kanavakis8, N. Al-Allawi9, A. Sefiani10,11, cing has been proven very difficult iRn ethsue lptsa:st. However, the development of S. Al-Hait12, S. C. Elalaoui10, N. Jalkh5, L. Al-Gazali13,14, F. Al-Jasmi13,14, H. Chaabouni Bouhamed15, E. Abdalla16, D. N. Cooper17, H. Hamamy1, S. E. Antonarakis1,3; Next Generation Sequencing techniques such as Whole Exome Sequencing 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, (WES) offers new diagnostic tools. We have investigated 61 Jeune Switzerland, 2Estonian Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Service of Asphyxiating Thoracic Dysplasia (JATD), 37 Bardet-Biedl-Syndrome (BBS), Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Department of 7 Joubert and 9 other ciliopathy cases (total of 113 cases) using WES and Clinical Genetics, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Saint were able to identify the disease causing gene in approximately two thirds Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 6Institut Jerôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 7Pediatric of all cases with about 50% of JATD and Joubert cases but up to 90% of BBS Department, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan, 8Department of Medical Genetics, cases being caused by known disease causing genes. Our findings lead to re- University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 9Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Dohuk, Dohuk, Iraq, 10Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut vision of the clinical diagnosis in some cases and revealed new phenotype- National d‘Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 11Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de genotype associations, especially in JATD. Functional studies for severa Sl unemw- Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université Mohamed V Souissi, Rabat, Morocco, 12Genetics gmeanreys: identified are currently under investigation. However, the proportion & IVF Department, The Farah Hospital, Amman, Jordan, 13Department of Paediatrics, of solved cases was much lower among less well defined phenotypes. College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Our findings in this large non-motile ciliopathy cohort demonstrate Arab Emirates, 14Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital, United Arab Emirates that WES is a very efficient tool in genetics diagnosis of heterogenous reces- University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 15Department of Human Genetics, University sive disorders facilitated by deep phenotyping. Compared to NGS gene panel Tunis El Manar, Faculty of Medicine, Tunis, Tunisia, 16Medical Research Institute, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, 17Institute of Medical Genetics, School of sequencing, WES offers additional opportunities to identify new genes pre- Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. v Mio. uSsclhy mnoidtt sa:s sNoocniaet. eEd. Cwhitahn tuhdee tc:o Nnodnitei.o Vn. iPnlvaegsntoigl:a Nteodn.e. F. Lescai: None. H. Jungbluth: None. G. Haliloglu: None. H. Kayserili: None. M.E. Hurles: None. P.J. Scambler: None. U. Consortium: None. P.L. Beales: None. H.M. Mitchison: None. Consanguinity increases the risk for autosomal recessive (AR) disorders. Exome sequencing provides an opportunity to arrive at a molecular diagno- sis in a proportion of unresolved phenotypes in these families, thereby iden- tifying novel candidate genes for AR phenotypes. Samples were collected ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 43 from 32 consanguineous families characterized by a wide spectrum of phe-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C15 .6 H. Gui: None. D. Schriemer: None. B.J.L. Eggen: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: Detection of clinically relevant copy number variants with whole None. W. van IJcken: None. M. van den Hout: None. P. Griseri: None. I. exome sequencing Matera: None. I. Ceccherini: None. A. Pelet: None. J. Amiel: None. S. Lyonnet: J. de Ligt1, P. M. Boone2, R. Pfundt1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, T. Richmond3, J. Geoghegan3, K. None. M. Garcia-Barcelo: None. P.K. Tam: None. M. Ruiz-Ferrer: None. G. O’Moore3, N. de Leeuw1, C. Shaw2,3, H. G. Brunner1, J. R. Lupski2,4, J. A. Veltman1, J. Y. Hehir- Antiñolo: None. S. Borrego: None. C. Berrios: None. A. Chakravarti: None. Kwa1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
C16 .2 Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States, 4Department A novel chromosomal breakage syndrome caused by a missense of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, mutation in a gene from the SM
C5 /6 complex United States. M. Harakalova1, S. N. van der Crabben1, M. P. Hennus2, J. M. van Montfrans3, I. Renkens1, K. Duran1, M. van Roosmalen1, S. van Lieshout1, P. M. van Hasselt4, S. W. Terheggen- Lagro5, P. Terhal1, T. Letteboer1, R. Hochstenbach1, K. Gaiser3, E. Kuijk6, I. J. Nijman1, N. Knoers1, W. Kloosterman1, E. Cuppen1,6, G. van Haaften1; Copy number variation (CNV) is a common source of genetic variation that 1Department of Medical Genetics, UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric has been implicated in many genomic disorders. This has resulted in the wi- Intensive Care, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department despread application of genomic microarrays as a first tier diagnostic tool. of Pediatric Immunology, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands, More recently whole exome sequencing (WES) has proven highly successful 4Department of Metabolic and Endocrine Diseases, Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, for unbiased detection of clinically relevant point mutations and small in- Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Wilhelmina Children’s sertion-deletions. Here, we evaluated the clinical utility of WES to detect Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Hubrecht Institute, KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht (UMCU), Utrecht, Netherlands. CNVs in a set of DNAs from 10 patients with intellectual disability in which diagnostic SNP arrays previously detected 12 pathogenic CNVs. WES read depth approaches were compared to CNV detection provided by a range of We characterized two Caucasian sisters who died at the age of one year of a (ultra) high-resolution microarrays (250K, 2.7M and 4.2M (exon targeted)), sudden progressive pulmonary deterioration with multiple viral infections to assess WES performance. Using WES read depth data, we detected 11 of despite an intact immune system. They showed failure to thrive, hypotonia, the 12 clinically relevant CNVs; a heterozygous single-exon deletion remai- mild psychomotor retardation, eczema, sparse hair growth, prominent ve- ned undetected. WES identified an average of five CNVs per exome, encom- ins, multiple aspecific cerebral calcifications and allergy. Karyotyping in cul- passing on average 8 genes (1-118). Breakpoint and gene content analysis tured lymphocytes showed up to two supernumerary marker chromosomes showed that even though WES lacks breakpoint accuracy compared to the in the first girl and up to eight supernumerary marker chromosomes and high-resolution microarrays, the gene content of clinically relevant CNVs, missing chromosomal parts in the second girl. Array-CGH at 180K resoluti- encompassing 3 or more exons, can be determined reliably. The detection on based on DNA from blood of both sisters showed a normal female profile. power of WES for small and single-exon CNVs currently does not match the Cultured skin fibroblasts grow very poorly; survivors show no chromosomal detection power of high-resolution microarray platforms, and should be anomalies. All known chromosomal breakage syndromes were excluded by optimized to detect these. The majority (76%) of all 33 rare coding CNVs genetic testing. (≥3 exons), identified by two independent microarray platforms, were suc- Homozygosity mapping in the family revealed a large homozygous stretch of cessfully identified by WES making it even more attractive as a first tier dia- g Jn. odset iLci gtot:o Nl ionn eg.e Pn.eMti.c Baolloyn hee:t Neroongee. nRe. oPufsu nddist:o Nrdoenres.. L.E.L.M. Vissers: more than 8Mb and subsequent genealogical analysis proved consanguinity None. T. Richmond: None. J. Geoghegan: None. K. O’Moore: None. N. de as far as ten generations back. Whole-exome sequencing in the two affected Leeuw: None. C. Shaw: None. H.G. Brunner: None. J.R. Lupski: None. J.A. girls followed by additional segregation analysis in their healthy parents, Veltman: None. J.Y. Hehir-Kwa: None. two sisters and a brother identified a novel missense variant in a gene from the SM
C5 /6 complex proofing inheritance in an autosomal recessive man- ner. The missense variant overlaps with the largest homozygous stretch, is 
C16 .1 located in a conserved region, and predicted to have a damaging effect on Patterns and Rates of Exonic de novo Mutations in Sporadic the protein function by PolyPhen and SIFT. It is absent in all available da- Hirschsprung Disease Patients tabases. H. Gui1, D. Schriemer2, B. J. L. Eggen2, R. M. W. Hofstra3, W. van IJcken3, M. van den Hout3, This work suggests the first evidence of a germline mutation in a gene from P. Griseri4, I. Matera4, I. Ceccherini4, A. Pelet5, J. Amiel5, S. Lyonnet5, M. Garcia-Barcelo1, P. the structural maintenance of chromosomes complex SM
C5 /6 linked to a K. Tam1, M. Ruiz-Ferrer6, G. Antiñolo6, S. Borrego6, C. Berrios7, A. Chakravarti7, on behalf n Mo.v Hela crahkraolmovoas:o Nmoanle b. rSe.aNk. avgaen sdyenrd Crorambeb.en: None. M.P. Hennus: None. J.M. of International Consortium of Hirschsprung Disease; van Montfrans: None. I. Renkens: None. K. Duran: None. M. van Roosmalen: 1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2The University of Groningen, None. S. van Lieshout: None. P.M. van Hasselt: None. S.W. Terheggen-Lagro: Groningen, Netherlands, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Istituto G. None. P. Terhal: None. T. Letteboer: None. R. Hochstenbach: None. K. Gaiser: Gaslini, L.go G. Gaslini 5, Italy, 5Université Paris 5-Descartes, Paris, France, 6Hospitales None. E. Kuijk: None. I.J. Nijman: None. N. Knoers: None. W. Kloosterman: Universitarios Virgen del Rocio, Servilla, Spain, 7Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, None. E. Cuppen: None. G. van Haaften: None. MD, United States. 
C16 .3 Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, aganglionic megacolon; 1 in 5000 live births) SPRTN deficiency causes a novel segmental progeroid syndrome with is a disorder of the enteric nervous system (ENS) characterized by the ab- chromosomal instability sence of enteric neurons along a variable length of the intestine. HSCR most D. Lessel1, J. Oshima2, J. Lopez-Mosqueda3, I. Marinovic-Terzic4, M. Philipp5, R. Fertig6, commonly presents sporadically, although it can be familial (5-20% of the S. von Ameln1, M. Degoricija4, H. Thiele7, G. Nürnberg7, P. Nürnberg7, G. M. Martin2, C. M. patients). The sporadic Aalfs8, K. Ramadan6, J. Terzic4, I. Dikic3, C. Kubisch1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Department of Pathology, de novo de novo University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Institute of Biochemistry II, form of the disorder is believed to be a genetically complex disease with University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 4Department of Immunology and Medical both and/or inherited genetic lesions. To assess the role of Genetics, University of Split, Split, Croatia, 5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular mutations (DNM) in sporadic HSCR, we performed exome sequencing on Biology, University Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 6Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 16 HSCR patients and their unaffected parents. Standard BWA/GATK pipe- University of Zürich-Vetsuisse, Zürich, Switzerland, 7Cologne Center for Genomics, line was used to map the sequence reads to human reference genome 19 University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam and call genomic variants for all 48 samples simultaneously. Exonic DNM Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. mutations were identified using KGGSeq. DNM candidates were scrutinDizNeMd using Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) and those variants deemed plau- sible were validated by Sanger sequencing. In total we confirmed 20 Syndromes with signs of premature aging affecting several tissues are crucial mutaDtiNoMns (17 SNVs, 3 Indels) in 16 genes. Five DNM were identified in RET to identify novel genes and pathways involved in the aging process. We have (major HSCR gene). CCR2, CO
L6 A3, MED26, NU
P98 , HMCN1 and DENND3 studied a consanguineous patient affected by a segmental progeroid syn- had mutations and were found mutated in independent HSCR pati- drome with chromosomal instability and early-onset hepatocellular carci- ents. Importantly, some of these genes are members of pathways involved in noma. Exome sequencing revealed just a single non-annotated homozygous the development of the ENS and the encoded proteins interact with known sequence change with a severe impact on protein structure: a homozygous key signaling molecules. The overall exonic DNM mutation rate is 1.25 per frame-shift mutation in a formerly uncharacterized gene SPRTN. We showed HSCR trio, with 10 out of 16 (62.5%) patients harboring ≥ 1 DNM mutations. that this protein is recruited to sites of DNA damage after treatment with ge- Therefore, DNM mutations, as inherited mutations, contribute to the deve- notoxic agents and is crucially involved in various DNA damage response pa- lo4p4ment of sporadic HSCR. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRthAwNayCs.E s i|R WNAW-mWed.iEatSedH dGep.OletRioGn in cultured cells resulted in both severeABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index proliferation defects and chromosomal instability with increased sensitivity compartmentalization are ensured by selective import of specific cargoes towards genotoxic agents comparable to the findings in patients’ primary through a barrier at the ciliary base. Given the structural constraints im- cells. We also observed a siRNA-mediated distortion of the nuclear envelope posed by this selectivity barrier, how membrane-associated proteins are like seen in other types of segmental progeria, which could be rescued by imported into the primary cilia has remained unclear. In a consanguineous expression of human wildtype but not by a construct expressing the mutant family with Joubert Syndrome (JS), combined exome sequencing and map- isoform. In addition, we cloned the zebrafish ortholog and could show that ping identified a homozygous splice site mutation in PD
E6 D, encoding a morpholino-based silencing resulted in an increase of γH2AX foci, as a mar- prenyl-binding protein. We found that pde6d depletion in zebrafish leads ker of DNA damage, as well as in developmental defects and increased mor- to renal and retinal developmental anomalies and that wild type but not tality. The latter could be partially rescued by expression of human wildtype mutant PD
E6 D is able to rescue this phenotype. In an effort to understand but not by a construct expressing the mutant protein. In summary, we iden- the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying PD
E6 D mutation in JS we tified the cause of a novel segmental progeroid syndrome and a crucial role used tandem affinity purification/mass spectrometry and identified the ci- o Df .t Lheiss sfoerl:m Neornlye .u Jn.c Ohsahraimctae:r Nizoende g. eJn. Le oinp etzh-eM roesgquulaetdiao:n N oofn aeg. iIn. gM.arinovic- liary farnesylated protein INP
P5 E involved in two ciliopathies (Joubert and Terzic: None. M. Philipp: None. R. Fertig: None. S. von Ameln: None. M. MORM syndromes) as a cargo of PD
E6 D. We showed that PD
E6 D binds to Degoricija: None. H. Thiele: None. G. Nürnberg: None. P. Nürnberg: INP
P5 E in a farnesyl-dependent manner and that patient truncated PD
E6 D, None. G.M. Martin: None. C.M. Aalfs: None. K. Ramadan: None. J. Terzic: None. I. Dikic: None. C. Kubisch: None. which localizes properly to the basal body, shows reduced binding to IN- P
P5 E and to AR
L2  and AR
L3  that act as cargo-release factors for PD
E6 D- bound farnesylated proteins. In patients and PD
E6 D-depleted cells, INP
P5 E fails to localize to the primary cilia indicating that PD
E6 D is required for 
C16 .4 INP
P5 E ciliary targeting. This study provides the first evidence of prenyl- Mutations in HDA
C8  cause a clinically recognizable Cornelia de Lange binding dependent trafficking in ciliopathies and highlights a specific me- Syndrome (CdLS)-like disorder cSh.a Tnhisomm aesn:a Nbolinneg. pKr.Je.n Wylraitgehdt :p Nrootneei.n S i.m Lpeo Crot rwreit:h Ninon per.i Am.a Mryo ccailliiaz.zi: F. J. Kaiser1, D. Braunholz1, M. Ansari2, S. Lynch3, N. DiDonato4, J. Eckhold1, M. Gil- None. M. Romani: None. A. Abhyankar: None. J. Saada: None. I. Perrault: Rodríguez5, J. Pié5, F. Ramos5, N. Revencu6, I. Krantz7, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, D. None. J. Amiel: None. J. Litzler: None. E. Filhol: None. N. Elkhartoufi: None. M. FitzPatrick2, M. Deardorff7; Kwong: None. J. Casanova: None. N. Boddaert: None. W. Baehr: None. S. 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, Lyonnet: None. A. Munnich: None. L. Burglen: None. N. Chassaing: None. F. United Kingdom, 3Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital Crumlin, Dublin, United Kingdom, Encha-Ravazi: None. M. Vekemans: None. J.G. Gleeson: None. E. Valente: 4Institut für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 5Unit of Clinical Genetics and None. P.K. Jackson: None. I.A. Drummond: None. S. Saunier: None. T. Attié- Functional Genomics, Zaragoza, Spain, 6Center of Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, Bitach: None. 7Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 
C16 .6 CdLS is a rare multisystem genetic disorder typified by characteristic facies, Integrator Complex Subunit 8 mutations associated with abnormal prenatal onset growth failure, intellectual disability, distal limNbI PaBnLo,m alies, brain development and spliceosomal defect gastrointestinal and neurological disease. The phenotype shows a broad R. Oegema, R. Schot, D. Heijsman, L. van Unen, S. Kheradmand Kia, J. Hoogeboom, A. range of variaSbMilCit1yA. AboSuMtC h3alf of patients have mutations in which Kremer, F. W. Verheijen, P. van der Spek, R. Hofstra, M. Fornerod, G. M. S. Mancini; encodes a cohesin-associated factor. An additional 5% of the patientsN IhPaBvLe ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. mutations in or , which encode structural components of cohe- sin. Loose genotype-phenotype correlations exist, with mutations in resulting in the majority of the “classically” affected patientsH. DHAoCw8ever aty- The Integrator Complex (IC) is responsible for the 3‘-end processing of the pical or variant CdLS cases have a much lower mutation detection rate. Here U1/U2 major spliceosome snRNAs. Maturation of these snRNAs presumably we demonstrate that mutations in the X chromosome gene adree n porveo- takes place in the subnuclear Cajal body and the IC is an essential compo- sent in about 5% of our patient cohort and cause a recognizable subgroup nent for its integrity. There is accumulating evidence that the IC is necessary of CdLS-like phenotypes. Most of these mutations are missense and . for normal vertebrate development, however no association with human About two-thirds of affected cases are heterozygous females and marked disease has been reported yet. skeHwDiAnCg8 o-f X-inactivation in peripheral blood DNA is common. Hemizygous Three siblings presented with severe developmental brain abnormalities, males are more severely affected than females. The craniofacial appearance cerebellar hypoplasia and periventricular nodular heterotopia (PNH) of of cases is distinct from classical CdLS, and delayed anterior fonta- unknown cause. UInsitneggr awthoor lCeo mgepnleoxm Seu bsuenqiut e8ncIiNnTg S(8Complete Genomics), nelle closure may be a useful discriminating feature. Limb malformations and filtering for recessive inheritance, we discovered compoundIN hTeSte8r ozy- appear to be rare and postnatal growth failure is less severe than clHasDsAicCa8l gous mutations in ( ) in the three sibs, the CdLS. Functional analysis of mutant HDA
C8  proteins demonstrates partial parents being heterozygous. QRT-PCR showed 2-fold decreased RNA or complete loss function. These data demonstrate that mutations in levels in patients’ cells compared to controls. Pathway analysis (Ingenuity) cause a clinically distinct subgroup of CdLS and solidify HDA
C8 -mediated of expression data (Affymetrix U133 expression arrays and Gene Chip 1.0 ST dFe.Ja.c Ketayislaetri:o Nno inne t.h De. mBroaluecnuhloalrz :m Neocnhea.n Mis. mAn insa croi:h Neosnine .f uSn. cLtyinocnh.: None. N. exon arrays) of RNA extracted from patient fibroblasts showed enrichment DiDonato: None. J. Eckhold: None. M. Gil-Rodríguez: None. J. Pié: None. F. Ramos: None. N. Revencu: None. I. Krantz: None. G. Gillessen-Kaesbach: of deregulated genes involved in mRNAI NspTlSic8i ng and posttranscriptional mo- None. D. FitzPatrick: None. M. Deardorff: None. dification. Expression data of (developing) human brain structures (Allen Brain Atlas) show that expression of peaks prenatally, especially in the ganglionic eminences, (sub)ventricular zone and hindbrain, similar to mouse embryo (Emage databse). From these areas neuronal precursoINrsT m
S8 i- 
C16 .5 grate to the cortex, and these regions are compatible with the PNH and cere- A homozygous PD
E6 D mutation in Joubert syndrome impairs bellar phenotype in the patients. Immuno-staining of Cajal bodies in - targeting of farnesylated INP
P5 E protein to the primary cilium depleted and in patients’ fibroblasts is ongoing and will be presented. S. Thomas1, K. J. Wright2, S. Le Corre3, A. Mocalizzi4, M. Romani4, A. Abhyankar5, We propose that dysfunction of the Integrator Complex, through a spliceoso- J. Saada6, I. Perrault1, J. Amiel1, J. Litzler1, E. Filhol7, N. Elkhartoufi1, M. Kwong2, J. Casanova8,5, N. Boddaert9, W. Baehr10, S. Lyonnet1, A. Munnich1, L. Burglen11, N. m Ra. lO deegfeemcta, :l eNaodnse t.o R s. eSvcehroelty: Ndoisnreu. pDt.e Hd ebirjsamina dne: vNeolnoep.m Le. nvat nin U hnuemn:a Nnso.ne. S. Kheradmand Kia: None. J. Hoogeboom: None. A. Kremer: None. F.W. Chassaing12, F. Encha-Ravazi1, M. Vekemans1, J. G. Gleeson13, E. Valente4, P. K. Jackson2, I. Verheijen: None. P. van der Spek: None. R. Hofstra: None. M. Fornerod: A. Drummond3, S. Saunier7, T. Attié-Bitach1; None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. 1INSERM U781 - Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Genentech Inc., San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Roma, Italy, 5The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, United States, 6Hopital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France, 
C17 .1 7INSERM U983 - Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 8INSERM U980 - Hôpital Natural variation in the histone demethylase, KDM4C, influences Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 9Service de Radiologie pédiatrique-Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10University of Utah Health Science Center, Salt transcriptional regulation and cell growth Lake City, UT, United States, 11Service de Génétique et embryologie médicales-Hôpital B. L. Gregory1, V. G. Cheung1,2; d‘Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale - EA4555 1University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Howard Hughes Medical UPSIII - CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 13Neurogenetics Laboratory - Institute for Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, United States. Genomic Medicine - University of California, San Diego, CA, United States. Histone demethylases are chromatin modifiers; while their biochemical ac- Primary cilia are microtubule-based oE rgS aH neG lle 2 s 0 w1 h3 o s| e P A foR rmIS at, i oF nR A anN d CE t i| v W itieW s hW av. eE bS eH enG c. hO arR aG cterized, very few of their target genes are kno4w5n.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index In this study, by genetic and molecular analyses, we identified and charac- missense or nonsense mutations (n=52).i nO vuirv oresults revealed that a signi- terized over 300 target genes of KDM4C, a member of the Jumonji family of ficant fraction of these variants have an effect on splicing. Importantly, when histone demethylases. KDM4C demethylates tri-methylated H3K9 histone patient RNA was available, minigene and daBtRa CwAe2re shown MtoL bHe1 con- marks, which are associated with transcriptional repression. cordant. Remarkably, a significant subset of variants induced exon skipping We measured gene expression in B-cells from members of 45 large pedi- in spite of being located outside splice sites (10 in i na nsdil i7co in ), an grees, and treateKdD gMe4nCe expression levels as quantitaKtiDveM t4rCaits in linkage effect that could not be predicted by commonly used bioinformatic approa- and associaticoisn analyses. We found extensiveK DinMdi4vCidual variation in the ex- ches. This observation led us to test a newly developed tool aiming pression level of . Genetic analyses showed that expression is at detecting exonic splicing regulatory elements. With very few exceptions, regulated in by variants near the 3’ end of , and luciferase reporter we found the predictions produced by this tool to be concordant with our assays confirmed the presence of enhancer activity in this region. The ge- minigene-derived data. This stuind ys islihcoows that the fraction of splicing muta- netic studies also identified more than 300 genes whoseK DexMp4rCession levels tions is underestimated in Mendelian diseases and highlights the predictive are regulated by KDM4C. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that potential of a newly developed tool in pinpointing exonic mutations KKDDMM44CC localized to these genes. Individuals with high expression tOha. tS aofufekcatr iRehN:A N sopnleic. iDn.g D.i Giacomo: None. S. Krieger: None. T. Frébourg: had more KDM4C binding to its target genes thanK iDnMdi4vCiduals with lower None. M. Tosi: None. P. Gaildrat: None. A. Martins: None. expression. Many of the target genes pKlaDyM ke4yC roles in cell prolifera- tion. We foundK DthMat4 cCells from individuals with high expression grew faster than those from individuals with lower expression. In additi- 
C17 .4 on, we found to be expressed at higher levels in cancers than in cor- New insights into human germline chromothripsis: underlying responding normal cells, and that KDM4C depletion attenuates cancer cell mechanisms and definition growth. In this presentation, I will describe how transcriptional regulation L. Nazaryan1, M. Bak1, A. Lind-Thomsen1, C. Halgren1, E. Stefanou2, C. Hansen1, K. F. b By. LK.D GMre4gCo dryif: fNerosn aem. Vo.Gn.g C inhdeiuvnidgu: aNlosn aen.d how this influences cell growth. Henriksen1, M. Bugge1, J. Lespinasse3, G. Houge4, N. Tommerup1; 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicin, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University General Hospital of Patras, 
C17 .2 Rion, Greece, 3Department of Cytogenetics, Central hospital, Chambery, France, 4Center Enrichment of uniparental disomy events detected in the Deciphering of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Bergen, Norway. Developmental Disorders rare disease study D. A. King, M. E. Hurles; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Recently, a new phenomenon of highly complex genomic rearrangements was revealed, which was termed chromothripsis and defined by the accu- mulation of multiple breakpoints within relatively small chromosomal regi- The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) project aims to identify ons and by extensive rearrangements within a single cell cycle. So far there the disease-causing mutations for 12,000 children in the UK with rare, pre- are only data from 13 reported germline chromothripsis (GC) cases with sumed genetic, developmental diseases. This study uses a proband-mother- a maximum number of breakpoints < 25. The lower complexity has been father trio design, which by its nature facilitates the identification of inhe- suggested to be due to selection. Herein, we present five new cases of GC, ritance anomalies. This work focuses on the investigation of uniparental di- two of which are the most complex cases studied so far, involving 46 and somy (UPD), an inheritance defect characterised by the inheritance of both 140 breakpoints, respectively. This supports that viability of these cases chromosome homologs from only one parent. UPD can result in imprinting is not determined by the number of breakpoints per se, but rather by the disorders, or lead to the unmasking of recessive disorders, phenomena that functional consequences of the truncated genes and regulatory landscapes. are generally uncommon, but over-represented among individuals with rare We confirmed the surprisingly balanced state of GC in four cases, but one is diseases. Our newly developed method reads VCF-formatted trio genotype associated with larger deletions at all breakpoints involved. The most likely data, identifies genotypes in the proband only compatible with uniparen- mechanism for these rearrangements would be local shattering of the chro- tal inheritance, and performs a statistical test to identify chromosomes mosomal regions generating numerous double-strand DNA breaks, which with a significant enrichment of these informative genotypes. Simulation have subsequently been repaired by non-homologous or microhomology- testing demonstrated 100% sensitivity in detecting whole-chromosome mediated end-joining mechanisms. However, we do not exclude the invol- UPD events from both SNP genotyping chip-derived and exome-derived ge- vement of replication based mechanisms in the case with deletions at all notypes, and remained completely sensitive for segmental UPD detection breakpoints. Combined with the reported GC cases, we observe a significant down to ten megabases for most types of UPD. We applied the method on overlap of the shattered chromosomal regions suggesting that the shatte- 1,075 trios from the DDD project and identified five probands with complete ring may be a non-random process. Finally, we clarify the term chromothrip- chromosomal uniparental disomy and one proband with segmental unipa- sis and classify chromosome shattering as mild, moderate and severe based rental disomy. This is a significant enrichment over the population preva- o Ln. Nthaez anruymanb:e Nr oonfe b. rMe.a Bkpaok:in Ntos naec.c Au.m Luinladt-eTdh owmitsheinn: a N colnues.t eCr.. Halgren: lence of UPD, suggesting that most of these events are pathogenic. One of None. E. Stefanou: None. C. Hansen: None. K.F. Henriksen: None. M. Bugge: these events represents a known imprinting disorder and exome analysis None. J. Lespinasse: None. G. Houge: None. N. Tommerup: None. has identified several rare homozygous candidate variants, mainly in the isodisomic regions of UPD chromosomes, which provide targets for further f Dun.Ac.t iKoinnagl: eNvoanlue.a Mtio.En.. Hurles: None. 
C17 .5 Whole-genome sequencing analysis of human induced pluripotent stem cells uncovers lineage-manifested CNVs 
C17 .3 A. E. Urban1, A. Abyzov2, J. Mariani2, D. Palejev2, M. Haney1, Y. Zhang2, L. Tomasini2, A. Exonic splicing mutations in Mendelian disorders: more prevalent Szekely2, S. M. Weissman2, M. Gerstein2, F. Vaccarino2; 1Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 2Yale University, New Haven, CT, United than currently estimated States. O. Soukarieh1, D. Di Giacomo1, S. Krieger2, T. Frébourg1,3, M. Tosi1, P. Gaildrat1, A. Martins1; 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Cancer Genetics, CRLCC François Baclesse, Caen, France, We have performed whole-genome sequencing based CNV analysis in 3Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. 7 fibroblast samples and 20 corresponding induced pluripotent stem cell lines obtained from two families [Abyzov et al., Nature. 2012 Dec 20;492(7429):438-42]. The identification of a causal mutation is essential for molecular diagnosis We found that on average an iPSC line has two LM-CNVs (lineage-manifested and clinical management of Mendelian diseases. Even if new-generation CNVs). We defined the term LM-CNV to describe CNVs detected by genome- exome sequencing has greatly improved the detection of exonic changes, wide analyses in an iPSC line but notd ien n tohveo fibroblast culture from which the biological interBpRreCtAa2tion ofM mLHos1t exonic variants remains challenging. the given iPSC line was derived but without making a statement as to the We evaluated the prevalence of RNBAR CspAl2icing mutationMsL aHm1o ng exonic va- nature of the CNV-forming event (i.e. formation during reprogram- riants identified in and , two genes implicateedx ivniv tohe most fre- ming from fibroblast to iPSC or unmasking of a somatic variant present in quent Mendelian forms of cancer. exon 7 and exon 10 were mosaic fashion in the fibroblast tissue). used as model systems. By performing minigene-based assays, we After detecting LM-CNVs by sequencing based analysis in the iPSC lines we determined the effect on splicing produced by all single-substitutions listed investigated the masked, mosaic presence of the same CNVs in the fibroblast 46 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG in public databases, within these exons, initially reported as synonymous, tissue of origin. We determined that more than half of the LM-CNVs detectedABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 12Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen-German Research Center for Environmental Health, in iPSC lines were already present as low alledlee n forevoquency, mosaic somatic Neuherberg, Germany, 13MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, CNVs in the fibroblasts and that up to 40% of fibroblast cells carry such me- Addenbrooke‘s Hospita, Cambridge, United Kingdom. dium-sized to large somatic CNVs. Therefore, CNVs in iPSCs may not be an obligate consequence of reprogramming. Our analysis unexpectedly revealed extensive somatic copy number variability in fibroblasts carrying Previous investigations by the Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric over into iPSC and becoming unmasked in the process. Traits (GIANT) consortium have shown that seven of the 14 single nucleoti- Our results underline the necessity of carrying out high-resolution genome de polymorphisms (SNPs) found to influence body shape have significantly analysis during iPSC-model based studies and demonstrate that whole-ge- larger effect in women than in men. Adult body composition and body shape nome sequencing allows for detection and managing of the potential con- change over time (e.g. following menopause), which may be explained by f oAu.En.d Us rcbaauns:e Fd. bCyo ngseunlotamnti/cA dvvairsioartyi oBno asurdc;h M aosd LeMst;- CTyNcVhse. Mathematical Content age-and-sex-dependent genetic effects. Analysis. A. Abyzov: None. J. Mariani: None. D. Palejev: None. M. Haney: We conducted age-and-sex stratified genome-wide association (GWA) meta- None. Y. Zhang: None. L. Tomasini: None. A. Szekely: None. S.M. Weissman: analyses of 117 studies (133,012 women, 100,652 men) within the GIANT None. M. Gerstein: None. F. Vaccarino: None. consortium. Each study tested for association of up to 2.8M SNPs and obesity related traits: body mass index (BMI) and waist-hip ratio (WHR). The effects were estimated separately in four strata divided by age (<50y, >=50y) and 
C17 .6 sex and subsequently compared against each other via heterogeneity test. Modelling and rescuing neurodevelopmental defect of Down Our analysis identified no sex- and eight age-specific BMI associations at 5% syndrome using induced pluripotent stem cells from monozygotic FDR. Three novel BMI SNPs are located in or near PVR
L2 , TCF7
L2  and DDC. twins discordant for trisomy 21 The novel TCF7
L2  association (observed in >=50y) is also linked to type 2 Y. HIBAOUI1,2, I. GRAD1, A. LETOURNEAU2, M. R. SAILANI2, S. DAHOUN2, F. A. SANTONI2, S. diabetes, however the effect direction is opposite. An additional five SNPs GIMELLI2, M. L. GUIPPONI2, M. PELT
E3 , F. BENA2, S. E. ANTONARAKI
S2 , A. FEKI1,4; are located near established BMI loci: SE
C16 B, ADCY3, TNNI3K, TMEM18, 1Stem Cell Research Laboratory, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Geneva NEGR1. Two out of the 8 SNPs have stronger effect in the older group. For University Hospitals, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine WHR, we identified no age- and 29 sex-specific associations, 20 of which are and Development, University of Geneva Medical School and Geneva University Hospitals, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland, 3Department of Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of novel loci. Strikingly, all but three SNPs have a more pronounced effect in Medicine, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland, 4Service de gynécologie women than in men. obstétrique, HFR Fribourg - Hôpital cantonal, CH-1708 Fribourg, Switzerland. Our results highlight the importance of sex- and age-stratified GWAS analy- ses in revealing the sex- and age-dependent genetic underpinnings of obe- s Zit. yK turtaailtisk.: None. T. Winkler: None. S. Chu: None. J. Czajkowski: None. T. Fall: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Down syndrome (DS, trisomy 21), is the most common chromosomal disor- Modest; MSD. A. Justice: None. T.O. Kilpeläinen: None. Y. Lu: None. R. Mägi: der, with an incidence of 1 in 800 live births. Its phenotypic characteristics None. M. Graff: None. K.E. North: None. I.M. Heid: None. R.J. Loos: None. include intellectual impairment and several other developmental abnor- malities, for the majority of which the pathogenetic mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we have generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21: Twin-N-iPSCs 
C18 .2 and Twin-DS-iPSCs. Since the rest of the genome is identical between the A causal association between vitamin D status and blood pressure: a two samples, we hypothesize that these twins were ideal to study the effect Mendelian Randomization study in up to 150,846 individuals of the supernumerary chromosome 21. K. S. Vimaleswaran1, D. J. Berry1, A. Cavadino1, P. van der Harst2, G. Grimnes3, A. K. Zaineddin4, C. Lu5, A. Couto Alves6, M. H. de Borst7, A. Wong8, E. Tikkanen9, M. Mangino10, We found that Twin-DS-iPSCs recapitulate the neurodevelopmental features K. A. Jablonski11, I. M. Nolte12, B. L. Langdahl13, D. K. Houston14, T. S. Ahluwalia15, P. J. van of DS. The alterations observed by genetic analysis at the iPSC level and at der Most12, D. Pasko16, L. Zgaga17, J. Heinrich18, E. Thiering18, F. G. R. Fowkes17, C. Ohlsson19, first approximationin ivni veoarly dienv evliotrpoment illustrate the developmental di- K. Michaëlsson20, T. M. Frayling16, T. Sørensen15, S. B. Kritchevsky14, L. Rejnmark13, L. sease transcriptional signature of DS. DS-iPSCs exhibited an abnormal neu- K. Billings21, T. D. Spector10, T. Lehtimäki22, D. Kuh8, S. E. Humphries23, C. Cooper24, J. G. ral differentiation and . Twin-DS-iPSC-derived neurospheres Eriksson25, W. März26, C. Power1, M. Kumari27, H. Brenner4, R. Jorde3, H. Snieder12, T. J. showed a reduced number of neuroprogenitor cells (NPCs). When NPCs Wang28, A. D. Hingorani27, S. Pilz29, J. C. Whittaker30, M. R. Järvelin6, E. Hyppönen on belalf of D-CarDia collaboration1; were further differentiated into neurons, we found structural changes in the 1MRC Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health, Centre for Paediatric Epidemiology and architecture and density of neuron, glial cell and oligodendrocyDtYe RpKo1pAulati- Biostatistics, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of ons together with misexpression of genes involved in lineage specification, Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, neurogenesis and brain development. Importantly, targeting REST/N R(SoFn Netherlands, 3Tromsø Endocrine Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, cWhNroTmosoNmOeT 2
C1 H) pharmacologically or by shRNA corrected these defects. University of Tromsø & Division of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of North These improvements were associated with the restoration of , Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Ageing Research, and signaling to near normal levels. German Cancer Research Centre, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, In conclusion, these findings establish iPSCs generated from human mono- Boston, MA, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of zygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21 as a unique model to recapitulate DS Public Health, MRC-HPA Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial College, Faculty phenotypes, study the detailed mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 7Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal DYS. Hainbda odueis:i gNno nnee.w I. tGhrearda:p Nieosn.e. A. Letourneau: None. M.R. Sailani: None. S. Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen and University of Groningen, Groningen, Dahoun: None. F.A. Santoni: None. S. Gimelli: None. M.L. Guipponi: None. M. Netherlands, 8MRC Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, Research Department of Pelte: None. F. Bena: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. A. Feki: None. Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 9Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 10Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 11The Biostatics Center, The George Washington University, 
C18 .1 Rockville, MD, United States, 12Unit of Genetic Epidemiology and Bioinformatics, Meta-analysis of 233,000 individuals identifies sex- and age- Department of Epidemiology, University Medical Center Groningen dependent genetic associations for obesity traits Z. Kutalik1,2, T. Winkler3, S. Chu4, J. Czajkowski5, T. Fall6, A. Justice7, T. O. Kilpeläinen8, Y. Lu9, R. Mägi10, M. Graff7, K. E. North11, I. M. Heid3,12, R. J. Loos9,13; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, Low vitamin D status is highly prevalent and associated with high blood Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, pressure (BP) and hypertension in observational studies. We used a Men- 3Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University delian Randomization approach to investigate the causal relationship bet- of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 4Department of Biostatistics, School of Public ween vitamin D status [measured by 25-hydroxyvitamin D, 25(OH)D] and Health, University of Michigan, Ann Harbor, MI, United States, 5Division of Statistical BP/hypertension. We examined associations of four vitamin D-related Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences & Systems Biology, Washington University School SNPs with 25(OH)D (for validation) and with BP/hypertension (for causal of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, 6Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular inference) individually and in combination using separate allele scores for Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 7Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of SNPs involved in synthesis (comprising DHCR7 and CY
P2 R1) and metabo- North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 8Novo Nordisk Foundation lism (comprising GC and CY
P24 A1) of 25(OH)D. Meta-analysis included Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, up to 108,173 individuals from 35 studies. 25(OH)D was associated with 9The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at systolic BP (SBP) (p=0.01) and hypertension (p=0.01). All four SNPs were Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 10Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, strongly associated with 25(OH)D (p<7.59 x 10-14). None of the SNPs/allele Tartu, Estonia, 11Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, scores was associated with BP/hypertension. However, when meta-analy- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEs |in Wg DW-CWarD.EiaS rHesGul.tOs RtoGgether with results from International Consort4iu7mABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 3Department of Biological Psychology, VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, for Blood Pressure to increase statistical power (n=125,172, overlapping Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Departments of Epidemiology & Internal Medicine, Erasmus studies excluded), both CY
P2 R1 (p=0.03) and synthesis score (p=0.01) Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. were associated with DBP. Similarly, CY
P2 R1 (p=0.02) and synthesis score (p=0.002) showed an association with hypertension after meta-analysing D-CarDia results with results from CHARGE and Global BPgen consortia (n=150,846). Instrumental variable analyses using synthesis score as an Imputation of missing genotypes can be an effective method to improve instrument suggested a modest causal association, where for every 10% in- genome-wide association studies (GWAS) by increasing the number of SNPs crease in 25(OH)D concentrations, there was a 0.24 mmHg decrease in DBP to be tested for association. By¬¬¬ matching the study haplotypes to high- (95%CI:-0.43,-0.05,p=0.02) and 7% decrease in the odds of hypertension resolution reference haplotypes, the imputation process is able to infer ge- (95%CI:2.4%,11.1%,p=0.003). In conclusion, these data support a causal notypes of un-typed variants. We show that the Genome of The Netherlands role of higher 25(OH)D in leading to reductions in blood pressure, providing (GoNL) reference set not only outperforms the 1000 genomes (1000G) re- f Kur.Sth. eVrim suaplepsowratr faonr: iNmopnoer. tDa.nJt. nBoenrr-ys:k Neloentael. eAf.f eCcatvsa fdoirn voi:t aNmonine. DP.. van der ference set for imputing Dutch samples but also for Italian samples. We also Harst: None. G. Grimnes: None. A.K. Zaineddin: None. C. Lu: None. A. Couto assessed the effect of fine-mapping on an eQTL study. Alves: None. M.H. de Borst: None. A. Wong: None. E. Tikkanen: None. M. We quantified the difference in imputation quality by using samples ge- Mangino: None. K.A. Jablonski: None. I.M. Nolte: None. B.L. Langdahl: notyped on the Hap550 and the ImmunoChip, which we used as our gold None. D.K. Houston: None. T.S. Ahluwalia: None. P.J. van der Most: None. D. standard. Genotypes from Hap550 were imputed using GoNL and 1000G to Pasko: None. L. Zgaga: None. J. Heinrich: None. E. Thiering: None. F.G.R. Fowkes: None. C. Ohlsson: None. K. Michaëlsson: None. T.M. Frayling: produce two datasets. The imputed genotypes were compared to genotypes None. T. Sørensen: None. S.B. Kritchevsky: None. L. Rejnmark: None. L.K. present on the ImmunoChip. The median concordance in the Dutch samp- Billings: None. T.D. Spector: None. T. Lehtimäki: None. D. Kuh: None. S.E. les of 4,192 rare SNPs (MAF <0.5%) increased from 0.37 to 0.54 when the Humphries: None. C. Cooper: None. J.G. Eriksson: None. W. März: None. C. imputing used GoNL compared to 1000G. In the Italian samples the median Power: None. M. Kumari: None. H. Brenner: None. R. Jorde: None. H. Snieder: concordance of rare variants also improved when using GoNL (from 0.27 None. T.J. Wang: None. A.D. Hingorani: None. S. Pilz: None. J.C. Whittaker: to 0.37). We found large deviations of the predicted concordance to the ob- None. M.R. Järvelin: None. E. Hyppönen on belalf of D-CarDia collaboration: served concordance, validating the use of our gold-standard benchmarking None. and making it evident that interesting imputed variants should always be validated. An eQTL dataset was used to assess the effects of a better imputation on 
C18 .3 GWAS. We found a significant improvement when using imputation, both in Large-scale genome-wide association meta-analysis using imputation signal strength and in fine-mapping. For the fine-mapping we performed an from the dense 1000 Genomes Project identifies novel susceptibility e Pn. rDicehemlenen: Nt oonne E. NF.C vOaDnE D’sij kre: gNuolnoem. LeD. FBr.ancioli: None. J. Hottenga: None. E. loci for glycemic and obesity traits: ENGAGE Consortium report van Leeuwen: None. M. Kattenberg: None. L. Karssen: None. K. Estrada: M. Horikoshi1, R. Mägi2, I. Surakka3, A. Sarin3, A. Mahajan1, L. Marullo4, T. Ferreira1, T. None. E. Kreiner-Møller: None. F. Rivadeneira: None. A. Kanterakis: None. H. Esko2,5, C. M. Lindgren1,5, A. P. Morris1, M. I. McCarthy1,6, S. Ripatti3,7, I. Prokopenko8,1; Westra: None. A. Menelaou: None. D. van Enckevort: None. .. Members of the 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Estonian Genome Center, University GoNL consortium: None. L. Franke: None. P. de Bakker: None. C. Wijmenga: of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4University None. M. Swertz: None. of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 5Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Wellocme Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 8Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. 
C18 .5 Genome-wide assocation study identifies common variation associated with congenital heart disease Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) detected numerous associations J. Goodship1, H. Cordell1, J. Bentham2, A. Topf1, D. Zelenika3, S. Heath3, C. Mamasoula1, D. with quantitative glycemic and obesity traits: only ~5% of phenotypic va- Brook4, S. Bhattacharya2, D. Winlaw5, K. Devriendt6, S. Mital7, A. Postma8, M. Lathrop3, M. riance been explained mainly by common variants (minor allele frequency, Farrall2, B. Keavney1; MAF >5%). Our aim was to detect novel associated loci; low frequency va- 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of riants influencing trait variability and novel independent variants at known Cardiovascular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Centre National de Genotypage, loci. We performed large-scale fixed-effects meta-analysis of GWAS data Evry, France, 4Institute of Genetics, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 5The Children‘s Hospital, Westmead, Australia, 6Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 7Hospital including up to 38 million SNPs imputed using the 1000 Genomes Project for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, reference panel (06/2011 release). The analysis was performed in up to Netherlands. 18 European GWAS, for fasting glucose (FG, n=46,694), fasting insulin (FI, n=24,245), body-mass-index (BMI, n=87,048) and waist-to-hip ratio adju- sRtMedS Tfor BMI (WHR, n=54,572). GALNT10 DTX2
P1  We tested the hypothesis that common variants contribute to congenital WGReI Did1enEtPifYiCed no-vA10eKl AloPc6i at genome-wide significance for FG (1 locus near heart disease by conducting a genome-wide association study for TetraloPgTy- , p=2.0x10 , MAF=0.10) an-8d BMI (5 loci near , , PofN F1a1llot (TOF) using a northern European discovery set of 835 cases and 1a d9n pa cl oey nns dd, i s ie, iw ne i fa d tn e phd n t i lf .7i ae xdd 0a N; -2n p 1Po )< .v a4 Ae t. l t5G lx ao61 w k
P0  nC -f o2, r eM (q nA u lF e o6= n c90 c uy 7. s0 v7 oa~ r6r0 i Wa. 14 n H,9 t M) Ra. s ,AT sR Fh oS =r cPo 0iaOu .0t3g e ,h d c w eo pi n dt =hd i t.Ft ei Go tn 1i ena d-l - 5 co1 n5 t9 wc lo sa n (st r a eo s pl s ls o i. c aA i ta itl oea ndr g P(e P =r =e g .1 9i .o 4 ×n × 1o 01n -05 ;c- 7 ch ) r a mo nm bd io nrs e eo p dm l i Pce a =1 t e 72 d .q 2 i n ×4 7 1w 9 0h 8-1i 1c c )-7h a Ss i e Nn s Pc al su n id d ne G 2s 9P 3C 15 e n ot o =e e S 2 - 1 4 f8 9 1 2 , e3 0 cx 0 r o r c 3 o 7 . , t a l 1 1 w w o on c bh ir no em dMno Ss Xo =1m 3lye i1 3n3 S×7q 83 1X92 81w )se er We eaa els xdo e2a n9s d2s e7o dc ci toa ht ne etd W( lP (= 1 o. l7 × i1 so0 v) a rn 1d or he ×p rli t0c oa-5- a zn eo tv he al nin td he ep pe rn ed ve ion ut sl le ya rd 1psi og rn tea dl w sii gt nh as lt (r no en wge βr a 0s .s 1o 1c i pa =ti 1o .n xa 1n 0d- 1l3a r Mg Aer =e 0ff .e 0c 8t cte d c o n v i Pc i n g -c 1a s n r Go s Sr e tp i ac a t i cn P = c. 2 1 f; si -e1 = , 7 , F m .0 T 01 . t A d o e y o vs. old β=0.04, p=2.1x10 , MAF=0.49). 1,995 cases with various CHD phenotypes. A region- 7on chromosome 4p16, Our results highlight the potential advantages of imputation using the high- between and , was associated (P=9.5x10 ) with the risk of atrial density reference panels for the identification of novel associated signals for b Mo.t hH ocroimkomshoin: Nanonde l.o Rw. Mfreäqgiu: eNnocnye v. aI.r Siaunrtask fkoar: qNuoannet. iAta. tSivaer imn:e Ntaobnoel. iAc .t raits. septal defect (ASD; N=340 cases), and this was repl-i4cated in a further 445- Mahajan: None. L. Marullo: None. T. Ferreira: None. T. Esko: None. C.M. 1A0SD cases and 2520 controls (replication P=1.1x10 ; combined P=6.9x10 Lindgren: None. A.P. Morris: None. M.I. McCarthy: None. S. Ripatti: None. I. ). The association between SNPs at 12q24 and TOF was not apparent in Prokopenko: None. any other CHD subgroup; similarly, the association between SNPs at 4p16 and ASD was not apparent for CHD phenotypes other than ASD. We con- clude that there is phenotypic specificity for common variants associated wJ.i tGho CoHdDsh.ip: None. H. Cordell: None. J. Bentham: None. A. Topf: None. D. 
C18 .4 Zelenika: None. S. Heath: None. C. Mamasoula: None. D. Brook: None. S. The ‚Genome of The Netherlands‘ outperforms ‚1000 genomes‘ as a Bhattacharya: None. D. Winlaw: None. K. Devriendt: None. S. Mital: None. A. reference set for imputing rare variants in the European population Postma: None. M. Lathrop: None. M. Farrall: None. B. Keavney: None. P. Deelen1, F. van Dijk1, L. Francioli2, J. Hottenga3, E. van Leeuwen4, M. Kattenberg3, L. Karssen4, K. Estrada5, E. Kreiner-Møller5, F. Rivadeneira5, A. Kanterakis1, H. Westra1, A. Menelaou2, D. van Enckevort6, .. Members of the GoNL consortium1, L. Franke1, P. de Bakker2, C. Wijmenga1, M. Swertz1; 1Genomics Coordination Center & Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen & University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Departments of Medical Genetics & Epidemiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 48 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C18 .6 Génétique Moléculaires, Paris, France, 17Service de Pédiatrie 1, CHU, Dijon, France. Common genetic variants predispose to a rare disease with high risk of sudden cardiac death R. Redon1,2, J. Barc3, Y. Mizusawa3, C. A. Remme3, J. B. Gourraud1,2, F. Simonet1, P. J. Insulin resistance (IR) is closely associated with many common, complex Schwartz4, L. Crotti4, P. Guicheney5, A. Leenhardt6, C. Antzelevitch7, E. Schulze-Bahr8, E. and multifactorial conditions. Identifying the genetic basis of rare mono- R. Behr9, J. Tfelt-Hansen10, S. Kaab11, H. Watanabe12, M. Horie13, N. Makita14, W. Shimizu15, genic forms of IR provides unique opportunities to decipher the molecular P. Froguel16, B. Balkau17, O. Lantieri18, M. Gessler19, D. Roden20, V. M. Christoffels3, H. Le mechanisms underlying more prevalent forms. SHORT syndrome (Short Marec1,2, A. A. Wilde3, V. Probst1,2, J. J. Schott1,2, C. Dina1,2, C. R. Bezzina3; 1Inserm UMR 1087, l‘institut du thorax, Nantes, France, 2CHU Nantes, l‘institut du stature, Hyperextensibility of joints and/or inguinal hernia, Ocular depres- thorax, Nantes, France, 3Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, sion, Rieger abnormality, Teething delay) is characterized by the presence Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Inserm UMR 956, UPMC, of lipodystrophy with generalized thin habitus despite normal food intake. Paris, France, 6Cardiology Unit, Hôpital Bichat, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Onset of IR and/or diabetes mellitus usually occur in adolescencdee. Wnoev ostu- Paris, Nantes, France, 7Department of Experimental Cardiology, Masonic Medical died eight families with SPHIKO3RRT1 syndrome using a combinatiPoInK 3oRf t1rio-based Research Laboratory, Utica, NY, United States, 8Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, exome sequencing and capillary sequencing, and identified five or University Hospital, Münster, Germany, 9Cardiovascular Sciences Research Centre, St inherited mutations of in all affected individuals. encodes George‘s University, London, United Kingdom, 10Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 11Department of Medicine I, Ludwig- the regulatory subunits of class IA phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3K), Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 12Department of Cardiovascular Biology and which play a key role in insulin signaling through binding oPfI Kp3hRo1sphorylated Medicine, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, insulin receptor substrates and subsequent activation of AKT serine/threo- Japan, 13Department of Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Shiga University of nine kinase. Multiple lines of evidence indicate that the mutations Medical Science, Otsu, Japan, 14Department of Molecular Physiology, Graduate School identified in individuals with SHORT syndrome should result in decreased of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan, 15Division of Arrhythmia PI3K/AKT signaling. Because growth hormone (GH) treatment is known to and Electrophysiology, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, National Cerebral induce hyperinsulinemia and to decrease insulin sensitivity, a phenomenon and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka, Japan, 16CNRS UMR 8199, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France, 17Inserm UMR 1018, Centre for research in Epidemiology and Population that may aggravate IR and accelerate the onset of PdIiaKb3eRt1es in subjects with Health, Villejuif, France, 18Institut inter Régional pour la Santé (IRSA), La Riche, SHORT syndrome, GH treatment was ceased in the patients treated. In con- France, 19Theodor-Boveri-Institute, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, clusion, our findings highlight the critical role of in insulin action, 20Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, normal growth and development. They also well illustrate the fact that novel Nashville, TN, United States. genetic findings can have direct implications for patient care by enabling a more personalized clinical management. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Duplomb: None. M. Avila: None. J. St-Onge: The Brugada Syndrome (BrS) is considered as a rare Mendelian disorder None. M. Le Merrer: None. B. Le Luyer: None. D. Héron: None. M. Mathieu- with autosomal dominant transmission. BrS is associated with an increased Dramard: None. P. Bitoun: None. S. Odent: None. J. Amiel: None. D. Picot: risk of sudden cardiac death and specific electrocardiographic features con- None. V. Carmignac: None. J. Thevenon: None. P. Callier: None. J. Petit: sisting of ST-segment elevation in the right precordial leads. Loss-of-function None. J. Capeau: None. C. Vigouroux: None. O. Lascols: None. F. Huet: None. L. Faivre: None. J. Rivière: None. mutations in SCN5A, encoding the pore-forming subunit of the cardiac sodi- um channel (Nav1.5), are identified in ~20% of patients. However, studies in families harbouring mutations in SCN5A have demonstrated low disease penetrance and in some instances absence of the familial SCN5A mutation 
C19 .2 in some affected members. These observations suggest a more complex in- Genome sequencing identifies mutations causing pancreatic agenesis heritance model. in a novel PTF1A enhancer To identify common genetic factors modulating disease risk, we conducted S. Ellard1, M. N. Weedon1, I. Cebola2, A. Patch1, E. de Franco1, S. E. Flanagan1, S. a genome-wide association study on 312 individuals with BrS and 1115 Rodriguez-Segui2, J. A. L. Houghton1, H. Lango Allen1, C. Shaw-Smith1, R. Caswell1, A. Murray1, P. Ravassard3, L. Vallier4, J. Ferrer5, A. T. Hattersley1; ancestry-matched controls. Two genomic regions displayed significant as- 1University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Institut d‘Investigacions sociation. Replication testing on two independent case/control sets from August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 3University Pierre et Marie Curie, Europe (598/855) and Japan (208/1016) confirmed both associations and Paris, France, 4University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Imperial College, revealed a third one. While two loci displaying association hits had alrea- London, United Kingdom. dy been shown to influence ECG parameters in the general population, the third one encompasses a transcription factor which had never been related to cardiac arrhythmia We showed that this factor regulates Nav1.5 channel Mutations in non-coding regulatory elements are a rare cause of human di- expression in hearts of homozygous knockout embryos and influence car- sease. Genome sequencing promises to uncover disease causing mutations diac conduction velocity in adult heterozygous mice. At last, we found that in novel regulatory elements, but as yet there are no reported successes the cumulative effect of the 3 loci on disease susceptibility was unexpectedly using this approach. large, indicating that common genetic variation may have a strong impact on We used a combination of genome sequencing and linkaPgTe Fi1nA consan- p Rr.e Rdeisdpoons:i tNioonn et.o J r.a Brea rdci:s Neaosnee.. Y. Mizusawa: None. C.A. Remme: None. J.B. guineous pedigrees affected with isolated pancreatic agenesis. Homozy- Gourraud: None. F. Simonet: None. P.J. Schwartz: None. L. Crotti: None. P. Guicheney: None. A. Leenhardt: None. C. Antzelevitch: None. E. Schulze- gosity mapping revealed a shared region PeTncFo1mApassing the gene in Bahr: None. E.R. Behr: None. J. Tfelt-Hansen: None. S. Kaab: None. H. which mutations are known to cause a rare syndrome of pancreatic agenesis Watanabe: None. M. Horie: None. N. Makita: None. W. Shimizu: None. P. and cerebellar hypoplasia. Sequencing of and 31 other genes within Froguel: None. B. Balkau: None. O. Lantieri: None. M. Gessler: None. D. the linkage interval failed to identify causative mutations. Roden: None. V.M. Christoffels: None. H. Le Marec: None. A.A. Wilde: None. V. Genome sequencing in two probands identified 6380 variants within the Probst: None. J.J. Schott: None. C. Dina: None. C.R. Bezzina: None. 7.6Mb shared homozygous region. The 193 novel variants included a base substitutioPnT Faf1fAecting a highly conserved nucleotide (GERP score = 5.65) lo- cated within a ~400bp region of strong evolutionary conservation >20kb 
C19 .1 from the gene. Four additional mutations and one large deletion Mutations in PIK3R1 cause syndromic insulin resistance and spaPnTnFi1nAg the element were identified in a total of 10 families. lipodystrophy Functional studies showed that the conserved element acts as an enhancer C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, L. Duplomb2, M. Avila2, J. St-Onge2,3, M. Le Merrer4, B. Le Luyer5, D. of in human and mouse pancreatic progenitor cells. The enhancer Héron6, M. Mathieu-Dramard7, P. Bitoun8, S. Odent9,10, J. Amiel4, D. Picot2, V. Carmignac2, binds transcription factors known to be critical for pancreatic development J. Thevenon1,2, P. Callier2,11, J. Petit12, J. Capeau13,14,15, C. Vigouroux13,14,15, O. Lascols13,14,16, F. and the mutations abolish transcription factor binding. Huet2,17,17, L. Faivre1,2, J. Rivière2,3; Mutations in this novel enhancer are the most common cause of non-syn- 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2EA 4271 GAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, dromic pancreatic agenesis in our cohort and these results provide new in- France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Dijon, France, 4Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service de Pédiatrie, CH, Le sights into the regulatory mechanisms underlying pancreatic development. Havre, France, 6Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence, Paris, France, 7Service To our knowledge, this is the first study to report the identification of patho- de Génétique clinique, CHU, Amiens, France, 8Service de Pédiatrie, CHU Jean Verdier, g Se.n Eicll amrdu:t aNtoionne.s Min.N a. nWoeveedl oreng: uNloantoer. yI. eCleemboelna:t Nbyon gee.n Ao.m Pea tscehq: uNeonncei.n Eg.. Bondy, France, 9Service de Génétique clinique, CHU, Rennes, France, 10UMR CNRS 6290 de Franco: None. S.E. Flanagan: None. S. Rodriguez-Segui: None. J.A.L. IGDR, Universitė, Rennes, France, 11Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU, Dijon, France, Houghton: None. H. Lango Allen: None. C. Shaw-Smith: None. R. Caswell: 12Service d’Endocrinologie, Hôpital Bocage, CHU, Dijon, France, 13INSERM, UMR 
S938 , None. A. Murray: None. P. Ravassard: None. L. Vallier: None. J. Ferrer: Paris, France, 14UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR 
S938 , Centre de Recherches Saint- None. A.T. Hattersley: None. Antoine, Paris, France, 15AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Service de Biochimie et Hormonologie, Paris, France, 16AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Laboratoire Commun de Biologie et ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 49ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C19 .3 Somatic mutations in AT
P1 A1 and AT
P2 B3 lead to aldosterone- producing adenomas and secondary hypertension frequency of patients with [p.Arg229Gln];[mut], we hypothesized that T. Wieland1, F. Beuschlein2, S. Boulkroun3,4, A. Osswald2, H. N. Nielsen5, U. D. Lichtenauer2, [p.Arg229Gln];[mut] may not bNeP HpaSt2hogenic in all individuals. This was D. Penton6, V. R. Schack5, L. Amar3,4,7, E. Fischer2, A. Walther1, P. Tauber6, T. Schwarzmayr1, confirmed by the identification of [p.Arg229Gln];[mut] in 6/129 unaffected S. Diener1, E. Graf1, B. Allolio8, B. Samson-Couterie3,4, A. Benecke9, M. Quinkler10, F. Fallo11, parents of children, who carried mutations in exons 1-5. Interestingly, P. Plouin3,4,7, F. Mantero12, T. Meitinger1,13,14, P. Mulatero15, X. Jeunemaitre3,4,7, R. Warth6, B. the mutations associated to p.Arg229Gln in affected patients are missense Vilsen5, M. Zennaro3,4,7, T. M. Strom1,13, M. Reincke2; mutations of exons 7-8 in the majority of cases (56/71 alleles, 79%), though 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, these mut-3a9tions are rare in patients with [mut];[mut] (34/498 alleles, 7%, 2Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), p=1.4x10 ). This striking difference points to the pivotal role of the asso- Unité Mixte de Recherche Scientifique (UMRS) 970, Paris Cardiovascular Research ciated mutation in the pathogenicity of [p.Arg229Gln];[mut]. To understand Center, Paris, France, 4Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, their pathogenic associAargt2i2o9Gnln at a cellular level, we studied the subcellular 5Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Medizinische localization of podocin Arg22 9iGnln function of the associated mutation in cul- Zellbiologie, Universität Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 7Assistance Publique- tured podocytes. Podocin was mislocalized only when co-expressed Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 8Department with podocins carrying the substitutions encoded by exons 7-8, but not with of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, substitutions encoded by exons 1-6. Accordingly, a structural model of ho- Germany, 9Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques, Bures sur Yvette, France, 10Clinical Endocrinology, Campus Mitte, modimerization supported that significant structural reorganization only University Hospital Charité, Berlin, Germany, 11Department of Medicine, University of appears in dimers of pathoghenic associations. Padova, Padova, Italy, 12Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Here, we described for the first time an autosomal recessive disorder, in Padova, Italy, 13Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, wKh. iTcohr yth: eN opnaeth. Dog.Ke.n Miceitnyy ohfá trhde: Ntwonoe a. lFl.e Nleesv doe: pNeonndes. Oon. Gearicbho uovthael:r .None. A. Germany, 14DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site, Munich Kerti: None. P. Stráner: None. C. Arrondel: None. T. Tulassay: None. G. Mollet: Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany, 15Department of Medical Sciences, Division of Internal None. A. Perczel: None. C. Antignac: None. Medicine and Hypertension, University of Torino, Turin, Italy. 
C19 .5 Primary aldosteronism is present in up to 7% of hypertensive individuals. A recurrent homozygous missense mutation in TT
C21 B encoding It is caused by bilateral adrenal hyperplasia or unilateral aldosterone-pro- the ciliary protein IFT139 unexpectedly causes steroid-resistant ducing adenomas (APAs) in 50% of cases, each. Recent reports identified nephrotic syndrome mutations in the potassium channel gene KCNJ5 as a cause of 30-40% of E. Huynh Cong1,2,3, A. Bizet1,2,3, S. Woerner1,2,3, E. Filhol1,2,3, O. Gribouval1,2,3, S. Thomas4,2,3, all APAs. F. Silbermann1,2,3, C. Bole-Feysot2, P. Nitschke2,3, G. Canaud5,3, J. Hachicha6, M. Gubler1,2,3, G. We sequenced additional APA-tumors without KCNJ5 mutations and mat- Mollet1,2,3, S. Saunier1,2,3, C. Antignac1,2,3; ched control tissue from nine males. We identified recurrent mutations in 1Inserm U983, Paris, France, 2Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 3Université Paris two members of the P-type ATPase gene family, AT
P1 A1 (encoding an Na+/ Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Inserm U781, Paris, France, 5Service de K+ ATPase) and AT
P2 B3 (encoding the plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase). Transplantation Rénale et Unité de soins intensifs, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, France, 6Department of Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, All five identified alterations are either located in the transmembraneous Tunisia. α helix M1 or the juxtaposed α helix M4 in both AT
P1 A1 and AT
P2 B3. The recurrence of mutations affecting these highly conserved regions involved in interaction with the transported cations in two paralogs is suggestive of Steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) is a glomerular disorder with a gain-of-function effect. a higThT Cg2e1nBetic heterogeneity. Using exome sequencing in 7 families with We then investigated a collection of 309 APAs and found 16 (5.2%) soma- SRNS, we found a recurrent homozygous missense mutation (p.
P209 L) in tic mutations in AT
P1 A1 and 5 (1.6%) in AT
P2 B3. Mutation-positive cases the gene encoding the retrograde intraflagellar transport protein showed male dominance, increased plasma aldosterone concentrations and IFT139, which was previously reported to cause isolated nephronophthisis lower potassium concentrations compared with mutation-negative cases. (NPH). Interestingly, analysis of biopsies of SRNS patients revealed tubular Functional in vitro studies of AT
P1 A1 mutants showed loss of pump activi- basement membrane thickening and tubulointerstitial anomalies similar to ty and strongly reduced affinity for potassium. Electrophysiological ex vivo NPH. Moreover, analysis of 3 unrelated patients carrying this homozygous studies on primary adrenal adenoma cells provided evidence for inappro- mutation and initially diagnosed as NPH reveals that they also have protein- priate depolarization of cells with ATPase alterations. uria and glomerular lesions as in SRNS patients. In summary, dominant somatic alterations in two members of the ATPase We demonstrated that IFT139 iisn e vxiptrroessed in podocytes and distal tubu- gene family result in autonomous aldosterone secretion in roughly 7% of a Tl.d Wosietelarnodn:e N-pornoed. uFc. iBnegu asdcehnleoimn:a Ns.one. S. Boulkroun: None. A. Osswald: les in fetal and adult human kidneys. Developing podocytes in fetal kidney None. H.N. Nielsen: None. U.D. Lichtenauer: None. D. Penton: None. V.R. and undifferentiated podocytes have a cilium, whereas it is absent Schack: None. L. Amar: None. E. Fischer: None. A. Walther: None. P. Tauber: in mature and differentiated podocytes. IFT139 localizes at the base of cilia None. T. Schwarzmayr: None. S. Diener: None. E. Graf: None. B. Allolio: in undifferentiated podocytes, whereas it stains the extended microtubule None. B. Samson-Couterie: None. A. Benecke: None. M. Quinkler: None. F. network in non-ciliated differentiated cells. While the 
P209 L mutant and Fallo: None. P. Plouin: None. F. Mantero: None. T. Meitinger: None. P. wild-type IFT139 display similar subcellular distribution, over-expression Mulatero: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. R. Warth: None. B. Vilsen: None. M. of the 
P209 L mutant in both podocytes and tubular cells leads to migration Zennaro: None. T.M. Strom: None. M. Reincke: None. defects. Our results, showing for the first time a mutation of a gene enco- ding a ciliary protein in a glomerular disorder, point to a critical function of IFT139 in podocytes in addition to its well established role in tubular 
C19 .4 epithelial cells, likely via dysregulation of ciliary transport and microtubule Mutation-dependent recessive inheritance in NPH
S2 -associated network which are essential for cell migration, polarity and proper organi- steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. Beyond Mendel’s laws z Ea.t iHouny/nmha Cinotnegn:a Nnocen eo. fA in. Bteirzceet:l lNuloanre j.u Sn.c Wtioonersn, einr:c lNuodnien.g E t.h Fei lshliotl :d Niaopnher.a Og.m . K. Tory1,2,3, D. K. Menyhárd4, F. Nevo1,3,5, O. Gribouval1,3,5, A. Kerti2, P. Stráner4, C. Gribouval: None. S. Thomas: None. F. Silbermann: None. C. Bole-Feysot: Arrondel1,3,5, T. Tulassay2,6, G. Mollet1, A. Perczel4, C. Antignac1,3,5; None. P. Nitschke: None. G. Canaud: None. J. Hachicha: None. M. Gubler: 1INSERM U983, Paris, France, 2Ist Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, None. G. Mollet: None. S. Saunier: None. C. Antignac: None. Budapest, Hungary, 3Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 4MTA-ELTE Protein Modeling Research Group, Laboratory of Structural Chemistry and Biology, Budapest, Hungary, 5Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 6Research Laboratory for Pediatrics and Nephrology, Hungarian Academy of Sciences and Semmelweis University, 
C19 .6 Budapest, Hungary. Characterization of the large patient cohort of the International NPH
S2  Inflammatory Bowel Disease Genetics Consortium (IIBDGC) I. Cleynen1,2, o. (IIBDGC)3; , encoding the membrane-anchored podocin, is the most frequently 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3IIBDGC, Cambridge, United Kingdom. mutated gene in steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). Its muta- tions are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. While mutations on both alleles ([mut];[mut]) lead to early-onset SRNS, the trans-association Large-scale genetic studies performed by the IIBDGC have concentrated on of the polymorphism c.686G>A (p.Arg229Gln, rs61747728, MAF in Euro- Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) overall. Their most recent peans: 3-4%) and a mutation ([p.Arg229Gln];[mut]) is known to cause late- study on ~75,000 individuals expanded the number of known IBD loci to onset SRNS. 163. The enormous resource assembled by the IIBDGC provides an oppor- A 5s 0there is an important difference in the obsEeSrvHedG a 2nd0 1th3e |e PxpAeRctIeSd, FR tuA nN ityC tE e| vW aluW atW c. lE inS icH alG . iO mR poG o e ly rtant sub-phenotypic variables and theirABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index DDHD2 relation to genetic variation. Pathogenic mutations were identified in three genes. In , compound Clinical data on 14,569 CD and 10,867 UC have been collected (age at dia- heterozygous frameshift mutations where identified in a family with com- gnosis, CD location and behaviour, UC extent, duration of follow-up⋯). QC plex ID. Follow-up studies revealeda recessive mutations in three additional analyses were done to identify non-random patterns of missing data and po- families with a similar phenotype. Further support that DDHD2 plays an tential classification differences across centres. Genotype-phenotype ana- essential role in the human CNSSL w
C9 aAs 6obtainSeLdC b6yA 8a reduced number of active lyses were performed using the Immunochip release 5 dataset, containing zones at synaptic terminals in Ddhd-knockdown Drosophila models. On the QC‘d data on 157,020 variants. X-chromosome, mutations in and , both previously implica- The median age at diagnosis for CD was 23y (IQR 16-33), and 30y (21- ted in X-linked ID, were identified in two brotherpair families. 43) for UC. 32% of CD patients had ileal (n=3252), 23% colonic (n=2376), Six novel candidate genes for ID were identified. In one of these, a homo- and 45% ileocolonic (n=4619) disease. 25% of CD patients had stricturing zygous splice donor site mutation segregated in a brotherpair family. This (n=2574) and 31% penetrating (n=3188) disease. 13% of UC patients had mSYuNtEat1ioZnN rFe5s8u2lts in MabCeMr3raAnPt mRPNTPAR sTplicing and subsequent absent enzy- proctitis (n=992), 38% left-sided (n=2941), and 49% extensive disease matic protein activity. Rare recessive missense variations were identified in (n=3757). Genotype-phenotype analyses confirmed a genome-wide signi- B,C OR
L1  and . In , we identified a compound heterozy- ficant association for the CD-associated NOD2 locus and the MHC/HLA regi- gous deletion and missense variation. Lastly, a hemizygous missense variati- on with ileal versus colonic CD (rs2066843, p=2.99×10-38, OR=1.70[1.57- on in on the X-chromosome was present in a brotherpair family. 1.84] and rs6930777, p=1.83×10−19, OR=0.57[0.51-0.65] respectively). In this study, we identified (potentially) pathogenic mutations in one novel, The MHC/HLA region was also associated with extensive UC (rs3115674, two known and six candidate ID genes in nine out of 20 (45%) families, thus p=2.82×10−13, OR=1.47[1.32-1.62]). Interestingly the HLA signals for CD demonstrating that recessiveA aJHnGd X-linked mutations can readily be identi- and UC overall are different from those for disease location/extent, warran- faied in small sibling families. ting more detailed analysis. J S.Hch.Muu. Srsc-hHuouerisjm-Haokeeijrms aekt earls. : NoneD. eAc.Te.m Vbueltro 2-v0a1n2 Silfhout: None. L.E.L.M. These findings provide a robust platform for further analyses enhancing our Vissers: None. I.I.G.M. van de Vondervoort: None. B.W.M. van Bon: None. J. u I.n Cdleerysntaenn:d Ninogn oe.f Oth. e( iuibnddgecr)l:y Ninogn ep.athogenesis of IBD sub-groups. de Ligt: None. C. Gilissen: None. J.Y. Hehir-Kwa: None. K. Neveling: None. M. del Rosario: None. G. Hira: None. S. Reitano: None. A. Vitello: None. P. Failla: None. D. Greco: None. M. Fichera: None. O. Galesi: None. T. Kleefstra: None. M.T. Greally: None. C.W. Ockeloen: None. M.H. Willemsen: 
C20 .1 None. E.M.H.F. Bongers: None. I.M.H. Janssen: None. R. Pfundt: None. J.A. RNA foci in 
C9 FTD/ALS patients sequester RNA binding proteins and Veltman: None. C. Romano: None. M.A. Willemsen: None. H. van Bokhoven: None. H.G. Brunner: None. B.B.A. de Vries: None. A.P.M. de Brouwer: None. subsequently alter downstream splicing and expression of their RNA targets. V. V. Belzil, J. Chew, W. Lee, L. Petrucelli; Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United States. 
C20 .3 Background: Associations between gene expression and phenotypes in 16p11.2 rearrangements Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal demen- K. Männik1,2, E. Migliavacca1, A. Macé3,4, G. Gianuzzi1, M. N. Loviglio1, F. Zufferey5, N. D. tia (FTD) are two devastating neurodegenerative diseases with substantial Beckmann5, L. Harewood1,6, L. Hippolyte5, A. M. Maillard5, V. Siffredi5, R. M. Witwicki1, G. clinical and neuropathologicaCl 9oOveRrFl7ap2. This connection was confirmed by Didelot1, J. S. Beckmann5,3,4, Z. Kutalik3,4, S. Jacquemont5, A. Reymond1; recent groundbreaking genetic studies identifying hexanucleotide (GGGG- 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, CC)n repeat expansions in the gene as the major cause of both ALS 2Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute and FTLD-TDP, the most common pathCo9loOgRiFca7l2 subtype of FTD. Transcripts of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre containing the expanded GGGGCC repeat accumulate as nuclear RNA foci in Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Babraham Institute, the frontal cortex and spinal cord of mutation carMrieetrhso, dasn: RNA Cambridge, United Kingdom. mechanism emerging as a common pathogenic process in many neurode- generative diseases caused by non-coding repeat expansions. Con- sidering the possibility of subsequent sequestration and altered activity of The recurrent 600kb-long 16p11.2 deletion and its reciprocal duplication RNA-binding proteins by these foci and consequently altering the splicing impact carriers’ cognition and behavior. These rearrangements are asso- and expression of their RNA targets, we attempted to determine using RNA ciated with mirror phenotypes such as obesity and underweight, macro- FISH and commercially available antibodies whether RNA binding prote- and microcephaly, as well as autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia. ins already known to be sequestered by foci in patients affected with other Although these imbalances are among the most frequent causes of neuro- neurodegenerative diseases also co-localize with 
C9 ORF72 foci. After iden- developmental disorders, the triggered transcriptome alterations and their tifying two sequestered proteins, we sequenced the cDNA of 
C9 FTD/ALS associations with the aforementioned phenotypes remained unexplored. patienRtess uanltds: conducted semi-quantitative as well as qRT-PCR for ten of their We generated transcriptome profiles of lymphoblastoid cell lines from known RNA targets. Any variation in expression was confirmed by western 16p11.2 deletion and duplication carriers, as well as controls. The expres- blot. Our findings confirm that RNA foci formCaotniocnlu isnio Cn9s:FTD/ALS sion levels of the 29 genes mapping to the imbalanced interval correlate lead to the sequestration of two RNA binding proteins, and consequently to to their gene dosage. We observed a greater correlation of the expression the aberrant splicing and expression of several targets. RNA foci levels of KCTD13, MVP and MAPK3, three genes shown to have an epista- formation in 
C9 FTD/ALS leads to a loss of function of two sequestered RNA tic effect on zebrafish head size. To investigate the functional relationship proteins, causing aberrant splicing and expression of genes having critical between gene-expression levels and phenotypes, we transformed anthro- fVu.nVc. tBioenlzsi li:n N noenuer. oJn. Calh seuwr:v Nivoanl.e. W. Lee: None. L. Petrucelli: None. pometric measurements into Z-scores. We found that Z-scores computed for weight and BMI were significantly associated with MAPK3 and MVP ex- pression after adjustment for copy-number status in a multivariate normal 
C20 .2 linear model for adults. We also show that transcription modules (subsets Rapid identification of autosomal recessive and X-chromosomal of genes that exhibit a coherent expression profile) involved in the regula- mutations in small sibling families tion of gene expression, chromatin modification, control of apoptosis and J. H. M. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, A. T. Vulto-van Silfhout1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, I. I. G. M. van cell division are perturbed in cells of 16p11.2 patients, further confirming de Vondervoort1, B. W. M. van Bon1, J. de Ligt1, C. Gilissen1, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, K. Neveling1, the emerging association between “cancer-associated” genes/pathways and M. del Rosario1, G. Hira1, S. Reitano2, A. Vitello2, P. Failla2, D. Greco2, M. Fichera2, O. Galesi2, neurodevelopmental disorders. Of note, genes whose expression levels cor- T. Kleefstra1, M. T. Greally3, C. W. Ockeloen1, M. H. Willemsen1, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, I. M. H. related with the number of copies of the 16p11.2 CNV were enriched for Janssen1, R. Pfundt1, J. A. Veltman1, C. Romano2, M. A. Willemsen1, H. van Bokhoven1, H. G. g Ke.n Mesä nanssiko:c Niaotneed. wE.i tMhi ignlitaevllaeccctua:a Nl doinsea.b Ail.i tMya acnéd: Nposynceh. iGa.t rGicia dniuszozrid: ers. Brunner1, B. B. A. de Vries1, A. P. M. de Brouwer1; None. M.N. Loviglio: None. F. Zufferey: None. N.D. Beckmann: None. L. 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2IRCCS Harewood: None. L. Hippolyte: None. A.M. Maillard: None. V. Siffredi: Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy, 3Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, None. R.M. Witwicki: None. G. Didelot: None. J.S. Beckmann: None. Z. Dublin, Ireland. Kutalik: None. S. Jacquemont: None. A. Reymond: None. Recent studies have shown that severe intellectual disability (ID) is mostly monogenic and highly heterogeneous. Small sibling families with ID have re- ceived little attention from the scientific community due to technical limita- tions to identify the underlying genetic deEfeScHt. GWe 2 s0tu1d3ie d| 2
P0 A sRucISh ,f aFmRilAieNs.CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 51ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C20 .4 GATAD2B loss-of-function mutations cause a recognizable syndrome with intellectual disability and are associated with learning deficits associated spectrum of psychopathology, including the novel finding of an- and synaptic undergrowth in Drosophila xiety and bipolar disorder in multiple patients. Importantly, one of the uni- M. H. Willemsen1, B. Nijhof1, M. Fenckova1, W. N. Nillesen1, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, A. que features of the oldest known patient was behavioral regression. Analy- Castells Nobau1, L. Asztalos2, E. Viragh3, B. W. M. van Bon1, J. A. Veltman1, H. G. Brunner1, ses also revealed phenotypes that distinguish MBD5 disruptions from seven B. B. A. de Vries1, J. de Ligt1, Z. Asztalos2, H. G. Yntema1, H. van Bokhoven1, D. A. Koolen1, L. well-established syndromes with significant diagnostic overlap. This study E. L. M. Vissers1, A. Schenck1, T. Kleefstra1; demonstrates that haploinsufficiency of MBD5 causes diverse phenotypes, 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Aktogen Ltd., Department yields insight into the spectrum of resulting neurodevelopmental and beha- of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Institute of vioral psychopathology, and provides clinical context for interpretation of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary. MBD5 structural variations. Empirical evidence also indicates that disrupti- on of non-coding MBD5 regulatory regions is sufficient for clinical manife- station, highlighting the limitations of exon-focused assessments. These re- de novo sults suggest an ongoing perturbation of neurological function throughout Introduction: Family based whole exome sequencing (WES) is successful tJh.eC l. iHfeosdpgaen:, Ninocnlue.d Ein. gM riticskhse lflo: rN noenue.r oVb. Pehillaavlaiomraalr rrie: gNroenses.i oTn.L.. Toler: None. F. in the elucidation of causative gene mutations in sporadic patients Bartel: None. H.M. Kearney: None. Y.S. Zou: None. W. Tan: None. C. Hanscom: with intellectual disability (ID) not presenting with clinically recognizable None. S. Kirmani: None. R.R. Hanson: None. S.A. Skinner: None. C. Rogers: syndromes. Establishing conclusive molecular diagnoses in patients with None. D.B. Everman: None. E. Boyd: None. C. Tapp: None. S.V. Mullegama: disruptive mutations in genes not previously associated with ID however, None. D. Keelean-Fuller: None. C.M. Powell: None. S.H. Elsea: None. C.C. requires the identification of additional mutations in the samdee ngeonvoe in simi- Morton: None. J.F. Gusella: None. B. DuPont: None. A. Chaubey: None. A.E. larly affected individuaGlsA.TA zinc finger domain containing 2B(GATAD2B) Lin: None. M.E. Talkowski: None. Patients, Methods, Results: By WES we recently identified loss-of- funGcAtTioAnD m2Butations in in two unrelated individuals. We identified an additional disruptive mutation 
C20 .6 in in a third individual by targeted Sanger sequencing in a selected Analysis of copy number variations at 15 schizophrenia-associated cohort with phenotypic overlap. Detailed clinical characterization revealed loci in a large, independent cohort a distinctive, highly similar phenotype comprising childhood hypotonia, E. Rees1, J. T. R. Walters1, L. Georgieva1, A. R. Isles1, K. D. Chambert2, A. Richards1, G. sGeAvTeArDe 2IBD , limited speech, abDnorormsoaplh silhaaped nose, sparse hair growth and Davies1, S. E. Legge1, J. L. Moran2, S. A. McCarroll2, M. C. O‘ Donovan1, M. J. Owen1, G. strabismus, defining a novel clinically recognizable syndrome. Modelling of Kirov1; losGsA-ToAf-Dfu2nBc tion in further confirmed its involvement 1MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, in learning processes and synapse development. 2Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Discussion: encodes a subunit of the MeC
P1 -Mi-2/ NuRD complex Cambridge, MA, United States. involved in transcriptional repression. It can be added to the growing list of ID genes implicated in chromatin remodelling. This study shows that exo- me sequencing is not only successful in the elucidation of responsible ge- Rare copy number variants (CNVs) at 15 different loci have been suggested nes in established clinical syndromes, but has also the potential to iddee nnotivfoy as susceptibility factors for schizophrenia (SCZ). However, as some of the- and define novel clinically recognizable syndromes. Moreover, we faced the se CNVs have only been observed in a single study, it is not clear whether challenge to make conclusive decisions about the pathogenicity of they are true risk factors for the disorder. We set out to test the associations mutations in potentially novel ID genes, which ultimately requires the iden- between these CNVs and SCZ, and to estimate their combined contribution t Mifi.cHa. tWioinll eomf dseisnr:u Npotinvee. mB.u Ntaijthioonf:s N inon sei.m Mil.a Frelyn cakffoevcate: dN ionndei.v Wid.uNa. lNs.illesen: None. E.M.H.F. Bongers: None. A. Castells Nobau: None. L. Asztalos: None. E. in a large new sample of 6,882 cases and 6,316 controls genotyped with Viragh: None. B.W.M. van Bon: None. J.A. Veltman: None. H.G. Brunner: Illumina arrays. CNVs were called with PennCNV and verified with a Z-score None. B.B.A. de Vries: None. J. de Ligt: None. Z. Asztalos: None. H.G. Yntema: algorithm. None. H. van Bokhoven: None. D.A. Koolen: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. A. We found higher rates in cases than in controls for 13 of the 15 previously Schenck: None. T. Kleefstra: None. implicated CNVs. Six were nominally significantly associated (p<0.05): dele- tions at 1q21.1, NRXN1, 15q11.2 and 22q11.2, and duplications at 16p11.2 and the Angelman/Prader-Willi Syndrome region. When combined with 
C20 .5 published data, 11 of the 15 loci showed highly significant evidence for as- Disruption of Methyl CpG Binding Protein 5 contributes to a spectrum sociation with SCZ (p<4.1 × 10-4). Moreover, two CNVs surpassed genome- of psychopathology and neurodevelopmental abnormalities wide significance that had not done so previously: duplications at the Angel- J. C. Hodge1, E. Mitchell1, V. Pillalamarri2, T. L. Toler3, F. Bartel4, H. M. Kearney5, Y. S. man/Prader-Willi locus and at 16p13.11. All eight Angelman/Prader-Willi Zou6, W. Tan7,8, C. Hanscom2, S. Kirmani1, R. R. Hanson9, S. A. Skinner4, C. Rogers4, D. B. duplications in cases were of maternal origin. Everman4, E. Boyd5, C. Tapp10, S. V. Mullegama11, D. Keelean-Fuller12, C. M. Powell12, S. Our study strengthens the support for the majority of the previously im- H. Elsea11, C. C. Morton8,13,14, J. F. Gusella2,14,15, B. DuPont4, A. Chaubey4, A. E. Lin2,3, M. E. plicated CNVs in SCZ and brings the evidence for two loci (duplications at Talkowski2,14,15; the AS/PWS locus and at 16p13.11), into the genome-wide significant level. 1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Overall, about 2.5% of SCZ patients and 0.9% of controls carry a large, detec- MA, United States, 3MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, MA, United States, 4Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 5Fullerton Genetic Center, t Eab. Rlee CeNs:V N aotn oen. Je. To.fR t.h We aplrteervsio: uNsolnye i.m Lp. lGiceaotregdie lvoac:i. None. A.R. Isles: None. K.D. Chambert: None. A. Richards: None. G. Davies: None. S.E. Legge: Asheville, NC, United States, 6Pathology Associates Medical Laboratories, Spokane, None. J.L. Moran: None. S.A. McCarroll: None. M.C. O‘ Donovan: None. M.J. WA, United States, 7Boston Children‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 8Harvard Owen: None. G. Kirov: None. Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 9Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau Claire, WI, United States, 10Agnesian Health Care, Fond Du Lac, WI, United States, 11Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA, United States, 12University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 13Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 14Broad Institute of Harvard and M.I.T., Cambridge, MA, United States, 15Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, United States. Microdeletions of chromosomal region 2q23.1 that disrupt MBD5 contribute to a spectrum of neurodevelopmental phenotypes. To characterize the struc- tural variation landscape of MBD5 disruptions and the associated human psychopathology, 22 individuals with genomic disruption of MBD5 (translo- cation, point mutation, and deletion) were identified through whole-genome sequencing or cytogenomic microarray at 11 molecular diagnostic centers. The genomic impact ranged from a single base pair to 5.4 Mb. Parents were available for 11 cases, all of which confirmed the rearrangement arose de novo. Phenotypes were largely indistinguishable between patients with full- segment 2q23.1 deletions and those with intragenic MBD5 rearrangements, including alterations confined entirely to the 5’UTR, confirming the critical impact of non-coding sequence at this locus. We identified heterogeneous, m 5u 2lti-system pathogenic effects of MBD5 disruptiEoSn HanGd c2h0ar1a3ct e|r PizAedR tIhSe, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .003 Posters Mutation spectrum of the CO
L2 A1 gene in 112 patients M. Barat-Houari1, B. Dumont1, A. Fabre1, F. Tran Mau Them1, P. Blanchet1, P. Calvas2, B. Isidor3, P. Khau Van Kien4, M. Lebrun5, S. Marlin6, S. Odent7, L. Pinson1, G. Baujat8,9, V. 
P01 .001 Cormier-Daire8,9, M. Le Merrer8,9, D. Genevieve1,10,11, I. Toutou1,10,11; ACTA2 mutation with childhood cardiovascular, autonomic and brain 1CHRU, MONTPELLIER, France, 2Institut Fédératif de Biologie (IFB), Hôpital Purpan, anomalies and severe outcome TOULOUSE, France, 3CHU, NANTES, France, 4CHU, NIMES, France, 5CHU, SAINT-ETIENNE, M. E. C. Meuwissen1, M. H. Lequin2, K. Bindels- de Heus3, H. T. Bruggenwirth1, M. F. C. M. France, 6Hôpital Armand Trousseau, PARIS, France, 7CHU, RENNES, France, 8Hôpital Knapen4, M. Dalinghaus5, R. de Coo6, Y. van Bever1, B. H. J. Winkelman7, G. M. S. Mancini1; Necker Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 9INSERM U781, Paris, France, 10INSTITUT DES 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, NEUROSCIENCES DE MONTPELLIER, INSERM U844, Montpellier, France, 11UNIVERSITE 2Dept. of Radiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept. MONTPELLIER 1, Montpellier, France. of Pediatrics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Dept. of Cardiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Background: Netherlands, 6Dept. of Child Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, A broad spectrum of 322 unique CO
L2 A1 mutations is currently described Netherlands, 7Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands. in the corresponding LOVD database gene entry that we manage (https:// grenada.lumc.nl/LOVD2/mendelian_genes/home.php?select_db=CO
L2 A1). Heterozygous mutations in this gene cause a large panel of skeletal dyspla- INTRODUCTION Connective tissue disorders are a common cause of vas- sia classified as Type 2 collagen group and similar disorders. cular disorders, such as thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection T(TGAFAβRD1). Objective: To report on 54 unique mutations including 36 novel and to inve- TCeGrFeβbRr2ovSaMscAuDla3r aAnCoTmA2al ies i nC cOoLn3nAe1c, tive tissue disorders are less frequent- stigate possible phenotype-genotype correlation. ly reported, although they c aCnO Lb4eA a1ssociaCteOdL 4wAi2t,h mutations in , Methods: Molecular analysis of the CO
L2 A1 gene in 112 patients with cli- , , and most frequentAlyC rTeAs2ulting in cerebral nical diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia was performed by Sanger bidirectional aneurysms, or mutations in and resulting in hereditary sequencing. porencephaly and cerebral hemorrhage. Recently, mutations have Results: been described in Moyamoya(like) disease and ischemic stroke. In addition, We identified 54 unique pathogenic mutations including 35 (65%) missen- a specific phenotype has been ascribed to the R179H mutation, leading to a se, 5 (9%) nonsense, 7 (13%) frame-shifts and 7 (13%) splice-site distribut- childhood presentation of disruption of smooth muscle cell dependent or- ed over the whole CO
L2 A1 gene. Fourty-six of 54 (85%) were substitutions, gans, brain developmental defects and abnormal cerebral vasculature. with 23 of 46 (50%) resulting in glycine substitution within a Gly-X-Y re- METHODS We report on a patient presenting with pulmonary hypertensi- peat. Fifty-five (49.5%) of the 112 patients carried one CO
L2 A1 mutation. on, patent DA, mydriasis, intestinal malrotation, bladder dysfunction and an Unexpectedly, 6 patients (3 Stickler, 1 Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Con- abnormal, straightened course of the anterior cerebral arteries. Our patient genita, SEDC, 1 Kniest and 1 Spondyloepimetaphyseal Dysplasia, Strudwick shows previously not described abnormal lobulation of the frontal lobes type) were compound heterozygous. Twelve (92%) of the 13 SEDC patients and position of the gyrus cinguli and rostral dysplasia of the corpus callo- carried a glycine substitution, whereas the Stickler patients displayed a sum. She died at the age of 3 yeards ed unroivnog surgery due to vascular fragility broader spectrum of mutations: 8 missenses, 4 nonsenses, 5 frame-shifts, and ductus arteriosus rupture. ACTA2. and 4 splice-sites. RESULTS We identified a novel c.535C>T in exonA 
C6 T Ale2a ding to Conclusions: p.R179C amino acid substitution in This series of skeletal dysplasia, one of the largest reported so far, adds 36 DISCUSSION Altogether these observations support a role of in brain (10%) novel mutations to those reported in LOVD and reveals first cases (vascular) development, especially related to the arginine at position 179. with dual mutations in these classically dominant syndromes. Moreover, we Although all previously reported patients with R179H substitution suc- confirm that 51% of the Stickler patients carry CO
L2 A1 mutation, and that cessfully underwent the same surgery at younger ages, the severe outcome t Mhi.s B pahraetn-ohtoyupaer ii:s N aosnseo.c Bia.t Dedu mwoitnht :a N laorngee. rA m. Fuatbarteio: nNaoln sep. eFc. tTrruamn mthaaun tShEeDmC: . of our patient warns against the devastating effects of the R179C substitu- None. P. Blanchet: None. P. Calvas: None. B. Isidor: None. P. Khau van kien: tMio.nE .oCn. Mvaesucwuilsastuerne: .None. M.H. Lequin: None. K. Bindels- de Heus: None. H.T. None. M. Lebrun: None. S. Marlin: None. S. Odent: None. L. Pinson: None. G. Bruggenwirth: None. M.F.C.M. Knapen: None. M. Dalinghaus: None. R. de Baujat: None. V. Cormier-daire: None. M. Le merrer: None. D. Genevieve: Coo: None. Y. van Bever: None. B.H.J. Winkelman: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. I. Toutou: None. None. 
P01 .004 
P01 .002 Craniofrontonasal Syndrome: A family with unusual inheritance Cherubism: a case report pattern of an X-linked Dominant genetic disease. T. H. ElBadry1, S. A. Temtamy1, A. A. Abd El Azeem1, M. I. Mehrez1, M. A. El Kassaby2; B. Ozyilmaz1, A. Gezdirici2, M. Özen2, O. Kalenderer3; 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Dentistry, Ain-Shams University, 1Tepecik Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, İzmir, Turkey, Cairo, Egypt. 2Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Genetics and Teratology Research Center, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Tepecik Training and Research Hospital, Department of Orthopedics, İzmir, Turkey. According to the WHO classification, cherubism belongs to a group of non neoplastic bone lesions that affect the jaws. Cherubism was first described in 1950 by Jones who described a condition which was characterized by Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS [MIM 304110]) is an X-linked domi- marked fullness of the cheeks and jaws and a slight upturning of the eyes nant disorder of craniofacial and skeletal development. CFNS unexpectedly giving the children a cherubic appearance Cherubism is a hereditary disease presents severe phenotype in heterozygous females and no or mild pheno- with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Mangion et al. (1999) type in hemizygous males. While heterozygous females show coronal cra- mapped the gene to 4p16.3. Mutations in the SH3B
P2  gene was demonstra- niosynostosis, craniofacial asymmetry, cleft palate, bifid nasal tip, Sprengel ted (Ueki et al. 2001). Patients with cherubism should be carefully evaluated deformity, wiry hair and hypertelorism, males generally only show hyper- for Noonan syndrome. Clinically, in cherubism, the lesions usually start in telorism. early childhood, affect both jaws, and have a symmetric distribution. It be- EFNB1 gene is located in Xq13.1 region and it is involved in random X-inac- gins to swell gradually until puberty. Although the condition is known to tivation process in females. In heterozygous females, random X-inactivation regress during the third decade of life, radiological changes persist until the process leads to mosaic distrubution of cells carrying mutant and wild type fourth. Although the disease is rare and painless, the affected suffer the emo- EFNB1 genes, thus the severity of heterozygous females is associated with tional trauma of disfigurement. cherubism interferes with normal jaw mo- patchy tissue pattern regarding the EFNB1 functional and non-functional tion and speech. Currently, surgical removal of the fibrous tissue and bone cells. Here we report a Turkish family with CFNS. The parents were 5th is the treatment available. This treatment has no expected results, when in- degree relatives and they had 5 children. Two female sibs were similarly troduced before puberty, results in an increase in bone growth .The use of affected and 2 male sibs were healthy. The father and mother were not pre- calcitonin and bisphosphonate with these surgeries was found to enhance senting any signs or symptoms regarding to CFNS. EFNB1 gene sequencing the outcome greatly and to prevent fierce recurrences. This report describes analysis revealed c.451G>A heterozygous mutation in 2 affected female sibs the clinical features of a 14-year-old girl with a severe case of cherubism and unexpectedly c.451G>A hemizygous mutation in their clinically unaf- affecting both jaws. We summarize the natural history of the disease over a fected father. The identification of the clinically unaffected father as hemizy- p Te.Hri.o Edl Boaf d1r1y :y Neaornse.. S.A. Temtamy: None. A.A. Abd El Azeem: None. M.I. gous for EFNB1 mutation, provides additional data for previously reported Mehrez: None. M.A. El Kassaby: None. u Bn.u Oszuyaill mgeanz:o Ntyopnee-.p Ah.e Gnoeztydpireic pi:a Nttoenren. oMf. t Öheze dni:s eNaosnee.. O. Kalenderer: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 53ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .005 Ozkinay1; Multiple craniosynostoses with unique digital anomalies: a new 1Ege University Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege craniosynostosis syndrome? University Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dr. Behçet Uz V. M. Siu1,2,3, S. DeRibaupierre1,2, D. Matic1,2, K. Y. Tay1,2, K. Norozi1,2,3, N. D‘Souza2; Children‘s Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Mersin Hospital of 1University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 2London Health Sciences Centre, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynocology, Department of Medical Genetics, Mersin, Turkey, London, ON, Canada, 3Children‘s Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada. 5Bezmialem University, Medical Faculty, Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. Craniosynostosis which is defined as the premature fusion of one or more Syndromic craniosynostosis syndromes are typically caused by single gene sutures of the skull is caused by mutations in FGFR1, FGFR2, or FGFR3. autosomal dominant disorders or chromosomal duplications or deletions. Among all craniosynostosis, syndromic craniosynostosis account for 15% of We report a 15 month old girl with multiple congenital anomalies. She was the cases. The most common forms of syndromic craniosynostosis are Crou- born with bilateral coronal synostosis and abnormal occipital bone with zon, Apert, Pfeiffer and Muncke syndrome that are mostly caused by mutati- premature fusion of the supraoccipital and interparietal portions, resulting ons in FGFR2 gene in which more than 60 mutations have been identified up in turribrachycephaly, hypertelorism, and downslanting palpebral fissures. to date. In this study we screened for FGR2 mutations in 8 patients having Transverse and sigmoid sinuses are congenitally absent, and a large single Crouzon, Apert and Pfieffer syndromes. We found heterozygous FGFR2 mu- vein from the superior sagittal sinus drains into large scalp veins through tations (p.
P253 R in 2 patients and p.
S252 W in one patient) in 3 Apert syn- the posterior fontanelle. At 3 months, she developed severe intracranial drome patients which were also reported to be the most common mutations hypertension requiring a posterior craniectomy and ventriculoperitone- in Apert syndrome. In 3 Crouzon syndrome patients heterozygous p.W290R, al shunt. Surgical correction of the skull deformities has been challenging. p.
S351 C and p.
S252 P mutations were detected. Heterozygous p.W290C mu- She had redundant nuchal skin, a ventricular septal defect (spontaneously tation was found in one patient diagnosed clinically as Pfeiffer syndrome. closed), and a persistently patent ductus arteriosus. Her symmetric hand One novel heterozygous mutation p.F334S has been detected in a patient anomalies involve hypoplasia of the proximal phalanges of trhde thumthb and with isolated nonsyndromic craniosynostosis. SIFT and PolyPhen analysis index fingers, and hypoplasia of the middle phalanges of the 3 and 5 digits, demonstrated that this aminoacid change may be tolerated, but functional resulttihng in marked brachydactylyth and ulnar deviation of the index fingers, analysis is needed. Revealing the phenotype-genotype correlation of parti- and 5 finger clinodactyly. The 4 digits are spared. Radii appear normal. cular syndromic forms of craniosynostosis leads to accurate diagnosis, ef- Family history is negative for any of these features. Array CGH using a 180k f Aic.i eDnutr mmaazn:a Ngoenmee. nHt., Oannday l:o Nngo-ntee.r Tm. Aptriok:g nNoosnies. oEf. tKhaer pacaati:e Nnotsn.e. F. Hazan: oligonucleotide array, as well as full sequencing of FGFR2 and FGFR3, tar- None. A. Kiraz: None. G. Yesil: None. O. Cogulu: None. F. Ozkinay: None. geted mutation analysis of FGFR1, and gene dosage studies of TWIST1 have not identified any alteration to account for these features. We propose that this disorder represents a previously undescribed craniosynostosis syndro- me with multiple congenital anomalies. Next generation sequencing may 
P01 .008 p Vo.Mte.n Stiiual:l yN oanide .i nS .t hDee Ridibeanutipfiiecarrteio: nN oonf eth. De .c Mauastiact:i vNeo gneen. Ke..Y. Tay: None. K. Rapid translation of research findings into clinical service for two Norozi: None. N. D‘Souza: None. new craniofacial genes identified in Oxford. H. Lord1, T. Lester1, S. R. F. Twigg2, V. P. Sharma2, A. L. Fenwick2, S. J. McGowan3, J. M. Phipps2, D. Johnson4, S. A. Wall4, L. Wilson5, F. Stewart6, J. Morton7, P. Noons8, E. Sweeney9, A. O. M. Wilkie2, A. Seller1; 
P01 .006 1Oxford Regional Genetics Laboratories, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, Expression of the Bardet-Biedl Syndrome gene 9 (BB
S9 ) in calvarial 2Clinical Genetics Group, Wetherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford suture of nonsyndromic craniosynostosis: pathophysiology of and Craniofacial Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Computational primary cilium in suture morphogenesis. Biology Research Group, Wetherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford C. Bernardini1, M. Barba1, G. Tamburrini2, S. A. Boyadjiev Boyd3, C. Di Rocco2, F. Michetti1, and Craniofacial Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Craniofacial W. Lattanzi1; Unit, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genetics, Level 4, York 1Inst. Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2Dept. House, Great Ormond Street NHS, London, United Kingdom, 6Northern Ireland Regional Neurosurgery - Pediatri Neurosurgery Unit- Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Lisburn Road, Belfast, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Italy, 3Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Genetics, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Metchley Park Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, Sacramento, CA, United States. United Kingdom, 8Birmingham Children‘s Hospital, Steelhouse Lane, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 9Clinical Genetics Department, Alder Hey Children‘s NHS Trust, Eaton Road, Liverpool, United Kingdom. Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NCS) is a relatively common craniofacial mJuaslftoicrem eat taiol,n N, awt iGthen ae tstrong genetic background. A recent GWAS found a Craniosynostosis (premature fusion of at least one cranial suture) results s2i0g1n2ificant association for sagittal NCS (sNCS) within the BB
S9  gene locus in skull and facial deformity, and is the second most common craniofacial ( malformation. Currently, single gene mutations/chromosomal abnorma- ). BB
S9  is a component of the BBBSomeV ienlveoril veet da il,n P tlhoes Opnriem 2a0r1y2 cilium- lities can only be identified in about one-fifth of cases, with mutations in related signalling. BB
S9  knockdown leads to cilia defect in the zebrafish, dis- the FGFR2, TWIST1, FGFR3, and EFNB1 genes accounting for the majori- playing severe developmental aberrations ( ). Inte- ty (~16%). Identifying the genetic cause in infants is important for genetic restinHgluyb, geer naensd c aCuosrimngie art-D leaaisret ,t wAmo c Jr aMneiods Gynenoestt oCs iSse smynind rMomede Gs e(Cnaetr.p2e0n1t2er counselling, risk assessment, surgical management and outcome. and Sensenbrenner syndrome) are involved in the cilia formation and func- Close partnership between the diagnostic Oxford Regional Genetics Labora- tion ( ). tory and Professor Wilkie’s research group in Oxford has enabled two new This study was aimed at clarifying the role of BB
S9  and related cilium-asso- craniofacial genes; ERF and TCF12, to be rapidly translated into the diagno- ciated genes in suture ossification. We have performed an in-depth in silico stic service. Mutations in these two genes have been shown to account for a analysis of our previous microarray data and identified a relevant number of further ~2% of cases. ciliome-associated genes differentially expressed in fused-versus-patent su- To date we have screened seventeen patients with multi-suture synostosis tures of NCS patients. BB
S9  was among the most significantly up-regulated in whom no mutation was identified in previous screens. An ERF mutation genes in the list; these data were confirmed in tissues and cells from an inde- was detected in one patient with pansynostosis. pendent set of NCS patients. Confocal microscopy showed that fused suture- Of fifteen patients referred with uni- or bi-coronal synostosis, in whom no derived cells has a decreased tendency to form primary cilia. Moreover we mutation was identified in previous screens; two patients were shown to have analyzed the expression of BB
S9  and related cilium-associated genes carry a mutation in TCF12. in the suture mesenchyme of the rat skull. The expression of BB
S9  increased Confirmation of other mutations in ERF and TCF12 identified in the research progressively over time. Overall, these data seemed to confirm an active role setting is currently in progress, and we have also undertaken cascade scree- of BB
S9  in osteogenesis and may suggest that BB
S9  sequence variants asso- ning in two of these families. This is important as variable penetrance has ciated to a dysregulation of BB
S9  expression could lead to premature suture o Cs.s Bifiecrantaiordni nini: NNConSe.. M. Barba: None. G. Tamburrini: None. S.A. Boyadjiev been observed. Boyd: None. C. Di Rocco: None. F. Michetti: None. W. Lattanzi: None. Incorporation of these new genes into our diagnostic service has identified the genetic cause in three new cases in our cohort, which will enable casca- d He. sLcorrede:n Ninogn ea.n Td. Laecscuterra:t Ne opnreo.g Sn.oRs.tFi.c T awdivgigc:e N toon bee. Vg.iPv.e Snh.arma: None. A.L. Fenwick: None. S.J. McGowan: None. J.M. Phipps: None. D. Johnson: 
P01 .007 None. S.A. Wall: None. L. Wilson: None. F. Stewart: None. J. Morton: None. P. FGFR2 mutations in syndromic craniosynostosis patients Noons: None. E. Sweeney: None. A.O.M. Wilkie: None. A. Seller: None. A. Durmaz1, H. Onay1, T. Atik2, E. Karaca1, F. Hazan3, A. Kiraz4, G. Yesil5, O. Cogulu2, F. 54 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .009 
P01 .011 Crouzon Syndrome and bent bone dysplasia associated to mutations A new insight into structural and functional impact of FGFR3 at the same TYR-381 residue in FGFR2 gene mutations at the same position in three FGFR3-related C. Collet1, J. Alessandri2, E. Arnaud3, V. Cormier-Daire4, F. Di Rocco3; chondrodysplasia. 1Service de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, D. Komla Ebri1, C. Benoist Lasselin1, N. Kaci1, P. Busca2, G. Prestat2, A. Munnich1, F. 2Service de Réanimation Pédiatrique, Hôpital Felix Guyon, Saint-Denis de la Réunion, Barbault3, L. Legeai-Mallet1; France, 3Unité de Chirurgie Craniofaciale, Service de Neurochirurgie, Centre de 1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2UMR CNRS 8601, Paris, France, 3ITODYS - Université Paris Référence National Dysostoses Crâniofaciales, hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 4Génétique Diderot, Paris, France. Clinique, Centre de Référence des Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. Three missense mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of fibroblast grow- th factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) affecting a lysine residue at position 650 lead Crouzon syndrome has an high penetrance and an extreme clinical variabi- to dwarfism with a spectrum of severity, hypochondroplasia (p. Lys650Asn), lity. The majority of the mutations responsible for his syndrome are located severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans in the exon 8 (IIIa) and 10 (IIIc) of the fibr oblast growth factor receptor 2 (p. Lys650Met), and thanatophoric dysplasia (p. Lys650Glu). Fgfr3 mu- gene (FGFR2) corresponding to an immunoglobulin domain. We report here tations induce a constitutive activation of the receptor characterized by a a familial Crouzon syndrome associated to a new p.Tyr381Asn mutation in sustained phosphorylation. To understand the severity of the clinical phe- exon 11 of FGFR2 gene. The proband was suspected of this syndrome at the notype, we developed computational and biological studies. Computational age of 3 years. At that time he presented with adolichocephaly with bilateral studies were conducted to get an atomic description of the p. Lys650Met, moderate exophtalmia, parrot-beaked nose and frontal bossing. A skull CT p. Lys650Glu and p. Lys650Asn built using a validated structural model of examination was performed at age 5 confirming the closure of the sagittal the FGFR3 kinase domain. Structural analyses indicate that a salt bridge suture associated a facial retrusion and inverted bite. His father and his si- between R655 and 
E686  is the cornerstone of the Tyr647 solvent exposi- ster displayed a milder phenotype. The Crouzon syndrome was confirmed tion. This salt bridge is, significantly, disturbed with p. Lys650Glu mutation after detection of novel heterozygous p.Tyr381Asn(c.1141T>C) mutation in and is destroyed with p. Lys650Met and p. Lys650Asn mutants. There is a FGFR2 gene located in the transmembrane domain for the 3 affected mem- qualitative correlation with the severity of the clinical phenotype. We evalu- bers of the family, segregating with the craniosynostosis phenotype. This ated also the impact of the FGFR3 mutants on signaling pathways. Transient mutation was located at the same position (p.Tyr381Asp(c.1141T>G)) that transfections of DNA mutants in human chondrocytes show both a gradient the recently described perinatal lethal bent bone dysplasia which is charac- of phosphorylation levels and an increased proliferation correlated with the terized by co ronal craniosynostosis associated with hypoplastic clavicle, severity of the disease. In addition, a higher activation of the signalling pa- bent long bones in the lower extremities, hypoplastic pubis and abnormal thways (ERK1/2, AKT, STAT, b-catenin) was also observed. phalanges. Ours cases did not show any appendicular bony abnormality on In conclusion, the three lysine 650 substitutions alter differently the confor- X-rays. This observation highlights the need of further researches to explain mation of the kinase domain thus leading to various activations of signalling such major clinical difference between those two syndromes associated pathways. Different mechanisms seem to be responsible for mild and lethal Nw C oi.t n Ch e o .a l F lFe . Gt D:F iN R Ro2 on cem c. ouJ :t. a NAt olieo nsn es .aafnfedcrit:i nNgo nthee. Esa. Amren aTuydr-: 3N8o1n ere. sVi.d Cuoer.mier-Daire: d Dw. aKrofimsmla .Ebri: None. C. Benoist Lasselin: None. N. Kaci: None. P. Busca: None. G. Prestat: None. A. Munnich: None. F. Barbault: None. L. Legeai- Mallet: None. 
P01 .010 1150 T>C change in exon 10 of the FGFR3 is preferentially associated 
P01 .012 with pathogenic mutations The STARD3NL locus is strongly associated with pediatric spine bone T. Y. Kanazawa, L. C. Bonadia, C. A. Moreno, D. P. Cavalcanti; mineral density in a regression-based multi-ethnic meta-analysis of State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. known adult loci. FGFR3 J. P. Bradfield1, S. Deliard2, C. E. Kim1, R. M. Chiavacci1, J. M. Lappe3, H. J. Kalkwarf4, V. Gilsanz5, H. Hakonarson6,1,2, S. E. Oberfield7, J. A. Shepherd8, A. Kelly9,6, B. S. Zemel10,6, S. F. Few pathogenic mutations in are known to be associated with the A. Grant1,2,6; achondroplasia phenotypic spectrum, leading to a good genotype-pheno- 1The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Center for Applied Genomics, Philadelphia, PA, type correlation. UncFoGmFmR3only, however, phenotype variations have been United States, 2The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Genetics, Philadelphia, observed. The speculation about a possible modulating effect of the 1150 PA, United States, 3Creighton University, Osteoporosis Research Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 4Cincinnati Children‘s Hospital Medical Center, Division of General and T>C transition in the , and the identification of a newborn with a se- Community Pediatrics, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 5Children‘s Hospital Los Angeles, vere form of hypochondroplasia with positive mutation (1620 C>A) and also Department of Radiology, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 6University of Pennsylvania, presenting the 1150 T>C substitution FinG FthRe3 exon 10 prompted us to bet- Perelman School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Philadelphia, PA, United ter investigate the role of this polymorphism. We evaluated the frequency States, 7Columbia University Medical Center, Morgan Stanley Children‘s Hospital of of the 1150 T>C polymorphism in the in both - a cohort of patients New York, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, New York, NY, United States, 8University of the FGFR3 pFhGeFnRo3typic spectrum with known mutations, and in normal of California San Francisco, Department of Radiology and Bioimaging, San Francisco, controls of the general population. Hitherto, using direct sequencing of the CA, United States, 9The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Endocrinology, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 10The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of exon 10 of the , we have studied 39 patients and 265 normal controls. Gastroenterology, Philadelphia, PA, United States. We have found the 1150 T>C polymorphism in two patients (2 alleles in 78 chromosomes or 2.6% of the C allele). One patient had a typical achondro- plasia (1138 G>A) and the second one was a hypochondroplastic patient Osteoporosis has its origins in childhood, where bone mineral accretion du- (1620 C>A) with a severe phenotype. Among the 265 studied controls, the ring development is a critical determinant of future bone health. We elected 1150 T>C polymorphism was found in only three individuals (3 alleles in to leverage data from an ongoing GWAS of pediatric bone accretion to inve- 530 or 0.6% of the C allele). In conclusion, the 1150 T>C polymorphism was stigate the association of previously reported adult BMD loci with pediatric founFdG FnRea3rly five times more frequent in patients of the FGFR3 family than BMD of the spine using a linear regression based meta-analysis of three eth- in normal controls, suggesting a possible role in pathogenic mutations of nicities. Our cohort is derived from the multi-center NICHD Bone Mineral the . Density in Childhood (BMDC) Study, which was initiated in 2001 to establish Supported by grants of CNPq (402008/2010-3, 590148/2011-7, 1 T3.Y2. 2K7a0n/a2z0a1w2a-:9 N)o anned. LF.ACP. EBSoPn a(9d8ia/:1 N6o0n0e6. -
C6 .)A.. Moreno: None. D.P. national reference standards for BMD and bone accrual for children ages 6 Cavalcanti: None. years and older. In order to maximize the statistical power in our cohort, we carried out a meta-analysis leveraging the three main ethnicities in the collection. This led to 753 Caucasian, 308 African American and 205 Hispa- nic samples being included in the analysis. All samples were genotyped on the Illumina OMNI-Express-Exome BeadChip platform, enabling us to query 59 of the 64 adult BMD. A linear regression in plink was used to test for association with pediatric spine BMD followed by a meta-analysis. No asso- ciation was found when the three groups were analyzed together, but when investigating each ethnicity individually, we found that SNP rs940347 at the STARD3NL locus yielded a P-value of 1.74x10-4 in the Caucasian cohort and survived Bonferroni correction; indeed, this is the same ethnicity where the original adult discovery was made. In summary, we conclude that there is ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 55 evidence that the STARD3NL locus contributes to adult spine BMD by exer-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index t Jin.Pg. iBtsra edffifeecltd :e aNrolyne i.n S li. fDe.eliard: None. C.E. Kim: None. R.M. Chiavacci: sented with high levels of RUNX2 while the other displayed very low SOX6. None. J.M. Lappe: None. H.J. Kalkwarf: None. V. Gilsanz: None. H. In conclusion, we provide evidences of heterogeneity and of additive effects Hakonarson: None. S.E. Oberfield: None. J.A. Shepherd: None. A. Kelly: oPf. sSeavrerrióanl :g Nenoense .f oLr. Mtheel lHibBoMvs pkyh:e Nnoontyep. eR.. Urreizti: None. S. Civit: None. N. None. B.S. Zemel: None. S.F.A. Grant: None. Cols: None. N. Garcia-Giralt: None. G. Yoskovitz: None. A. Aranguren: None. S. Di Gregorio: None. L. Del Río: None. J. Malouf: None. R. Güerri: None. X. Nogués: None. A. Díez-Pérez: None. D. Grinberg: None. S. Balcells: None. 
P01 .013 Correlation between platelet phenotype and NBEA
L2  genotype in patients with congenital thrombocytopenia and α-granule deficiency R. Bottega1,2, A. Pecci3, E. De Candia4, N. Pujol-Moix5, P. Heller6, P. Noris3, D. De Rocco1,2, G. 
P01 .015 Podda7, A. C. Glembotsky6, M. Cattaneo7, C. L. Balduini3, A. Savoia1,2; A homozygous missense mutation in HSPA9 causes epiphyseal- 1Department of Medical Science, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for vertebral-ear (EVE) dysplasia Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS „Burlo Garofolo“, Trieste, Italy, 3IRCCS Policlinico C. T. Gordon1, M. Oufadem1, A. Linglart2, D. Lehalle3, S. Marlin4, C. Bole5, P. Nitschke5, A. San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 4Hemostasis and Thrombosis Unit, Policlinico Munnich1,3, S. Lyonnet1,3, J. Amiel1,3; Agostino Gemelli, Roma, Italy, 5Platelet Pathology Unit, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant 1Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U-781, Paris, France, 2Service d’endocrinologie Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 6University of Buenos Aires. CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina, pédiatrique, Hôpital Cochin - Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique, 7Medicina 3, Ospedale San Paolo, Milano, Italy. Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique, Hôpital d‘Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 5Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. The gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is a rare inherited bleeding disorder cha- racterized by thrombocytopenia, increased volume of platelets and defects Epiphyseal-vertebral-ear (EVE) dysplasia is an extremely rare disorder with of α‐granules formation which gives a characteristic gray appearance to pla- distinctive dysmorphic features and ossification defects. A single family has telets. been reported, with two affected sisters born to healthy, consanguineous After the recent identification of mutations in NBEA
L2  gene as the genetic parents. Key features were midface hypoplasia, depressed nasal bridge, an- defect responsible for GPS, we hypothesized that this gene was responsible teverted nares, symmetrical dysplasia of the helices, epiphyseal dysplasia, for low platelet count and α‐granule deficiency in 11 unrelated probands mid-coronal clefting of vertebral bodies, odontoid hypoplasia, elbow dislo- with inherited thrombocytopenia and α‐granules defects. cation and intrauterine growth restriction with post-natal catch-up growth. DNA sequencing of NBEA
L2  led to identification of 9 novel alteration of the Similar craniofacial and skeletal features have been noted in cerebral, ocular, gene including 2 missense, 3 nonsense, 2 frameshift mutations, as well as dental, auricular, skeletal anomalies (CODAS) syndrome. The genetic causes 2 nucleotide substitutions that altered the splicing mechanisms, in 4 fami- of EVE and CODAS syndromes have not been reported.We performed exome lies. In addiction, evaluation of platelet phenotype revealed that all patients sequencing of the two affected EVE dysplasia patients, and after filtering for with NBEA
L2  biallelic mutation showed thrombocytopenia, large platelets published and in-house SNPs and selecting for deleterious variants, the only and severe reduction of α‐granules. Of note, although they were not throm- homozygous variant shared between both sisters was the missense muta- bocytopenic, also individuals carrying only one mutated allele had platelet tion p.Thr362Ile in heat shock 70kDa protein 9 (HSPA9). The catalytic ac- macrocytosis and significant reduction of the α‐granules in contrast with an tivity of HSPA9 is encoded by the ATPase domain, a structure conserved in autosomal recessive transmission. In the remaining 7 probands, we did not chaperones from vertebrates to bacteria. Thr362 is absolutely conserved in identify any NBEA
L2  alterations, suggesting that other genetic defects are known orthologues of HSPA9 and falls within the ATPase domain. Structural responsible for their platelet phenotype. modelling of thHeS mPAu9tation Thr362Ile indicates disruption of hydrogen bon- Our data extend the spectrum of mutations responsible for GPS and demon- ding, predicted to lead to protein instability. Published transcriptomic data strate that macrothrombocytopenia with α‐granule deficiency is a genetic indicates that isH hSiPgAhl9y expressed in human fetal cartilage, and we h Re.t Berootgteegnae:o Nuosn ter.a Ait.. Pecci: None. E. De Candia: None. N. Pujol-Moix: have explored this expression pattern in greater detail by in situ hybridisati- None. P. Heller: None. P. Noris: None. D. De Rocco: None. G. Podda: on.This work identifies as a novel regulator of craniofacial and skele- None. A.C. Glembotsky: None. M. Cattaneo: None. C.L. Balduini: None. A. Savoia: None. tal development, with its mutation causing EVE dysplasia. CODAS syndrome m Ca.Ty. bGeo rcdaounse: dN obnye m. Mu.t aOtuiofands eimn :a Nreolnaet.e Ad .g Leinneg loarrt p: aNtohnwea. yD.. Lehalle: None. S. Marlin: None. C. Bole: None. P. Nitschke: None. A. Munnich: None. S. Lyonnet: None. J. Amiel: None. 
P01 .014 Analysis of the high bone mass phenotype using genomic and transcriptomic tools: evidences of genetic heterogeneity and of 
P01 .017 additive effects of TWIST1, I
L6 R, DLX3 and PPARG The genetic study of intracranial aneurysm in the Japanese P. Sarrión1,2,3, L. Mellibovsky4, R. Urreizti1,2,3, S. Civit5, N. Cols1,2, N. Garcia-Giralt4, G. population Yoskovitz4, A. Aranguren1, S. Di Gregorio6, L. Del Río6, J. Malouf7, R. Güerri4, X. Nogués4, A. S. Low1, A. Takahashi1, M. Kubo2, Y. Nakamura3; Díez-Pérez4, D. Grinberg1,2,3, S. Balcells1,2,3; 1Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Tokyo, 1Dpt. Genetics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, Japan, 2Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, 3CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 4URFOA, IMIM, Hospital del Mar, RETICEF, Barcelona, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute Spain, 5Dpt. Statistics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6CETIR, Barcelona, of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Spain, 7Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. Intracranial aneurysms (IA) are balloon like dilation of arterial walls in Osteoporosis is characterized by very low bone mineral density (BMD). The the brain; rupture of IA leads to aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage high bone mass (HBM) phenotype is a non-pathogenic condition characte- (aSAH), which is the most serious subtype of stroke. Genetic factors have rized by BMD values at the other extreme of the spectrum. The aims of the been known to play an important role in the development of IA. Here, we study were to establish the prevalence of HBM in a cohort of Spanish post- conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify common menopausal women (BARCOS); to determine the contribution of LR
P5  and genetic variants that are associated with IA by using 1383 aSAH subjects DKK1 mutations to this phenotype; to test the hypothesis of an inverse cor- and 5484 controls from the Japanese population. The variants thaEtD sNhoRwAed relation between the number of common variant risk alleles and HBM; and suggestive association in the GWAS were validated in an independent set of to characterize the expression of 88 osteoblast-specific and Wnt pathway 1048 IA cases and 7212 controls. We identified, rs684-29241, near at genes in primary osteoblasts from two HBM cases. cEhDrNoRmAosome 4q31.22 (combined P-value = 9.58 × 10 ; odds ratio = 1.25), A 0.6% of individuals (10/1600) displayed bone mineral density Z-scores tEoD bNeR sAig nificantly associated with IA. Owing to the functional importance of in the HBM range [sum (lumbar spine + femoral neck) Z-score >4]. No mu- to IA, we performed functional analysis of the associated variants on tations in relevant exons of LR
P5  were found and one woman had a rare and identified rs6841581 as a functional variant that might affect missense change in DKK1 (p.Y74F). Fifty-five BMD SNPs from Estrada et al the expression of EDNRA and subsequently result in the IA susceptibility. [NatGenet 44:491-501,2012] were genotyped in the HBM cases to obtain To further understand the etiology of Pthe disease, we performed pathway r lais tek d-s c wo ir te hs f ho er e ea rc ih i -n sd ci ov ri ed su a wl. iZ th-s ac o sr ie ns lw e er xe efo pu tin od ,t o b he n he mga at yiv be ely c xo pr lr ae i- analysis utilizing the GWAS dataset and GiSdEAentified No-6tch signaling pathway t s sk , g e c n w ic e - to be significantly associated with IA ( =3.0 × 10 ). In addition, we also ned by a rare penetrant genetic variant. The expression analysis in primary participated in a collaborative study that performed meta-analysis, which osteoblasts from two HBM cases and five controls, showed that I
L6 R, DLX3, successfully identified six genetic loci, 8q12.1, 9p21.3, 10q24.32, 13q13.1, T 5W 6IST1 and PPARG were negatively related to Z-EscSoHre.G O n2e0 H1B3M | c PasAeR pIrSe-, FR1A8qN11C.2E a|n Wd 4Wq3W1.2.
E2 S, aHs GIA. OcoRmGmon susceptible loci of the European andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Japanese population. Our findings have reveal a better understanding of the than 5 years) Conclusions: We provide a detailed description of features as- c So.n Ltoriwb:u Ntioonne o. fA g. eTnaektaihc afaschtio: rNso tnoe .I AM.. Kubo: None. Y. Nakamura: None. sociated with RNU4ATAC mutations. Our results expand the phenotypic and mutational spectrum of this malformation syndrome and further investiga- tions of the prevalence of RNU4ATAC mutations in correlation with clinical pLh.Ken. Eotffyapte: Naoren er.ecommended. 
P01 .018 A novel missense mutation in ANO5 is causative for gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia in a large Italian pedigree C. Marconi1, P. Brunamonti Binello2, G. Badiali3, E. Caci4, R. Cusano5, J. Garibaldi6, T. 
P01 .020 Pippucci1, A. Merlini2, C. Marchetti3, K. J. Rhoden1, L. J. V. Galietta4, F. Lalatta7, P. Balbi8, Multicentric carpo-tarsal osteolysis: clinical and molecular review of M. Seri1; 8 cases 1Medical Genetics Unit,, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Struttura Complessa C. Mehawej1, J. Courcet2, G. Baujat1, R. Mouy3, M. Gerard4, I. Landru5, M. Gosselin6, P. di Odontostomatologia, Dipartimento di Chirurgie Specialistiche , Ospedale Galliera, Koehrer7, C. Mousson8, Q. Pierre3, M. Le Merrer1, L. Faivre2,9, V. Cormier-Daire1; Genova, Italy, 3Unità di Chirurgia Orale e Maxillo-facciale, Dipartimento di Scienze 1Département de génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique des Odontostomatologiche, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Laboratorio di Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 2Pédiatrie 1 et Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d‘Enfants, Genetica Molecolare, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 51-Istituto di Ricerca CHU, Dijon, France, 3Service de Rhumatologie et d’Immunologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Genetica e Biomedica-CNR;2-CR
S4 , Laboratorio di Genomica, Parco tecnologico della Necker Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, Sardegna, Cagliari, Italy, 6Odontoiatra, Genova, Italy, 7Unità di Genetica Medica,Clinica 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Clémenceau, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire, Mangiagalli; Dipartimento area salute della Donna, del Bambino e del Neonato Caen, France, 5Service de Néphrologie, Centre Hospitalier, Lisieux, France, 6Service Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 8Struttura de Néphrologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Pontaillou, Rennes, France, 7Service Complessa di Odontostomatologia, Dipartimento di Chirurgie Specialistiche, Ospedale d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital Général, Dijon, France, 88 Service de Néphrologie, Hôpital le Galliera, Genova, Italy. Bocage, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire, Dijon, France, 9Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies de Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’interrégion Grand-Est, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, Dijon, France. Gnathodiaphyseal dysplasia (GDD) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by frequent bone fractures at a young age, bowing of tubu- lar bones and cemento-osseus lesions of the jawbones. To date, two muta- Multicentric carpo-tarsal osteolysis (MCTO) with or without nephropathy is tions on the same cysteine residue at position 356 of Anoctamin 5 (ANO5) a rare osteolysis disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance beginning have been described in GDD families. Sequencing the entire ANO5 coding in early childhood and involving mainly carpal and tarsal bones. In the ma- and untranslated regions in 21 individuals (7 affected, 14 not affected) of jority of cases, renal disease appears later in life and evolves quickly to end a large Italian GDD family, we found a novel missense mutation causing the stage renal disease. Recently, mutations in the amino-terminal transcriptio- p.Thr513Ile substitution. The mutation perfectly segregates in the family nal activation domain of the MAFB gene (v-maf musculoaponeurotic fibro- and has never been described in any database as a polymorphism. Clinical sarcoma oncogene ortholog B) have been identified in MCTO patients by features of the patients are completely superimposable to those of previous- exome sequencing. MAFB, known as a regulator of various developmental ly described families . Thus this is the third mutation described to be cau- processes, is essential for osteoclastogenesis and podocyte differentiation sative for GDD. ANO5 belongs to the anoctamin protein family that includes and renal tubule survival. MWAe FcBollected the data of eight patients with MCTO calcium-activated chloride channels. However, our experiments show that issued from six different families to review the clinical features and perform ANO5 may not function as calcium-activated chloride channel. Mutations in the molecular analysis of . Among the 8 cases, renal disease was pre- ANO5 have also been found in many cases of rare forms of muscular dystro- sent in the six older. We identified five missense mutations in all screened phy (MMD3 and LGMD2L). The mutations described until now are spread cases confirming the genetic homogeneity of MCTO. Three among the five throughout the gene, with no apparent trend in their position with regard to mutations were novel clustered within the hot spot mutation region of the specific motifs, transmembrane domains or cytoplasmic versus extracellu- gene. Disease variability and associated features were observed , concerning lar regions of the protein. This heterogeneity and the still-unknown function especially the extension and consequences of osteolysis and age of onset of of ANO5 make it difficult to unravel the molecular pathophysiology of GDD. renal manifestations. Since the intensity of rheumatologic and nephrologic The findings of this third mutation may help in this unraveling process and symptoms vaMriAeFdB even within the same family, we conclude that MCTO is in the understanding of the anoctamins’ function and role in these different a genetically homogeneous but clinically variable condition; the molecular d Cis. eMaasrecso.ni: None. P. Brunamonti Binello: None. G. Badiali: None. E. Caci: s Ccr. eMeenhinawg eojf: None. Jw. iCll oaullrocwet :e Narolnye d. iGag. nBoasuijsa te:s Npoenceia. lRly. iMno iusoyl:a Nteodn ec.a Mse. s. None. R. Cusano: None. J. Garibaldi: None. T. Pippucci: None. A. Merlini: Gerard: None. I. Landru: None. M. Gosselin: None. P. Koehrer: None. C. None. C. Marchetti: None. K.J. Rhoden: None. L.J.V. Galietta: None. F. Lalatta: Mousson: None. Q. Pierre: None. M. Le Merrer: None. L. Faivre: None. V. None. P. Balbi: None. M. Seri: None. Cormier-Daire: None. 
P01 .019 
P01 .021 A Clinical and Molecular Genetic Study of 6 Arab families with Nail-Patella Syndrome: evidence for genetic heterogeneity Microcephalic Osteodysplastic Primordial Dwarfism type I F. M. Petit1,2, F. Escande1, A. Jourdain1, N. Porchet1,2, M. Holder-Espinasse1,2,3, S. L. K. Effat; Manouvrier-Hanu1,2; Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research, giza, Egypt. 1CHRU de Lille, LILLE, France, 2Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 3Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Backgroud: Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type I (MOPD I) is a rare recessive disorder characterized by severe microcephaly, Nail patella syndrome (NPS) is a hereditary osteo-onychodysplasia with auto- intrauterine growth retardation, developmental brain malformations, skel- somal dominant inheritance. Prevalence is estimated at 1/50 000. This affec- etal changes and early lethality. It is caused by mutations in the RNU4ATAC tion comprises characteristic skeletal anomalies (naLiMl dXy1sBplasia, hypoplastic gene encoding U4atac, a small nuclear RNA that is a crucial component of or absent patella, iliac exostoses⋯) frequently associated with ocular or re- the minor spliceosome. Objective: To determine the spectrum of clinical and nal involvement. NPS results from mutations in the gene, localized in neuroradiologic features in MOPD I patients due to RNU4ATAC gene muta- 9q34 and spanning approximately 95 kb. This gene encodes a transcription tions. Methods: RNU4ATAC was sequenced in 10 patients from 6 unrelated factor belonging to the LIM homLeMoXd1oBmain protein family. This protein plays a Arab families with MOPD I. In addition, we evaluated the clinical phenotype, crucial role in the dorso-ventral polarisation of the limbLsM. MX1uBtations respon- cognition, behavior and brain MRI. sible for haploinsuffficiency of are identified in 85-90% of patients. Results: All patients were homozygous or compound heterozygous of RNU4- In about 10-15% of patients, no mutation is identified in . To our know- ATAC mutations. The probands harbored 4 different mutations (g.55G>A, ledge, the hypothesis of a genetic heterogLeMnXe1itBy has never been studied in g.51G>A, g.66G>C and g.124G>A) of which 2 were novel. The severity of this disease. We study 5 families affected with typical LNMPSX 1foBr whom routine brain and skeletal anomalies, degree of motor and speech delay, and survival screening has not identified a mutation in (exons and flanking introns varied considerably among patients even with the same mutation. Mild mo- sequencing, MLPA). We performed NGS for the whole gene in 4 fami- tor delay was noted in 3/10 patients. Typical skeletal changes were found in lies, revealing no mutation in coding or non-coding sequence. In one family, all patients but metopic suture synostosis were additional finding in 5 pati- results provide clues for non-linkage at 9q34, confirming the likelihood of a ents. All patients showed hypogenesis of corpus callosum but 2 patients had g Fe.Mne. tPice thite: tNeroongee. nF.e Eitsyc.ande: None. A. Jourdain: None. N. Porchet: None. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. S. Manouvrier-Hanu: None. pachygyria and interhemispheric cyst in addition. Interestingly, 4 sibs from showed oculocutaneous albinism. One paEtSieHntG sh 2ow0e1d3 l o|n PgA suRrIvSiv,a Fl (RmAoNre CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 57ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .022 K.U. Ludwig: None. P. Garg: None. A.C. Boehmer: None. M. Rubini: None. R. Genetic variants in SKI, FGFR1, WNT3, IRF6 and BM
P4  genes are Steegers-Theunissen: None. P.A. Mossey: None. M.M. Noethen: None. E. associated with risk for non-syndromic CL/CLP and/or CP in Latvian Mangold: None. A.J. Sharp: None. population I. Kempa1,2, L. Piekuse1, I. Akota3, B. Barkane3, A. Krumina4, J. Stavusis4, J. Klovins4, B. Lace4; 
P01 .024 1Scientific Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, Genome-wide association study reveals new candidate loci for knee 2Department of Biology and Microbiology, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 3Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Stomatology, Riga Stradins osteoarthritis University, Riga, Latvia, 4Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia. A. Näkki1, M. Heliövaara2, P. Leino-Arjas3, U. M. Kujala4,5, J. Saarela1; 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland, 4University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland, 5ORTON Orthopedic The identification of susceptibility genes for non-syndromic cleft lip with or Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. without cleft palate and isolated cleft palate (CL/CLP/CP) has been the sub- ject of extensive research. To localize candidate genesI RaFn6d loci of non-syn- dromic clefts, several genome-wide linkage screens, association studies and Objective. Osteoarthritis is a complex disease common in the elderly. Our fine mapping have been published. However, only the gene has shown aim was to study single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genome-wide a convincing degree of consistency across studies and was considered to be association study (GWAS) of knee OA. responsible for less than 20% of non-syndromic CL/CLP and/or CP. Methods. The study subjects were part of Finnish Health2000 study sample The aim of the present study was the identification of candidate genes invol- (Genmets) consisting of 2118 individuals genotyped using Illumina Human- ved in the etiology of non-syndromic CL/CLP and CP in Latvian population. Hap 610k. Presence of osteoarthritis in the knee joints were evaluated by a Selection of the candidate genes were based on recent publications regar- clinician based on physical status, symptoms, and medical history. Indivi- ding confirmed linkage and association studies with non-syndromic CL/ duals suffering from rheumatoid arthritis or below the age of 50 were ex- CLP or CP. Genotyping of 672 SNPs in 45 genes were done using APEX-2 cluded. Seventy-five individuals had OA in at least one knee and 895 were technology, MALDI-TOFF technology and TaqMan assays. For case-control healthy controls without knee or hip OA based on the clinical evaluation. study 178 non-syndromic CL/CLP/CP patients (135 CL/CLP patients and Association was monitored using the Plink program, age, sex and body mass 43 CP patients) and 483 unaffected individuals as controFlsG wFRer1e aWnNalTy3zedS,K inI index as covariates. aBdMdPit4ion TDIRTF w6as carried out in 122 trios. Results. In the knee OA GWAS analysis the most significant results were for Our results showed very strong association between , , , SNPs in or next to MARK1 gene on chromosome 1q41 (OR=2.44, 95%CI SKI aFnGdF R1, W gNeTn3es andI RnFo6n -syndromic CL/CLP and CP, and possible in- 1.68-3.54, p=2.67x10-6), MYO10 gene on chromosome 5p15.1 (OR=2.61, teraction between 19q13 locus and non-syBnMdrPo4mic CL/CLP. Genetic variants 95%CI 1.71-4.00, p=9.19x10-6), and on chromosome 13q21.1 (OR=2.29, in , and genes may contribute susceptibility to both 95%CI 1.59-3.28, p=7.12x10-6). non-syndromic CL/CLP and CP, whereas gene could have protective Conclusion. Variants in/near MARK1 and MYO10 showed suggestive evi- effect in the susceptibility for non-syndromic CL/CLP in Latvian populati- dence for association with knee OA. MARK1 plays a role in cell polarity and on. microtubule dynamics. MYO10 has a role in integration of F-actin and micro- Obtained results continue to support the involvement of these genes in the tubule cytoskeletons during meiosis. Results did not reach genome-wide si- d I.e Kveelmoppma: eNnotn oef. nLo. nP-iseyknudsero: mNoicn eC.L I/. ACLkoPt/aC: PN ionn eC.a Bu.c aBsairaknasn.e: None. A. gnificance, but a follow-up study in an independent study set is ongoing: The Krumina: None. J. Stavusis: None. J. Klovins: None. B. Lace: None. three SNPs are being genotyped in the remaining part of the Health2000 with 302 knee OA cases and 1700 controls based on the same criterion as i An .t Nheä kinkii:t iNaol nscer. eMe.n Hinegli.övaara: None. P. Leino-Arjas: None. U.M. Kujala: 
P01 .023 None. J. Saarela: None. Genome-wide analysis of parent-of-origin effects in non-syndromic orofacial clefts K. U. Ludwig1,2, P. Garg3, A. C. Boehmer1,2, M. Rubini4, R. Steegers-Theunissen5, P. A. 
P01 .025 Mossey6, M. M. Noethen1,2, E. Mangold2, A. J. Sharp3; Phenotype-genotype correlation and role of ancillary investigations 1Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Mount Sinai School of Medicine, in atypical and rare forms of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, New York, NY, United States, 4University M. Balasubramanian1, M. J. Parker1, N. J. Bishop2; of Ferrara, Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Ferrara, Italy, 1Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Academic Unit of Child 5Erasmus Medical Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and Clinical Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6University of Dundee, Orthodontic Unit, Dental Background: Hospital & School, Dundee, United Kingdom. CO
L1 A1 COOLs1teAo2genesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous group of in- herited disorders of bone formation. About 90% of patients have mutations Non-syndromic orofacial clefts (NSOFC), one of the most common congeni- in / , with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. tal malformations, have a genetically complex background. Although recent Other genes are associated with autosomal recessive forms of OI. Other, rare GWAS detected a number of NSOFC susceptibility loci, these conventional phenotypes have been described. association studies have the inherent presumption that the effect of a vari- For this study, patients with phenotypic similarities to Russell-Silver syn- ant is independent of parental origin. They are thus underpowered to detect drome (RSS) [Parker et al., 2011], OI syndromes (not commonly fitting the possible parent-of-origin (PofO) effects, a phenomenon where the effect of Sillence classification) such as Cole-Carpenter and Bruck syndrome and an allele on phenotype depends on whether it was transmitted by the mo- TAyimpes :V OI were considered. All these conditions were collectively referred ther or the father. In this study we hypothesized that PofO effects play a role to as Atypical OI. in NSOFC etiology. To investigate individuals with atypical forms of OI, with a view to We applied a number of statistical tests on published genome-wide SNP Mpreotphoosdinsg: sub-classifications and identify genotype-phenotype correlati- data from ~2500 trios with NSOFC, mainly of European and Asian ethni- ons. city. These tests included a modification of the family-based Transmission Patients who fulfilled the inclusion criteria were recruited from Disequilibrium Test, biased ratios of maternal versus paternal transmis- the Sheffield Clinical Genetics and OI Services. Detailed phenotyping, skin sions, and biased frequencies of reciprocal classes of heterozygotes in the biopsy for histology, including electron microscopy (EM) and collagen spe- offspring. Sixty-four candidate SNPs were followed-up in a replication co- cRieessu alntsa:l ysis (CSA), skeletal survey, and sequencing of OI genes and aCGH hort of ~1200 NSOFC trios of European origin. were performed. In the combined analysis, we did not identify any SNPs that achieved geno- Recruited patients (n=14) were phenotypically divided into three me-wide significance. However, we observed an overall excess of maternal sub-groups: Group 1) predominant features of RSS (n=5); Group 2) OI with versus paternal signals (P=0.013) and identified several loci that showed additional features (n=6); and Group 3) Type V OI (n=3). Common features nominally significant effects in the same direction in both discovery and included poor growth, feeding difficulties, facial dysmorphism +/- fractures. replication cohorts, suggesting variants with potential PofO effects which Pathogenic oligogenic mutations were identified in seven patients; chromo- escaped the genome-wide threshold due to the lack of power. Those latter sCoomncallu imsiobanlsa:n ces in three patients. Skeletal surveys and skin biopsies have include a possible maternal effect associated with rs12543318 at 8q21.3, revealed common findings. CSA has correlated with molecular findings. a locus also identified in a recent meta-analysis of non-syndromic cleft lip This study has enabled us to sub-classify patients with Aty- with/without cleft palate (Pmat=1.5x10-7, Ppat=0.17). pical OI and established the need for aCGH, skin EM and CSA, routinely in 58 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FR inA vN estC igE a t| i nW g tW heW se . pE aS tieH nG ts..ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index M. Balasubramanian: None. M.J. Parker: None. N.J. Bishop: None. 
P01 .028 Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V with Hyperplastic Callus, a clinical and molecular review of 9 cases G. Baujat1, M. Le Merrer1, S. Dos Santos1, G. Pinto1, J. P. Bonnefont1, C. Cormier2, G. 
P01 .026 Finidori1, S. Naudion3, Z. Pejin1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1, A. Lebre1; Identification of novel CO
L1 A1 gene mutations in Brazilian patients 1Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Hôpital with Osteogenesis Imperfecta Universitaire Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France. M. V. D. Moraes1,2, C. Barbirato1,2, M. G. Almeida1,2, L. Belcavello1,2, M. R. G. O. Rebouças3, V. Sipolatti3, V. R. R. Nunes3, A. N. J. Akel3, M. Zatz4, F. Paula1,2; 1Post Graduation Program in Biotechnology, Northeast Network of Biotechnology, Federal University of Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil, 2Molecular and Human Genetics The Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) group includes various heritable diseases Center, Department of Biological Science, Federal University of Espírito Santo, Vitória, of the extracellular bone matrix, characterized by low bone mass, variable Brazil, 3Nossa Senhora da Glória Children’s Hospital, Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil, deformities and high fractures incidence. Among them, OI type V is characte- 4Human Genome Research Center, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. rized by propensity to hyperplasic callus formation, calcification of the fore- arm interosseous membrane and radial head dislocation. This do minant inherited OI subtype is associated with a specific histopathologic pattern. Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a type I collagenopathy that has received Recently, the recurrent c.14 C>T mutation was identified in IFITM5gene as great attention in the last decades because of the relevant number of new the unique molecular cause of OI type V in all patients. genes recently related to this disCoOrLd1eAr. 1The mCaOinL 1sAy2mptoms of OI patients We describe here 9 patients from 7 families, regularlIyF IfToMllo5wed in Necker- are bone fragility and recurrent fractures. Although several new genes have Enfants malades Hospital with OI type V (age: 6 months-38 years). In all been described for the disease, and genes mutations are cases, OI was caused by the c.-14C>T mutation in . 6/ 9 patients present in the majority of OI cases. The characterization of mutation pat- presented with a severe form of OI, with a progressive evolution leading to tern among OI genes in patients from different eCthOnLi1cA p1rofile will help us to significant mobility impairment and wheelchair in 4/6 older cases. The age improve the development of strategies for molecular diagnosis in OI. The of first fracture was early in all cases (between birth and 2.5years). By con- goal of this work was to detect the pattern of gene mutations in trast, the number of fractures (from 6 to > 60) and age of the first hyperpla- OI patients from Espírito Santo, southeast Brazil. A total of 33 unrelated stic callus varied widely (between 3 months and 13 years). The adult height patients were analyzed through a PCR-SSCP screening mutation method ranged from 1.30 to 1.50 meter. Scoliosis was noted in 4 cases. Surprisingly, and sequencing of abnormal fragments. Patients showed mild, modera- persistent alkaline phosphatase without D vitamin defect was noted in 3 te and severe clinical symptoms in 45%, 25% and 30% of the sample, re- cases. The study confirms the clinical variability, and further describes the spectively. Two novel frameshift mutations were found in a mild OI case clinical and radiological evolution under medical (bisphosphonates, anti- [c.2750delG (p.Gly917AspfsX191)], and a sporadic severe OI [c.3239delC inflammatory) and surgical (intramedullary rods, vertebral arthrodesis) (p.Pro1080LeufsX28)]. We hypothesize that these frameshifts mutations are tGre. aBtamuejantt:s N.one. M. Le Merrer: None. S. Dos Santos: None. G. Pinto: pathogenics since they can result in abnormal sized protein products with None. J.P. Bonnefont: None. C. Cormier: None. G. Finidori: None. S. Naudion: None. Z. Pejin: None. A. Munnich: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. A. Lebre: an incorrect amino acid sequence. Furthermore, two missense mutations None. [c.1138G>T (p.Gly380Cys); c.3235G>A (p.Gly1079Ser)], and three splice site mutations [c.1056+1G>A; c.1875+1G>C; c.2559+1G>A] previously reported were also identified. In conclusion, due to genetic heterogeneity, phenotypic variability and limitations in SSCP technique sensitivity, we strongly support 
P01 .030 the importance of molecular studies in OI. Financial support: FAPES, FACI- A deletion mutation in TMEM38B associated with autosomal recessive T ME.CV., Da.n Md oMraCeTsI:/ NCoNnPeq. /CM. BECar/bCiAraPtoE:S N.one. M.G. Almeida: None. L. Belcavello: osteogenesis imperfecta None. M.R.G.O. Rebouças: None. V. Sipolatti: None. V.R.R. Nunes: M. Volodarsky1, B. Markus1, I. Cohen1, O. Staretz-Chacham2, H. Flusser2, D. Landau2, I. None. A.N.J. Akel: None. M. Zatz: None. F. Paula: None. Shelef3, Y. Langer1, O. S. Birk1,4; 1Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Division of Pediatrics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 3Diagnostic Imaging Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4The Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel. 
P01 .027 FKB
P10  gene and recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta C. Barbirato1, M. V. D. Moraes1, L. Belcavello1, L. S. Almeida1, M. Trancozo1, M. R. G. O. Autosomal recessive osteogensis imperfecta (OI) was diagnosed in three Rebouças2, V. Sipolatti2, V. R. R. Nunes2, A. N. J. Akel2, F. Paula1; 1Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil, 2Hospital Infantil Nossa Senhora unrelated Israeli Bedouin consanguineous families. Fractures were evident da Glória, Vitória, Brazil. in all cases in infancy. Genome wide linkage analysis ruled out association with any of the known OI genes, and identified a single homozygosity locus of ~2 Mb on chromosome 9 common to all affected individuals (maximum Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a very heCtOerLo1gAe1nic genCeOtLic1 Ad2isorder with multipoint lod score 6.5). Whole exome sequencing identified only a sin- phenotypes that varies from mild to neonatal lethal forms. Most cases of gle mutation within this locus that was shared by all affected individuals: a OI are caused by dominant mutations in and genes, that homozygous deletion mutation of exon 4 of TMEM38B, leading to an early codes for the procollaFgeKnB Pty1p0e I chains. In the last few years, the number stop codon and a truncated protein, as well as low TMEM38B mRNA levels. of genes related with recessive OI has risen significantly. One of the most TMEM38B encodes TRIC-B, a ubiquitous component of TRIC, a monovalent recent amoFnKgB tPh1e0m is gene that codifies a chaperone that interacts cation-specific channel involved in Ca2+ release from intracellular stores with the collagen protein. Our objective was to determine the mutations that has been shown to act in cell differentiation. Molecular mechanisms patCtOerLn1 Ain1 CO
L1  Ag2ene from Brazilian patients diagnosed wiFthK BOPI.1 A0 total through which a TMEM38B mutation might lead to an OI phenotype are yet of 26 patients from Espírito Santo (southeast of Brazil) without mutations t Mo .b Veo eloxdpalorsrekdy.: None. B. Markus: None. I. Cohen: None. O. Staretz-Chacham: None. H. Flusser: None. D. Landau: None. I. Shelef: None. Y. Langer: in or genes were analyzed. DNA mutations inF KB
P10  gene None. O.S. Birk: None. were screened using SSCP method and sequencing of abnormal fragments. We detected the c.1546G>A missense change in the exon 9 of in one of the OI patients. This mutation was not previously described and results in an amino acid change (p.Leu516Phe) into the protein. This mutation was 
P01 .031 not observed in 90 control samples from the same population. Additional TAPT1 and CREB3
L1  interfere with normal type I collagen secretion studies are necessary, but we suggest that the p.Leu516Phe mutation may and further expand the genetic spectrum of recessive Osteogenesis be related with OI in this particularly case. Molecular studies are strongly Imperfecta S. Symoens1, F. Malfait1, S. D‘hondt1, B. Callewaert1, A. Dheedene1, W. Steyaert1, D. Syx1, E. required because of the great genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in OI. Parthoens2, H. Bächinger3,4, H. Kayserili5, A. De Paepe1, P. Coucke1; Thus, these results increase our knowledge about the genetic characteri- 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, stics in OI and may contribute to the development of more efficient methods 2Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, to diagnose and treat OI patients. Financial support: FAPES, FACITEC, and 3Research Department, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Portland, OR, United States, M CC. BTIa/rCbNiraPtqo/: MNoEnCe/.C MA.PVE.DS.. Moraes: None. L. Belcavello: None. L.S. Almeida: 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science None. M. Trancozo: None. M.R.G.O. Rebouças: None. V. Sipolatti: None. V.R.R. University, Portland, OR, United States, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Nunes: None. A.N.J. Akel: None. F. Paula: None. Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable brittle bone disorder with high ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEc |l iWnicWal vWar.iEabSiHlitGy. D.OomRiGnant forms are mostly due to heterozygous mu5ta9ti-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CO
L1 A1 CO
L1 A2 United States, 4NC Oral Health Institute, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 5Section on Physical Biochemistry, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United ons in a type I procollagen gene ( / ). In recessive OI the un- States. derlying mutations often affect type I collagen processing or chaperoning. A small proportion of OI cases still remains molecularly unexplained. We identified mutations in two novel genes f oCrR hEuBm3La1n OI in two separate fa- Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by mutations in genes en- milies. In family 1, candidate gene analysis revealed a homozygous genomic coding proteins involved in post-translational interactions with tyPpPeIB I col- deletion of CREB3
L1  in the affected siblings. encodes OASIS, an en- lagen. Types VII-IX OI involve defects in the collagen proly 3-hydroxylation doplasmatic reticulum (ER)-stress transducer that intranuclearly regulates complex, which modifies α1(I)Pro986. Cyclophilin B, encoded by , is a procollagen type I expression upon processing by regulated intramembrane complex component with PPIase Pacptiibvity that facilitates collagen folding. proteolysis during murine bone formation. In family 2, with three afTfeAcPtTed1 To invPepsitbig ate the role of CyPB in collagen post-translational modifications foTertaunssems eamnbdr sainxe h Aeanlttehryio sri bPlionsgtesr, igoern Tormaen-swfoirdme alitniokna-g1e analysis and exome and crosslinking, we generated a KO mouse using gene-trap techno- sequencing revealed a homozygous acceptor-spTliAcPeT s1ite mutation in logy. expression is absent in skin, fibroblasts, femora, and calvarial ( ), that causes an in- osteoblasts; only residual (<11%) α1(I)
P986  3-hydroxylation is detectable frame deletion of the highly conserved exon 10. has been reported in in cell cultures, skin and bone tissues. Collagen from KO cells has delayed the context of murine skeletal patterning. TAPT1 electrophoretic mobility, consistent with delayed intracellular folding in cell In both defects, type I (pro)collagen posttranslational modification was culture assays. However, total collagen 5-lysyl and prolyl 4-hydroxylation gTrAoPsTs1ly preserved, but secretion was delayed in mutated fibroblasts. was normal, suggesting altered glycosylation in KO. We demonstrated that, Similarly to OASIS, immunocytochemistry localized TAPT1 to the ER, and except for lysyl residues involved in crosslinking, most helical residues of KO expression was upregulated upon ER stress. Moreover, both genetic collagen have increased diglycosylation. Although total bone collagen cros- defects demonCsRtrEaBte3 La1lt erat iToAnPsT i1n the ER stress response pathways with slinks (HP+LP) in KO were double WT (p=0.003), abnormal modification is nearly absent expression of CHOP and XB
P1 . associated with a 70-80% reduction of collagen deposited into KO matrix. In conclusion, and are two novel genes for human recessive We detected a 4-fold increase in trivalent LPPp icbrosslinks (p=0.001) and cor- OI. Mutations in both genes similarly affect the normal ER stress response responding decrease in the HP/LP ratio, due to reduced hydroxylation of t Sh.a St ylimnkose ntos :t yNpoen eI .c Fo.l lMagaelfnai pt:r Noodnuec.t iSo.n D.‘hondt: None. B. Callewaert: helical crosslink residues in KO bone. This KO mouse recapitulates the None. A. Dheedene: None. W. Steyaert: None. D. Syx: None. E. Parthoens: OI type IX phenotype including delayed collagen folding, and smaller long None. H. Bächinger: None. H. Kayserili: None. A. De Paepe: None. P. Coucke: bones with significantly reduced BMD, BV and TbN. The finding that colla- None. gen crosslink patterns are shifted to trivalent forms lacking helical Hyl may c Won.Atr. iCbaubtera tlo: Ndoencere. aI.s Peedr cdoivllaargae: nN monaet.r Mix. dWeepioss: iNtioonne a. nMd. Tbeornaeji mstar:e Nngotnhe.. A.R. Blisset: None. W. Chang: None. E. Makareeva: None. S. Leikin: None. D.R. 
P01 .032 Eyre: None. M. Yamauchi: None. J.C. Marini: None. Osteomalacia as a key feature of Raine syndrome: changing the paradigm. V. Faundes1, P. Gonzalez-Hormazabal2, S. Castillo Taucher1,3, A. Crosby4, A. Maturana5; 
P01 .034 1Sección Genética, Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2Programa de Russell-Silver syndrome and preaxial polydactyly Genética Humana, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, G. Morin1, A. Irani2, K. Braun3, T. Dery1, G. Jedraszak1, B. Demeer1, I. Netchine4, B. Chile, 3Laboratorio de Citogenética, Clínica Alemana, Santiago, Chile, 4Genetics Boudailliez3, J. Gondry5, M. Mathieu1; Research Centre, St. George‘s University London, London, United Kingdom, 5Servicio de 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Amiens, France, 2Neonatology Unit, Beauvais, France, 3Pediatric Neonatología, Clínica Alemana, Santiago, Chile. Endocrinology, Amiens, France, 4Endocrinology Laboratory - Trousseau Hospital, Paris, INTRODUCTION: France, 5Prenatal Diagnosis Centre, Amiens, France. Raine syndrome is a skeletal dysplasia characterised main- ly by osteosclerosis of bones, facialC dAySsEm RoErpPhOisRmT,: and a course frequently Russell-Silver syndrome is a growth disorder characterized by pre and post- lethal. However, we present the first alive case molecularly confirmed whose natal growth restriction, conserved head circumference, distinctive facies radiographs showed osteomalacia. The patient was born at and body asymmetry. Its molecular mechanisms are complex including ma- 26 weeks of gestation to non-consanguineous and healthy parents, due to ternal disomy of chromosome 7 for less than 10% of cases and methylation intrauterine growth retardation and worsening of Doppler examination. His defect of the 11p15 chromosomal region for the majority of them. Among birth parameters were all p<2, and albeit delivery and Apgar scores were skeletal anomalies, short stature, short arms, fifth fingers clinodactyly, short normal, he subsequently suffered from different premature birth complica- and stubby fingers and toes are usual. We report here a case of Russell-Silver tions. Furthermore, at 70 days old bilateral forearm spontaneous fractures syndrome associated with unilateral preaxial polydactyly. were suspected and confirmed, whereas follow-up radiographs revealed broad epiphyses and thin diaphyses of long bones, accompanied of genera- This male patient was born at 37 weeks of amenorrhea, after a pregnancy lised osteomalacia. At physical examination, the patient had some dysmor- characterized by IUGR and unilateral kidney agenesis. Prenatal karyotype phic characteristics which suggest Raine syndrome such as ocular proptosis, on amniotic cells was unremarkable and array-cgh without imbalance. At hypertelorism, slightly downslanted palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, birth, weight was 1400g, height was 36.5cm and OFC 33.5cm. Facies was midface hypoplasia, micrognathia and short limbs and fingers. Karyotype triangular with broad forehead, naevus flammeus, small pointed chin, small was normal, and although his cerebral ultrasounds were normal, renal echo- philtrum angioma. He had bilateral fifth fingers clinodactyly, moderate hy- graphy FrAeMve2a0leCd nephrocalcinosis. One year later, his health status has im- pospadias and right thumb duplication. Renal ultrasound examination sho- proved substantially, specially his osteomalacia and nephrocalcinosis. Par- wed a horseshoe kidney. The presence of demethylation of the H19 locus allelly, sequencing analysis was performed, which demonIsnt rsailtiecdo confirmed the diagnosis of Russell-Silver syndrome. the heterozygous duplication g.286470_286503dup34 and heterozygous SNP rs192542992, which is present just in 0.7% of the popuClaOtiNoCnL. USION: analysis of these findings showed rupture of splicing site of exon 4, and the The association of Russell-Silver syndrome and preaxial polydactyly is unu- creation of a new splicing regulatory element, respectively. sual. To our knowledge, it was reported only one time in a 4-year-old boy Although these results should be confirmed experimentally, it seems that presenting with marked language delay and uniparental maternal disomy of osteomalacia is also a key feature of Raine syndrome, in concordance with chromosome 7 (Potgieter 2000). With a frequency of preaxial polydactyly in t Vh.e F raeucnednetlsy: pNuobnlei.s hP.e Gd omnuzarilneze- Hmoordmeal.zabal: None. S. Castillo Taucher: the general population of 1 in 3000 births, a simple coincidence cannot be None. A. Crosby: None. A. Maturana: None. rule out. However, a real association is possible with Russell-Silver syndro- me, particularly with these 2 different molecular mechanisms. G. Morin: None. A. Irani: None. K. Braun: None. T. Dery: None. G. Jedraszak: None. B. Demeer: None. I. Netchine: None. B. Boudailliez: None. J. Gondry: 
P01 .033 None. M. Mathieu: None. Abnormal Type I Collagen Glycosylation Pattern and Cross-linking in a Cyclophilin B KO Mouse Model of Recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta W. A. Cabral1, I. Perdivara2, M. Weis3, M. Terajima4, A. R. Blisset1, W. Chang1, E. Makareeva5, S. Leikin5, D. R. Eyre3, M. Yamauchi4, J. C. Marini1; 1Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Laboratory of Structural Biology, NIEHS, NIH, Research Traingle Park, NC, United States, 3Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 60 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .035 
P01 .037 Results of longstanding clinical observation of siblings with Collagen deregulation in the glenohumeral capsule of patients with Sensenbrenner syndrome anterior shoulder instability A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2, D. Zwolinska3, J. Walczak-Sztulpa1; M. F. Leal, P. S. Belangero, G. E. Machado, A. C. Pochini, M. A. C. Smith, C. V. Andreoli, S. I. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Center Belangero, B. Ejnisman, M. Cohen; for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 3Department and Clinic of Paediatric Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Nephrology, Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. Anterior shoulder instability is a common orthopedic problem among Sensenbrenner syndrome (cranioectodermal dysplasia, CED) is a very young athletes. After a traumatic shoulder dislocation, patieCnOtLs1 pAr1esCeOnLt 1caAp2- rare autosomal recessive ciliopathy, characterized by craniofacial, skele- CsuOlLa3r Ala1xity. MCoOlLe5cuAl1ar modifications in the glenohumeral capsule may be tIFalT, 1a2n2d( WecDtRo1d0e)rmIFaTl 1a2b1n(oWrmDRa3li5ti)esI.F TA4b3o(uCt1 44O0 RcFa1s7e9s )haveI FbTe1e4n4 d(WesDcrRi1b9e)d associated with this injury. Here, we aimed to evaluate the , , to date. CED is a heterogeneous genetic disorder and recently four genes: , and expression in traumatic anterior shoulder instability. , , and , Collagen gene expression was analyzed by real-time quantitative PCR in have been identified (all encoding proteins that are part of the intraflagellar the antero-inferior, antero-superior, and posterior portions of the shoul- transport complex A, IFTA). IFTA is involved in retrograde ciliary transport, der capsule from 33 patienCtsO Lw1iAth1 traumCOatLic3 Aa1nterior shoulder instability which returns proteins from the tip of the cilia to the cell body and pays an and 5 Pindividuals wPith acromioclavicular injury (CcOoLn1tAro2l s). We observed import role in the assembly and maintenance of cilia structure. an increaPsed expression of and in the antero-superior re- Here we report on a 11-year-old girl and her 7-year-old brother witIhF T
C1 E2
D2. gion ( =0.038 and =0.034, respectively) and of in the posterior Their healthy parents are distantly consanguineous. Molecular analysis re- portion ( =0.043) of glenohumeral capsule of shoulder instability patients vealed a homozygous missense mutation p.V553G (c.T1658G) in the compared with thCeO cLo1nAtr1ols. Concerning the clinical data, patients who had gene. Clinical features included short stature with rhizomelic shortening of experienced more than 1 year of shoulder instability demonsPtrated redu- limbs, brachydactyly, narrow chest, craniosynostosis, dolichocephaly, high Pced expression of in the antero-inferior and in the posterior regions forehead, full cheeks, telecanthus, broad nasal bridge, low-set prominent cCoOm L5
pAa1re d with patients with less than 1 year of symptoms ( =0.014 and ears, small and widely spaced teeth, dysplastic auricles, fine sparse hair, ab- <0.001, respectively). In theP a=ntero-inferior po rCtOioLn1, Ar1educed expression of normal nails, bilateral inguinal hernia, skin laxity. Mental development is was associated with recurrent shoulder dislocation Pc=ompared with normal. Both children suffer from tubulointerstitial nephropathy with more a single dislocation episode ( 0.049). Reduced was also associated severe features in the brother (kidney transplantation at the age of 7 was with recurrent shoulder dislocation in the posterior region ( 0.006). Thus, necessary). We present changing phenotype of the sibs during long clinical collagen expression was deregulated in the three evaluated portions of the o Ab.s Leartvoast-iBonie.leńska: None. D. Zwolinska: None. J. Walczak-Sztulpa: None. glenohumeral capsule of shoulder instability patients which may be related to the capsular laxity. Since there is a reciprocal load-sharing relationship in the capsule, these modifications in distinct portions of the capsule may  P01
.036 r Mef.lFe. cLte aa lc:o Nmopneen. Ps.aSt.o Brye lmanegcehraon:i Nsmon aef.t Ger.E a. dMisalcohcaadtioo:n N eopnies.o Ad.eC.. Pochini: None. M.A.C. Smith: None. C.V. Andreoli: None. S.I. Belangero: None. B. A distinctive autosomal recessive osteocutaneous syndrome with Ejnisman: None. M. Cohen: None. unusual face caused by a mutation in PO C1
A S. Allon-Shalev1,2, O. Sarig3, S. Nahum2, D. Rapaport4, A. Ishida-Yamamoto5, D. Fuchs- Telem6, L. Qiaoli7, K. Cohen-Katsenelson8, R. Spiegel1, J. Nousbeck6, S. Israeli9, Z. Borochowitz10, G. Padalon-Brauch3, J. Uitto11, M. Horowitz12, E. Sprecher3,9;  P01
.038 1Ha‘emek medical center, Afula, Israel, 2Rapapport faculty of medicine, Technion, Severe brachydactyly and absent ossification of several tubular bones Haifa, Israel, 31Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, in hands and feet as distinctive features of a rare skeletal dysplasia Israel, 4Department of Cell Research and Immunology,3Department of Cell Research G. Mortier1, E. Steenackers1, M. Vaerenberg2, K. Nieuwinckel2, B. Albrecht3, G. Gillessen- and Immunology, Tel Aviv, Israel, 54Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical Kaesbach4, G. Vandeweyer1, W. Van Hul1; University, Asahikawa, Japan, 6Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Sint-Joseph Hospital, Bornem, Belgium, Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 7Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson 3Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, PA, United States, 8Rapapport faculty of medicine, Technion, haifa, Israel, 95Department of Human Molecular Genetics & Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 108The Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 116Department We report on a boy with a generalized skeletal dysplasia characterized by of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, severe brachydactyly and pronounced growth failure. The proband is the PA, United States, 12Department of Cell Research and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of first child of healthy parents originating from the same village in Macedonia. Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. A non-lethal skeletal dysplasia was suspected on prenatal ultrasound. The boy was born at 36 weeks with a weight of 1990 g, length of 36.5 cm and head circumference of 30.5 cm. He did not require assisted ventilation in We describe multiple affected individuals from two families of Arab Moslem the neonatal period. On follow-up a severe growth failure became apparent. origin with a distinctive syndrome of severe short stature, peculiar facial The last clinical evaluation at the age of 9 months revealed a weight of 2510 and other clinical features, with autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. g and a length of 52.4 cm. He has a relatively large head with frontal bossing, The affected individuals have pre and post- natal growth retardation, which bluish sclerae, redundant and soft skin and very tiny fingers and toes. In the manifests probably as early as the second trimester of pregnancy. Typical literature only 5 other cases with a similar phenotype have been described. skeletal changes included short long bones especially of the femurs, humerii All patients died during the first year of life. They share a similar and unusu- and hands, with mild metaphyseal changes and very short femoral necks. al pattern of ossification defects in hands and feet. Two pairs of affected sibs Homozygosity mapping located the disease gene to 3p21.1-3p21.31. Using suggest an autosomal recessive inheritance. Whole exome sequencing in the PwOhCo1leA exome sequencing analysis complemented with Sanger direct se- proband revealed a list of 37 homozygous, non-synonymous variants not an- quencing, we identified a homozygous point mutation (p.Leu171Pro) in notated in databases of common variation. Eleven variants were predicted (Centriolar Protein Homolog A), that co-segregate with the disease to have a deleterious impact on the protein. Although none of these variants phenotype in two families. The mutation affects a highly conserved amino involve genes that have been associated with a known skeletal dysplasia, acid residue and is predicted to interfere with protein function. Poc1, PO C1
A some are interesting to further explore since they are either associated with homolog, had previously been found to have a role in centrosome stability l Gim. bM odretvieerl:o Npmoneen. tE o. rS pteleany aac rkoelres :i nN gornoew. Mth. Vaanedr ecenlbl ecrygc:l eN roengeu. lKa.t ion. in unicellular organisms. Accordingly, although centrosome structure was Nieuwinckel: None. B. Albrecht: None. G. Gillessen-Kaesbach: None. G. preserved, the number of centrosomes and their distribution was abnor- Vandeweyer: None. W. Van Hul: None. mal in affected cells. In addition, the Golgi apparatus presented a dispersed morphology and cholera toxin trafficking from the plasma membrane to the Golgi was aberrant, with accumulation in large vesicles in the cytosol. Our  P01
.039 data underscore the importance of PO C1
A for proper bone, hair and nail for- Rare cases with skeletal dysplasia - Romanian experience. Diagnosis mation as well as the importance of normal centrosome in Golgi assembly based on clinical and radiographic correlations a Sn.d A tllroanff-iSchkainlegv f:r Nomon eth. eO p. Slaasrmiga: Nmoenme.b Sra. nNea htou mth:e N Goonleg.i D a.p Rpaapraatpuosr.t: V. Plaiasu, D. Ochiana, G. Motei, F. Brezan, N. Iagaru; None. A. Ishida-Yamamoto: None. D. Fuchs-Telem: None. L. Qiaoli: None. K. IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania. Cohen-Katsenelson: None. R. Spiegel: None. J. Nousbeck: None. S. Israeli: None. Z. Borochowitz: None. G. Padalon-Brauch: None. J. Uitto: None. M. Horowitz: None. E. Sprecher: None. Skeletal dysplasias represent a group of more than 400 conditions which ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEa |f fWectW caWrti.lEagSeH anGd. OboRneG growth, defined by molecular, biochemical and6 1ra-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index diographic criteria, included in 40 different groups, after the last Revision among familial SHFM subtypes and is inherited in an autosomal recessive of Nosology and Classification of Genetic Skeletal Disorders. Although indi- manner. It has wide clinical variability including isolated cutaneous syndac- vidually rare or very rare, collectivelly there are many patients with these tyly and even non-penetrance and should be excluded in seemingly sporadic congenital disorders. cases. Clinical variability also exists between limbs of a single individual. Clinical evaluation is the fundation upon which any suspicion of skeletal We describe the variable clinical and morphologic features of four affected dysplasia is built. X-ray films are all that are needed to identify a particu- individuals with SHFM6 in a highly inbred Omani family. The first two fema- lar diagnosis in most cases. Suspected cases of skeletal dysplasias involves le siblings have the classical phenotype with asymmetrical involvement of systematic imaging of the long bones, thorax, hands and feets, skull and spi- both hands and feet with ectrodactyly, oligodactyly, syndactyly, absent car- ne. pal and tarsal bones. In contrast, their two double first cousins, a boy and a Our Medical Genetics Department provides evaluation from clinical and ra- girl, present mildly with only cutaneous syndactyly of the feet. This is the diological point of view, diagnosis and counselling for children with skele- first case report of an Omani family with SHFM6 with a novel homozygous tal dysplasia and their families. In this work we present selected cases with mutation c.290T>C p.Leu97Pro in exon 3 of WNT10B gene. The limb malfor- bone dysplasias, some of them very rare, from our clinic day experience: mations required multiple surgeries for cosmetic and functional corrections achondroplasia, osteogenesis imperfecta, lysosomal storage disorders with and had profound psychosocial impact and stigma in this family such that skeletal involvement, geleophysic dysplasia, Camurati-Engelmann disorder, they opted for preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Conradi-Hünermann syndrome, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, short rib-poly- A. Al-Kindy: None. F. Al-Murshedi: None. Z. Bruwer: None. dactyly, nail-patella syndrome, metaphyseal dysplasias, multiple epiphyse- al dysplasia, Langer-Giedon syndrome, Proteus-like syndrome etc. Clinical summary of the patients, including the pedigree, clinical photographs and  P01
.042 X-rays are presented, focussing on diagnostic issues for each condition. A novel role of MARP proteins in intercellular communication Because of their variety, skeletal dysplasias remain a diagnostic challenge. A. R. Nestorovic1, J. Jasnic-Savovic1, L. Rakicevic1, D. Radojkovic1, G. Faulkner2, S. Kojic1; Clinical exam and radiological findings represent the key for the recognition 1IMGGE, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2CRIBI, University of Padova, Padova, of a skeletal dysplasia condition from the long list of genetic skeletal disor- Italy. d Ve. rPsl aainads ufo: rN tohnee .p Dre. -Otecshti acnoau:n Nseolnlien. gG.. Motei: None. F. Brezan: None. N. Iagaru: None. The MARP family members Ankrd1/CARP and Ankrd2/ARPP are compon- ents of the sarcomeric I band mechanosensory complex in both cardiac and  P01
.040 skeletal muscles, where they bind N2A region of titin. In response to mecha- Small Patella Syndrome : new TBX4 mutations and literature review nical stimuli they shuttle to the nucleus, acting as messengers in stress re- F. Escande1, C. Vanlerberghe2, F. Petit2, A. S. Jourdain1, A. Dieux2, A. Toutain3, S. sponse pathways. Since they are altered in a number of neuromuscular and Jacquemont4, A. Ferrarini4, N. Boutry5, M. Holder6,2, S. Manouvrier2; cardiovascular disorders, as well in some tumors such as rhabdomyosarco- 1Service de biologie moléculaire, Centre de Biologie et Pathologie, CHRU, Lille, France, ma, renal oncocytoma and ovarian cancer their potential role as diagnostic 2Service de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 3Service de génétique clinique, CHU, Tours, France, 4Service de génétique and/or prognostic markers is under the study. Recently, regulatory role of clinique, CHU Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Service de radiologie pédiatrique, Ankrd2/Arpp was corroborated demonstrating its ability to bind signaling hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 6Clinical Genetics Department, Guy‘s proteins that contain PDZ motifs. Here, using protein array methodology, we hospital, London, United Kingdom. have identified 10 PDZ proteins that directly interact with Ankrd1/CARP. Moreover we have confirmed its interaction with Zonula Occludens 1 (ZO-1) employing in vitro binding assay. Apart from p53, titin and calpain 3, ZO-1 Small patella syndrome (SPS), also called ischiopatellar dysplasia, coxopodo- represents a novel common partner for both MARPs. ZO proteins are loca- patellar or ischio-pubic-patellar syndrome (OMIM 147891), is characterised lized at tight junctions and establish a link between the transmembrane by patellar agenesis or hypoplasia, abnormal ossification of the ischio pu- components and the perijunctional cytoskeleton at cell-cell contacts. They bic jusntction andnd feet abnormalities, compthrising tahn enlarged spTaBcXe4 between are delocalized or down-regulated in several types of carcinomas: breast the 1 and 2 toes (sandal gap), short 4 and 5 rays and pes planus. This cancer, primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer and brain microvascular rare autosomal dominant disorder is cauTsBeXd4 by mutations in , known endothelial cells from human brain tumors. Interaction with ZO-1 suggest to be involved in hindlimb development and outgrowth. Here, we describe possible role of Ankrd1/CARP and Ankrd2/Arpp in intercellular communi- four families presenting with SPS, and a mutation has been identified cation. The functional interplay between MARPs and tight junction proteins in three of them. One mutation had been previously reported: c.1112dupC could have potential role in mechanisms involved in triggering malignant (TpB.PX4ro372SerfsX14), whereas the two others had not been yet identified: t Ara.Rn.s fNoersmtoartoiovnic.: None. J. Jasnic-Savovic: None. L. Rakicevic: None. D. c.1062T>G (p.Tyr354X) and c.(?_-45)_(401+?)del (an intragenic deletion of Radojkovic: None. G. Faulkner: None. S. Kojic: None. ’s first three exons). In addition to SPS’s common features, our patients pnrdesentedrd with some minor associated findings such as syndactyly of the 2 and 3 toes, dental anomalies and/or hip dysplasia. We compare their  P01
.043 phenotypes to those of previously described patients, who had been mole- Split hand/foot malformation with long bone deficiency and BHLHA9 cularly characterTisBeXd4 or not, in order to underline the expression variability duplication: report of 13 new families of SPS. Furthermore, we discuss if the associated minor features could also S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2, A. Jourdain1, J. Andrieux1, G. Baujat3, C. Baumann4, C. Bénéteau5, be explained by mutations. Since SPS is a rare condition, achieving a A. David5, L. Faivre-Olivier6, D. Gaillard7, B. Gilbert-Dussardier8, P. Jouk9, C. Le Caignec5, P. better clinical description and establishing correlations with the genotype Loget10, L. Pasquier10, N. Porchet1,2, M. Holder-Espinasse1,2,11, F. Escande1, F. Petit1,2; 1CHRU de Lille, LILLE, France, 2Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 3Hôpital might help towards an earlier diagnosis and an appropriate medical ma- nFa. gEesmcaenndt.e: None. C. Vanlerberghe: None. F. Petit: None. A.S. Jourdain: Necker-Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 4Hôpital Robert Debré, PARIS, France, 5CHU de None. A. Dieux: None. A. Toutain: None. S. Jacquemont: None. A. Ferrarini: Nantes, NANTES, France, 6CHU de Dijon, DIJON, France, 7CHU de Reims, REIMS, France, None. N. Boutry: None. M. Holder: None. S. Manouvrier: None. 8CHU de Poitiers, POITIERS, France, 9CHU de Grenoble, GRENOBLE, France, 10CHU de Rennes, RENNES, France, 11Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom.  P01
.041 Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) with long bone deficiency (SHFLD, Split hand/split foot malformation type 6 in multiple MIM#119100) is a rare condition characterized by SHFM associated with consanguineousOmani family with a novel homozygous mutation in long-boneB mHLalHfoAr9mation usually involving the tibia. Previous published data WNT10B gene providingfurther evidence of recessive inheritance in reported several unrelated patients with 17p13.3 duplication and SHFLD. SHFM Recently, duplication has been identified to beB HreLsHpAo9nsible for this A. Al-Kindy, F. Al-Murshedi, Z. Bruwer; limb malformation. No mutation has been reported so far. We described Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman. 13 families affected with ectrodactyly harbouring a duplication, identified either by array-CGH or quantitative PCR. Affected patients pre- sent with isolated limb malformations. Hands defects consisted usually in Split hand/split foot malformation (SHFM) is a rare isolated congenital limb uni- or bilateral ectrodactyly. Syndactyly or monodactyly were infrequent malformation, characterized by a deep median cleft of the hand and/or foot findings. Long bone deficiency was present in 41% of the affected patients, due to the absence of the central rays and aplasia/or hypoplasia of the pha- being a specific finding regarding which BHLHA9 duplication testing should la 6n 2ges, metacarpals and metatarsals. SHFM6 (OMIEMS #H 2G25 230001)3 is |t hPeA raRrIeSst, FRbAe aNdCdrEes |s eWd.W ThWis d.EefSeHct Gco.nOceRrnGed the tibia in most cases, and infrequent-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P01
.046 A genome wide association study in dogs reveals a new candidate ly the radius or the femur. As reported before, pedigrees show incomplete gene for human chondrodysplasias penetrance of BHLHA9 duplication, and high intrafamilial and intraindivi- K. Kyöstilä1,2,3, A. K. Lappalainen4, H. Lohi1,2,3; d Su. aMl avnaroiuavbriileitry-H. anu: None. A. Jourdain: None. J. Andrieux: None. G. 1Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Baujat: None. C. Baumann: None. C. Bénéteau: None. A. David: None. L. 2Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Faivre-Olivier: None. D. Gaillard: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. P. Jouk: 3Department of Molecular Genetics, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, None. C. Le Caignec: None. P. Loget: None. L. Pasquier: None. N. Porchet: 4Department of Equine and Small Animal Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, None. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. F. Escande: None. F. Petit: None. Finland.  P01
.044 Similar to humans, dogs suffer from different types of genetic skeletal dis- Vitamin- D deficiency and Familial Brachydactyly mimicking orders affecting the bone and cartilage tissues. We have established pedi- Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) grees and sample cohorts of two dog breeds that suffer from an autosomal M. A. Soylemez; recessive chondrodysplasia. The affected dogs present with a disproportio- Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. nate short stature dwarfism of varying severity. Radiographic examination OBJECTIVE of two affected animals revealed from mild to severe skeletal changes, in- cluding curvature of radii and ulnae, metaphyseal flaring and misshapen :Vitamin D deficiency is not a rare disorder. The Endocrine Socie- femoral heads and necks. A genome wide association study in a cohort of ty recommends levels >30 ng/mL for good health. Pseudohypoparathyroi- nine affected and nine healthy dogs mapped the disease to a 2-Mb region on dism (PHP) is a rare disorder characterized by parathyroid hormone (PTH) canine chromosome 17 using a canine 22K SNP chip. The associated locus resistance with (type 1a) or without (type 1b) the Albright Hereditary Os- contained a promising cartilage-specific candidate gene that was screened teodystrophy (AHO) phenotype of short stature, brachydactyly, and mental for possible disease causing mutations. Sequencing of all the coding regions retardation [2]. Patients with PHP have elevated PTH levels. However, the revealed a nonsense mutation that segregated fully with the recessive disea- same laboratory values can also be seen in children or adults with vitamin se in both breeds. The encoded protein is known to be expressed in cartilage D deficiency, and diagnostic confusion is common. We report three cases of chondrocytes and to be involved in the process of endochondral ossification. vCiatsaem Pinre Dse ndteafitcioienncy and familial brachydactyly with presentations sugge- As a consequence of the nonsense mutation, the protein is severely trunca- stive of PHP. ted and was not detected in the affected cartilage tissue. Our study describes : We report a family with 3 affected members in three a large animal model to further examine the role of the gene in growth plate generations confirming autosomal dominant inheritance and variable ex- function. The mutated gene has not been reported in human chonrodyspla- pressivity of short metacarpals and metatarsals (Figure-1). Biochemical sias and thus represents a novel candidate for human patients. Meanwhile, a results are evaluated. All patientse tr aelvealed high PTH and low Vitamin D le- g Ke.n Keytiöcs tteilsät: eNnoanbel.e As .tKh.e L earpapdaiclaaitnioenn: o Nf otnhee. cHo.n Ldoithiio: nE .i nO twhnee arsffheipc tIendte brersete ds. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Genoscoper vels (Table-1). Short metacarpals and metatarsals are frequent findings in Oy (Ltd). brachydactyly type E. Poznanski . [1] concluded that ‚brachydactyly E is radiologically indistinguishable from the PHP syndrome. Elevated PTH le- vels are treated with vitamin- D replacement therapy. Correction of Vitamin DCo dneclfuicsiieonncsy: resulted in a return to normal range of PTH levels in whole  P01
.047 patients (Table-2). A novel ARSE mutation in a patient with chondrodysplasia punctata We report a case of co-existence of brachydactyly and vitamin 1 and in his mother with low frequent somatic and/or germline D deficiency for the first time in the literature. After correction of vitamin mosaicism detected by deep sequencing using NGS D deficiency, Parathormon levels returned to normal range, which in return T. KANAM E1
, K. Kurosawa2, K. Yanagi1, K. Naritomi1; prevented misdiagnosis. Geneticists should be more careful about diagnosis 1University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 2Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. of PHP syndrome. Otherwise, a chance of therapy and preventing hyperpa- r Mat.Ahy. rSooiydliesmme czo: mNopnliec.ations will be missed. Chondrodysplasia punctata 1 (CDPX1) is an X-linked recessive disorder characterised by apruynlscutalftaet caaselc EificAaRtiSoEns in radiographs of the feet and other  P01
.045 sites, nasomaxillary hypoplasia and brachytelephalangy. It is known that Mutations in ECE L1
 cause distal arthrogryposis type 5 with mutAatRiSoEns of the ( ) gene affect the disorder. ophthalmoplegia We met a male patient clinically diagnosed with CDPX1. Examination of S. Shaaban1,2,3, F. DUZCAN4,5, C. Yildirim4, W. Chan1,6, C. Andrews1,6, N. Akarsu7, E. Engle1,3,6; 1Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Dubai Harvard Foundation for Medical the gene by Sanger sequencing for all exons in the patient revealed a Research, Boston, MA, United States, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, missense mutation, c.266G>A (p. S89
N). The mutation was not found in 250 4Faculty of Medicine, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey, 5Pamukkale University healthy controls. Prediction of functional effects of the substitution by Poly- Hospital, Denizli, Turkey, 6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, United Phen-2 and SIFT displayed that the mutation affects the protein function. States, 7Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. In order to confirm whether his mother is carrier, the molecular test was done as well. However, the Sanger sequencing could not detect the mutation in the mother, suggesting that the mutation was de novo. However, since the- Using aE CcoEm L1
bination of homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequen- re is no report of de novo mutation in CDPX1A pRaStiEents, there was a possibili- cing, we identified a novel mutation in the endothelin-converting enzyme- ty that the mother had a germline mosaicism and/or somatic mosaicism. like 1 ( ) gene in a consanguineous Thus, we performed deep sequencing of the gene in the mother using GS Junior, next generation sequencer, resulted that the mother had a somatic pedigree of Turkish origin presenting with camptodactyly, scoliosis, limited mosaicism of the mutation in the blood cells at a ratio of 11%. knee flexion, severe myopia, facial weakness and ophthalmoplegia. The mis- We concluded that the deep sequencing using NGS could detect low frequent sense c.1819 G>A mutation results mosaicism, which might be a part of germline mosaicism, and should be per- formed in patient’s parents with such ‘de novo’ mutation to make reliable ECE L1
 gTe. nKeatnica cmoeu:n Nsoenllein. Kg.. Kurosawa: None. K. Yanagi: None. K. Naritomi: None. in the substitution of serine for the highly conserved glycine at residue 607 of ECE L1
. mutations were recently reported to cause recessive forms of distal arthrogryposis without ophthalmoplegia. Distal arthrogryposis is most commonly inheritedE aCsE aL 1d-ominant trait with reduced penetrance and  P01
.048 variable expressivity. This report expands on the molecular basis and the Founder effects in Galician (NW Spain) lamellar ichthyosis families phenotypic spectrum of associated congenital contracture syndro- L. Fachal1, L. Rodríguez-Pazos2, M. Ginarte2, J. Toribio2, A. Salas3, A. Vega1; 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS. Grupo de Medicina mes. Xenómica-USC, CIBERER, IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Department of S. Shaaban: None. F. Duzcan: None. C. Yildirim: None. W. Chan: None. C. Dermatology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, SERGAS, Faculty of Medicine, Andrews: None. N. Akarsu: None. E. Engle: None. Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Unidade de Xenética, Instituto de Medicina Legal, Facultade de Medicina, and Departamento de Anatomía Patolóxica e Ciencias Forenses, Facultade de Medicina, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 63 Mutations in transglutaminase 1 gene (TGM1) are a major cause of la-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mellar ichthyosis. Three mutations, c.2278C>T, c.1223_1227delACAC and Nager syndrome belongs to the acrofacial dysostSoFs3eBs 4group, which are cha- c.984+1G>A, were observed at high frequency (~46%, ~21% and ~13% of racterized by the association of craniofacial and limSFb3 Bm4alformations. Re- all TGM1 gene mutations, respectively) in 11 non-consanguineous Galician cently, exome sequencing studies identified the gene as the cause of (NW Spain) ichthyosis families. this autosomal dominant condition in mSFo3sBt 4patients. encodes a highly We aimed to determine whether these mutations were inherited from a com- conserved protein implicated in mRNA splicing and bone morphogenic pro- mon ancestor, and to estimate the number of generations since their initial tein (BMP) signaling. We peSrfFo3rBm4ed sequencing in 11 families (15 appearance. We carried out a haplotype-based analysis of a region 12 Mb. patients) suggestive of Nager syndrome and found 7 mutations predicted to encompassing TGM1. Haplotype reconstruction from unphased genotypes result in haploinsufficiency. is the major gene responsible for auto- of the members of the affected families showed that all carriers for each of somal dominant Nager syndrome. All mutations reported were null mutati- the mutations harbored the same haplotypes, indicating common ancestry. ons thus no genotype-phenotype correlation could be delineated. Mutation Two linkage disequilibrium based methods were used to estimate the time negative patients were phenotypically indistinguishable from mutated pati- to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA), while a Bayesian-based pro- e An.t Js,o tuhrudsa igne:n Neotince h. Fe.t eErsocgaenndeei:t yN iosn leik. eNl.y P.orchet: None. J. Amiel: None. B. cedure was used to estimate the age of the two most frequent mutations. Doray: None. M. Delrue: None. E. Flori: None. S. Marlin: None. S.P. Robertson: None. S. Manouvrier-Hanu: None. M. Holder-Epinasse: None. F.M. Petit: None. In good agreement with the documentation record and the census, both mu- tations arose between 2,800-2,900 years ago (y.a.), but their TMRCA was in the range 600-1,290 y.a., pointing to the existence of historical bottlenecks in the region followed by population growth. This demographic scenario  P01
.051 finds further support on a Bayesian Coalescent Analysis based on TGM1 ha- Contribution of MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2 and WNT10A genes in four plotypes that allowed to estimate the occurrence of a dramatic reduction families with non syndromic tooth agenesis of effective population size occurring around 900-4,500 y.a. (95% highest N. Dinckan, H. Kayserili, Z. Uyguner; posterior density) followed by exponential population growth. istanbul medical faculty medical genetic department, istanbul, Turkey. This work was funded by a grant from the Ramon Areces Foundation given t Lo. AFVa.chal: None. L. Rodríguez-Pazos: None. M. Ginarte: None. J. Toribio: None. A. Salas: None. A. Vega: None. Tooth agenesis is the most common developmental abnormality of human dentition. Oligodontia is a subgroup of this developmental absence, where six or more permanent teeth are congenitally missing, excluding third mo-  P01
.049 lars. Oligodontia or hypodontia, both may occur as a single clinical entity or Myhre syndrome-causing SMAD4 mutations result in disorganization as a part of a syndrome. Investigations on model organisms and similarity of extracellular matrix that is corrected by losartan treatment. analysis subjecting sequence/structure/functional relationships revMeaSlXe1d P. Piccolo1, P. Mithbaokar1, V. Sabatino1, J. Tolmie2, M. Schiaffino3, M. Filocamo4, D. Melis5, PmAoXr9e than hundreds of genes A eXiItNhe2r direWctlNyT o1r0 Aindirectly involved in the G. Andria5, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,5; regulation of tooth development. Nevertheless, previously reported , 1Telethon Insitute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Ferguson-Smith Department and recently addressed and are the only genes cur- of Clinical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Clinica Pediatrica, rently associated with human non-syndromic tooth agenesis. Istituto G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 4Centro di Diagnostica Genetica e Biochimica delle Malattie Metaboliche, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 5Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy. FMoSuXr1 faPmAiXli9esA,wXiItNh2 isolateWdN oTli1g0oAdontia are ascertained by detailed oral ex- amination and panoramic radiographs. We aimed to investigate the role of , , and genes in the oligodontia in our cases, by Myrhe syndrome (MS, MIM 139210) is an autosomal dominant disorder sequencing the genes primarily only on index cases. If an alteration is identi- presenting with short stature, laryngotracheal stenosis, brachydactyly, ge- fied, the concordance with oligodontia will be expanded to convey the point neralized muscle hypertrophy, joint stiffness, thick skin, and aS MdAisDti4nctive b PAy Xa 9n alyzing other affected and unaffected individuals in the family. facies. Cognitive disability and cardiac involvement are also frequently re- ported. Recently, recurrent mutations affecting codon Ile500 of gene screening identified known MheStXe1rozygous c.G718C in two of the fami- have been found in patients with MS. Mutations in this residue result in per- lies, one with further known heterozygous c. C1
A19XGIN, 2a nd otWheNrT w10itAh further turbation of expression in both TGF-β and BMP target genesS tMhaAtD a4re invol- heterozygous novel c.-18G>A in , both segregating with oligodontia. ved in extra-cellular matrix (ECM) homeostasis. Our investigation is continuing for screening of and genes. PAX9 MSX1 In this study, we investigated the functional consequences of mutati- AXIN1 WNT10A ons and the efficacy of TGF-β signaling antagonist losartan for correction of We hope our findings will further delineate the contribution of , , ECM defect in four MS fibroblast cell lines harboring the p.Ile500Val mutati- and genes human tooth development during embryogene- on and the p.Arg496CysM mMuPta2tion. Western blot analySsiEsR sPhIoNwEe1d increased sis. SMAD4 levels in MS fibroblasts. Compared to control cells, MS fibroblasts N. Dinckan: None. H. Kayserili: None. Z. Uyguner: None. showed upregulation of and downregulation of genes, sug- gesting an imbalance in protease/inhibitors ratio. Based on these findings, we hypothesized an impaired ECM deposition that was confirmed by redu- ced length and thickness of fibrillin microfibrils in MS fibroblasts compared  P01
.052 to controls. Because disruption of microfibril network results in increased Copy number changes underlying syndromic and isolated bilateral bioavailability of TGF-β, we investigated whether losartan is effective at im- radial ray aplasia: screening of a cohort of 20 probands A. Jamsheer, A. Sowinska, M. Socha, A. Latos-Bielenska; proving ECM deposition in MS cells. We found that losartan treatmeMntM im P2
- Department of Medical Genetics, University o Medical Sciences in Poznan, Poland, provSeEdR mPIiNcrEo1fibril thickness and networking compared to vehicle-treated Poznan, Poland. fibroblasts, normalized phosphorylated SMAD2 protein levels, and and mRNA levels. In conclusion, the results of these studies sug- gest that losartan might be a good drug candidate for treatment of connecti- Radial ray aplasia is characterized by the absence of radial bone(s) often in- vPe. tPiiscscuoel om: aNnoinfees. tPa.t Miointhsb iano MkaSr.: None. V. Sabatino: None. J. Tolmie: None. M. Schiaffino: None. M. Filocamo: None. D. Melis: None. G. Andria: None. N. cluding thumb(s) and can either be isolated or syndromic. Although several Brunetti-Pierri: None. causative genetic alterations resulting in radial ray aplasia have been identi- fied, many patients have normal result of appropriate molecular screening. In this report we studied a cohort of 20 unrelated individuals affected by bilateral radial ray deficiency by means of conventional GTG-banding, MLPA  P01
.050 for 1q21.1 locus, sequencing and MLPA for all exons of both TBX5 and Nager syndrome: report on 11 families and confirmation of SF3B4 SAL L4
, as well as array CGH. In six unrelated patients we found a microde- haploinsufficiency as the major cause letion on 1q21.1, which was typical of TAR syndrome. Two probands car- A. Jourdain1, F. Escande1, N. Porchet1,2, J. Amiel3, B. Doray4, M. Delrue5, E. Flori4, S. Marlin6, S. P. Robertson7, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,2, M. Holder-Epinasse1,2,8, F. M. Petit1,2; ried point mutations in genes known to be involved in radial ray deficiency 1CHRU de Lille, LILLE, France, 2Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 3CHU syndromes: one in TBX5, and the other in SAL L4
. Two additional probands Necker-Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 4CHU de Strasbourg, STRASBOURG, France, had deletions encompassing either TBX5 or SAL L4
 detected upon MLPA and 5CHU de Bordeaux, BORDEAUX, France, 6CHU Armand-Trousseau, PARIS, France, subsequently confirmed by array CGH. Finally, one additional case carried 7University of Otago, OTAGO, New Zealand, 8Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. a pure terminal microduplication of 5q35.2-5q35.3 encompassing distal 5.4-5.6 Mb. To conclude, we detected copy number changes in nine patients, 64 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG whereas a point mutation only in two out of the 20 probands from the initialABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index cohort. Although based on a small sample, our study shows that submicro- Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is characterized by severe marfanoid scopic genomic rearrangements may account for a significant proportion of hSKabIitus, intellectual disability, camptodactyly, facial dysmorphism and cra- radial ray aplasia causative mutations. Therefore, we propose that either a niosynostosis. Recently, using family-based exome sequencing, we identified combination of MLPA or qPCR for specific genes/loci or array CGH should be as the gene responsible for SGS, with a cluster of mutations in exon 1 in included into routine molecular screening of patients affected by syndromic 18 patients. Taking advantage of this work, we further clinically delineate o Ar. iJsaomlastehde erra:d Niaoln rea. yA d. eSfoicwieinnsckya.: None. M. Socha: None. A. Latos-Bielenska: SGS from the original cohort as well as new patients (mean age 20 years). All None. cases were sporadic except one family with somatic mosaicism and another following dominant inheritance. All mutations were found in exon 1, infra- me. All patients display a remarkable phenotype associating a recognizab-  P01
.053 le facial dysmorphism (scapho/dolichocephaly 94%, hypertelorism 89%, Clinical and molecular review of 8 new cases of spondyloepiphyseal down slanting palpebral fissures 84%, malar hypoplasia 84%, proptosis dysplasia congenital-Strudwick type 79%, micrognathia 79%) and severe skeletal manifestations (arachnodacty- C. K. Ridout1, D. Avdjieva2, L. Wilson3, R. Savarirayan4, S. Mansour5, M. Irving6,7; ly 94%, feet malposition 89%, scoliosis 84%, pectus deformation 79%, joint 1DNA Laboratory, GSTS Pathology. Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, contractures 79%, camptodactyly 47%). Craniosynostosis is not mandato- 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, ry for the diagnosis (63%). Other common manifestations include hernia, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children, London, United Kingdom, 4Victorian loss of subcutaneous fat and myopia. The gene identification permitted to Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Department confirm the risk of aortic dilatation in affected patients (16% of the cohort, of Medical Genetics, St George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, even in childhood), besides to the presence of valvular abnormalities (31%), 7Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s College London, UK, London, United justifying long-term regular cardiac follow-up from infancy. One young adult Kingdom. died suddenly without aortic dilatation, and another female died in her fSoKr-I CO L2
A1 ties of respiratory insufficiency. Even if all genotyped cases reported to date had intellectual disabilities, we identified a case of SGS and a recurrent Mutations in cause a spectrum of clinically distinct conditions, in- mutation with normal intelligence but typical morphology, showing the im- cluding Stickler Syndrome, achondrogenesis and spondyloepimetaphyseal portance of clinical delineation of a disease in light with molecular results. dysplasia (SEMD). SEMD is characterised by significantly short long bones, V. Carmignac: None. L. Adès: None. B. Callewaert: None. J. Thevenon: epi-metaphyseal irregularities and platyspondyly. The rare clinical variant, None. S. Julia: None. B. Tournier: None. J. Plaisancié: None. T. Edouard: SEMD type Strudwick (OMIM reference 184250) is distinguished by conge- None. Y. Dulac: None. G. Baujat: None. F. Petit: None. D. Martin: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. K. Holman: None. M. Renard: None. H. Plauchu: nital metaphyseal spurs and by early radiographic development of distincti- None. G. Plessis: None. J. De Backer: None. A. Child: None. G. Arno: None. L. ve irregular ‘dappled’ metaphyses. Other features are chest deformities, se- Duplomb: None. B. Aral: None. P. Vabres: None. N. Gigot: None. M. Durbeej- condCaOryL 2toA 1rib involvement, cleft palate, laryngobronchomalacia, vitreoreti- Hjalt: None. E. Arbustini: None. M. Grasso: None. S. Tinschert: None. P.N. nal anomalies and hearing loss. Previously only 10 individuals with six diffe- Robinson: None. M. Di Rocco: None. J. Sanchez Del Pozo: None. F. Huet: rent mutations have been described. Here eight new cases of SEMD None. G. Jondeau: None. J. Rivière: None. N. Hanna: None. C. Chapusot: type Strudwick are presented, the largest cohort to be reported so far. The None. N. Laurent: None. R. Byard: None. R. Gustafsson: None. C. Boileau: clinical and radiological findings CaOreL 2dAe1scribed in detail to characterise the None. A. De Paepe: None. L. Faivre: None. key manifestations further and highlight variability of this skeletal dysplasia condition. Analysis of the entire gene revealed mutations in seven of these individuals. The majority of these are glycine missense mutations  P01
.055 clustered together in a small number of exons in the triple helix domain, The SMAD-binding domain of SKI: a hotspot for de novo mutations near similar mutations known to cause Kniest dysplasia and SEDC, though causing Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome. one mutation is located in exon 45. Mutations at glycine residues disrupt the D. Schepers1, A. J. Doyle2,3, J. J. Doyle2, S. L. Bessling2, L. Gillis1, P. Willems4, S. Mansour5, M. tightly bound type II collagen helix, qualitatively affecting this key growth Simpson6, H. Fryssira7, G. R. Mortier1, A. J. M. Hoogeboom8, A. S. Mc Callion2,9, H. C. Dietz2,3, plate cartilage extracellular matrix protein, a molecular mechanism also of L. Van Laer1, B. L. Loeys1; aetiological signifiCcOanLc2eA 1in a number of other conditions affecting fibrillar 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2McKusick-Nathans collagen. This increases to 13 the number of reportedC cOaLs2eAs,1 expands the cli- Insititute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, nical spectrum of mutations associated with SEMD type Strudwick Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD, a Cn.dK .h Rigidholiugth:t Ns othnee. c Dli.n Aicvadlj iuetvilai:t yN oofn eo.f Lc.h Warialscotenr:i Nsionnge . R. Sava mriruatyaatino:n s. United States, 4GENDIA, GENetic DIAgnostic Network, Antwerp, Belgium, 5SW None. S. Mansour: None. M. Irving: None. Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George‘s, Univerity of London, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, King‘s College London School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Medical Genetics, National and Kapodistrian University  P01
.054 of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Clinical reappraisal of Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome at the light of Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Molecular and Comparative the gene discovery Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. V. Carmignac1, L. Adès2,3,4, B. Callewaert5, J. Thevenon1,6, S. Julia7, B. Tournier8, J. Plaisancié7, T. Edouard9, Y. Dulac10, G. Baujat11, F. Petit12, D. Martin13, C. Thauvin- Robinet1,6, K. Holman2,3,4, M. Renard5, H. Plauchu14, G. Plessis15, J. De Backer5, A. Child16, G. Arno16, L. Duplomb1, B. Aral1,17, P. Vabres1,18, N. Gigot1, M. Durbeej-Hjalt19, E. Arbustini20, Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is a rare systemic connective tissue M. Grasso20, S. Tinschert21, P. N. Robinson21, M. Di Rocco22, J. Sanchez Del Pozo23, F. disorder characterized by craniofacial, cardiovascular, skeletal and skin Huet1, G. Jondeau24,25, J. Rivière1,17, N. Hanna12, C. Chapusot8, N. Laurent8, R. Byard26, R. manifestations that show significant overlap with Marfan (MFS) and Loeys- Gustafsson27, C. Boileau28, A. De Paepe5, L. Faivre1,6; Dietz syndrome (LDS) features. A distinguishing finding in SGS patients is 1Equipe GAD, Fac.de Médecine, Univ.de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 2Marfan Res.Group, the presence of intellectual disability. Several lines of evidence confirm the Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 3Disc.of Paediatrics & Child Health, key role of the transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) signaling in the pa- Univ.of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4Dep.of Clin.Gen., Children’s Hospital at Westmead, thogenesis of MFS and LDS. Based on exome sequencing experiments and Sydney, Australia, 5Ctr for Med.Genetics, Univ.Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Ctre de Réf. Anomalies du Dév.& Synd.Malformatifs, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 7Serv.de the hypothesis that the TGFβ pathway was highly likely to be involved in Génétique, CHU Purpan, Toulouse, France, 8Serv.d’Anat.Pathol., Plateau Techn.de Biol., SGS, we identified de novo heterozygous mutations in the proto-oncogene CHU, Dijon, France, 9Serv.de Pédiatrie, CHU, Toulouse, France, 10Serv.de Cardiologie, CHU, SKI, a known repressor of TGFβ activity, in ten SGS patients. All mutations Toulouse, France, 11Ctre de Réf.Maladies Oss.Constit., Dép.de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, cluster in two distinct N-terminal regions of the protein: the SMAD2/3-bin- Paris, France, 12Serv.de Gén.Clin., Hôp.Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 13Serv.de ding domain and the Dachshund-homology domain (DHD) which mediates Gén., Pôle de Biopath., UF3162, Ctre Hospitalier, Le Mans, France, 14Dép.de Gén., Hôp. binding to SNW1 and N-Cor proteins, both essential for the transforming Louis Pradel, CHU-HCL, Lyon, France, 15Serv.de Gén., CHU, Caen, France, 16Dep.of Cardiac activity of SKI and for the recruitment of transcriptional corepressors. & Vasc. Sciences, St. George’s Univ., London, United Kingdom, 17Serv.de Biol.Mol., Plateau Techn. de Biol., CHU, Dijon, France, 18Serv.de Dermatologie, CHU, Dijon, France, 19BMC Here we report on five additional de novo heterozygous missense SKI muta- B12, Dep.of Exp.Med.Science, Fac.of Med., Lund, Sweden, 20Ctr for Inh.Cardiovas.Dis., tions in SGS patients, four recurrent and one novel. Adding our new findings IRCCS Policl. S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 21Inst.f.MedGen. & HumGen, Charité, Berlin, Germany, to the existing data clearly reveals a pattern of hotspot mutations, with 22Rare Diseases Unit, Dep.of Pediatrics, Gaslini Inst., Genova, Italy, 23Dep.of Gen., Div. 48% (13/27) of the hitherto described mutations affecting the SKI-residues of Endocrin., 12 d.Oct.Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 24Ctre de Réf. Maladie de Marfan, Hôp. p.Gly34 and p.Pro35, both located in the SMAD2/3-binding domain. The im- Bichat, Paris, France, 25INSERM U portance of TGFβ in the SGS pathogenesis is further confirmed by enhan- ced activation of TGFβ signaling cascades and higher expression of TGFβ- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEr |e sWpoWnsWive. EgeSnHesG in.O cuRltGured dermal fibroblasts from SGS patients. 65ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index D. Schepers: None. A.J. Doyle: None. J.J. Doyle: None. S.L. Bessling: None. L. Gillis: None. P. Willems: None. S. Mansour: None. M. Simpson: None. H. Fryssira: None. G.R. Mortier: None. A.J.M. Hoogeboom: None. A.S. Also, there is temporal and spatial regulation of collagen IX gene expression, Mc Callion: None. H.C. Dietz: None. L. Van Laer: None. B.L. Loeys: None. which seems to be more tightly regulated in cartilaginous than non-cartila- ginous tissues. It is a heterotrimeric molecule formed by three genetically distinct chains: α1, α2, and α3 encoded by the CO L9
A1, CO L9
A2, and CO-  P01
.056  L9
A3 genes. Proteins are characterized by three collagenous (CO L1
, CO L2
, Novel mutations in a family with spondylocostal dysostosis and CO L3
, numbered from the C terminus) that are joined by four small non- C. Yang1, F. Tsai2, Y. Chen1, J. Wu1; collagenous domains (N C1
 to N C4
). Although dominant and recessive muta- 1Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. tions have been described in α1 and α2 chains, only heterozygous mutations of CO L9
A3 gene have been reported in human and related to: 1) multiple epiphyseal dysplasia 3, 2) susceptibility to an intervertebral disc disease, Spondylocostal dysostosis (SCDO) comprises a heterogeneous group of and 3) hearing loss. Here, we describe the first autosomal recessive family vertebral malsegmentation disorders characterized by hemivertebrae, rib presenting with deafness, myopia and slight bones changes due to loss of fusions and deletions. A SCDO family with two affected children inherited as functional mutations (c.1176_1198del, p.Gln393Cysfs*25) of CO L9
A3 gene. an autosomal recessive mode was identified in Taiwan. Four known genes, These findings further extend the knowledge of the role of type IX collagen DL L3
, MES P2
, LFNG, and HE S7
, causing autosomal recessive forms of SCDO iFn. gFeanleetrraat:i Nngo ndei.s eAa.Ps.e D. ‘adamo: None. I. Bruno: None. E. Athanasakis: None. S. Biskup: None. L. Esposito: None. P. Gasparini: None. were excluded to be disease-causing gene for this family by direct Sanger sequencing. Exome sequencing of this family using Illumina Hiseq2000 was subjected to identify novel homozygous and compound heterozygous vari- ants. Four novel homozygous variants were identified and were not present  P01
.059 in 376 Taiwanese controls. One of the variants is a homozygous insertion Cosegregation of Freiberg’s infraction with a familial translocation variant that results in a frameshift in amino acid sequence of a gene that has t(5;7)(p13.3;p22.2) with breakpoints mapping at the ADAMT S12
 gene caused other disorders with vertebral malsegmentation and much severe and at the SDK1 gene clinical manifestations. Functional analysis revealed that the mutant prote- A. T. Midro1, M. Mysliwiec1, B. Panasiuk1, M. Debiec-Rychter2, P. Iwanowski1, B. in presented different cytoplasmic pattern compared to the normal protein Nowakowska3, M. Niedzwiecka4, A. Marcinkowska5, P. Stankiewicz3, J. R. Lupski3,6; 1Department of Clinical Genetic Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 2Center for and may be functional inactive. This finding expends the phenotypic spec- t Cru. mYa rnegs:u Nltoinneg. fFr.o Tmsa ni:o Nveoln me. uYt.a Ctihoenn o: fN tohnee g. eJn. We.u: None. Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Department of Radiology Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 5Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Regional Children Hospital, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 6Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of  P01
.057 Medicine and Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States. Ift140/IFT140 mutations shown to cause cauli mouse phenotype and Jeune syndrome: a new biologic model for the study of ciliopathies R. Savarirayan, K. Miller, C. Ah-Cann, T. Tan, P. Farlie; We observed a 16 year -old girl with features of Cri du Chat syndrome (CDC) Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. connected with unusual changes of skeletal system due to unbalanced re- arrangement der(5) t(5;7)(p13.3;p22.2). Interestingly epiphysial aseptic ciliopathies necrosis of the head of the second metatarsal bone well known as Freiberg’s Defects in cilia formation and function result icna udliiverse ranges of human infraction (FI) were present in her mother and her grandmother, both car- skeletal and visceral abnormalities, termed . As part of an ENU riers of t(5;7)(p13.3;p22.2). The mapping both chromosome breakpoints mouse mcauutalit ion scree n, we identified a mutant, , with a phenotype con- using R P11
-666A5 and G248 P8216
C9  clones from 5p as well and R
P11 - sistent with an underling ciliopathy. 2A6D1ANM1T0S 1an2 d R
P11 -348A21 clones from 7p have been peSrDfoKr1m ed. We found Mutant embryosare characterized by mid-gestation lethality, craniofa- that the breakpoint position mapped on 5p13.3 were in coding sequence of cial dysmorphism, neural tube defects, short, disorganiseIfdt 1r4ib0s,, polydactyly, gene and the breakpoint on 7p22.2 involved gene. Both ge- syndacctayulyli, and internal organ defects. Linkage and candidate gene sequen- nes probably were interrupted as a result of this rearrangement. Unknown cing revealed homozygous mutations in the cilial gene, as the cause genetic predisposition to ocAcuDrArMenTcSe1 o2f FI from one side and the observation of the phenotype. in situ of the cosegregation of FI together with t(5;7)(p13.3;p22.2) are suggestive Imny omguetnainnt embryos; skeletal preparations revealed defectsM osfx 1th e craSnoixo9- a As. Tc.a Musidalr or:e lNaotinoen. sMh.i pMwysiltihw iec: None. Bg. ePnaen adsisiurku:p Ntioonne.. M. Debiec-Rychter: facial skeleton, vertebrae, and thoracic rib cage; hybridisation with None. P. Iwanowski: None. B. Nowakowska: None. M. Niedzwiecka: None. A. Marcinkowska: None. P. Stankiewicz: None. J.R. Lupski: None. showed disordered somite patterning, and with and abnormalities of the axial neural tube; and examination of primary cilia showed abnormal morphology, consistent wiitnh sai tdue fect of retrograde cilial transport. Components of the Shh/Grem1/Fgf signalling systems invoclavuedli 
P01 .060 in limb development were also analysed by hybridisation, showing Fryns mesomelic dysplasia is caused by duplication of the HOXD conscisatuelnit disruption of expression patterns between controls and cluster on chromosome 2q31 mutants. IFT140 A. Toutain1,2,3, O. Pïchon4, A. Briand4, B. de Courtivron5, C. Bonnard5, C. Le Caignec4; The phenotype is reminiscent of human short-rib polydactylies (SRP). 1Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-universitaire, Tours, France, 2Faculté de Médecine, Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 3INSERM U930, Tours, France, Mutations in have also been shown toI FuTn1d4e0rlie a subset of patients 4Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-universitaire, Nantes, France, 5Service de with Jeune and Mainzer-Saldino syndromes. We screened patients with SRP Chirurgie Orthopédique Pédiatrique, Centre Hospitalo-universitaire, Tours, France. phenotypes and found a novel, homozygous mutation in a patient diagnosed with Jeune syndrome. These data confirm the utility of this mouse model to further understand Mesomelic dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of inherited skeletal dys- the pleiotropic anomalies that arise in Jeune syndrome and other skeletal plasias among which Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis caused by SHOX ha- ciliopathies. It provides a platform for further analysis of the developmental s Rig. nSaalvlianrgir asyysatne:m Nso nreeg. uKl.a Mteidlle vri:a N tohnee p. rCi.m Aahr-yC cainlinu:m N.one. T. Tan: None. P. ploinsufficiency and its homozygous form, Langer dysplasia, are the most Farlie: None. frequent and best known. Kantaputra type dysplasia is characterized by marked mesomelic shortening of the upper and lower limbs. A complex ~1 Mb genomic imbalance composed of two microduplications of 481 and 507 kb, separated by a segment of normal copy number, on chromosome 2 
P01 .058 (2q31.1-q31.2) has been identified in the original Thai family described by Deafness, myopia and slight bones changes caused by autosomal Kantaputra et al. recessive mutations of CO
L9 A3 gene: a new clinical entity? In 2011, at thael. ESHG meeting we reported a female patient and her similarly F. Faletra1, A. P. D‘adamo1, I. Bruno1, E. Athanasakis1, S. Biskup2, L. Esposito3, P. affected father who had the same phenotype as a family published in 1988 Gasparini1; 1Genetica Medica-Dipartimento Scienze e Riproduzione dello Sviluppo, Trieste, Italy, by Fryns et In both families the patients had severe bilateral shortening 2CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 3CBM S.c.r.l. Area Science Park, Trieste, Italy. and bowing of the forearms with ulnar deviation of the hands resulting from severe developmental abnormality of the ulna, without any other fea- tures particularly with no lower limbs involvement. A 60K oligoarray CGH Type IX collagen is expressed mainly in cartilage together with collagens II performed in our patient identified in the 2q31.1 region a 200 Kb micro- and XI. Collagen IX has been shown to be present also in the human inter- duplication which was confirmed by qPCR. No other imbalance was iden- ve6 r6 tebral disc, vitreous humor, in the tectorial mE emS bH raG n e2 o0 f 1 th3 e | i nP nA erR eI aS r., FR tiA fieN dC . TE h e| gW enW omW ic. rE eS arH raG ng.O emR eG nt resulted in the duplication of the entireABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index HOXD cluster and of the neighbouring gene EVX2. Parental analysis showed All had a normal neuromotor development. There were no signs of myotonia that it was present in her affected father. Molecular karyotyping was: arr or ocular problems (SJS) nor evidence for immunodeficiencies or anaemia 2q31.1(176,883,603-177,090,474)x3 pat (hg19). Our results confirm that (CHH). duplication to the entire HOXD cluster leads to mesomelic dysplasia and si- This family with true KD is to our knowledge the first to demonstrate that at gnificantly reduce the minimum size of the duplication responsible for this least a subtype of KD has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. This p Ah.e Tnoouttyapine:. None. O. Pïchon: None. A. Briand: None. B. de Courtivron: observation has important consequences for genetic counselling of patients None. C. Bonnard: None. C. Le Caignec: None. with KD, and identification of other families may allow clarification of the gOe.nMe.t iVca bnaackkkgerro: uNnodne.. U.I. Fränkel: None. A. De Paepe: None. 
P01 .061 Retrospective study of 16 prenatal forms of hypophosphatasia with 
P01 .063 fetal examination. Identification of new SQSTM1 mutations in familiar Paget‘s disease M. DERAMECOURT1, S. MEHAUT2, M. SINICO3, B. JACOB4, G. ANDR
E1 , F. PELLUARD1, C. R. Usategui Martin1, M. López Bartolomé2, E. Bueno Martínez1, J. Del Pino Montes2, R. BENETEAU5, M. JOUBERT5, P. MARCORELLE
S6 , A. BUENERD7, L. DEVISM
E8 , N. Members González Sarmiento1; of SoFFoet9, D. GAILLARD10; 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Dpto.de Medicina, IBSAL-CIC, Universidad de 1Foetopathologie, CHU, BORDEAUX, France, 2Anatomie Pathologique, Troyes, France, Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Reumatología, Hospital Clínico 3Foetopathologie, CHI, CRETEIL, France, 4Foetopathologie, CHU, CAEN, France, Universitario de Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain. 5Foetopathologie, CHU, NANTES, France, 6Foetopathologie, CHU, BREST, France, 7Foetopathologie, CHU, LYON, France, 8Foetopathologie, CHU, LILLE, France, 9Société Française de Foetopathologie, Rennes, France, 10Service de Génétique CHU, REIMS, Paget‘s disease of bone (PDB) is a focal disorder of bone that affects seg- France. mentally the skeleton, presenting a increase in osteoclast number, size and activity that results in a variegated and anarchic bone structure that alters the mechanical properties. Hypophosphatasia (HP) is a rare inherited disorder characterized by bone There is a tendency to familial aggregation (15-40%) with an autosomal do- defective mineralization, caused by mutations within the gene that encodes minant pattern modified by environmental factors. The most plausible can- the tissue-nonspecific enzyme of alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP). Two of didate gene is sequestosoma1 gene, encoding the p62 protein, which plays the 6 recognized forms can be detected by prenatal ultrasounds, showing an important role in cellular signal crossroads related with osteoclastogesis poor skeletal mineralization and fetal crowding. If most prenatal forms are such as NF-kB pathway. lethal (LP-HP), a few benign forms are reported with a third trimester and a We studied in 21 families with proven diagnosis of PDB, exons 6, 7 and 8 of postnatal improvement (BP-HP). SQSTM1 gene in genomic DNA by PCR and subsequent automatic sequen- Sixteen fetal cases of P-HP were collected from members of the Société cing Big DyeTerminators. Française de Foetopathlogie (SoFFoet) between 1983 and 2012 in order to Our results show that 8 of the 21 families studied (38.09%) were carriers of precise the fetal phenotype. This retrospective study included X-Rays, fetal a mutation in the SQSTM1 gene. Three of the eight families carry the mutati- examination and TNSALP mutations. on p.
P392 L (12.5% of all patients studied), often described in the literature. Termination of pregnancy was made after molecular prenatal diagnosis in 2 In three families appears the p.
E273 D mutation and in other appears the cases at 15 and 16 weeks of gestation (WG), and after prenatal ultrasounds p.R321C mutation neither described in the literature. in 13 cases between 15 and 33 WG. One fetus was dead in utero at 35 WG. “In silico” study categorizes both novel mutatations as pathogenic. A popu- Dysmorphy was reported in 10/16 cases. The skull was soft on the touch lation study in 100 healthy individuals alleles by dHPLC (Denaturing High with absence of ossification on X-Ray in any case. Micromelia and short bo- Pressure Liquid Chromatography), failed to detect the mutations. wing legs were present in all the fetus except one. Spurs were present in We report two new Spanish families carrying novel mutations in SQSTM1 9/16 cases. The 16 fetuses showed a severe hypomineralization without g Re.n Ues watheigcuhi r Meianrftoinr:c eN othnee .r Mol.e L oófp tehzi sB gaertnoelo inm Pé:a gNeotn dei. sEe.a Bseu.eno Martínez: any fracture. Absence ossification was constant but heterogeneous along None. J. Del Pino Montes: None. R. González Sarmiento: None. the vertebral column and the extremities. The metaphyses appeared bifid with a thickened hypertrophic cartilage on microscopic sections. X The fetus were composite heterozygous in 10/16 genetic studies with different family genotypes. 
P01 .064 The 2 forms of LP-HP and BP-HP will be discussed in this retrospective stu- The role of matrix metalloproteinases (MM
P2 , MM
P9  and MM
P12 ) d My.. Deramecourt: None. S. Mehaut: None. M. Sinico: None. B. Jacob: None. G. gene polymorphisms in abdominal aortic aneurysm and aortoiliac Andre: None. F. Pelluard: None. C. Beneteau: None. M. Joubert: None. P. occlusive disease Marcorelles: None. A. Buenerd: None. L. Devisme: None. N. Members of A. Korcz1, S. Hryhorowicz2, J. Mikolajczyk-Stecyna1, K. Pawlaczyk3, M. Zowczak- SoFFoet: None. D. Gaillard: None. Drabarczyk3, M. Molinska-Glura3, G. Oszkinis3, R. Slomski1, M. Gabriel3; 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland, 3Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. 
P01 .062 Three generation family with kyphomelic dysplasia suggests Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and aortoiliac occlusive disease (AIOD) autosomal dominant inheritance are common vascular disorders considered to be complex diseases with O. M. Vanakker1, U. I. Fränkel2, A. De Paepe1; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of both genetic and environmental risk factors involved. Destructive remode- Paediatrics, Zorgsaam Hospital, Terneuzen, Netherlands. ling of extracellular matrix and histological signs of chronic inflammation associates both of these pathologies. Matrix metalloproteinases play a major role in the remodeling of the extracellular matrix of aorta, and their contri- Kyphomelic dysplasia (KD) is a rare skeletal dysplasia belonging to the bution to the pathogenesis of AAA is unquestionable. The purpose of this group of bent bone dysplasias. It represents a heterogenous group of disor- study was to examine the role of MM
P2 (nt-1306); MM
P9 (nt-1562); MM
P12  ders, with at least three distinct entities: Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS), (nt-82) gene polymorphisms in the development of AAA or AIOD in Polish Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia (CHH) and ‘true’ KD. For the latter, the genetic patients. The case-control designed study included three selected groups: background is unknown and autosomal recessive inheritance is presumed 308 patients with AAA and 312 patients with AIOD who underwent sur- based on several sporadic cases with parental consanguinity. gery; 375 individuals from control group free of these vascular diseases. We report a three generation family presenting with a true KD phenotype. Genotypes were compared with demographic and clinical data of subjects The proband was born at term after an uneventful pregnancy. Her length and analyzed in relation to risk factors. We found significant differences bet- and weight at birth were 37cm and 1578g respectively. She had severe rhi- ween patients with AAA and control group for MM
P9  (nt-1562) (p=0,026) zomelic shortening of upper and lower limbs. Radiographs showed stubby and MM
P12  (nt-82) (p=0,037) gene polymorphisms. There were also signi- femora which were extremely curved. Iliac wings were short and widened; ficant differences between patients with AIOD and control group for MM
P9  the humeri were also short and dumbbell-shaped. (nt-1562) (p=0,014). No differences were found in case of MM
P2  (nt-1306) The mother of the proband has a similar disproportionate short stature phe- gene polymorphism. In a multivariable logistic regression analysis adjusted notype. Radiographs taken at birth revealed severe femoral bowing, though for traditional cardiovascular risk factors MM
P12  was an independent risk less prominent compared to her daughter. Follow-up radiographies in the factor for AAA and MM
P9  for AIOD. In conclusion, we suggest that polymor- mother demonstrated gradual improvement of the bowing over several phism in MM
P12  may independently contribute to pathogenesis of AAA years. The maternal grandfather of the prE obS aH ndG h 2 ad0 a1 n3 id | e nP tA icR al I pS h, e F noR tA ypN e. CEw | hWerWeasW M.MES
P9 H pGol.yOmRorGphism is a risk factor of AIOD. Supported by N6at7io-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index n Aa.l KSocirecnz:c eN Coneen.t eSr. Hgrraynhto NroNw4ic0z3: 2N0o9n6e3. 5J. Mikolajczyk-Stecyna: None. K. gests that rs11209026 could affect the disease severity rather than suscep- Pawlaczyk: None. M. Zowczak-Drabarczyk: None. M. Molinska-Glura: None. G. tFib. iCliotys.tantino: None. A. Kadi: None. B. Izac: None. A. Leboime: None. R. Said- Oszkinis: None. R. Slomski: None. M. Gabriel: None. Nahal: None. H. Garchon: None. G. Chiocchia: None. M. Breban: None. 
P01 .065 
P01 .067 Genetic variants in selenoprotein genes SEP
P1 , TXNRD1, TXNRD2 and Transcriptomic Analysis Of Derived Dendritic Cells (MD-DCs) Reveals abdominal aortic aneurysms development Several Genes Differentially Regulated Between Spondyloarthritis E. Strauss1, R. Staniszewski2, G. Oszkinis2; (SpA) Patients And Healthy Controls 1Institute of Human Genetics the Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, A. Talpin1, N. Bonilla1, F. Costantino1, A. Leboime2, F. Letourneur1, S. Jacques1, F. Dumont1, 2Department of General and Vascular Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, H. Garchon1,2,3, M. Breban1,2,3, G. Chiocchia1; Poznan, Poland. 1Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne-Billancourt, France, 3Versailles-Saint Quentin University, Versailles-Saint Quentin, France. Enhanced oxidative stress in cardiac and vascular myocytes is causative to cardiovascular diseases. Selenium, a trace element, as a component of sele- Introduction: As originally shown in an HLA-B27 transgenic rat model, mo- noproteins helps control the intracellular redox state. In the presented study nocytes-derived DCs from SpA patients exhibit a weaker stimulatory effici- the associations between the four SNPs in genes encoding selenoproteines: ency of CD4+ T cells than control DCs. selenoprotein P (SEP
P1  rs7579G>A, rs3877899G>A), thioredoxin reductase Aim: To identify genes differentially expressed in MD-DCs from SpA pati- 1 (TXNRD1 rs35009941C>G) and 2 (TXNRD2 rs9605031C>T) and the ab- ents, as compared to healthy controls. dominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) occurrence were examined. Materials and Methods: Monocytes were purified from 9 HLA-B27+ SpA The case-control study encompassed a series of 506 AAA patients and 468 patients and 10 controls PBMCs using anti-CD14-coupled immunomagnetic controls. In patients the presence of symptomatic peripheral arterial disea- beads and cells were further cultured with IL-4 and GM-CSF for 7 days. MD- se (PAD) was determined. High-throughput SNPs genotyping was perfor- DCs were then stimulated with LPS for 6 and 24 hours. Transcriptomic study med using the TaqMan pre-designed assays. Associations between alleles/ was performed with Affymetrix HuGene 1.0 ST microarrays on unstimula- haplotypes and the intermediate traits related to the vascular diseases were ted and stimulated MD-DCs. Gene expression levels in patients and controls also examined. were compared using a multivariate design under a linear model. Real-time SEP
P1  SNPs were in complete linkage disequilibrium, then only three of quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) was performed for genes validation. rs7579-rs3877899 haplotypes: G-G (0.469), A-G (0.293), G-A (0.238) were Results: Transcriptomic analysis revealed 104 genes differentially ex- observed. None of the studied alleles/haplotypes was associated with AAA. pressed in MD-DCs from SpA patients compared with controls (p<0.01 and However, the higher frequency of the SEP
P1  rs3877899A allele (the G-A ha- fold-change ±1.5). Five candidate genes have been validated by RT-PCR plotype) carriers in AAA subjects with advanced PAD (53.5%) as compared (ADAMT
S15 , F13A1, SELL, ERA
P1  and CITED2). Interestingly, expressi- to those without PAD (30.9%, p=0.012) and controls (41.7%, p=0.1) were on of ADAMT
S15 , belonging to the metallopeptidase family, was inversely noted. The association between the SEP
P1  rs7579A allele (the A-G haploty- correlated with the expression of the transcription factor CITED2 (R=0.75, pe) and obesity in AAAs was also found (p<0.005), but no significant rela- p=0.0003). Further, in silico pathway analysis conducted on CITED2 co-ex- tions between studied variants and age, gender, hypertension, diabetes and pressed genes provided identification of the Wnt signaling pathway. HDLC level were noted. Discussion: This transcriptomic study reveals striking differences in the In conclusion, selenoprotein P gene haplotypes are associated with the de- gene expression patterns of SpA MD-DCs compared to controls. Up-regu- velopment of peripheral atherosclerosis and with obesity in abdominal aor- lation of ADAMT
S15  highlights the potential role of metallopeptidase in tic aneurysms. The work was supported by the National Science Centre in SpA pathogeny. Moreover, deregulation in SpA patients of the Wnt signaling P Eo. lSantrda uusnsd: eNro gnrea.n Rt .N Sota. NniNsz4e0w3s2k5i:0 N44on0e.. G. Oszkinis: None. pathway may have consequences on the balance between osteoblast and o As.t eToaclplains:t Nfuonncet.i oNn. sB.onilla: None. F. Costantino: None. A. Leboime: None. F. Letourneur: None. S. Jacques: None. F. Dumont: None. H. Garchon: None. M. Breban: None. G. Chiocchia: None. 
P01 .066 The I
L23 R Non-Synonymous Polymorphism rs11209026 is Associated with Radiographic Sacroiliitis in Spondyloarthritis F. Costantino1, A. Kadi1, B. Izac1, A. Leboime2, R. Said-Nahal2, H. Garchon1,2,3, G. 
P01 .068 Chiocchia1, M. Breban1,2,3; Novel homozygous missense mutations in the SL
C2 A10 gene in a 1Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne-Billancourt, France, Turkish pediatric patient with arterial tortuosity syndrome. 3Versailles-Saint Quentin University, Versailles-Saint Quentin, France. S. G. TEME
L1 , O. BOSTAN2, D. PROOST3, L. VAN LAER3, E. CI
L2 , B. LOEY
S3 ; 1University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology & Embryology, Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology & Embryology, Bursa, Objective: Spondyloarthritis (SpA) is a group of inflammatory articular dis- Mersin, Turkey, 2University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric orders sharing genetic background. The non-synonymous single-nucleotide Cardiology, Bursa, Turkey, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. polymorphism rs11209026 (Arg381Gln) in the I
L23 R gene, has reproducib- ly been shown as associated with ankylosing spondylitis (AS). Here, we ex- amined the association between rs11209026 and SpA as a whole. Particular Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal recessive connec- attention was devoted to genotype-phenotype correlation. tive tissue disorder, mainly characterized by tortuosity and elongation of Methods: rs11209026 was genotyped in a French collection of 415 the large- and medium-sized arteries with predisposition to stenoses and cases/372 controls and 383 trios. Association analysis was carried out in aneurysms. ATS is caused by mutations in the SL
C2 A10 gene, encoding for SpA as a whole group and then separately in AS and non-radiographic SpA the facilitative glucose transporter 10 (GLUT10) and is described typical- (non-AS) patients. Phenotype/genotype correlations were examined using ly in pediatric patients. We report a 2 years old boy with ATS who initial- a logistic regression analysis. ly presented with a cardiac murmur. Echocardiography at the age of one Results: A significant association between rs11209026 and SpA was only month demonstrated dilatation of the aortic root (15mm) and tortousity identified in the familial dataset (P = 0.03; OR = 0.57). Strong associati- in the descending aorta. The main clinical findings included elongated face, on with AS was observed in both case/control and familial datasets (P = saggy cheeks, micrognathia, malar hypoplasia, joint hypermobility and hy- 4.5x10-4 and 4x10-3, respectively). In contrast, such association was not perextensible skin. Follow-up echocardiography showed an increase of the detected with the non-AS group. Furthermore, rs11209026 frequency was diameter of the aortic root to 32mm and 35 mm at the age of 8 months significantly different between the AS and non-AS patients (P = 2.5x10-3). and 2 years old, respectively. Angiography and computerized tomography Phenotype/genotype correlation study revealed that both radiographic angiography showed fusiform aneurysmatic dilatation of ascending aorta, sacroiliitis and an early onset were independently associated with a lower marked tortuosity of both pulmonary arteries and thoracic aorta, stenosis in frequency of the rare protective rs11209026 allele A in patients (P = 9x10-3 vena cava inferior and collateral structure associated with right hepatic vein. and 8x10-3, respectively). Sequencing of the SL
C2 A10 gene in the proband revealed the presence of a Conclusion: Our study replicated the robust association between rs11209026 novel pathogenic homozygous missense variant (c.727C>A). Heterozygous and AS, in the French population. However such association was restricted SL
C2 A10 mutations were shown in her mother and father, demonstrating to AS patients, as compared to non-radiographic SpA. The fact that it was in6d8ependently conditioned by radiographic sacroiEliiStiHs aGnd 2 a0ge1 a3t o| nPsAetR suISg-, FRtrAuNe hCoEm |o zWygWosiWty.. EThSeH pGat.hOogReGnic variant leads to a p.Gln243Lys changeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in the seventh transmembrane domain of GLUT10. The proband underwent suggest that reduction of ABCG1 expression in macrophages is associated aortic root replacement surgery. ATS resembles Loeys-Dietz and Marfan re- with atherosclerosis, but ABCG1 genetic variants -134(T/G) and -204(A/C) lated disorders, so timely differential diagnosis is extremely important for dVo. Mnoirto asfhfencikt othvais: eNxopnree. sEs.i oDne.mina: None. N. Mayorov: None. V. Davydenko: early diagnosis and intervention of aneurysms to prevent serious vascular None. P. Kurjanov: None. V. Vavilov: None. A. Denisenko: None. A. c So.mG.p Tliecmateiol:n Nso.ne. O. Bostan: None. D. Proost: None. L. Van laer: None. E. Cil: Schwarzman: None. None. B. Loeys: None. 
P01 .071 
P01 .069 Fetal presentation of Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia with extensive SL
C2 A10 knockdown in aortic smooth muscle cells underscores granulomatous inflammation mitochondrial dysfunction as a key pathogenetic event in arterial M. Crahes1, A. Laquerrière1,2, S. Patrier1, M. Aziz1, N. Pirot3, M. Brasseur-Daudruy3, V. tortuosity syndrome Layet4, T. Frebourg5,6,7, P. Saugier-Veber5,6,7; 1Pathology Laboratory, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Region-Inserm Team A. Willaert, A. Boel, W. Trypsteen, A. Fieuw, B. Menten, B. Callewaert, A. De Paepe, P. ERI28, University of Rouen, Rouen, France, 3Department of Radiology, Rouen University Coucke; Hospital, Rouen, France, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Le Havre Hospital, Le Havre, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. France, 5Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 6Inserm U1079, Rouen, France, 7Normandie University, IRIB, Rouen, France. Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a recessively inherited connective tissue disorder, mainly characterized by tortuosity, stenosis and aneurysm Cartilage-hair-hypoplasia is a rare autosomal recessive metaphyseal dyspla- formation of the main arteries. In pSaLtCi2enAt1 0tissue samples, fragmentation of sia due to RMRP (the RNA component of the RNase MRP -ribonuclease mi- elastic fibers and enhanced TGFβ-signaling was found. ATS is caused by tochondrial RNA processing- complex) gene mutations. So far, more than 90 loss-of-function mutations in the gene, encoding the facilitative mutations have been reported in the promoter and the transcribed regions. glucose transporter GLUT10. The function of this transporter and the pa- Clinical characteristics include short-limbed short stature, sparse hair and thogenesis underlying ATS has been a matter of debate. Cellular studies defective cell-mediated immunity. We report herein the antenatal presenta- and a recent ATS zebrafish model suggested a role for GLUT10 as a mito- tion of a female fetus, in whom CHH was suspected from 23 weeks’ gestati- chondrial transporter of the antioxidant dehydroascorbic acid (vitamin C). on, leading to a medical termination of the pregnancy at 34 weeks’gestation, GLUT10 loss-of-function would therefore lead to increased oxidative stress and thereafter confirmed by morphological and molecular studies. Post- and mitochonSdCrLia2lA d1y0sfunction associated with disturbed TGFβ-signaling. In mortem examination confirmed short stature and limbs, and revealed thy- this study we wanted to investigate the initial altSeLrCat2iAo1n0s in gene expressi- mic hypoplasia associated with severe CD4 T-cell immunodeficiency along on following knockdown in human aortic vascular smooth muscle with extensive non caseating epithelioid granulomas in almost all organs, cells (aVSMC). Two different siRNA’s, targeting , were separately which to our knowledge has been described only in five cases. Molecular transfected in aVSMC, both resulting in knockdown efficiencies of >80%. studies evidenced on one allele the most frequently reported founder muta- RNA was extracted at 24 hours post-transfection and loaded on Agilent tion NR_003051: g.70A>G, which is present in 92% of Finnish patients with 8X60k expression arrays. Differential gene expression was determined as Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia. On the second allele, a novel mutation consisting transcript-level changes of ≥1.5 (p<0.05) relative to control samples. As a of a 10 nucleotide insertion at position -18 of the promoter region of the result, 264 different genes and 7 lincRNA’s showed differential expression RMRP gene (M29916.1:g.726_727insCTCACTACTC) was detected. The foun- in both siRNA treatments. In-depth data mining indicates disturbed mito- der mutation was inherited from the father, and the novel mutation from the chondrial functioning, elevated mitochondria-mediated apoptosis, altered mother. To our knowledge, this case report represents the first detailed fetal TGFβ-signaling and disturbed production of extracellular matrix compon- a Mn.a Clyrsaihs edse:s Ncroinbee.d A i.n L tahqeu leirtreirèarteu: rNeo.ne. S. Patrier: None. M. Aziz: None. N. ents. However, at the cellular level, no apoptosis or pronounced disruption Pirot: None. M. Brasseur-Daudruy: None. V. Layet: None. T. Frebourg: None. P. of mitochondrial integrity was detected at this early stage after knockdown. Saugier-Veber: None. Altogether, these data further evidence a key role for proper mitochondrial fAun. Wctiilolaneinrtg: Nino vnaes. cAu. lBaro edle: vNeolonpe.m We.n Ttr.ypsteen: None. A. Fieuw: None. B. Menten: None. B. Callewaert: None. A. De Paepe: None. P. Coucke: None. 
P01 .073 Expanding the phenotypic and mutational spectrum of EDS dermatosparaxis type: a report of five new patients 
P01 .070 T. Van Damme1, F. Malfait1, S. Symoens1, Y. Alanay2, C. Giunta3, U. Lindert3, M. Rohrbach3, Influence of promoter SNPs on the ABCG1 transporter gene S. Pelin Ozlem4, A. Colige5, A. De Paepe1; expression level 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Pediatrics Genetics, V. Miroshnikova1,2, E. Demina1, N. Mayorov2, V. Davydenko2, P. Kurjanov2, V. Vavilov2, A. Department of Pediatrics, Acibadem University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, Denisenko3, A. Schwarzman1; 3Division of Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Ihsan 1Petersburg nuclear physics institute, Gatchina, Russian Federation, 2Saint-Retersburg Dogramaci Children’s Hospital, Clinical Genetics Unit, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Retersburg, Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg Turkey, 5Laboratory of Connective Tissues Biology, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. institute of experimental medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) dermatosparaxis type is a recessively inhe- Atherosclerosis is characterized by cholesterol deposition in vascular wall. rited connective tissue disorder, caused by deficient activity of ADAMT
S2 , Transporter ABCG1 mediates cholesterol efflux from macrophage foam which cleaves the amino (N)-propeptide of type I procollagen. Only ten hu- cells to high density lipoproteins. However the importance of ABCG1 gene man EDS dermatosparaxis patients have been reported, in six of whom a expression in human macrophages for atherosclerosis development is still homozygous p.(Q225*) was identified. Due to the decreased N-proteinase undiscovered. Two SNPs -134T/G (rs1378577) and -204A/C (rs1893590), activity, uncleaved pN-collagen molecules are incorporated in the collagen which can affect ABCG1 gene expression level, were identified in promoter fibrils, resulting in fibrils with a pathognomonic ‘hieroglyphic’ appearance. region of ABCG1 gene. The aim of this study was to investigate influence of All reported patients present a recognizable phenotype with a characteristic SNPs -134T/G and -204A/C on ABCG1 gene expression level and association dysmorphic facies, extreme skin fragility and -laxity, excessive bruising and of ABCG1 gene expression in monocytes and macrophages with atheroscle- sometimes internal complications. rosis. Human peripheral blood monocytes were obtained from 26 patients We report clinical, molecular, biochemichal and ultrastructural findings in with angiographically proved atherosclerosis and 20 healthy individuals. To five new EDS dermatosparaxis patients from four independent families. get monocyte-derived macrophages for 11 persons of each group, monocy- Three patients display a strikingly milder phenotype than that of previously tes were cultured with macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) for 5 reported patients, mainly with regard to skin fragility and -laxity and dys- days. ABCG1 mRNA levels were measured using real time PCR. For identi- morphic features. Molecular ADAMT
S2  analysis revealed three novel ho- fication of -134(T/G) and -204(A/C) genotypes allele-specific PCR and PCR mozygous loss-of-function mutations (c.2927_2928delC (p.(
P976 Rfs*42)), with restriction analysis, respectively, were used. Macrophage ABCG1 mRNA c.669-670dupG (p.Pro224Alafs*41), c.2751-2A>T) and a compound levels were significantly reduced in group of patients when compared with heterozygous mutation (c.2T>C (p.(Met1Thr)) and c.888-891delTGAA the controls: average levels were 1.33±0.48 and 2.46±0.45 (p<0.001). There (p.(M295Nfs25*))). were no differences in monocyte ABCG1 mRNA levels between patients and SDS-PAGE showed accumulation of bands representing pN alpha chains and controls. And there was no correlation between -134(T/G) and -204(A/C) decrease of bands representing mature alpha chains of type I procollagen in SNPs and ABCG1 mRNA levels in monocytEesS aHndG m 2a0cr1op3h |a gPeAs. RThISes,e F rResAulNts CEa |l lW paWtieWnts.E. USlHtraGst.rOucRtuGral dermal analysis revealed milder collagen f6ib9rilABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index abnormalities than those of previously reported patients. Collagen fibrils cauliflower fibrils were specific to the EDS classical subtype, however we showed irregular contours and a somewhat branched appearance, but their did not identify Collagen (V) or (I) mutations in all of these patients (25% general cylindrical appearance was preserved. These observations suggest [n=3]). incomplete N-propeptide cleavage, either due to residual enzyme activity or No EM finding was completely sensitive or specific to a particular EDS sub- compensating enzymes. type. Detailed clinical, genetic, biochemical and structural assessment re- Together our findings show that milder forms of EDS dermatosparaxis type mains the gold standard for assessment of these patients. There is limited e Tx. iVsta,n w Dhaicmhm mea: yN roenme.a Fi.n M uanlfdaiiat:g nNoosneed. S(i. nS ay mnoonen-ssp: eNcoianleis. eYd. Acllainniacya:l Nseotntein. gC).. data describing dermal collagen fibril characteristics and fibroblast archi- Giunta: None. U. Lindert: None. M. Rohrbach: None. S. Pelin Ozlem: None. A. tecture and dimensions in the normal population. Colige: None. A. De Paepe: None. ONn. gS etetm alb. rVidirgceh:o Nwosn eA.r Ach.M (.2 V0a1n2d)e 4rs6t0e:e6n3:7 N-6on4e9. N. Ghali: None. R. Pollitt: None. M. Nesbitt: None. P. Sawle: None. D. Ferguson: None. F.M. Pope: None. 
P01 .074 Marked intrafamilial variation in Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome type IV is 
P01 .076 explained by biallelic CO
L3 A1 mutations. A second family carrying a mutation of the PLOD3 identified by whole A. Jørgensen1, T. Fagerheim1, S. Rand-Hendriksen2, M. Pepin3, P. Lunde4, D. F. Leistritz3, U. exome sequencing: a new subtype of EDS? Schwarze3, P. H. Byers3,5; E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, S. Kircher2, M. Hagl2, J. Behunova2, O. Brandau2, F. Laccone2; 1Medical Genetics Department, Division of Child and Adolescent Health, University 1Univ. Klinik f. Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute of Medical Hospital of North-Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2TRS, National Resource Centre for Rare Genetics, Vienna, Austria. Disorders, Sunnaas Rehabilitation Hospital, Nesoddtangen, Norway, 3Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Division of Cardiothoracic and Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital of North-Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 5Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. A male patient aged 10 years was referred with severe S-formed scoliosis, ptosis of the right eyelid, asymmetrical face, midface hypoplasia and shallow orbitae with pseudoexophtalmus. Additionally, bilateral adducted thumbs, CO
L3 A1 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) type IV, the vascular type, is an autosomal non progressive flexion contractures of proximal finger joints, atrophy of dominant disorder caused by mutations in ,which encodes the thenar muscles and overall poor muscle development were noted. Bilateral chains of type III procollagen. We identified a family in which there was mar- sensorineural deafness was diagnosed at the age of two years. He has a thin ked clinical variation with the earliest death due to extensive aortic dissec- and soft skin, without scarring, and reduced skin creases on both palms. tion at age 15 years and other family members in their 80s with no compli- Motor development was slightly retarded and cognitive function mildly im- catioCnOsL. T3Ah1e proband was born with right sided clubfoot but was otherwise paired. The patient’s sister was similarly affected, but without significant healthy until he died unexpectedly at 15 years. He and his sister each had scoliosis. Parents were healthy, non-consanguineous, but originating from two mutations (c.1786C>T, p.Arg596Ter, in exon 26 and c.3851G>A, an isolated rural region. A so far uncharacterized “complicated form” of Eh- p.Gly1284Glu, in exon 50). The mutations segregated to different alleles. In lers-Danlos-syndrome was suspected. We performed whole exome sequen- mRNA in cells from the sister the missense mutation in exon 50 was appa- cing, analyzed the data under the hypothesis of parental consanguinity and rently „homozygous“, consistent with nonsense mediated instability of the identified the Lysyl hydroxylase3 gene (PLOD3) involved in the posttransla- mRNA that carried the premature termination codon. Cells from the com- tional modification of collagen biosynthesis as a strong candidate gene. Both pound heterozygote produced a reduced amount of type III procollagen that patients were homozygous for the c.1935+1G>A mutation and both parents was largely retained in the cells, the chains of which all had abnormal elec- were carriers. Study of the literature unveiled one single family carrying a trophoretic mobility. Cells from an individual heterozygous for the missense mutation in this gene with a strikingly similar phenotype (Salo et al., 2008 mutation produced some normal and some abnormal type III procollagen. Am J Hum Genet 83:495, OMIM: #612394), which suggests a syndromic pat- Cells from an individual heterozygous for the nonsense mutaCtiOoLn3 pAr1oduced tern caused by PLOD3-mutations. Therefore the PLOD3 caused disease may a reduced amount of apparently normal type III procollagen. This is only the be considered a new form of the vascular-contractural-deafness type of EDS, second instance of compound heterozygosity for deleterious muta- expanding the group of diseases caused by a dysfunction of the collagen as- tions and in both instances the individuals with bi-allelic mutatiCoOnLs 3hAa1ve a s NEe o.m nS ebt .el y Oic. .h Be rn a- nG de ars ud o Nr of: eN .o Fn .e L. aS c. K oi nrc eh e Nr o: nN eo .ne. M. Hagl: None. J. Behunova: : n c : significantly worse outcome than the heterozygotes. This is a rare explanati- o An. fJoørr gmeanrskeend: cNloinniec.a Tl .v Faargiaetrihoeni min: iNnodnivei.d Su.a Rlsa nwdi-tHh emndurtiaktsioenns: Nino ne. M. . Pepin: None. P. Lunde: None. D.F. Leistritz: None. U. Schwarze: None. P.H. Byers: None. 
P01 .077 Development of sporadic dilatative pathology of ascending thoracic aorta (DPATA): impact of Fibrillin-1(FBN1) polymorphysms 
P01 .075 (rs1036477, rs10519177, rs755251, and rs2118181) Dermal electron microscopy findings in the Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes G. Jariene, R. Sepetiene, G. Zukovas, E. Juskaite, Z. Stanioniene, R. Benetis, V. Lesauskaite; Institute of Cardiology, Kaunas, Lithuania. (EDS). N. Stembridge1, A. M. Vandersteen1, N. Ghali1, R. Pollitt2, M. Nesbitt3, P. Sawle1, D. Ferguson4, F. M. Pope1; FBN1 FBN1 1UK National EDS Clinic, Harrow, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Dilatation of ascending thoracic aortain patients with Marfan syndrome is Trust, Sheffield., United Kingdom, 3Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, caused by mutations. The role of polymorphismFBsN w1ithin spSoNrPas- United Kingdom, 4Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, University of drisc1 c0a3s6e4s 7o7f ,D rPsA1T0A5 1is9 1le7s7s, erxsp7l5o5re2d5.1 rs2118181) Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. The aim of our study - to investigate the association of gene ( and within development of different phenotypes (post-stenotic aortic dilatation (PSAD); aneurysm There is limited published data describing dermal collagen ultrastructure of thoracic aorta (ATA); a2nd3 8dissection of thoracic aorta (DTA) of sporadic (Electron Microscopy, EM) across EDS subtypes. We present data from 188 DPATA. patients, correlated with clinical, molecular and biochemical findings. Methods. Study included patients who were undergoing aortic recon- We identified normal collagen fibril size in the majority of patients classified struction due to DPTA at the Department ofn C=a4rd4i5ovascular Surgery, Lithua- as hypermobile EDS (64.6% [n=82]), as well as other patients with arterial nian University of Health Sciences. No patients had phenotypic characteri- aneurysm and dissection and non-specific features of hereditary disorders stic of Marfan syndrome. Reference group ( ) was formed from a ran- of connective tissue. dom saFmBpNl1e oSNf KPasurnsa1s0 p3o6p4u7l7ation.r Bs2o1th1 8g1r8o1u,p rss 1a0ge5 1a9n1d7 s7e, xr sm75a5tc2h5e1d). DNA Fibril size irregularity is seen in the majority of patients with confirmed va- was extracted from blood, concentration was measured by spectrophoto- scular EDS (vEDS) (90% [n= 10]), but also in patients with confirmed colla- metry. ( and were gen (I) and (V) abnormalities, and rarely in other patients with EDS III/BHS. analysed by real-time PCR. Results were calculated statistically by apprFoBvNed1 We could not confirm the findings of Ong et al (2012) of abnormal fibroblast Fisher’s exact test, logistic regression. shape, lysosomal inclusions, dermo-epidermal junction abnormalities in 10 Results: The patients with DTA had a significantly higher frequency of confirmed vEDS patients. G/G genotype than the reference group subjects. Occasional small collagen flowers were common in EDS III/BHS (30.7% [n=39]), but also seen across all EDS subtypes. Dilated endoplasmic reticu- lum, collagen fibril kinking and loose or dense packing were seen across al7l 0EDS subtypes and were non-specific findings. NEuSmHerGo u2s 0(>153% |) PcoAllRagIeSn, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index FBN1 Table 1 re pain threshold) and Raynaud‘s syndrome, were detected to have stati- DTA PSAD ATA Reference group stically significant associations with Val158Met polymorphism (p=0.037, GG genotype frequency n=52* n=66 n=120 n=445 p=0.042, p=0.039 and p=0.033, respectively). Pain sensitivity, measured by rs2118181 8.51% * 3.17% 2.63% 1.35% algometry, was statistically higher in patients with Met/Met genotype than rs1036477 8.51% * 3.17% 2.63% 1.35% the patients with Val/Val and Val/Met genotypes (p=0.017). The results of rs10519177 17.02% * 7.81% 12.39% 6.97% *rs755251 17.02% 7.81% 12.39r%s21181816, .9r7s1%036477 this study suggest that COMT gene Val158Met polymorphism is positively p<0.05 associated with predisposition to develop FMS and play a relevant role in tSh.e S celizneirc:a Nl osynme. pOt.o Amtes so:f N thonee d. iNse. aKsaer.akus: None. A. Inanir: None. N. Bozkurt: It was associated with increased odds of DTA ( None. S. Inanir: None. S. Yigit: None. OR=6.8; 95 % CI 1.849-25.058, p=0.004; rs10519177, rs755251 OR=2.7; 95% CI 1.178-6.369, p=0.019). Summary. Our data draw attention to the pathogenetic link between spora- d Gic. JDaTrAie nane:d N aoonreti. cR p. aStehpoelotigeyn ein: NMoanref.a Gn .s Zyunkdorvoamse: .None. E. Juskaite: 
P01 .080 None. Z. Stanioniene: None. R. Benetis: None. V. Lesauskaite: None. Paternally inherited mutations in GNAS exons 1-13 lead to severe intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) N. Richard1, P. Rault-Guillaume1, A. Molin1, N. Coudray1, G. Abeguilé1, M. Decamp1,2, C. Colson1, I. Blanchard3, N. Gruchy1,2, H. Mittre1,2, M. Gerard1, H. Jüppner4, M. Kottler1,2; 
P01 .078 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Caen, France, 2UFR médecine, Université de Caen Assessment of the enrichment for rare coding variants in 16 cases of Basse Normandie, Caen, France, 3Université de Caen Basse Normandie, Caen, France, familial fibromuscular dysplasia 4Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. R. Kiando1,2, P. Plouin2,3, X. Jeunemaitre1,2,3, N. Bouatia-Naji1,2; GNAS 1INSERM UMR970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Center (PARCC), Paris, France, 2Paris Descartes University, Paris Cité Sorbonne, Paris, France, 3AP-HP Centre for Rare Vascular Diseases, Hopital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. Maternally inherited, heterozygous mutations in , the imprinted gene complex encoding the alpha-subunit of the stimulatory G protein (Gs), cause pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (PHP-Ia), a disorder characterized by resistance toward parathyroid horGmNoAnSe (PTH) and developmental defects Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is an arterial disease characterized by non- referred to as Albright’s Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO). When inherited atherosclerotic stenoses reported in renal (70%) and extra-cranial carotid paternally, the same heterozygous mutations lead to pseudo-pseudo- (30%) arteries. FMD predisposes to hypertension, renal ischemia and stro- hypoparathyroidism (PPHP), i.e. AHO features in the absence of hormonal ke. The causes of FMD are unknown and it occurs predominantly in females resistance. Subcutaneous ossifications (referred to as progressive osseous (age<50 years) with a prevalence of ~4/1000. Despite evidence for its inhe- heteroplasia (POH)) occur predominantly with paternally inherited mutati- ritance the genetics of FMD is under-investigated. The aim of this study is to ons. Recent studies suggested that paternal mutations are associated with assess the role of rare coding and putatively functional variants in the onset intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR). of familial FMD. Objectives: To confirm and extend earlier findings, we obtained birth weight Patients are five affected sib-pairs and two sib-trios (N=16; mean age=51yrs, (GWNA) Slength (L) and head circumference (HC) for patients, who had been dia- min=32; max=61) with confirmed multifocal “string-of-beads” FMD dia- gnosed with either PHP-Ia (n=26) or PPHP/POH (n=22), and are carrier of gnosed by angiography/scanner. Mean age diagnosis =44yrs (min=23; mutations on the maternal or paternal allele, respectively. W, L and HC max=57). Exome sequencing and variant calling was performed by Integra- parameters at birth were compared to the French reference charts for girls Gen® using Agilent’s capture Kit (V4) and Hiseq2000 (Illumina®). and boys; results were expressed as Z-scores for gestational age. We identified 4,311 confident (high calling-score and depth >8X) missense Results: The Z-scores for all three parameters at birth (Table) suggest that rare (MAF<0.02 in EVS and/or 1000G) variants predicted to be damaging mutations on the maternal allele affeGcNt iAnSt rauterine development to a lesser (PolyPhen2) in 3,414 genes. We performed a genomic burden test for highly mutated genes (>= 4 variants, N=45) and used the EVS data from ~4,300 extent than mutations on the paternal allele. GNAS Conclusion: Our cohort shows that mutations on the paternal allele uPnselected EuropPeans as controls. Fischer exact test revealed two genes si- can be responsible for severe IUGR in humans, indicating that paternal gnificantly- 8enriched for pu-7tatively causative variants at the genomic level transcripts play a major role in the normal feto-placental development. ( =4.9x10 and =7.1x10 ). We have demonPstrated previously important Table: Birth parameters (Z-scores) fibrosis and loss of extracellular matrix (ECM) at the media of FMD arteries. Weight (W) Lenght (L) Head Circumference (HC) Using less stringent significance threshold ( <0.01), we identified several Mean ± SEM (n) Mean ± SEM (n) Mean ± SEM (n) genes involved in ECM structure, cell shape and junction, which are intere- PHP-Ia (maternal -0.65 ± 0.25 (26) -1.14 ± 0.22 (23) -0.04 ± 0.29 (19) sting candidates for FMD. Validation of the identified variants both in stati- PPHP/POH (paternal -2.80 ± 0.24 (22) -2.34 ± 0.20 (20) -1.39 ± 0.23 (19) sRti.c Kalia annddo c: aNnodnied.a Pt.e P gleonueins: iNs ounned. eXr.w Jaeyu.nemaitre: None. N. Bouatia-Naji: pN. Richard: None. P. Rau<lt0-.G00u0il1laume: Non0e.0.0 A0.3 Molin: None. N0. .
C00 o0u9dray: None. None. G. Abeguilé: None. M. Decamp: None. C. Colson: None. I. Blanchard: None. N. Gruchy: None. H. Mittre: None. M. Gerard: None. H. Jüppner: None. M. Kottler: None. 
P01 .079 Clinical symptoms in fibromyalgia are associated to catechol-O- methyltransferase (COMT) gene Val158Met polymorphism 
P01 .081 S. Sezer1, O. Ates1, N. Karakus1, A. Inanir2, N. Bozkurt1, S. Inanir3, S. Yigit1; Genome-wide association analysis identifies a susceptibility locus for 1Gaziosmanpasa University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Tokat, pulmonary arterial hypertension Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa University Faculty of Medicine Department of Physical Therapy M. Eyries1,2,3, M. Germain4,3, D. Montani5,6, O. Poirier2,3, B. Girerd5,6, P. Dorfmuller6,7, and Rehabilitation, Tokat, Turkey, 3Gaziosmanpasa University Faculty of Medicine F. Coulet1, S. Nadaud2,3, S. Maugenre2,3, C. Guignabert7, W. Carpentier8, A. Vonk- Department of Psychiatry, Tokat, Turkey. Noordegraaf9, M. Levy10, A. Chaouat11, J. Lambert12, M. Bertrand13, A. Dupuy14, L. Leteneur15, M. Lathrop16, P. Amouyel17,12, T. De Ravel18, M. Delcroix19, E. Austin20, I. Robbins21, A. Hemnes21, J. Loyd21, E. Berman-Rosenzweig22, R. Barst22, W. Chung22, G. Simmoneau23,6, D. Tregouet4,3, M. Humbert5,6, F. Soubrier1,2,3; Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is a common chronic widespread pain syn- 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2UMR_
S956 , drome mainly affecting women. Genetic risk factors are known to contribute INSERM, Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 3ICAN, Institute for Cardiometabolism and to the etiology of the syndrome. The aim of this study was to explore the Nutrition, Paris, France, 4UMR_S 937, INSERM, Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 5Centre frequency and clinical significance of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) de Référence de l‘Hypertension Pulmonaire Sévère, Hôpital de Bicêtre, DHU thorax gene Val158Met polymorphism in a large cohort of Turkish patients with innovation, AP-HP, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 6Univ Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, FMS. The study included 379 patients with FMS and 290 healthy controls. France, 7UMR_
S999 , INSERM, LabEx LERMIT, Centre Chirurgical Marie Lannelongue, Genomic DNA was isolated and genotyped using polymerase chain reaction Le Plessis Robinson, France, 8Post-Genomic Platform 
P3 S, Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 9Department of Pulmonary Diseases, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, France, (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analyses for the 10Cardiac Surgery Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Univ Paris 05, AP-HP, COMT gene Val158Met polymorphism. The genotype frequencies of COMT Paris, France, 11Respiratory Disease Department, CHU Brabois, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, gene Val158Met polymorphism showed a small difference between FMS France, 12UMR_
S744 , INSERM, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille-Nord de patients and healthy controls (p = 0.047), however the Met/Met genotype France, Lille, France, 13UMR_
S708 , INSERM, Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 14UMR_
S888 , was significantly higher in FMS patients than healthy controls (p=0.016, OR: INSERM, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 15U897, INSERM, Univ Bordeaux, 1.64, 95% CI: 1.09-2.45). No difference was observed for allele frequencies ISPED, Bordeaux, France, 16Institut de Génomique, Centre National de Génotypage, between two groups (p=0.143). Stratification analysis according to clinical Commissariat à l‘Energie Atomique, Evry, France, 17CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 18Centre features for this disease reveals that weiEghStH, FGIQ 2sc0o1re3, a|l gPoAmRetIrSy, ( FprReAssNu-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 71ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index for Human Genetics, University Hospitals of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 19Catholic 
P01 .083 University of Leuven (KUL), Department of Pneumology, Gasthuisberg University A Molecular Genetic Study of Congenital Lymphedema Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 20Department of Pediatrics, Divisions of Pulmonary Allergy S. Melikhan Revzin1, E. Dagan2, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,3; and Immunology Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United 12The Bruce and Ruth Rappaport School of Medicine, Techn‏ion, Haifa, Israel, 2Dept of States, 21Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Nursing, Faculty of Welfare and Health Sciences, University of Haifa, Israel, Haifa, Israel, Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United 3Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, Haifa, Israel. Scientific Background: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare and devastating disease, re- Primary lymphedema results from a dysfunction of sulting from progressive obliteration of small caliber pulmonary arteries by the lymphatic system. F amilial lymphedema usually segregates as an auto- proliferating vascular cells, and leading to cardiac failure, with an untreated somal dominant trait, with only one case described in line with autosomal mean survival of less than three years. PAH can complicate other patholo- recessive transmission. Genetic studies of families with hereditary lym- gical conditions, or can occur in the context of genetic mutations causing phedema have yielded mutations in three lymphangiogentic genes: FLT4 heritable PAH, or can be considered as idiopathic (iPAH), which represents (VEGFR3), FOX
C2 , SOX18. Our research seeks to map and ultimately hunt approximately 40% of all PAH. Low penetrance dominant BMPR2 mutations the mutation that causes hereditary lymphedema in an extended consan- are found in ~80% of familial PAH (fPAH), and in ~15% of iPAH which are guineous Muslim family consisting of four affected individuals: one female, thereafter considered as heritable PAH. We conducted a Genome-Wide As- presenting with isolated edema of the lower extremities, and three males sociation Study (GWAS) based on two independent case-control studies for pMraetseernitainl ga nwdit hM leymthpohdesd:ema of the lower extremities, lymphocele and mild iPAH and fPAH (without BMPR2 mutations) totaling 625 patients and 1,525 mental retardation. healthy individuals, to identify novel genetic factors associated with iPAH After locating a candidate locus using whole ge- and fPAH (i/fPAH). A genome wide significant association was detected at nRoemsuel tlsin: kage analysis (Illumina CytoSN
P6000  array), Sanger sequencing of 18q22.3, the risk allele being associated with an odds ratio for i/fPAH of the candidate genes was preformed. 1.97 [1.59 - 2.45] (P = 7.47 x 10-10). We have shown by immunochemistry A candidate locus of 2.3 Mb located on chromosome 5q35.3 was and RT-PCR analysis that the closely mapping gene is expressed in the lung, identified, showing homozygosity in the affected individuals. This locus has particularly in pulmonary vascular endothelial cells. Furthermore, its ex- been previously linked to congenital lymphedema. Using SUPERLINK online, pression is increased in explanted lungs from PAH patients and in endotheli- linkage analysis generated a two-point LOD score of 3.18. Several mutations al cells cultured from explanted PAH lungs. Altogether, these results strongly in the candidate gene, FLT4, previously described in Muslim-Israeli families, suggest a role for this gene as a novel contributor to the physiopathology of were discarded as culprit using sequence analysis. While sequencing FLT4, i M/f.P EAyHri.es: None. M. Germain: None. D. Montani: None. O. Poirier: None. B. a missense mutation has been discovered in exon 28 (Ser1235Cys). Unlike Girerd: None. P. Dorfmuller: None. F. Coulet: None. S. Nadaud: None. S. other mutations previously described, this mutation is located outside the Maugenre: None. C. Guignabert: None. W. Carpentier: None. A. Vonk- Noordegraaf: None. M. Levy: None. A. Chaouat: None. J. Lambert: None. M. tyrosine-kinase domains, and has perfect segregation within the family. A Bertrand: None. A. Dupuy: None. L. Leteneur: None. M. Lathrop: None. P. population screen for the mutation was performed, with no carriers found Amouyel: None. T. De Ravel: None. M. Delcroix: None. E. Austin: None. I. in 100 Muslim Israeli-Arabs. Furthermore, a whole-exome analysis of an af- Robbins: None. A. Hemnes: None. J. Loyd: None. E. Berman-Rosenzweig: fected individual revealed no other mutations in lymphedema-related ge- None. R. Barst: None. W. Chung: None. G. Simmoneau: None. D. Tregouet: nSe.s M.elikhan Revzin: None. E. Dagan: None. R. Gershoni-Baruch: None. None. M. Humbert: None. F. Soubrier: None. 
P01 .084 
P01 .082 Pulmonary venooclusive disease and interstitial fibrosis in a female Clinical expression of Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia and with Myhre syndrome due to the common SMAD4 mutation: evidence digestive lesion characteristics in patients with SMAD4 mutation. for pathogenic mechanism. M. Bonjean1, S. Giraud2, E. Decullier3, J. Saurin4, P. Edery1, S. Dupuis-Girod1; P. Kannu1, N. Karp1, E. Cutz1, V. Cormier-Daire2, A. Hinek1; 1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Génétique et centre de référence sur la maladie 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Hôpital Necker Enfants Malade, Paris, de Rendu-Osler, Bron F-69677, France, 2Hospices Civils de Lyon, Laboratoire de France. biologie moléculaire, Hôpital E. Herriot, Lyon, F-69437, France, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, pôle IMER,, Lyon, F-69003, France, 4Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service d’Hépato- gastroentérologie, Hôpital E. Herriot,, Lyon, F-69437, France. Myhre syndrome (MS) is a rare connective tissue disease characterized by Backgrounds short stature, a peculiar body build, hearing loss, joint stiffness, brachydac- tyly, variable intellectual disability and characteristic skeletal and facial : Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an autoso- features. A common missense mutation in the MAD homology 2 domain of maEl NdGominant vascular disorder chAaCrVaRcLte1rized by epistaxis, telangiectasia SMAD4, a gene involved in TGF-β/BM
P2  signaling, was recently shown to be and arteriovenous malformations. MMoAstD oHf4 HHT cases result from mutations causative of the condition. The majority of previously reported individuals in (coding for endoglin) and (coding for activin receptorlike are males with only eight females described to date. We report on a female kinase 1). In addition, mutations in (encoding SMAD4) which cause patient with Myhre syndrome identified with the common SMAD4 hetero- a juvenile SpMolAyDpo 4sis /HHT overlap syndrome, have been described. Our aim zygous mutation who developed severe pulmonary venoocclusive disease Mwaest htoo ddsefine clinical expression of HHT and digestive leSsMioAnsD 4in HHT pati- and pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. This respiratory complication has been ents with mutation followed in the French reference center. previously reported only in a single male patient with Myhre syndrome. : Restrospective analysis of HHT patients with mutations. We performed in vitro studies on skin fibroblasts from the proband and CRuersauçlatso criterias were used for HHT diagnosis and Jass criteriaSsM fAorD j4uvenile identified a chain of molecular events triggered by the SMAD4 mutation. The polyposis. principal defect results in furin deficiency leading to a deficit of a functio- : 14 among 589 patients with identified mutation had muta- nal form of CD109, which in turn causes a decreased rate of TGF-β receptor tion (2.3%). Epistaxis and telangiectasia were present in 13 (93%) and 11 degradation. The latter results in an exaggerated response to normal levels (79%) patients respectively. Nine patients among 13 screened patients had of TGF-β1 and higher than normal production of fibrous components of ex- pulmonary arterioveinous malformations (PAVMs) (69%). Among them 4 tracellular matrix (elastin, collagen type 1 and fibronectin). We propose that had diffuse or multiple PAVMs associated with hypoxemia. Three patients this chain of events contributes to the development of the severe pulmonary, among 11 screened patients (27%) had severe hepatic AVM with high car- v Pa. sKcaunlanru a: nNdo ninet.e Nr.s tKitairapl :d Nisoenaes.e E i.n C Mutyzh: rNeo Snyen. dVr. oCmorem.ier-Daire: None. A. dCioancc oluutspiount. Among eleven SMAD4 patients who had digestive endoscopies: Hinek: None. 10 (91%) had digestive lesions. : In this study the digestive presentation in patients with SMAD4 mutations is not limited to juvenile polyposis. ThSeM HAHDT4 phenotype appeared 
P01 .085 to be more severe for hepatic and pulmonary arteriovenous malformati- Spherophakia and megalocornea in a German patient with LTB
P2  ons. This study confirms that any patient with mutation should be mutations screened for juvenile polyposis or digestive tract cancers as well as for HHT cMo.m Bpolnicjaetaino:n Ns.one. S. Giraud: None. E. Decullier: None. J. Saurin: None. P. T. M. Neuhann1, A. Stegerer1, M. Smitka2, E. Holinski-Feder1, N. Di Donato3; Edery: None. S. Dupuis-Girod: None. 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Institut für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 72 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Mutations in LTB
P2  have been originally identified as a cause of primary me-wide Human SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). congenital glaucoma; furthermore mutations were reported in megalocor- Results: We obtained suggestive associations for a total of 3 clusters in the nea, ectopia lentis and secondary glaucoma , in one patient with isolated Spanish group (RIM
S1 , BIC
C1 , and RAD51
L1 ), whereas one main region spherophakia, and most recently associated with features of Weill-Marche- was identified in the Han-Chinese population (ABI3BP). Five regions sho- sani syndrome . So far only homozygous mutations in patients from con- wed suggestive associations after meta-analysis: HLF, RAD51
L1 , CO
L24 A1, sanguineous and Gipsy families were reported. We report on a German boy GalNAc-T13, and FBX
L7 . Some of these genes are related with Ca++ channels with spherophakia and megalocornea (corneal diameter LE 14.5 mm; RE and cAMP signaling pathways. 14.5 mm) without other signs of connective tissue disease. Mutation ana- Conclusions: The associations described with genetic variants different lysis of LTB
P2  revealed two mutatios c.688delC; p.(Gln230Argfs*50) and from those related with the metabolism of the arachidonic acid open up new c.1610delC; p.(Pro537Leufs*20). Segregation analysis revealed the pres- potential pathways for understanding the mechanisms underlying NSAID- ence of one mutation in each parent. Thus, mutations in LTB
P2  should be iJn.dAu. cCeodr nAeUjAo-.Garcia: None. M. Lee: None. Y. Chen: None. N. Blanca-López: considered not only in patients with primary congenital glaucoma, but more None. I. Doña: None. M.J. Torres: None. C. Rondón: None. P. Campo: None. J.J. Laguna: None. J. Fernández: None. V. Godineau: None. P. Ayuso: importantly in patients with variable ocular phenotypes including megalo- None. M.C. Plaza-Serón: None. M. Gandolfo: None. A. Rosado: None. G. cornea, ectopia lentis, and (micro-) spherophakia, also, if extraocular fea- Canto: None. C. Mayorga: None. M. Blanca: None. t Tu.rMe.s N aerueh parnens:e nNto anne.d A r.e Sgatergdeleresrs: oNf otnhee. eMth. Snimc ibtkaac:k Ngroonuen. Ed.. Holinski-Feder: None. N. Di Donato: None. 
P01 .088 Copy number variants in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms 
P01 .086 D. F. Majoor-Krakauer1, K. M. van de Luijtgaarden2,3, H. J. M. Verhagen2, R. J. Stolker4, First description of a homozygous whole gene deletion of CO
L6 A1 G. C. M. Huijbrechts1, L. Koster1, A. M. Bertolli Aveda1, B. H. B. Berveloo1, L. J. C. M. van gene in a patient with Ullrich Congenital Muscular Dystrophy Zutven1; D. Wahl1,2, U. Heinrich1, C. Uebler3, I. Rost1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 2Medical Netherlands, 2Department of Vascular Surgery, Erasmus University Medical Center, Practice for Genetic Counselling and Psychotherapy, Augsburg, Germany, 3Josefinum Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Erasmus Univeristy Medical Children‘s Hospital, Augsburg, Germany. Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Anesthesiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Ullrich Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (UCMD; OMIM 254090) is a rare neuromuscular disease which is difficult to diagnose by the clinical phe- Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) are a major cause of morbidity and notype being mainly characterized by congenital muscle weakness as well mortality in the elderly and are characterized by extracellular matrix (ECM) as wasting and proximal joint contractures associated with severe distal degeneration, dysregulation of vascular smooth muscle (SMC) cells, inflam- joint laxity. We present a girl with congenital general muscular hypotonia - mation and atherosclerosis. In approximately 20% of cases abdominal an- suspected to be syndromic - failure to thrive due to sucking weakness, joint eurysm are familial (fAAA). The genes involved in fAAA have not been iden- laxity, and discrete dysmorphic features, who was seen by the genetic coun- tified sofar. The aim of the current study was to investigate if copy number sellor for the first time at the age of 4 months. She suffered from broncho- variants (CNV) may add in discovering pathofysiologic pathways and genes pneumonia at the age of 3 ½ months and showed a twofold elevated CK-MB involved in AAA formation. in the course of the laboratory evaluation. Since it was not possible to iden- AAA patients referred for genetic counseling in 2011 and 2012 were in- tify the cause of her symptoms during the counselling interview, array-CGH cluded. Patients were classified as familial when at least one first-degree was performed revealing three chromosomal imbalances - a heterozygous was reported to have an aortic aneurysm. Patients without a positive family duplication 5q35.3, a heterozygous duplication 16q12.2 and a homozygous history were classified as sporadic (spAAA). Microarray was performed in deletion 21q22.3. The deletion spans 56,94 kb of genomic DNA and contains the index patient and in case of a CNV, also affected relatives were analysed, the CO
L6 A1 gene, one of the three causative genes in UCMD. Array-CGH of when possible. the parents revealed both as carriers of the deletion 21q22.3 though con- Microarray was performed by using the Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 sanguinity was denied by the parents. This case demonstrates the possibili- and analysed using Nexus CopyNumber Discovery v6.1 software. Results ty to detect a recessive monogenic disease by array-CGH. To the best of our were evaluated using the UCSC Genome Browser March 2006, the Database knowledge this is the first case of UCMD due to a homozygous deletion of of Genomic Variants and an in-house database of controls. Inguinuity pa- CO
L6 A1. The causality of this deletion is very probable, because nonsense tRhewsauylt (sIPA) pathway analysis was performed of genes identified in rare CNV mutations leading to a lack of the CO
L6 A1 gene product have been already regions. d De.s Wcraibhel:d N aosn ae .r Uea. sHoenin froicr hU: CNMonDe.. C. Uebler: None. I. Rost: None. : The study population consisted of 77 index AAA patients; 62 were classified as fAAA and 15 as spAAA. We found 19 rare CNV variants in 14 (23%) of the fAAA patients and in one (7%) spAAA. The CNV’s and the ge- 
P01 .087 nes localized in the affected regions will be presented together with the IPA NSAIDs-induced acute urticaria/angioedema: Genome-wide p Da.tFh. wMaayjo aonr-aKlyrsaiksa.uer: None. K.M. van de Luijtgaarden: None. H.J.M. Verhagen: None. R.J. Stolker: None. G.C.M. Huijbrechts: None. L. Koster: association study in Spanish and Han-Chinese populations None. A.M. Bertolli Aveda: None. B.H.B. Berveloo: None. L.J.C.M. van Zutven: J. A. Cornejo-Garcia1, M. Lee2, Y. Chen3, N. Blanca-López4, I. Doña5, M. J. Torres5, C. None. Rondón5, P. Campo5, J. J. Laguna6, J. Fernández7, V. Godineau1, P. Ayuso4, M. C. Plaza- Serón1, M. Gandolfo8, A. Rosado9, G. Canto4, C. Mayorga1, M. Blanca5; 1Research Laboratory, UGC Allergy, Málaga General Hospital, Málaga, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
P01 .089 Academia Sinica, Taipei, Spain, 4Allergy Service, Infanta Leonor Hospital, Madrid, Twenty patients including 7 probands with autosomal dominant cutis Spain, 5UGC Allergy, Málaga General Hospital, Málaga, Spain, 6Allergy Service, Cruz Roja Central Hospital, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain, 7Allergy Service, Alicante Hospital, laxa confirm clinical and molecular homogeneity Alicante, Spain, Alicante, Spain, 8Allergy Service, Fuenlabrada Hospital, Madrid, Spain, B. Callewaert1, S. Hadj-Rabia2, E. Bourrat3, M. Kempers4, A. S. Plomp5, V. Layet6, M. 9Allergy Service, Alcorcón Foundation-Hospital, Madrid, Spain. Renard1, D. Bartholdi7, J. De Backer1, F. Malfait1, O. Vanakker1, P. J. Coucke1, A. De Paepe1, C. Bodemer2; 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, Ghent, Belgium, 2Service de Dermatologie, MAGEC, Hôpital Necker - Enfants Background: Acute urticaria/angioedema (AUA) induced by cross-intole- Malades, Paris, France, 3Service de Dermatologie, MAGEC Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, rance (CI) to NSAIDs is the most frequent clinical entity in hypersensitivity France, 4University Medical Center St. Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Academic reactions (HRs) to drugs. However, most of genetics studies in NSAIDs HRs Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Groupe Hospitalier Du Havre – Department of have been carried out in patients with aspirin-induced asthma, mainly in Medical Genetics, Le Havre, France, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Asian populations, and have followed the candidate gene approach. Zurich, Switzerland. Objective: We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in two ethnically different populations of Spanish and Han-Chinese patients suffe- ring from NSAIDs-induced AUA. Elastin gene mutations have been associated with a variety of phenotypes. Methods: We included a total of 232 cases (112 from Spain and 120 from Autosomal dominant cutis laxa (ADCL) is a rare disorder that presents with Taiwan) with NSAIDs-induced AUA, without airway involvement or under- typical facial characteristics, inguinal hernias, aortic root dilatation and pul- lying chronic urticaria, and 225 unrelated controls (124 from Spain and 101 monary emphysema. In most patients, frameshift mutations are found in the from Taiwan). Whole-genome scan was peE rS foH rmG e d2 u0 s1 in3 g A| fP fyA mR etI rS ix, ®F R GeA nN o-C
E3  |’ WregWionW o.fE tShHe eGla.sOtiRn Ggene (exons 30-34) which result in a C-termin7a3llyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index LMNA extended protein, though exceptions have been reported. age of 27 yearLsM. HNeA had the same characteristic build and was also homo- We clinically and molecularly characterized the thus far largest cohort of zygous for the R582H mutation in . Molecular diagnostics identified ADCL patients, consisting of 19 patients from six families and one sporadic heterozygous mutations in both parents, who were unaware of con- patient. sanguinity. The father had a mild lipodystrophy build without other disease Molecular analysis showed C-terminal frameshift mutations in exon 30, 32, characteristics; the motherL hMaNdA hypertension and hypercholesterolemia wi- and 34 of the elastin gene and identified a mutational hotspot in exon 32 thout the typical build. (c.2262delA). This cohort further confirms the previously reported clinical Conclusion:Homozygous mutLaMtioNnAs causing lipodystrophy show constellation of skin laxity (100%), inguinal hernia (51%), aortic root dila- slight intrafamilial variability in phenotype and do not seem to cause a more tation (55%) and emphysema (37%). sYe.vMe.r He opehdeenmoatyepkee rtsh:a Nno hneet. eLr.oPz.Vy.g Boeursg er: No nme.u Jta. tLiaonngse.ndonk: None. E. In conclusion, ADCL is a clinically and molecularly homogeneous disorder, Brusse: None. M. Michels: None. M. van Slegtenhorst: None. G. Mancini: None. Y. van Bever: None. but intra- and interfamilial variability in the severity of organ involvement needs to be taken into account. Regular cardiovascular and pulmonary eva- l Bua. tCioanlles waaree ritm: Npoenraet. iSve. Hina dthj-eR aclbiniai:c aNlo fnoell.o Ew. -Buopu orrfa tth: eNsoen pea. tMie. nKtesm. pers: None. A.S. Plomp: None. V. Layet: None. M. Renard: None. D. Bartholdi: 
P01 .092 None. J. De Backer: None. F. Malfait: None. O. Vanakker: None. P.J. Coucke: Loeys-Dietz syndrome caused by a TGFB2 mutation: further None. A. De Paepe: None. C. Bodemer: None. delineation of the phenotype S. Salemink1, M. Kempers1, D. Schepers2, L. van Laer2, B. Loeys1,2; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
P01 .090 Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. Severe Congenital Lipodystrophy and Progeroid Appearance: Mutation in the Penultimate Exon of FBN1 Causing a Recognizable Phenotype R. Kosaki1, T. Takenouchi2, K. Kosaki3; Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a rare autosomal dominant connective tissue 1Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and Development disorder which has many features in common with Marfan syndrome (MFS). Hospital, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of The disease is typically characterized by the triad of arterial tortuosity and Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of aneurysms, hypertelorism, and bifid uvula or cleft palate. In TmGoFsBtR c1a ses, LTDBS- Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan. iFsB cRa2usedS bMyA hDe3te.rozygous mutations in genes encoding positive effectors of TGFβ signaling, including the subunits of the TGFβ receptor and or Most recently, we showed that loss-of-function mutations Recently, three Marfanoid patients with congenital lipodystrophy and a neo- in the gene encoding the TGFβ2 ligand can also cause a phenotype within natal progeroid appearance were reported. Although their phenotype was the LDS spectrum. TGFB2 distinct from that of classic Marfan syndrome, they all had a truncating mu- Here we describe the phenotypic characteristics of a large family (n=9 affec- tation in the penultimate exon, i.e., exon 64, of FBN1, the causative gene for ted individuals) with a mutation (c.1097 C>A; p.Pro366His). Within Marfan syndrome. These cases might represent a new entity, but the exact this family we observe a variable clinical expression with near absent to phenotypic and genotypic spectrum remains unknown. Here, we report a severe cardiovascular involvement. The main clinical features shared with girl born prematurely who exhibited severe congenital lipodystrophy and MFS include aortic aneurysm, pectus deformity, arachnodactyly, scoliosis a neonatal progeroid appearance. The patient exhibited a peculiar growth and skin striae. Clinical features other than in MFS include hypertelorism, pattern consisting of an accelerated growth in height with a discrepant poor bifid uvula, biTcGuFspBiRd1 a, oTrGtFicB vRa2lv, eS,M aArtDe3r,i al tortuosity, cluTbG feFeBt2 a nd thin skin weight gain. She had a characteristic facial appearance with craniosynosto- with easy bruising. Ectopia lentis was not observed. Compared to LDS pa- sis. A mutation analysis identified c.8175_8182del8bp p.Arg2726Glufs*9 in tients with a patients with a mutation do exon 64 of the FBN1 gene. A review of similar, recently reported patients present rather mild aortic disease, more frequent mitral valve disease and revealed that the cardinal features of these patients includes 1) congenital iSn.c rSeaalesemdi nink:c iNdoennec.e M o.f K celumbp feerest:. None. D. Schepers: None. L. van Laer: lipodystrophy, 2) premature birth with an accelerated linear growth dispro- None. B. Loeys: None. portionate to the weight gain, and 3) a progeroid appearance with distinct facial features. Lines of molecular evidence suggested that this new proge- roid syndrome represents a neomorphic phenotype caused by truncated 
P01 .094 transcripts with an extremely charged protein motif that escapes from non- Coexistence of pathogenic mutations in APC and NF1 in the same sense-mediated mRNA decay, altering FBN1-TGF beta signaling, rather than patient. representing the severe end of the hypomorphic phenotype of the FBN1- C. Jimenez Criado; TGF beta disorder spectrum. We propose that this Marfanoid entity com- Centro de Investigacion del Cancer, Salamanca, Spain. prised of congenital lipodystrophy, a neonatal progeroid appearance, and a peculiar growth prolife and caused by rare mutations in the penultimate e Rx.o Kno osfa FkBi:N N1o nbee. nTe. wTalyke rneofeurcrheid: Ntoo naes .M Ka. rKfaonsaokidi:- pNroongee.roid syndrome. Neurofibromatosis type I is a rare genetic disorder that causes benign tu- mors on nerves and other skin and bone manifestations. NF1 gene muta- tions cause this disease. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare 
P01 .091 inherited disease characterized by the appearance of more than 100 colonic Homozygous LMNA lipodystrophy polyps. APC mutations are responsible of increased risk of FAP. Y. M. Hoedemaekers1,2, L. P. V. Berger2, J. Langendonk2, E. Brusse2, M. Michels2, M. van We report the case of a 20 years old woman with pink polypoid lesions asso- Slegtenhorst2, G. Mancini2, Y. van Bever2; ciated with a possible neurofibromatosis type I. The patient had a preventi- 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ve total colectomy due to maternal inherited, surgeries due to cysts and epi- Background: dermal Trichilemmal and a abdominal laparotomy due to a desmoid tumor. LMNA We analyzed DNA extracted from peripheral blood and from neurofibro- ma. The neurofibroma showed the presence of a pathogenic NF1 mutation Heterozygous mutations cause a broad spectrum of diseases such as (c.5418_5422delGGGC / p.Q1806QfsX) that produces a stop codon, resulting progeria, muscular dystrophies, dilated cardiomyopathy and lipodystrophy. in a truncated protein responsible of the disease. Moreover, analysis of APC Lipodystrophy is chaLrMacNtAerised by loss of subcutaneous fat from limbs and showed a second pathogenic mutation (c.3783_3785delTT/p.T1261TfsX) trunk and a tendency to insulin resistance, dyslipidemia and hypertension. that produces a stop codon in the position 1273. The resulting a truncated SMoe ftahro hdosm anozdy rgeosuusl ts: mutations causing lipodystrophy have not been protein is believed to cause increased risk of FAP. Neither of the two mutati- described. LMNA ons were described previously. Thus we present a case of a woman carrying a germline mutation in the APC We report the first two lipodystrophy patients with homozygous gene and a somatic mutation in the NF1 gene that could generate a somatic mutations. The index patient was referred under the suspicion of mosaic mosaicism and explain the presence of two hereditary diseases in the same Turner syndromeL.M SNhAe had hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. Her patient. build showed typical partial lipodystrophy and a homozygous mutation was Supported FIS PI 10/00219 identified in the gene (R582H). Subsequent cardiac and neurologic examinations were normal. The brother of the index patient was diagnosed w7it4h diabetes mellitus type I, hypertension and hyEpeSrHchGol e2s0te1ro3le |m PiaA aRt tIhSe, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .097 Familial presentation of Cartilage-Hair Hypoplasia (Metyaphyseal Pathogenic mutations chondrodysplasia Mckusick type) Sample APC study NF1 study A. M. Gómez Pastor, M. L. Quitanilla Mata, L. Sánchez Gancedo, M. L. González Moral, L. DNA from peripheral c.3783_3785delTT/p. No mutations Navarro Casado; blood T1261TfsX Servicio de Análisis Clínicos.Hospital General de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. c.3783_3785delTT/p. c.5418_5422delGGGC/ DCN. AJ ifmroemn etuz mCorriado: None. T1261TfsX p.Q1806QfsX INTRODUCTION: 
P01 .095 Cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH) is an autosomal recesive disorder affecting Neurofibromatosis type 1 gene mutation analysis using sequence the bone metaphyses, causing small stature from birth and sometimes in- capture and high throughput sequencing. mune deficiencies. The CHH-AD spectrum includes a range of phenotypes: E. Jokinen1, A. Hammais1, E. Palonen2, V. Mäkelä2, E. Jouhilahti1, A. Brandt2, J. Soini2, J. metaphyseal dyspRlMasRiaP without hypotrichosis (MDWH), CHH and anauxetic Peltonen1, S. Peltonen3; dCyAsSpEla:sia (AD) with the most pronounced skeletal phenotype. 1Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, Mutations in the gene are responsible for the disease. 2Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, Turku University of Applied Sciences, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Dermatology, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Proband 30 months old with short stature, low weight, blonde, fine silky Finland, Turku, Finland. hair, laxity of ligaments with hypermobility of joints and short thick tubu- Background: lar bones. Father diagnosed of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Schmid type NF1 (MCDS) in childhood. ProbandR´Ms mRPother has normal phenotype, but several Neurofibromatosis type 1 syndrome is caused by mutations maternal rReMlaRtiPves with clinical diagnosis of CHH. No evidence of consangui- in the gene. More than thousand pathogenic mutations have been pu- nity. SeqRuMenRcPe analysis of the showed the following results: bAliimshse:d. At present, diagnostic laboratories uNsFe1 traditional sequencing me- ProbandR: MRP c.70A>G (homozygous) thods, which often require fresh blood, or tissue sample. Father: c.70A>G and c.4C>T (compound heterozygous) The aim of this study is to develop an mutation analysis method Mother: c.70A>G (heterozygous) wMheitchho ddose:s not require invasive sampling and is performed with lower costs Genetic study was extended to the family of the mother. Neither of her two than the traditional methods. NF1 sisters was carrier of the mutation c.70A>G. but both of them were c.4C>T Genomic DNA (gDNA) of 16 NF1 patients was isolated from saliva (heterozygous). The molecular study of their parents showed that the mo- using saliva sampling (Oragene, DNA Genotek). exome with additional ther was compound heterozygous for mutations c.70A>G and c.4C>T and 50 nucleotides of flanking intronic sequences was captured and enriched had short stature. using SeqCap EZ Choice Library protocol (Roche Nimblegen). Captured DNA The father´s proband had normal hair and was diagnosed of MCDS. The wReassu sletqs:uenced with Roche/454 GS Junior system in two sample sets of dif- molecular study showed that the disease was in fact MDWH, which could ferent size (6 and 10 samples). explain the confusion in the diagnostic. The average coverage of targeted regions was 41x (10 samples) CHH-AD disorder has a high incidence in certains populations with consa- and 74x (6 samples). A putative mutation was discovered in 10 samples out guinity (Amish 1-2:1000). In this family there was no evidence of consangui- oCfo nthcelu tsoitoanl s1:6 . In addition, evidence of one known microdeletion was ob- n Ait.My .b Gutó mtheezy Pcaosmtoer f:r Noomn ea. sMm.La.l lQ vuililtaagneil loaf Mapatrao:x Nimonaete. lLy. 1
S0 á0n0ch0e izn hGaabnictaendtos:. served. None. M.L. González Moral: None. L. Navarro Casado: None. NF1 Our study provides proof of principle that the sequence cap- ture methodology combined with high-throughput sequencing is applicable to mutation analysis. The advantages include that saliva sampling is no- 
P01 .098 ninvasive and the samples can be sent to the laboratory via regular mail. The RAB33B is mutated in Smith-McCort Dysplasia limitations include that deep intronic mutations may be undetectable and N. Dupuis1,2, J. Masliah-Planchon3,1,2, S. Lebon1,2, S. Drunat3,1, L. M. Graul-Neumann4, P. change at the DNA level does not always predict the outcome at the mRNA Gressens1,2,5, V. El Ghouzzi1,2; o Er. pJrooktienienn l:e Nveolnse.. A. Hammais: None. E. Palonen: None. V. Mäkelä: None. E. 1Inserm U676, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Médecine Paris Diderot - Université Paris VII, Jouhilahti: None. A. Brandt: None. J. Soini: None. J. Peltonen: None. S. Paris, France, 3Genetic department_Robert-Debré hospital, Paris, France, 4Institute of Peltonen: None. Medical Genetics_Charité_Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 5Neurologie pédiatrique_Robert-Debré hospital, Paris, France. 
P01 .096 A Family With Basex-Dupré-Christol Syndrome with Persistent Milia Smith–McCort dysplasia (SMC) is a rare autosomal recessive skeletal dyspla- A. Kuskucu1, M. Ugras2, A. Vitrinel2; sia characterized by a short limbs and trunk dwarfism with a barrel-shaped 1Yeditepe University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, chest and specific radiological appearance. Skeletal features of SMC are Turkey, 2Yeditepe University School of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, identical to those of Dyggve–Melchior–Clausen syndroDmYeM (DMC) but with Turkey. normal intelligence and no microcephaly. SMC and DMC were shown to be allelic disordDeYrMs that both result from mutations in the gene, which en- codes the Golgi protein DYMECLIN. However, a few SMC patients remained Bazex-Dupré-Christol Syndrome (BDCS) is a rare X-linked dominant inheri- negative in mutation screening. ReceRnAtlBy,3 a3uBtozygosity mapping and ted genodermatosis with cancer predisposition, characterized by follicular exome sequencing in a large consanguineous SMC family have allowed the atrophoderma, congenital hypotrichosis, milia and basal cell malformati- identification of a missense mutation in the gene. This gene encodes ons. another Golgi protein which belongs to the large Rab family of small GTP- We present a three-generation family without a diagnosis until index case binding proteins involved in defined steps of vesicular trRanAsBp3o3rBt including was referred to our center from department of pediatrics. Index case was protein secretion and endocytosis. Here, we report a novel missense muta- nine months old boy and third child of the non-consanguineous parent. He tion in a SMC case that affects the GTP-binding domain of and leads has persistent milia and congenital hypotrichosis. He has two healthy brot- to a marked reduction of the protein. These data confirm the genetic hetero- hers. His mother and maternal aunt had milia until age 2. There is a family geneity of SMC RdAysBp3l3aBsi a and highlight the role of Golgi transport in the pa- history of congenital hypotrichosis, follicular atrophoderma and basal cell thogenesis o f SMC and DMC syndromes. Our results also raise the question carcinoma on his mother, maternal grandfather and grandaunt and mater- of whether the gen e woulDdY aMccount exclusively for SMC, suggesting nal cousins. The differential diagnosis of BDCS includes other hereditary that mentalretardation and microcephaly would be mainly associated with syndromes associated with the development of BCCs at early age, such as a complete loss-of functionof the gene. Analyses in additional cases of basal cell nevus syndrome, Rombo syndrome, Oley syndrome and Xeroder- S NM. CD uapnudi sD:M NCo nsey.n Jd. rMoamselisa har-Pe lnanocwh orenq: uNiorende. t So. aLnesbwoenr: tNhoins eq.u Se.s Dtirounn.at: ma pigmentosum. None. L.M. Graul-Neumann: None. P. Gressens: None. V. El Ghouzzi: None. Based on the clinical findings of index case, family history and inheritance pattern we diagnosed the family as BDCS. To the best of our knowledge, about 20 families referred to as BDCS and this is the third family from Tur- kAe.y K wuistkhu BcDu:C NS.one. M. Ugras: None. A. Vitrinel: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 75ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .099 Mutations in CO
L2 A1 in a Brazilian cohort of patients with typical phenotypes of the type 2 collagenoapthie spectrum fiber calcification and fragmentation, resulting from ABC
C6  mutations. Re- K. C. Silveira1, L. C. Bonadia1, C. A. Moreno1, C. Steiner1, M. T. V. Sanseverino2, E. Mattos2, cently, upregulation of the pro-osteogenic BM
P2 -RUNX2 pathway was de- D. R. Bertola3, G. Yamamoto3, A. A. L. Jorge3, D. P. Cavalcanti1; monstrated in patients. Also, recent reports on vascular malformations in 1Universidade de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do patients suggested a possible developmental role for ABC
C6 . Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Methods and results. We used 4 zebrafish (ZF) models, targeting each of 3 CO
L2 A1 abcc6 isoforms and a combined knock-down, to assess the developmental phenotype, mineralization and mineralization-associated pathways. In-situ Heterozygous mutations in can produce different phenotypes, but Hybridisation demonstrated all isoforms to be mainly expressed in the pro- with the same pattern known as type-2 collagenopathies. Although the clini- nephric ducts. Abcc6 knock-down was obtained by injecting translational cal-radiological pattern is recognizable, the correlation genotype-phenotype blocking or splice junction morpholinos in 1-4 cell stage embryos. Morphants still needs additional studies. In order to better understand the molecular exhibited a delay in gastrulation. At 3 days post fertilization (dpf), curving basis of type-2 collagenopathies the aim of this investigation was to study and shortening of the tail, variable in severity, pericardial edema, decreased a cohort of patients with suggestive phenotype of type-2 collagenopathies. mobility, total body length and body pigmentation as well as underdevelop- The most phenotypes of the 2 collagCeOnL 2spAe1ctrum are represented in the 13 ment of head and eyes were observed. Cardiovascular evaluation, using MO patients here reported. Molecular analysis was performed by direct sequen- injection on Fli:gfp embryos demonstrated the development of a rudimen- cing of the known hot spots of the according to the phenotype. So tary tubular heart compared to controls, contributing to early demise of the far four new mutations have been found - two point mutations (c.1438G>C morphants. Further, underdevelopment and delayed sprouting of multiple - p.G480A, c.1546G>A - p.G516S) associated with SEDC, a T-to-G transver- vessels was noted. Calcein staining of the morphants (5dpf) showed advan- sion (p.
C1315 G) in a patient with Torrance dysplasia (TD), and a deletion ced skeletal mineralization compared to controls. QPCR analysis revealed (4387_4389delATT - Ile1463del) also associated with TD. These last two upregulation of BM
P2 a, RUNX2a and MSXc. mutations are placed in the C-propeptide domain. In addition, six previously Conclusion. We illustrate a distinct phenotype, affecting longitudinal grow- described mutations were found, two transitions with a glycine substitution th, eye and cardiovascular development. The cardiovascular underdevelop- in the triple helix domain [SEDC and ACGII], three identical C-to-T transiti- ment in the morphants corroborate the hypothesis that ABC
C6  may also ons - p.R989C associated with SEMD phenotype, also called Strudwick dys- have an embryological role. Advanced mineralization and confirmation of plasia, and a deletion (g.899_924+2del) in a patient with Kniest dysplasia BM
P2 -RUNX2 involvement suggest that ZF is a useful model organism for (CKODL)2.A F1inally, for three cases (KD, Hypochondrogenesis, aCnOdL 
S2 EAD1C) no muta- fMur.Jth. eHro PsXenE: cNeolln sei.g An.a Wlliinllga errets: eNaornche.. P.J. Coucke: None. A. De Paepe: tions were found on the respective hot spots and the complete sequencing of None. O.M. Vanakker: None. is ongoing. In conclusion, four new mutations in were found contributing to a better understanding about the type-2 collagenopathies spectrum. 
P01 .102 Supported by grants of CNPq (402008/2010-3, 590148/2011-7), Two unusual manifestations in Sturge-Weber Syndrome: ipsilateral C KA.CP.E SSi (lv0e2irpa0: 5N0o3n2e/. 2
L0 .
C1 .0 B) oannadd FiaA:P NEoSnPe .( 9
C8 .A/.1 M60o0re6n-o6:) None. C. Steiner: retinal vascular anomalies and cerebellum calcifications None. M.T.V. Sanseverino: None. E. Mattos: None. D.R. Bertola: None. G. C. M. Jurca1,2, K. Kozma1,2, D. Bembea1, A. Jurca1, C. Cladovan1,2, I. Drăgan2, M. Bembea1,2; Yamamoto: None. A.A.L. Jorge: None. D.P. Cavalcanti: None. 1University from Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2Municipal Clinical Hospital ”dr. G. Curteanu”, Oradea, Romania. Introduction 
P01 .100 Lysosomal Cathepsin A deficient mouse model shows altered . Sturge-Weber syndrome is a rare genetic disorder (frequen- vasoactive peptid Endothelin I (ET-1) level in serum and organs cy 1:50,000 newborns) with unknown etiology. Also called encephalotrige- V. Seyrantepe, M. Delman, Z. Timur, S. Akyildiz, S. Ozturk; minal angiomatosis, it is characterized by fOacbiajel chteivmea. ngioma (Porto wine Izmir Institute of Technology, İzmir, Turkey. stain) extending to the supraorbital region and associated with eye abnor- malities and leptomeningeal angiomMateotshiso. ds To preRseesnutl tas case of Sturge-Weber syndrome associated with unusual retinal vascular abnorma- Cathepsin A is lysosomal enzyme that makes complex with α-neuraminidase lities and cerebellum calcifications. . Case report. . A 12- and β-galactosidase. It has also carboxypeptidase activity catalyzing the hy- year-old girl who presented at birth with a hemangioma extending from the drolysis of C-terminal peptide bond, potentially affects vasoactive peptide left hemiface, including over- and periorbital regions, to the neck, ear, cheek, actions in normal and pathological conditions. In order to elucidate the bio- lower lip and chin. Ophthalmologic examination showed anomalies exclu- logical function of Cathepsin A in vivo, previously we generated knock-in sive to the left eye: secondary glaucoma and fundus vascular anomalies: mouse model with catalytically inactive Cathepsin A protein. We showed tortuous andC odnilcaltuesdi ovneins, arteries „in vortex“ around veins and pseudo- that Cathepsin A-/- mice have significantly increased arterial blood pressu- neovascularisation. CT revealed multiples calcifications in the ipsilateral re and higher level of ET-1 secreted from cultured brain cells. In this work cerebellum. . The case presented shows two unusual manifesta- we present our further study of ET-1 levels from serum and four organs in- tions of Sturge-Weber syndrome: ipsilateral retinal vascular anomalies and cluding lung, kidney, liver and brain of 3 and 6-months old male Cathepsin mCu.Mlt.i pJuler ccaa:l cNifoicnaet. iKon. Ks oinz mthae: iNposnilea.t eDr. aBl ecmerbeebae:l lNuomn.e. A. Jurca: None. C. A-/- mice (n=6-7) and age matched wild-type mice (n=7). Our ELISA data Cladovan: None. I. Drăgan: None. M. Bembea: None. shows that ET-1 level is slightly higher in liver and brain tissues of 3 months as well as in kidney and brain tissues of 6 months old Cathepsin A-/- mice compared to wild-type mice. Interestingly, although there is no difference in 
P01 .103 the serum ET-1 level between 3 and 6 months old wild type mice, five times Association of hereditary thrombocytosis and transverse limb lower ET-1 level in serum of 6-months compared to 3-months old Cathepsin deficiency in three independent families with THPO mutations A-/- mice may suggest the contribution of other carboxypeptidases such as C. Graziano1, M. David2, C. Stockklausner3, P. Magini1, J. Baptista1, M. Romagnoli1, T. homologous Scpep1 for the degradation of ET-1 in aging mice. The detailed Pippucci1, A. Kulozik3, A. Superti-Furga4, M. Seri1; analysis of other vasoactive peptides including substance P in different or- 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Division of Hematology-Oncology, CHU Sainte- gans of CathepsinA-/- mice will be valuable to understand better the phy- Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and silogical role of Cathepsin A in the modulation of vasoactive peptides and Immunology, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), c Vo.m Speylerxa nptreopcee:s Nseosn er.e Mgu. lDaetilnmga bnl:o Noodn per. eZs. sTuirmeu.r: None. S. Akyildiz: None. S. Lausanne, Switzerland. Ozturk: None. Hereditary thrombocytosis, usually inherited as a dominant trait, can be caused either by heterozygous mutations in the thrombopoietin gene 
P01 .101 (THPO) or by heterozygous mutations in the THPO receptor MPL. Germline Comprehensive characterization of a zebrafish model for mutations in THPO identified so far affect the 5’-UTR and remove the ORFs pseudoxanthoma elasticum role reveals a role for the abcc6 upstream of the regular translation start, which have an inhibitory effect on transporter in cardiovascular development translation. As a consequence, the mutations result in increased translation M. J. Hosen, A. Willaert, P. J. Coucke, A. De Paepe, O. M. Vanakker; Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. of the THPO m-RNA and overproduction of platelets. Vascular disruption is believed to be the most common cause of unilateral limb deficiency, usually a sporadic birth defect. We describe three families B7ac6kground. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) isE S chH arG ac t2 e0 ri1 ze3 d | b P y A elR asI tS ic, FRwAhNereC tEh r|o WmbWocWyto.EsiSs HcaGus.eOd RbyG a dominant THPO mutation is associatedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index with unilateral transverse limb defects in multiple affected family members. mutations in a total of 80 unselected Japanese index cases with theE sNuGspec- We hypothesize an involvement of THPO signaling in embryo vasculature ted diagnosiAsC oVf RHLH1T . Mutation analysis was performed using direct sequen- development, since THPO was identified as a critical factor for the prolifera- cing of exonic regions and gene dosage analysis with MLPASM pAroDb4es. mu- tion of the hemangioblast, the embryonic progenitor of hematopoietic and tations and mutations were identified in 47 cases (59%) and 23 ca- endothelial lineages. THPO excess may thus alter vasculogenesis, conferring ses (29%), respectively. Two cases were associated with mutations, predisposition to vascular disruptions. and 1 caEsNeG was caused by a mutation in the other TGFβ signaling molecule. We speculate that this could be possible on a specific genetic background, In total, disease causing mutations were identified in 73 index cases (91%). since the same pathogenetic mechanism (THPO overproduction) is obser- 6A6CV%R oLf1 mutations were predicted to cause premature termination with ved in large families with isolated thrombocytosis. This speaks against a nonsense, frameshift, or out-of -frame deletion mutations, while 65% of simple direct relationship between the THPO mutation and the limb defects mutations were missense or in-frame deletion mutations. Families and suggests the necessity of an additional common genetic variant in the study added another 46 mutation-positive cases and genotype-phenotype determination of limb defects. In order to address this issue, we are under- correlation analysis was performed in a total of 119 genetically defined HHT taking NGS analysis to compare family members with thrombocytosis only patientsE. NPuGlmonary arteriovenous mAaClVfoRrLm1ation (PAVF) and cerebral arte- a Cn.d G trhaozsiaen wo:i tNho tnher.o Mm. bDoacvyitdo:s Niso pnelu. sC l.i mStbo cdkekfliacuiesnnceyr.: None. P. Magini: riovenous malformation (CAVF) were observed significantly more frequent- None. J. Baptista: None. M. Romagnoli: None. T. Pippucci: None. A. Kulozik: ly with mutation carriers than ACVR m
L1 utation carriers (PAVF: 85% None. A. Superti-Furga: None. M. Seri: None. vs. 30%; CAVF: 33% vs. 11%), while hepatic arteriovenous malformation was significantly more common among mutation carriers (11% vs. 45%). This is the first and largest Japanese national study with genetically 
P01 .104 dHe.f iMnoerdis HaHkiT: .None. M. Komiyama: None. O. Yamada: None. K. Osuga: None. T. Some novel CO
L3 A1 mutations with unexpected clinical phenotypes. Morisaki: None. F. M. Pope1, N. Ghali1, N. Burrows2, A. Shugar3, P. Kannu4, R. Pollitt5, M. Nesbitt6, P. Sawle1, D. Ferguson7, G. Sobey8, A. Vandersteen1; 1UK National EDS Clinic, Harrow, United Kingdom, 2Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
P01 .106 Foundation Trust, Dept. Dermatology, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3The Hospital for Sick Children, Division of Clinical & Metabolic Genetics, Toronto, Canada., ON, Canada, Development of a novel Col3a1 transgenic mouse model for vascular 4The Hospital for Sick Children, Division of Clinical & Metabolic Genetics., Toronto, Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Canada, ON, Canada, 5Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Y. Kang1, B. Guillemyn1, S. Symoens1, W. Toussaint2, L. Vanhoutte2, M. Renard1, J. De Kingdom, 6Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation Trust,, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 75) Backer1, F. Branco-Madeira2, S. Janssens2, R. De Rijcke2, P. Segers3, P. Coucke1, F. Malfait1, Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe B. Lambrecht2, A. De Paepe1; Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 8UK National EDS Clinic, Sheffield, United Kingdom. 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, VIB, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department IBITech-MEDISIP-INFINITY-GROUP-ID Consortium, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. CO
L3 A1 mutations commonly cause obvious vascular EDS phenotypes; cutaneous thinning, vascular fragility and rupture, especially of large and medium sized arteries. Dermal histology, (light and electron microscopy), Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a dominantly inherited connec- shows characteristic changes in collagen morphology, Collagen protein ana- tive tissue disorder, characterized CbOy Lt3hAin1, translucent skin, easy bruising, lysis from cultured skin fibroblasts may show procollagen and collagen type typical facies and arterial/intestinal/uterine fragility and ruptures. Defects III deficiency. CO
L3 A1 gene sequencing identifies helical glycine missense in type III pCroolc3oall1agen (encoded by ) underlie vEDS and mostly com- substitutions, exon skips or rare variably sized CO
L3 A1 deletions. Here we prise glycine-substitutions in the collagen triple-helical domain. While cur- describe five patients with unusual clinical phenotypes and novel CO
L3 A1 rently two -/- mice models have been generated, no mouse model is mutations. Case 1 with a CO
L3 A1 substitution, c.1771G>C, p.(Gly591Arg) available foCro tl3hae1 typical glycine-substitutions. had an unexpectedly mild clinical course, having ruptured her aorta at We generaCteodl3 aa 1transgenic mouse model harboring the p.Gly183Ser-sub- age 42, during a femoral embolectomy; she has survived for 25 years with stitution C(ol3a1 -c.547G>A), which was identified in several vEDS pati- no further complications. Case 2 with glycine substitution c.3256G>T, ents. Five -transgenic mouse lines were produced, each harboring p.(Gly1086Cys) had infantile talipes equinovarus and features consistent different -transgene copies, of which line 1 mice carried the highest with BHS/EDS III. A routine colonoscopy perforated his sigmoid colon, transgene-copy number. Line 1 mice had a decreased pre-weaning survival subsequent imaging showed an asymptomatic iliac artery aneurysm. Case in comparison to WT-mice (p-value<0.05) and male mice were smaller at 3 with an X position mutation c.2044G>A, p.(Glu582Lys) presented with age 12- and 16-weeks when compared to WT-mice (12 and 16.2%, respec- spontaneous oesophageal rupture at age 43 and generalised external fea- tively). Additionally, line 1 transgenic males displayed a fragile, thin skin tures consistent with Classical EDS. Electron microscopy showed no colla- and spontaneously developed severe transdermal wounds progressing from gen rosettes, collagen V gene sequencing was normal. The CO
L3 A1 mutation the shoulder area to the abdomen. Tensile strength measurements demon- segregates in a large autosomal dominant pedigree, with occasional intesti- strated that the mechanical properties (e.g. maximum load, extensibility, nal fragility. Case 4 has a splice donor site mutation c.(1923+2_1923+5del); stiffness, relative failure energy) of the skin and aorta were significantly his childhood clinical features resembled Classical EDS. Later, he perforated decreased, thereby confirming the observed fragility when handling both a diverticulum at age 19, eventually requiring a total colectomy. Case 5 with tissues. Ultrastructural data of the dermis showed a disorganised aspect of an X position mutation c.2513C>T, p.(Pro838Leu) presented with bilateral cFa.Mro.t Pido apret:e Nryo ndei.s sNe. cGtihoanl ia: nNdo nfeea. tNu.r Besu rcroonwssis: tNeonnt ew. iAth. S BhHuSg/aEr:D NSo InIIe.. P. the extracellular matrix and an increased variability in collagen fibril diame- Kannu: None. R. Pollitt: None. M. Nesbitt: None. P. Sawle: None. D. Ferguson: ter, which demonstrates disturbed collagen fibrillogenesis. Dilatation of the None. G. Sobey: None. A. Vandersteen: None. endoplasmic reticulum of dermal fibroblasts waCso la3lsao1 seen, which implies the involvement of ER-stress in the observed phenotype. In conclusion, the phenotype of this transgenic -mouse model faith- f Yu.l lKya rnegc:a pNiotnuela. tBe.s G thuailtle omf yhnu:m Naonn ev.E SD.S S.ymoens: None. W. Toussaint: 
P01 .105 None. L. Vanhoutte: None. M. Renard: None. J. De Backer: None. F. Branco- Mutation analysis of TGFβ pathway genes in Hereditary Hemorrhagic Madeira: None. S. Janssens: None. R. De Rijcke: None. P. Segers: None. P. Telangiectasia patients in Japan: Genotype-phenotype correlations in Coucke: None. F. Malfait: None. B. Lambrecht: None. A. De Paepe: None. 119 cases H. Morisaki1, M. Komiyama2, O. Yamada3, K. Osuga4, T. Morisaki1,5; 1National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita, Japan, 2Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 3National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, 
P01 .107 Suita, Japan, 4Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan, 5Osaka Emotional reactions to genetic testing for vascular Ehlers-Danlos University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suita, Japan. Syndrome in young adults K. Lahlou-Laforet1,2, J. Albuisson2,3, J. M. Mazzella2, X. Jeunemaitre2,3, M. Franck2, S. M. Consoli1,3; 1C-L Psychiatry Department, PARIS, France, 2Centre de Référence des Maladies Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT) is an autosomal dominant Vasculaires Rares - HEGP, Paris, France, 3Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Paris, disease characterized by recurrent epEisNtGaxis, mucocutaneous telangiec- France. tasAiaC VanRdL 1visceral arteriovenous malfoSrMmAaDti4ons. The majority of cases are Introduction and Objectives: caused by mutations in either endoglin ( ) or activin receptor-like kinase 1 ( ) gene, while mutations in are seen in patients with the Vascular Ehlers-Danlos (vEDS) syndrome is a combined syndrome of juvenile polyposEisS aHndG H 2H0T.1 W3e |h PavAeR scISre,e FneRdA foNr CE r | a rW e aW ndW au.E toS soH mG al. O doR mG inant arterial disease. The occurrence of organ 7ru7p-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .109 Exome sequencing in a family presenting with an unclassified tures in young adults reduces life-expectancy. Thus genetic testing for vEDS autosomal-recessive childhood vasculitis/stroke syndrome may have an important psychological impact. Our study aimed to evaluate E. Tilch1, B. Schormair1,2, I. Voth2, T. Wieland1, E. Graf1, J. U. Walther3, T. M. Strom1,4, T. tPhoep uelmatoiotino naanld c oMnestehqoudes:n ces of a positive genetic testing and to compare Meitinger1,4, J. Winkelmann1,4,2; emotional reactions according to sex. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, This study included consecutive patients with a 2Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Kinderklinik und Kinderpoliklinik im Dr. v. Haunerschen Kinderspital, positive CO
L3 A1 mutation diagnosed in our centre between 2003 and 2012. Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet Muenchen, Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Human Our multidisciplinary testing procedure included a systematic psychiatric Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. visit after the announcement of the molecular diagnosis. Psychiatric minu- tes were retrospectively reviewed for type of emotional reaction (adapted, trivialization, depression) and nature of the predominant preoccupation We present a family from Southern Germany with an autosomal-recessive (Rtersaunlstsm: ission to offspring; limitation of physical activities; other preoccu- vasculitis of unknown aetiology resulting in multiple strokes with onset at pation). childhood as the cardinal symptom. The index case had recurrent ischemias Thirty-eight patients aged 18 to 40 years (n=26 females) were inclu- at the age of two and nine years, accompanied by fever and skin alterations. ded in the study. Predominant reaction to diagnosis was depression, n=17 Two brothers and one sister are also affected to varying degrees of severity, (45%), especially for women: n=16 (62%) vs. n=1(8.3%) in men. Antide- whereas one sister as well as both parents don’t show any symptoms. Known pressive therapy was necessary in n=11 (29%) patients. Trivialization was causes of early-onset stroke/vasculitides were excluded based on extensive observed in n=7(19%) patients: 7/12 men vs. 0/26 women (p<0.001). Risk clinical evaluation and laboratory tests. We performed exome sequencing of transmission was the first preoccupation in 19/26 women and 2/12 men, in the index case using Agilent SureSelect AllExome-Kit for enrichment and fCoolnlocwluesdio nbsy: limitation of physical activity, expressed by 5/12 men vs. 0/26 Illumina 100bp-paired-end-reads for sequencing. A total of 10.8Gb of se- women (p<0.001). Depression and risk of transmission were associated. quence were generated with 92% of the target sequence covered ≥20x. For Diagnosis of vEDS is associated with a high rate of depression. candidate variant identification, we analysed homozygous and compound Emotional reactions significantly differed between genders. These findings heterozygous missense, nonsense, splice-site, stoploss and frameshift vari- emphasize the necessity of multidisciplinary management of vEDs genetic ants. We excluded variants present in dbSN
P135 , the 1000genomes data, testing, and the adaptation of psychological support to each gender’s coping the ESP dataset, and an in-house exome-database with MAF>2%. Thereby, m Ke. cLhaahnloisum-la.foret: None. J. Albuisson: None. J.M. Mazzella: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. M. Franck: None. S.M. Consoli: None. we aimed to investigate for both private and combinations of private and rare variants with putative disease-causing compound heterozygous state. We found no private or rare (MAF<2%) variants in knownZ sNtrFo2k5e9 or vascu- litis risk genes. Our approach identified 24 genes with variants whicChE wCeRr1e 
P01 .108 tested for co-segregation in the family. Top candidates are , possibly Natural course of pregnancy and delivery in vascular Ehlers-Danlos affecting Lp-PLA2-levels and thus vascular inflammation, as well as , syndrome: a retrospective study of 37 patients and 81 pregnancies. encoding an adenosine-deaminase-related growth factor that stimulates M. Frank1, L. Golmard2, A. Cordier3, J. Albuisson2,4, J. Mazzella2, H. Plauchu5, P. Khau Van macrophage proliferation. Additional cases with a similar phenotype are Kien6, E. Messas1,4, A. Benachi3, X. Jeunemaître1,2,4; nEe.e Tdilecdh :in N oorndee. rB t. oS ccohnofrimrmai rt:h Ne otnrue.e I .c aVuostha:l Nvaorniea.n Tt.s Wini etlhainsd f:a mNoilnye.. E. 1National Referral Centre for Rare Vascular Diseases, HEGP, APHP, Paris, France, Graf: None. J.U. Walther: None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. J. 2Department of Genetics, HEGP, APHP, Paris, France, 3Department of Obstetrics, Winkelmann: None. Hôpital A. Béclère, APHP, Clamart, France, 4University Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 5Department of Genetics, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu,, Lyon, France, 6Clinical Cytology and Cytogenetic Laboratory, CHU Nîmes, Nîmes, France. Background: 
P01 .110 Retinopathy in HbSS and HbSC genotypes from sickle cell disease and Pregnancy in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is at relationship with the -308G/A polymorphism in the TNFA gene Ohibgjhe rcitsikve o:f maternal death. There is still limited data however on the natu- L. S. Torres1, E. Belini-Junior1, J. V. Okumura1, W. M. Barberino1, R. G. Oliveira1, V. U. ral course of pregnancy and the peri-partum period in the course of vEDS. Teixeira1, D. G. H. Silva1, C. L. C. Lobo2, C. R. Bonini-Domingos1; Methods: To assess obstetrical events in genetically proven vEDS patients 1UNESP - Sao Paulo State University, Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2HEMORIO - Institute of Hematology Arthur de Siqueira Cavalcanti, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. followed in a single French referral centre. vEDS patients with a history of pregnancy were interviewed and standardized data on number and course of pregnancies, type of birth, anae- sRtehseusliats a:nd on events during pregnancy and the peri-partum period were Sickle cell disease (SCD) is among the most common genetic complicati- collected. ons in the world. The more frequents genotypes are homozygous (HbSS) A total of 37 patients with at least one pregnancy were included and double heterozygous HbSC. Ocular manifestations are long term com- in the study. Eighty pregnancies dividing into 57 life-born infants, 2 still- plications of the SCD and mainly affect the SC individual, due to increased born, 12 spontaneous and 1 therapeutic abortions, 7 voluntary terminati- blood viscosity, besides possible inflammatory role in this process. The aim ons and 1 ectopic pregnancy, were identified. Median age at delivery and of this study was to determine the occurrence of retinopathy in HbSS and at molecular diagnosis was 27[24-30] and 38[29-44] years, respectively. HbSC Brazilians patients and to relate this clinical event with the polymor- Diagnosis was known in 9(24%) patients at the time of delivery. One fatal phism -308G/A in the gene encoding pro-inflammatory protein TNF-α (tu- and 1(1.7%) non-fatal arterial event occurred. Non arterial, vEDS-related mor necrosis factor-alpha). We evaluated 30T3N SFCAD patients from Brazilian complications (colon (1), bladder (1), uterine (2) and mitral papillary mus- southeast region. The genotypes for the SCD were confirmed bCyh ic-lassical cle (1) ruptures) occurred in 6(10.2%) deliveries. Course of pregnancy was tests and m Roalteicoular analysis. The -308G/A ( ) polymorphism was per- marked by an increase in prevalence of premature rupture of membranes formed by PCR-RFLP. Statistical analysis was conducted by the Square (20%) and preterm labour (37%). Vaginal deliveries (61%) were associated and Odds (OR) tests. 263 samples corresponded to HbSS patients with high-grade perineal tears (50%), and caesarean-sections with severe and 40 to HbSC. The retinopathies occurrence was higher in HbSC patients, hCaoenmcloursrihoang:e s (29%; p=0.003). Epidural anaesthesia (63%) when perfor- with 33.3%T NaFgAainst 5.2% in HbSS group (p<0.05). The HbSC genotype was med remained uneventful. associated with retinopathy risk (OR=6.4;2.6≤CI95%≤15.9). The allele A Pregnancy and the post-partum period in vEDS patients are (-308G/A- ) was more frequent in patients witThN rFeAtinopathy in both not only marked by maternal death, but also by severe maternal morbidity, groups: HbSS (10.71% against 3.38%; p=0.02) and HbSC (40.0% against r Meg. aFrrdalneks:s N oof ntey.p Le. oGf odlemliavredr:y N.one. A. Cordier: None. J. Albuisson: None. J. 22.8%; p=0.4). Risk factor of the allele A (-308G/A- ) in the retinopa- Mazzella: None. H. Plauchu: None. P. Khau Van Kien: None. E. Messas: thy in HbSS group was OR=T3N.4F3A (1.1≤CI95%≤10.6). These results confirm None. A. Benachi: None. X. Jeunemaître: None. the prevalence of ocular manifestations in HbSC patients and suggest some effect of allele A (-308G/A- ) in the retinopathy process, probably due its elevated ability to increase cell adhesion through the recruitment of in- f Lla.Sm. mToartroersy: mNoondeu. lEat. oBresl,i ncoi-nJutrnibiourt:i Nngo nteo. vJa.Vso. O-okcucmluusrivae: Nevoenne.t sW..M. Barberino: None. R.G. Oliveira: None. V.U. Teixeira: None. D.G.H. Silva: None. C.L.C. Lobo: None. C.R. Bonini-Domingos: None. 78 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .111 
P01 .113 Maternal mortality in Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome patients : A complex rearrangement of the OCA2 gene in two unrelated albino retrospective analysis of 40 french families patients J. Mazzella, D. Molière, E. Messas, T. Mirault, X. Jeunemaitre, M. Frank; F. Morice-Picard1,2, E. Lasseaux3, D. Simon2, S. François2, D. Cailley3, C. Rooryck2,3, D. Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. Lacombe2,1, B. Arveiler2,3; 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2Laboratoire Background Maladies Rares - Génétique et Métabolisme (EA 4576) (Université de Bordeaux), CO
L3 A1 Bordeaux, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. : Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare genetic disease caused by mutations in the gene. Affected patients show in- creased vascular, intestinal and uterine fragility. Pregnancies are considered Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is an autosomal recessive disease charac- aOtb hjiegcht irvisek for vEDS patients, but there is a paucity of data on the prevalence terized TbYyR hypopigmentation of the skin, hair and eyes.T MYRoPle1cular analy- of mortality in this population. sSisL Ca4ll5oAw2s to classify patients, depending on the gene that is mutated, into Methods : To assess maternal mortality (MM) in vEDS patients followed in OCA1 ( gene), OCA2 (formerly called P gene), OCA3 ( ) and OCA4 a single French referral center. ( ). Deletions and duplications are investigated using ultra-high : We retrospectively reviewed medical charts and pedigrees of resolution array-CGH, in which the 4 genes are covered at a density of 1 all vEDS patients referred to our centre. Index-cases and their female as- probe/102bp on average. We report two patients with a complex rearran- cendants (mothers and grand-mothers) were classified as carriers, likely gement. Array-CGH analysis indicated the presence of two heterozygous de- or unlikely transmitters according to their family CpOeLd3igAr1ee. Live births in letions restricted to introns 2 and 20 respectively, the intervening segment pedigrees of carriers and likely transmitters were selected for mortality cal- being present in two copies. Both deletions were inherited from her mother, cRuelsautilotns. Neomutations (both parents negative for mutation) were thus indicating that both deletions were on the same allele. Patient 2 was excluded from analysis. heterozygous for the same deletions of introns 2 and 20 as patient 1. Remar- : A total of 85 families were identified of which 45 were neomutati- kably, the 5’ breakpoint of the intron 2 deletion and the 3’ breakpoint of the ons. The remaining 40 vEDS families were eligible for analysis. Pedigrees of intron 20 deletion seemed to be at the same position as the breakpoints of n=35 index-cases and female ascendants in these families showed 6 geneti- an intron 2-20 deletion that previously identified in three patients of polish cally confirmed vEDS cases and 32 likely transmitters. All these women gave origin. The same haplotype as that associated with the intron 2-20 deletion birth to 116 live-born children. Maternal death occurred in n=9 parturients. in the polish patients was observed. A PCR-sequence analysis performed Causes of death were either intra-abdominal arterial rupture (n=6), either with primers located on each side of the intron 2-20 deletioOnC cAo2nfirmed that uCtoenrcinlue sriuopnt ure (n=3). Medium age at death was 30.9 years ± 4.0 years. Ma- patients 1 and 2 indeed harbored the “polish” deletion. FISH analysis sho- ternal mortality rate was estimated about 7.3 %. wed that the interOvCeAni2ng segment was inserted near the gene. High : These findings confirm previous maternal mortality estima- throughput sequencing of the entire 15q11-13 region revealed a complex tions in vEDS. However, due to specific obstetrical protective measures, a p Jo. sMsaibzlzee ellfaf:e Ncto onfe t. hDe. lMaottleièrr ceo: uNlodn neo. Et b. Me emsesaassu: rNeodn.e. T. Mirault: None. X. r NFe o.a nMr ero .a r Dnic .g e Ce-mP aiie lc ln ea yrtd :i n: N N oo nn ee . . C Eg . .e R Ln oae os. rs ye ca ku : x N: o N no en . e D. . D L. a S ci om mo bn e: :N No on ne e. .S B. .F Ara rvn eç io leis r:: Jeunemaitre: None. M. Frank: None. None. 
P01 .112 
P01 .114 The clinical and molecular spectrum of D4ST1-deficient Ehlers- KRT74 mutation associated with autosomal recessive hair-nail Danlos Syndrome ectodermal dysplasia D. M. Syx1, S. Symoens1, M. C. Maiburg2, I. Van de Laar3, J. Morton4, A. De Paepe1, F. D. Raykova1, J. Klar1, A. Azhar2, M. Wajid2, T. Naeem Khan2, S. M. Baig2, N. Dahl1; Malfait1; 1Department of Immunonology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory at 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department Uppsala University, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Human Molecular Genetics of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women‘s Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan. Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Pure hair and nail ectodermal dysplasia (PHNED) comprises a heteroge- Recently, we described Ehlers-Danlos syCnHdSrTom14e (EDS), musculocontractu- neous group of rare heritable disorders chaKrRaTcHteBr5ized byH OthXiCn1 a3n d brittle ral type (former EDS-type-VIB), an autosomal recessive (AR) EDS-subtype hair, hypotrichosis, onychodystrophy and micronychia. PHNED has pre- caused by loss-of-function mutations in , encoding dermatan-4-sul- viously been associated with mutations in and on chro- fotransferase-1 (D4ST1). D4ST1 catalyzes 4-O-sulfation of the glycosamino- mosome 12p11.1-q14.3. We have investigated a KcRoTnHsaBn5guineoHuOsX C
P1 ak3istani glycan dermatan-sulfate (DS), which is covalently linked to proteoglycans. family with autosomal recessive PHNED linked to the keratin gene cluster Loss of D4ST1-activity results in the replacement of DS by chondroitin- on 12p11.1 but without detectable mutations in and . Exo- sCuHlSfaTt1e4 on the decorin proteoglycan and leads to impaired collagen fibril me sequencing of affected family members revealeKdR tThr7e4e linked genes with assembly. missense variants that were excludKeRdT in74 a control population. One of these -defects have previously been associated with the ‘adducted-thumb- variants (c.T821C, p.Phe274Ser) is located in the gene expressed in clubfoot-syndrome’ and the EDS-Kosho-type. Based on their clinical and hair follicles and nail matrix. The KvRaTri7a4nt segregates in a homozy- molecular overlap, these entities likely represent oneC pHhSeTn1o4typic continu- gous state in all affected family members, whereas all heterozygous carriers um, referred to as ‘D4ST1-deficient EDS’. Here, we present a comprehensive have normal hair and nails. Heterozygous mutations have previously phenotypic characterization and novel homozygous -mutations in beKeRnT a7s4sociated with autosomal dominant hypotrichosis simplex and wooly three new D4ST1-deficient EDS patients to highlight the severe and pleio- hair (HSWH). Our results suggest for the first time that hKoRmT7o4zygosity for tropic presentation of the disorder and to further document its molecular a missense mutation causes autosomal recessive PHNED. These fin- basis. Characteristic clinical manifestations are the craniofacial abnormali- dings expand the phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations ties, severe skin fragility with dystrophic scarring, and easy bruising, exces- and imply that autosomal recessive PHNED and autosomal dominant HSWH sive palmar wrinkling, tapered fingers, congenital joint contractures with aDr.e R aallyekliocv cao: nNdointieo. nJs. .Klar: None. A. Azhar: None. M. Wajid: None. T. Naeem distal joint hyperlaxity, clubfeet, and early-onset eye abnormalities, inclu- Khan: None. S.M. Baig: None. N. Dahl: None. ding glaucoma, cataract and retinal detachment. Despite clinical overlap with several other recessive EDS subtypes such as EDS-type-VIA, spondylocheirodysplastic EDS, FKB
P14 -deficient EDS, and progeroid EDS, the condition can be recognized by its characteristic cra- 
P01 .115 niofacial features, congenital joint contractures with adducted thumb and Novel ZMPST
E24  (FAC
E1 ) mutations in patients affected with clubfeet, and severe gastrointestinal and urogenital manifestations. The Restrictive Dermopathy or related progeroid syndromes and mutation spectrum includes homozygous and/or compound heterozygous mutation update. C. L. Navarro1,2, V. Esteves-Vieira3, S. Courrier1,2, A. Boyer3, T. Nguyen4,5, L. Huong4,6, nonsense, missense and frameshift mutations, all causing loss of D4ST1 P. Meinke4, W. Schröder4, V. Cormier-Daire7, Y. Sznajer8, D. Amor9, K. Lagerstedt10, M. function. By linking EDS to genetic defects in proteoglycan synthesis, this Biervliet11, P. C. van den Akker12, P. Cau1,2,13, P. Roll1,2,13, N. Lévy1,2,3, C. Badens1,2,3, M. disorder further highlights the broad genetic heterogeneity of the EDS spec- Wehnert4, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1,2,3; t Dru.Mm. .Syx: None. S. Symoens: None. M.C. Maiburg: None. I. Van de Laar: 1UMRS_910 (INSERM), Marseille, France, 2AMU (Aix-Marseille Université), Marseille, None. J. Morton: None. A. De Paepe: None. F. Malfait: None. France, 3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, La Timone Children’s Hospital, Marseille, ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 79ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index France, 4Institute of Human Genetics and Interfaculty Institute of Genetics and 
P01 .117 Functional Genomics, Greifswald, Germany, 5Institute of Genome Research (IGR), Hà Antisense mediated exon skipping gene therapy for dystrophic Nội, Viet Nam, 6National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Hà Nội, Viet Nam, epidermolysis bullosa 7Inserm/Université U 781, Hôpital Necker - Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 8Center S. Turczynski1,2, M. Titeux1,2, L. Tonasso3, A. Hovnanian1,2,4; for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, UCL, Bruxelles, Belgium, 9Royal 1INSERM U781 - Imagine Institute of Genetic Diseases, Paris, France, 2University Paris Children’s Hospital Genetics Clinic, Victoria, Australia, 10Department of Clinical Descartes Sorbonne Cité, Paris, France, 3CNRS UMR5288, Toulouse, France, 4Department Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 11Department of Medical of Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France. Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 12University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 13Laboratory of cellular Biology, La Timone Children’s hospital, Marseille, France. Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB) is a group of genodermatoses inhe- rited in a CdOom
L7 iAna1nt (DDEB) or recessive (RDEB) manner, characterised by Restrictive dermopathy (RD) is a rare and extremely severe congenital ge- severe skin and mucosae blistering after mild trauma. DEB is caused by mu- nodermatosis, characterized by a tight rigid skin with erosions at flexure tations in encoding type VII collagen that assembles into anchoring sites, multiple joint contractures, low bone density and puZlmMoPnSaTrEy2 4insuf- fibrils to form key dermo-epidermal CaOdh
L7 esAi1on structures. Exon skipping re- ficiency generally leading to death in the perinatal period. RD is caused in lies on modulating the splicing of pre-messenger RNA to induce skipping of most patients by compound heterozygous or homozygous ZMPST nEu2l4l a mutated exon. Exons 73 and 80 of are of particular interest since mutations., This gene encodes a metalloprotease specifically involved in tinh evyiv coarry many recurrent mutations and their excision preserves the open lamin A post-translational processing. Here, we report 7 novel reading frame. We first demonCsOtrLa7tAe1d the dispensability of these exons in an mutations identified in classical RD or Mandibulo-acral Dysplasia (MAD) xenograft model using collagen VII null RDEB cells transduced with affected patients. We also report 9 new families with one or two affected retroviral vectors containing cDNAs deleted of exon 73 or exon 80. childrZeMnP cSaTrEry2i4ng the common, homozygous thymine insertion in exon 9 and We subsequently transfected primary RDEB keratinocytes and fibroblasts demonstrate the lack of a founder effect. Additionally, we describe several with antisense oligoribonucleotides (AONs) targeting key splicing regula- new variants identified in unaffected controls or in patientZsM aPf-- tory elements of these exons, and achieved efficient skipping (up to 90%). fSeTcEte2d4 with non-classical progeroid syndromes. This mutation update inclu- Western blot and immunocytochemistry analyses demonstrated significant des a comprehensive search of the literature on previously described type VII collagen re-expression (up to 24%) in cells from three RDEB pati- ZMP mSTuEt2a4tions and associated phenotypes. Moreover, pathophysiological ents which were completely deficient in type VII collagen expression ibne fvoivroe mechanisms underlying RD and other premature aging syndromes linked transfection. We have now grafted RDEB skin equivalents generateCdO Lfr7oAm1 to are deeply discussed, confirming a general rule: RD mutations patients’ cells and have injected several doses of AONs to address lead to complete loss-of-function of ZMPST
E24 , whereas other less severe efficiency. A humanized transgenic mouse carrying only the human pCh.eLn. Notayvpaersro a:r Ne oanses.o Vc.i aEtsetde vweist-hV aieti rleaa: sNto onnee. Sh.a Cpolouirnrsieurf:f iNcioennet. aAl.l eBleo.yer: gene will also be used for pre-clinical studies to evaluate toxicity and routes None. T. Nguyen: None. L. Huong: None. P. Meinke: None. W. Schröder: of administration. If successful, this approach would offer potential for trea- None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. Y. Sznajer: None. D. Amor: None. K. t Sin. gT uRrDczEyBn pskait:i eNnotnse b. yM l.o Tciatel uoxr :s Nysotneem. Lic. Tdoenliavsesryo :o Nf oAnOeN. As.. Hovnanian: None. Lagerstedt: None. M. Biervliet: None. P.C. van den Akker: None. P. Cau: None. P. Roll: None. N. Lévy: None. C. Badens: None. M. Wehnert: None. A. De Sandre-Giovannoli: None. 
P01 .118 Revertant mosaicism in the first case of recessive Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex due to KRT5 loss of function mutations 
P01 .116 M. Titeux1,2, N. Pironon1,2, E. Tron3, S. Fraitag4, C. Prost-Squarcioni5, A. Hovnanian1,2,3; The class II cytokines and psoriasis: a case-control study and meta- 1Inserm U781 - Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2University Paris Descartes - Sorbonne analysis Cité, Paris, France, 3Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 4Department E. Galimova1,2,3, V. Akhmetova1, B. Latipov4, K. Kingo5,6, R. Rätsep3,6, T. Traks5,6, S. Kõks3,6, of Histology, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 5Department of Histology, Avicenne Hospital, E. Khusnutdinova1,2; Bobigny, France. 1Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department of Genetics and Fundamental Medicine, Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Department of Physiology, University Epidermolysis bulloKsRa Ts5implKexR T(1
E4 BS) is characterized by intra-epidermal of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Republican Dispensary of Dermatology and Venerology, Ufa, blistering upon mild trauma. Most EBS cases aKreR Tc1au4sed by dominant mis- Russian Federation, 5Department of Dermatology and Venerology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Centre of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, sense mutations in or encoding keratin 5 and keratin 14, but Estonia. few cases of recessively inherited EBS due to mutations have been reported. In this study, we report the case of a 14 months-old girl from unre- lated healthy parents, presenting witKhR sTe5v ere and extensive skin blistering Background: The molecular basis of pathogenesis of psoriasis remains at birth with partial improvement during childhood and patches of non- unclear, but one unifying blistering skin. Direct sequencing of from blood leukocyte DNA of the hypothesis of disease aetiology is the cytokine network model. The class II proband and her parents revealed two recessive loss-of-function mutations cytokines (CF2) and their receptors (CRF2) are all involved in the inflamm- leading to frameshift and PTC: 1) a tKwRoT 5base-pair deletion in exon 3 inhe- atory processes and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in respective rited from the mother; 2) a T>C transition deep within intron 2 inherited genes have been associated with psoriasis in a previous study of the Esto- from the father. The latter disrupts pre-mRNA splicing and leads to nian population. the inclusion of a 41 nucleotides pseudo-exon through imbalanced binding Methods: DNA was obtained from 395 psoriasis patients of two ethnic of SRp40 and hnRNPA1 splicing factors. Western blot analysis from patient groups from the Volga-Ural region of Russia and 476 ethnically matched keratinocytes demonstrated reduced level of full-length keratin 5 indicating controls. 47 SNPs in the loci of the CF2 genes and CRF2 were selected by that the intronic mutation is leaky, rescuing the synthesis of a small amKoRuTn5t SNPbrowser version 3.5. Genotyping was performed using the SNPlexTM of wild-type protein. Splicing modulation using an antisense oligoribonu- platform. cleotide targeting the mutation restored the synthesis of wild type Results: The genetic variant rs30461 previously associated in original case- mRNA and keratin 5 protein. Remarkably, direct sequencing, RT-PCR and control study in Estonians, was also associated in Russians (Pc = 0.008, OR immunohistofluoKrReTsc5e nce analyses of islands of non-blistering skin demon- = 0.44), but did not reach statistical significance in the Bashkir populati- strated somatic revertant mutations. This is the first reported case of reces- on. Combined meta-analysis of three populations, including 943 psoriasis sive EBS due to mutations, demonstrating gene dosage effect in EBS aMn.d T pitreeusxe:n Ntionnge w. Nit. hP rireovneornta: nNto mneo.s Ea.i cTirsomn.: None. S. Fraitag: None. C. Prost- patients and 812 healthy controls, showed that the I
L29  rs30461 C-allele Squarcioni: None. A. Hovnanian: None. was not associated with decreased risk of psoriasis (P = 0.165, OR = 0.68). Moreover, stratification of studies by ethnicity revealed a significant asso- ciation in the European cohort (P = 9.506E-006, OR = 0.53). Conclusion: Therefore, there is no overall evidence of association between 
P01 .119 psoriasis and SNP rs30461 of the I
L29  gene, but there is some evidence to Filaggrin mutations in Slovenian patients with atopic and contact suggest that an association exists in Europeans. However, this current con- dermatitis cept should be considered as preliminary and the results need to be confir- M. Rijavec1, H. Rupnik2, P. Korošec1; m E.e Gd ainli mfuotvuar:e Ninodnee.p Ve.n Adkehnmt settuodviae:s N.one. B. Latipov: None. K. Kingo: 1University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia, None. R. Rätsep: None. T. Traks: None. S. Kõks: None. E. Khusnutdinova: 2Department of Dermatovenereology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, None. Slovenia. 80 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Skin, Modasa, India, 5Dermatology Centre, Rashid Hospital, Dubai Health Authority (DHA), Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 6Department of Fetal Medicine, Lifeline Genetics Dysfunction of epidermal barrier contributes significantly to the develop- and Research Centre, Lifeline Hospital, Adoor, India, 7Foundation for Research in ment of common skin diseases, such as atopic dermatitis (AD), allergic con- Genetics and Endocrinology, Ahmedabad, India, 8Division of Surgical Oncology, Regional Cancer Centre, Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram, India, 9Department of tact (ACD) and chronic irritant contact dermatitis (FCLIGCD). One of the most dermatovenereology, Brichkandi Hospital and Trust, Mumbai, India, 10Cancer center, important proteins, involved in generation and maintenance of epidermal Creighton University, Omaha, NE, United States, 11Green Cross Blood Bank and Genetic barrier, is filaggrin, encoded by the filaggrin genFeL G( ), located within the Research laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. epidermal differentiation complex on chromosome 1q21. Four prevalent loss-of-function mutations in the gene (R501X, 2282del4, R2447X and 
S3247 X)F LwGere genotyped in 241 AD, 100 ACD and 44 CICD pa- Hidradenitis Suppurativa / acne inversa (AI) is a chronic, inflammatory, re- tients and in 164 healthy controls from Slovenia. current, debilitating skin follicle disease that usually presents after puberty The most frequent mutation 2282del4, but not R501X, R2447X or with painful, deep-seated, inflaNmCeSdT NlesPiSoEnNs 1in theP aSpEoNcErNine gland-bearing 
S3247 X, was significantly assoFcLiGated with greater risk for AD (OR=4.33, 95% areas of the body, most commonly the axillaries, inguinal, and anogenital CI: 1.26-14.96, P=0.012). Furthermore, subgroup analysis among AD pati- regions. Recently, mutations of , and genes located at ents revealed that carriers of loss-of-function mutation were more likely 1q23.3,19q13.12 and 14q24.2, respectively, have been reportNedC SinT Nsp oradic to have earlier onset (<2 years: OR=8.09, 95% CI: 2.19-29.87, P=0.0006) and and familial AI patients, suggesting that these genes play an important role longer persistence of the disease (>20 years: OR=15.54, 95% CI: 4.13-58.44, in AI development. Here, we report two novel mutations of in two PFL<G0.0001) as well as they more often required hospitalisation (OR=12.38, multi-generational Indian families with AI and various associated anoma- 95%F CLIG: 3.36-45.60, P<0.0001). On the other hand no association between lies including squamous cell carcinoma. Mutation search in exons and splice mutations and ACD or CICD, were found. junctions of above three candidate genes identified a frameshift mNCuStaTtNion, The loss-of-function mutatFiLoGns that contribute to the impaired epithe- c.687insCC (p.Cys230ProfsX31), which is predicted to terminate at codon lial barrier function, increases the risk for development of AD, but not ACD 261 after the addNitCioSnT Nof 31 novel amino acids within exon 6 of NCST. NA or CICD, in Slovenian patients. mFLuGtations are also a predisposing factor nonsense mutation- due to a 2-nt deletion, resulting in a stop codon (
L600 X), for a more severe AD phenotype, leading to earlier onset, longer persistence within exon 16 of was found in family UR-253. It is known that and hospitalisation. Genotyping of mutations is helpful for identificati- is subunit of the γsecretase complex, an endoprotease complex that cata- o Mn. oRfi jpaavteiecn: Ntso ante h. Hig.h Reur prnisikk: f oNro nseev. ePr. eK aonrodš emc:o Nreo npee.rsistent disease. lyzes the intramembrane cleavage of integral membrane proteins such as Notch receptors and APP (β-amyloid precursor protein). We did not detect a pathogenic or predisposing variant in any caNnCdSiTdNate genes in another three 
P01 .120 multigenerational AI families, indicating genetic heterogeneity in AI. Identi- Mutations in I
L36 RN in patients with generalized pustular psoriasis ficat-ion of present novel mutations expands gene mutation spectrum U. D. Hüffmeier1, A. Körber2, R. Renner3, H. Sticht4, D. Wilsmann-Theis5, P. Schulz6, M. associated with AI phenotype. The present data supported the significance Sticherling3, H. Traupe7, R. Mössner8; o Rf .γ Mseedcar:e Ntaosnee d. yUs.f Runatcntiaomna ilna :t hNeo neeti.o Dlo. gJyh aolfa A: NI.one. S.K. Nath: None. T.Y. 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Mehta: None. F.M. Al-Ali: None. M.V. Rao: None. S. Nair: None. J.J. Sheth: Dermatology, University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, None. N.K. Chandramohan: None. D.G. Saple: None. M.R. Kuracha: None. R. University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 4Bioinformatics in Biochemistry, University Uppala: None. of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 5Deparment of Dermatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Dermatology, Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim, Germany, 7Department of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 8Department of Dermatology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. 
P01 .122 IP-associated NEMO mutations as a tool to unravel the key molecular mechanisms in NF-kappaB activation GPP is a rare disorder affecting 2 of 1 million individuals in Europe. It is A. Pescatore1, E. Esposito1, G. Courtois2, V. Ursini1; characterized by repeating flare-ups of pustular psoriasis and a potentially 1nstitute of Genetics and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati Traverso” CNR, Naples, Italy, 2nstitut de Recherches en Technologies et Sciences pour le Vivant (iRTSV), Grenoble, life-threatening accompanying multisystemic inflammation. Recently, mis- France. sense mutations in I
L36 RN were identified for GPP. We screened I
L36 RN in 19 GPP patients and identified mutations in 7 patients: 4 homozygous for p.His32Arg, p.Pro76Leu or p.Ser113Leu (twice), and 3 patients com- Mutations of the gene coding for NEMO has been shown to cause the X-linked pound heterozygous for p.Ser113Leu and either p.Arg48Trp, p.Glu94X or inherited disease Incontinentia Pigmenti (IP). IP presents with skin lesions p.Pro76Leu. p.Glu94X as well as the 2 missense mutations p.His32Arg and appearing at birth and evolving in four typical inflammatory stages. In addi- p.Pro76Leu affecting highly conserved residues were novel. Molecular mo- tion, other neuroectodermal tissues can be affected. NEMO is the regulatory deling of missense mutations revealed effects on protein stability or binding subunit of the kinase complex IKK, required for the canonical NF-kappaB ac- to IL-36 receptor. The newly identified mutations were not present in 190 tivations. Further progress on the comprehension of the IP physiopathology controls. Available parents were tested as heterozygous mutations carriers. depends also on the detailed understanding of the mechanisms of action of 1 further patient was heterozygous for p.
S113 L, while neither he nor 11 NEMO mutated protein in the context of IP pathology. patients without I
L36 RN mutations had an intragenic deletion. Phenotype Starting from the NEMO screening in a large cohort of IP patients from EU genotype correlation was difficult due to different mutations in few carriers. we investigated the IP physiopathology by studying selected mutations in No significant difference in age of onset between noncarriers/ carriers of several cell lines. mutations was observed. The widely varying age of onset (1-51C Ay.R) Din1 44 ho- We described a NUB (NEMO Ubiquitin Binding) domain mutation, A323P mozygous patients for p.Ser113Leu (2 previously published) can currently that we found in a patient with a severe form of IP. This substitution caused not be explained. An additional coding variant (p.Ser200Asn) in was a defect in the non-degradative ubiquitination process and, consequently, identified in one of them (aoo.: 1 year) which might modify disease severity. drastically decreased NEMO-dependent NF-kappaB activation. Combining The rate of 35.2% I
L36 RN mutation carriers provides further evidence that these evidences to the molecular study of an N-terminal missense mutation GPP is heterogeneous. As therapy with anakinra in some GPP patients is ef- (
E57 K), we finally characterized the domains participating in NEMO/TRAF6 fective, revealing the molecular basis of GPP in single patients is important fUor.D t.h Herüaffpmeueiteicr: d Neocnisei.o An.- mKöarkbienrg:. None. R. Renner: None. H. Sticht: None. D. interaction, providing genetic and molecular evidences supporting the role Wilsmann-Theis: None. P. Schulz: None. M. Sticherling: None. H. Traupe: of this physical interaction in NF-kappaB activation. More important, dissec- None. R. Mössner: None. ting specific molecular interactions within the NEMO-related activity, not only as NF-kappaB regulator, could suggest new targets for the development of potentially effective therapeutic strategies. This study is supported by the Association Incontinentia Pigmenti France 
P01 .121 ( Ah.t tPpe:/sc/awtowrwe:. iNncoonne.t iEn.e Enstipaopsiigtmo: eNnotni.efr. )G.. Courtois: None. V. Ursini: None. Novel γ-secretase gene mutations in familial Hidradenitis suppurativa / Acne inversa and evidence for genetic heterogeneity. R. Meda1, U. Ratnamala2, D. Jhala1, S. K. Nath3, T. Y. Mehta4, F. M. Al-Ali5, M. V. Rao1, S. Nair6, J. J. Sheth7, N. K. Chandramohan8, D. G. Saple9, M. R. Kuracha10, R. Uppala11; 1Department of Zoology, School of Sciences, Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, India, 2Department of Pharmacology, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, United States, 33. Arthritis and Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 4Samarpan Medical & Research Organization on ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 81ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .123 
P01 .125 Naturally occurring keratoderma in dog breeds as relevant models for Porphyria Cutanea Tarda (PCT): An exploratory focus group study human palmoplantar keratoderma. J. Andersen1,2, M. Råheim2, G. A. Strandnæs1, S. Sandberg1,2, E. Gjengedal2; A. Thomas1, J. Plassais2,3, E. Guaguère4, E. Bourrat5, A. Guillory2,3, C. Dufaure de Citres6, 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. P. Quignon2,3, F. Degorce-Rubiales7, L. Lagoutte2,3, C. Hitte2,3, E. Bensignor8, C. Kaerle6, M. Delverdier9, C. André2,3; 1ANTAGENE, Laboratoire d‘analyses génétiques, La Tour de Salvagny, France, 2CNRS, PCT is characterized by fragile skin with blistering on sun exposed areas, UMR 6290, Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France, and exists in both hereditary and sporadic forms. Symptoms typically deve- 3Université Rennes 1, UEB, Biosit, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France, 4Clinique Vétérinaire Saint Bernard, Lomme, France, 5Département de dermatologie, Hôpital St lop in late adulthood and can be triggered by iron overload, alcohol intake, Louis, Paris, France, 6ANTAGENE, La Tour de Salvagny, France, 7Laboratoire d’Anatomie estrogens and various liver diseases. Treatment consists of phlebotomy to Pathologique Vétérinaire du Sud-Ouest LAPVSO, Tolouse, France, 8Clinique Vétérinaire reduce iron, or to increase urinary porphyrin excretion by administering de la Boulais, Cesson-Sévigné, France, 9Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, Ecole chlorochin. The Norwegian Porphyria Centre (NAPOS) offers predictive ge- Vétérinaire de Toulouse, Toulouse, France. netic testing and counseling to at-risk family members in hereditary cases. The aim was to explore what experiences persons with PCT have con cer- ning symptoms, treatment, prevention and follow up. Interpretive descrip- In humans, inherited palmoplantar keratoderma is a complex heteroge- tion was used as a qualitative approach. Three focus groups were held,each neous group of genodermatoses clinically presenting as hyperkeratosis of consisting of seven participants, 11 women and 10 men aged between 31 the palms and soles. Genetic causes of non syndromic autosomal recessi- and 77. Eleven participants had hereditary PCT, and all had experienced ve keratoderma are not well known except for Meleda‘s disease. In dogs, symptoms during the last five years. footpad hyperkeratosis naturally segregates mainly in two breeds, Dogue Participants’ symptoms varied from fragile skin to what was described as de Bordeaux and Irish Terrier. The onset usually occurs in puppies of six a desperate situation, with huge blisters, skin falling off and feeling as if months old or younger. Clinical signs consist of dermatological lesions af- in a “horror movie”. Treatment with phlebotomy did cause rapid improve- fecting footpads and/or nose showing thickening with severe keratinous ment and made the situation less dramatic. PCT was perceived as being in proliferations and fissures. These two breeds having concentrated delete- the blood, rather than a skin disease, and made participants contemplate rious alleles due to the drastic selection of these breeds. Pedigree analyses if other health issues were caused by PCT, and if there were more to this led us to hypothesize a monogenic recessive inheritance of the disease in disease than the specialist knew. Although most participants had not expe- each breed. The genetic causes of the disease in the two dog breeds are sear- rienced relapses, they regarded PCT as a chronic disease, requiring controls ched by genetic linkage and genetic association studies. We collected blood a Jn. dA npdroeprsheynla: cNtoicn ep.h Mle.b Roåtohmeimy f:o Nro tnhee. rGe.mA.i nSdtrearn odfn tæhesi:r N loivnees.. S. Sandberg: samples from 100 Dogues de Bordeaux, including 30 affected dogs and 33 None. E. Gjengedal: None. Irish Terrier, including 12 affected dogs. We performed a Genome Wide As- sociation Study in both breeds using the recently available Illumina Canine HD 170,000 SNPs array. To date, most of the genes known to be involved in 
P01 .126 human Palmoplantar Keratoderma, have been excluded by genetic linkage, Frame shift mutation of the ZMPST
E24  gene in two siblings affected allowing to hypothesize that novel genes could be discovered in the two dog with restrictive dermopathy breeds. These approaches, in addition to comparative genetics, bring alter- A. Morkūnienė1,2, A. Matulevičienė1,2, L. Ambrozaitytė1,2, R. Meškienė1,2, R. Meškauskas3, native spontaneous models and also open the field for clinical trials for the A. Utkus1,2; b Ae.n Tehfiotm oaf sd:o Ngso naen.d J .h Pulmasasnasi.s: None. E. Guaguère: None. E. Bourrat: None. A. 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Guillory: None. C. Dufaure de Citres: None. P. Quignon: None. F. Degorce- Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Rubiales: None. L. Lagoutte: None. C. Hitte: None. E. Bensignor: None. C. University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3National Centre of Pathology, Affiliate of Vilnius Kaerle: None. M. Delverdier: None. C. André: None. University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. 
P01 .124 Restrictive dermopathy (RD) is a rare lethal autosomal genodermatosis. We Molecular study in a patient with Incontinentia pigmenti report on 2 siblings from consecutive pregnancies affected with RD. The C. Cervera-Acedo1, J. Aguirre-Lamban1, J. del Olmo López2, A. Olloqui Escalona2, A. proband was born at 28 weeks of gestation to a 27-year-old healthy wo- Garcia-Oguiza3, M. Poch-Olive3, E. Dominguez-Garrido1; man whose first child died due to respiratory insufficiency on his 16th day, 1Fundación Rioja Salud-CIBIR, Logroño, Spain, 2Fundación Hospital de Calahorra, falsely diagnosed with congenital ichthyosis by dermatologist. There were Calahorra, Spain, 3Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain. no further investigations performed for him at that time. Clinical symptoms of the first child showed the same morphology as that of the second baby. Physical examination of the proband showed extensive areas of tight, shiny, Introduction translucent skin with multiple fissures on the neck and shoulders and pro- Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare X-linked dominant genodermatosis minent cutaneous vessels. Face showed the characteristic dysmorphic fea- (Xq28), lethal in the majority of affected males in utero anIKdB vKaGriaNblEyM eOx- tures: hypertelorism, antimongoloid slant, sparsed eyelashes, small pinched pressed in females due to lyonization phenomenon. The diagnosis of IP is nose, micrognathia, mouth O-shaped, multiple joint contractures. The pati- based on clinical findings and molecular genetic testing of ( ) ent died on 23rd day after birth due to pulmocardial insufficiency. gene. It consists of 10N eExMonOs and encodes a protein of 419 amino acids. Ap- Skin biopsy microscopic examinations revealed evenly thickened epidermis, proximately 65% of affected females present a 11.7 kb deletion that remo- hypergranulosis with large keratohyalin grains and decrease of the elastic ves exons 4-10 of the gene. fibers in the dermis, undeveloped sweat glands. Subjects and Methods The DNA of the proband and his parents were extracted from the venous pe- A one and a half year old female patient, with healthy and non-consan- ripheral blood samples using phenol-chlorophorm DNA extraction method. guineous parents, was dignosed with IP by skin biopsy. The karyotype The sibling DNA was extracted from dried blZoModP SsTpoEt2 s4ample (Guthrie card) was normal, 46XX. Multiplex PCR and electrophoresis were performed to using the InstaGene™ Matrix (BIO-RAD Laboratories, Inc., USA). Amplificati- identify the common deletion. In addition, sequencing analysis of all the 10 on using specific primers for 10 exons of the gene was performed exons was performed. The X chromosome inactivation (XCI) pattern was de- for all samples. ZMPST
E24  termined by PCR amplification at the Androgen receptor locus (HUMARA). Homozygous frame shift mutation c.50delA (p.[Lys17Serfs*21];[Lys17Serfs Results *21]) was identified in exon 1 of the gene for both affected child- Deletion of exons 4 to 10 was not detected. Moreover, no additional variants r Ae.n M. Tohrkeū pnaierennėt:s N goenneo. tAy.p Mesa twuleervei čhieetneėr:o Nzyogneo.u Ls. f Aorm tbhriosz maiutyttaėt:i oNno.ne. R. were found. The XCI showed a partial skewing: 16% / 84%. Meškienė: None. R. Meškauskas: None. A. Utkus: None. Discussion NEMO IP is a severe systemic pathology that requires multidisciplinary follow-up, particularly during the first year of life. Currently, is the only known 
P01 .127 geneassociated with IP, and it is responsible of 73% of the cases. cDNA se- Retinitis Pigmentosa, Cutis Laxa and Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum-Like quencing analysis will be analyzed. Due to the etiology is still unknown in Skin Manifestations Associated with GGCX mutations the remaining 27%, it suggests that other genes should be further investi- A. Kariminejad1, B. Bozorgmehr1, A. Najafi2, A. Khoshaeen3, M. Ghalandari1, H. gCa.t eCde.rvera-Acedo: None. J. Aguirre-Lamban: None. J. del Olmo López: Najmabadi1, O. M. Vanakker4, M. J. Hosen4, F. Malfait4, D. Quaglino5, R. J. Florijn6, B. A. B. None. A. Olloqui Escalona: None. A. Garcia-Oguiza: None. M. Poch-Olive: Bergen7,8,9, R. C. Hennekam8,10; None. E. Dominguez-Garrido: None. 1Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Azad University Medical Branch,Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 82 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Iran, 3Mehrgan Genetic Center, Sari, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 44- Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Ghent, Belgium, 5 14 55- Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Localized Simplex Epidermolysis Bullosa (EBS-loc., EBS Weber-Cockayne) Modena, Italy, Modena, Italy, 6 Department of Ophthalmogenetics, The Netherlands is caused by mutations in keratins and . However, in 50% of patients Institute for Neuroscience (NIN), an institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts these mutations are not found deTsGpMite5 acral skin blistering presence. This and Sciences (KNAW), Amsterdam, NL, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 76- Department of symptom is also present in another condition - acral peeling skin syndrome Ophthalmogenetics, The Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience (NIN), an institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW),, Amsterdam, Netherlands, (APSS) caused by mutations in a gene encoding transglutaminase 5. 87- Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, So far only 24 APSS cases have been reported worldwidTeG aMn5d no epidemio- Amsterdam, Netherlands, 98- Department of Ophthalmology, Academic Medical Center, logical data for Slavic population are available. KRT5, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 109- Department of Pediatrics, TKhReT 1a4im of the study was to verify the hypothesis that mutations oc- AcademicMedicalCenter, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. cur in Polish patients with EBS-loc. clinical suspicion, no mutations in TGM5. and no family history of blistering disorders. DNA from 20 unrelated probands was analyzed by direct sequencing of the We describe the clinical findings and molecular results in 13 affected mem- bers of two families who had a remarkably consistent phenotype consisting The Gly113Cys mutation was detected in 55% (22/40) alleles of affected pa- of pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE)- like skin manifestations in neck and tients (9 homozygous, 4 heterozygous cases) and in 2 (2%) healthy controls trunk, cutis laxa of trunk and AuBpCpCe6r limbs, and retinitis pigmentosa. They (n=103). A novel mutationT -G cM.3531delG was found in three proband’s alleles. had no coagulation abnormalities. Molecular studies are currently being pursued. No mutation was identified in known to cause PXE. SubseGqGuCeXntly, all Our reTsuGlMts5 indicate that mutations are common in Polish patients 13 affected family members were found to be homozygous for the splice- with the clinical suspicion of the EBS-loc., which strongly supports the idea site mutation c373+3G>T in the Gamma-Glutamyl carboxylase ( ) gene. of the molecular analysis incorporation into the first line diagnostic Parents were heterozygous and healthy siblings were either heterozygous procedure in such cases. We showed for the first time that Gly113Cys mu- oGrG ChXad the wild-type. The two families were not known to be related, but tation is common in Polish patients and we identified previously unrepor- originated from the same geographic region suggesting a founder effect. ted recurrent mutation - c.331delG. High frequency of Gly113Cys in control mutations have been reported in patients with a PXE-like phenotype population may also suggest that APSS incidence is highly underestimated and cutis laxa before in patients who also had multiple Vitamin K-dependent i Dn .P Noelasntedr.uk: None. K. Wertheim-Tysarowska: None. A. Giza: None. J. Sota: coagulation factoGrG dCeXficiencies and no retinitis pigmentosa. We suggest that None. J. Bal: None. C. Kowalewski: None. the present affected individuals represent a hitherto unreported phenotype associated with mutations, as the presence of two independent dis- orders co-segregating in 13 family members and noGtG oCcXcurring in an isola- 
P01 .130 ted way in other family members us unlikely. Di-genic inheritance has been No mutations in the serotonin related TPH1 and HTR1B genes in suggested to explain the variations in phenotype in mutation carriers. patients with monogenic sclerosing bone disorders. Consequently, the present unusual phenotype may not be explained by the E. Boudin1, K. Jennes1, F. de Freitas1, D. Tegay2, G. Mortier1,3, W. Van Hul1; GGCX mutations alone but may be influenced by variants in other genes or 1University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 2New York Institute of Technology College of e Ap.i gKeanriemtiicn eajnadd :e Nnvoinreo.n Bm. eBnotzaol rfgamcteohrrs:. None. A. Najafi: None. A. Khoshaeen: Osteopathic Medicine (NYITCOM), Old Westbury, NY, United States, 3University Hospital None. M. Ghalandari: None. H. Najmabadi: None. O.M. Vanakker: None. M.J. Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium. Hosen: None. F. Malfait: None. D. Quaglino: None. R.J. Florijn: None. B.A.B. Bergen: None. R.C. Hennekam: None. Since the identification of LR
P5  as the causative gene for the osteoporo- sis pseudoglioma syndrome (OPPG) as well as the high bone mass (HBM) 
P01 .128 phenotype, LR
P5  and the Wnt/β-catenin signaling have been extensively Odonto-Onycho-Dermal Dysplasia/Schopf-Schulz-Passarge Syndrome studied for their role in the differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis of spectrum: An interesting case. osteoblasts and osteocytes. However, more recently the direct effect of LR
P5  M. Bedford1, F. Mussani2; on osteoblasts and bone formation has been questioned. Gene expression 1Genetics Department, North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Division of studies showed that mice lacking lrp5 have increased expression of trypto- Dermatology, University of Toronto, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON, phan hydroxylase 1 (tph1), the rate limiting enzyme for the production of Canada. serotonin in the gut. Furthermore, mice lacking either tph1 or htr1B, the re- ceptor for serotonin on the osteoblasts, were reported to have an increased bone mass due to increased bone formation. This led to the hypothesis that We present a case of a 38-year-old female from Newfoundland with a mul- LR
P5  influences bone formation indirectly by regulating the expression of titude of symptoms pertaining to her hair, nails, teeth and skin. For many thp1 and the production of serotonin in the gut. Based on these data we years, she has had slow growing, fine, brittle hair on her scalp and scarring decided to evaluate the role of TPH1 and HTR1B in the development of cra- alopecia. Since childhood, she has had dystrophic finger and toenails and niotubular hyperostoses, a group of monogenic sclerosing bone dysplasias. previously had dental work for peg shaped teeth. Furthermore, she has al- Using Sanger sequencing, we screened the coding regions of both selected ways had diminished sweating and palmo-plantar keratoderma. Recently, genes in 53 patients with a form of craniotubular hyperostosis which lack she has been diagnosed with a melanoma in-situ and eyelid cysts. Dysmor- a mutation in the known causative genes LR
P5 , LR
P4  and SOST. We found phology exam noted a bird-like facies. several common and rare coding variants in both studied genes. However, This patient’s presentation is consistent with features of both Odonto- we could not identify disease-causing variants in neither of the tested genes. Onycho-Dermal Dysplasia (OODD) and Schopf-Schulz-Passarge syndrome Therefore, we cannot provide support for an important function of serotonin (SSPS). There is considerable overlap in clinical features between the two i En. t Bhoe updaitnh:o Ngoennee.s Kis. oJfe nscnleesr:o Nsionnge b. oF.n dee d Fyrsepiltaassi:a Ns.one. D. Tegay: None. G. conditions. Both types of ectodermal dysplasia are autosomal recessive and Mortier: None. W. Van Hul: None. have been associated with homozygous and compound heterozygous muta- tions of the WNT10A gene. Our patient was found to be homozygous for the Cys107X mutation in WNT10A. This particular mutation has been reported 
P01 .131 in cases of both OODS and SSPS suggesting that features of these two con- ZNF750 is expressed in differentiated keratinocytes and regulates ditions are part of a spectrum connected by the same gene. Basal cell and epidermal late differentiation genes squamous cell carcinomas have been reported in SSPS. Unique to this case is I. Cohen1,2, R. Y. Birnbaum3,4, K. Leibson1,2, R. Taube2, S. Sivan1,2, O. S. Birk1,2,5; the occurrence of melanoma in situ. To our knowledge this is the first case of 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for Biotechnology in a M W. BNeTd1fo0rAd :g Nenoen em. Fu.t aMtuiosns arneip: oNrotende. in the Newfoundland population. the Negev, Ben Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 3Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San 
P01 .129 Francisco, CA, United States, 5Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, The transglutaminase 5 mutations are frequent among Polish Israel. patients with acral skin blistering D. Nesteruk1, K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, A. Giza1, J. Sota1, J. Bal1, C. Kowalewski2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Disrupted skin barrier due to altered keratinocyte differentiation is common in pathologic conditions such as atopic dermatitis, ichthyosis and psoriasis. However, the molecular cascades governing keratinocyte terminal differen- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 83 tiation are not fully understood. We have previously demonstrated that aABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index dominant mutation in ZNF750 leads to a clinical phenotype reminiscent of carpal tunnel syndrome.d Ceh nilodvhoood pictures show underdevelopment of the psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis. Here we show that ZNF750 is a nuclear middle one third of the face (no longer visible now due PtoD Efa4cDial surgery). effector that is strongly activated in and essential for keratinocyte terminal She was found to have a 5q12.1 deletion of 64 kb (hg18: 59783994- differentiation. ZNF750 was specifically expressed in the epidermal supra- 59848643) of which the proximal breakpoint is within PD E(p4rDomoter basal layers and its expression was augmented during differentiation, both in region and first exons). PD
E4 D human skin and in-vitro, peaking in the granular layer. Silencing of ZNF750 Discussion: this is, as far as we know, the first non-missense muta- in differentiated HaCaT keratinocytes led to sustained proliferation, as well tion identified. The dPeDleEti4oDn is expected to result in decreased func- as diminished apoptosis. Genome-wide expression analysis of keratinocytes tioning. No functional studies were performed to explain the milder skeletal in which ZNF750 expression was silenced, showed markedly reduced ex- phenotype. Possibly, missense mutations result in a dominant nega- pression of epidermal late differentiation genes, including gene subsets of tive effect on pdreo nteoivno analysis. PD
E4 D epidermal differentiation complex and skin barrier formation such as FLG, Conclusion: We present a relatively mild skeletal phenotype of acrodysosto- LOR, SPINK5, ALOX12B and DSG1, known to be mutated in various human s Pis. -
L2 a kdeume aton :a N one. L.C d. eKlenteigotn: oNfo tnhee. Vp.r Coxoirmmaiel rp-Darati roef: None. R..C.M. skin diseases. Furthermore, overexpression of ZNF750 in undifferentiated Hennekam: None. keratinocytes induced terminal differentiation genes. Thus, ZNF750 is a regulator of keratinocyte terminal differentiation and with its downstream targets can serve in future elucidation of therapeutics for common diseases 
P01 .134 o I.f Cskoihne bna: rNroienre.. R.Y. Birnbaum: None. K. Leibson: None. R. Taube: None. S. Genetic and functional studies on Hungarian families with Brooke- Sivan: None. O.S. Birk: None. Spiegler Syndrome N. Nagy1,2,3, N. Rajan4, K. Farkas2, L. Kemeny3,2, M. Széll1,2; 1University of Szeged, Dept of Medical Genetics, Szeged, Hungary, 2Dermatological Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary, 3University of 
P01 .132 Szeged, Dept of Dermatology and Allergology, Szeged, Hungary, 4University of Newcastle Deciphering the genetics of inherited zinc deficiencies upon Tyne, Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. S. Küry1, S. Schmitt1, E. Blouin2, S. Bezieau1; 1CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 2Laboratoire Labcatal, MontRouge, France. Brooke-Spiegler syndrome (BSS; OMIM 605041) is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by the development of skin appendage tumors, such Background: Acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE; MIM #201100) is a rare as cylindromas, trichoepitheliomas and spiradenomas. BSS develops due to and severe autosoSmLCa3l 9rAec4essive zinc deficiency disorder, characterized by mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, CYLD. In this study we aimed to acral and periorificial dermatitis, alopecia and diarrhea. In 2002,S LwCe3 9aAnd4 perform genetic and functional studies on Hungarian BSS families. Genetic others identified as the AE-causing gene, the mutation of which screening of the CYLD gene identified a novel heterozygous missense mutati- induced a defective intestinal zinc transport. The routine testing of on (c.2613C>G; p.His871Gln) in a Hungarian BSS pedigree located in Szeged. which we proposSeLdC 3in9 Ao4ur laboratory since then showed that only 43% of Functional studies on the novel missense mutation demonstrated, that the patients with a clinical picture suggestive of AE presented clearly pathoge- CYLD-interactor NEMO protein immunoprecipitated from fibroblasts car- nicS aLnCo3m9Aa4lies in . rying the mutation is more ubiquitinated than the one immunoprecipitated Purpose: Our goal was to determine the genetic cause of the cases unlinked from control cells. Since NEMO is a well-known negative regulator of the to . SL
C39 A4 SL- NF-κB signaling pathway, we hypothesize that this novel missense mutation M
C3 e9tAh4od: 76 patients with a severe zinc deficiency were included:S 
L7 C03
 w9Ait4h of the CYLD gene might influence the NF-κB signaling pathway. In another no identified mutation, seven heterozygous for a deleterious family screening we identified a recurrent heterozygous nonsense mutation variant, and two not screened yet by the routine testing of . (c.2806C>T, p.Arg936X) in a BSS family located in the region of Szekszárd. A custom next-generation sequencing approach was used which targeted 50 The same recurrent nonsense mutation was identified in an Anglo-Saxon genes directly inSvLoClv3e9dA 4in zinc homeostasis. pedigree in the UK (region of Newcastle). Haplotype analysis of the Hungari- Results: A still preliminary analysis showed that ten cases could be related an and Anglo-Saxon BSS pedigrees carrying the same nonsense mutation to mutations in . At least 12 patients were found heterozygous car- revealed independent mutation events in the background of the disease. Our riers of a very likely pathoSgLeCn3i9c Av4ariant in other genes of zinc homeostasis, results suggest that the position of the identified recurrent nonsense muta- and a differential diagnosis could be established for two patients. tion is a mutational hotspot on the gene. Conclusions: We confirm as the main causative gene of inherited The genetic screening of BSS pedigrees may identify the causative mutation zinc deficiency. Furthermore, we highlighted several genes potentially re- on the CYLD gene thus we can offer presymptomatic screening and prenatal sponsible for rarer forms of zinc deficiency, which could contribute to ex- d Nia. gNnaogsyi:s N, wonheic. hN .m Raayj ahna:v Neo an he.u Kge. Fimarpkaacst: oNno nfaem. Li.l yK pelmanennyin: gN.one. M. Széll: None. tend our knowledge on zinc physiology. As it turns out, a whole exome se- quencing approach could be followed to identify new candidate genes in still u Sn. eKxüprlya:i nNeodn eA.E S-.l iSkec hcmasitets: .None. E. Blouin: None. S. Bezieau: None.  P01
.135 Kallikrein-related peptidase 5 transgenic mice recapitulate cutaneous and systemic hallmarks of Netherton syndrome, supporting a central  P01
.133 role of this protease in the disease A milder phenotype of acrodysostosis-2 due to a deletion of the L. Furio1,2, S. de Veer1,2, C. Deraison2, A. Briot2, C. Bonnart2, A. Robin2, A. Hovnanian1,2,3; proximal part of the PD E4
D gene? 1University Paris Descartes Sorbonne Cite, Paris, France, 2INSERM U781 and Imagine P. Lakeman1, L. C. Knegt1, V. Cormier-Daire2, R. C. M. Hennekam1,3; Institute of Genetic Diseases, Paris, France, 3Department of Genetics, Necker hospital, 1Academic Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Paris, France. 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades., Paris, France, 3Academic Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics., Amsterdam, Netherlands. SPINK5 Netherton syndrome (NS) is a severe, autosomal recessive ichthyosiform dermatosis caused by mutations of the -encoded lymphoepithelial Background: Acrodysostosis-2 (#MIM 614613) is a rare autosomal domi- Kazal-type-related inhibitor (LEKTI). Complementary studies in humans nant skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature, severe brachydac- and mice demonstrate the complexity of NS pathophysiology, which invol- tyly with cone-shaped epiphyses, midface and nasal hypoplasia anedt aslpinal ves abnormal desquamation and constitutive activation of pro-inflammato- stenosise.t Malany patients havdee (nmovooderate) intellectual disability, some have ry and pro-allergic pathways. Although several proteases (kallikrein-related hormone resistance (e.gP. DcoEn4gDenital hypothyroidism). In 2012, Lee . and peptidase (KLK) 5, KLK7 and elastase 2) are overactive following absence of Michot . both identified heterozygous missense mutations in the LEKTI, the known functions of KLK5 suggest it is central to the NS pheno- phosphodiesterase 4D, gene (5q12)(#MIM 600129), which is invol- type. To explore the role of KLK5 in NS, we have developed KLK5 transgenic ved in the cyclic AMP metabolism. All mutations were absent in controls and mice (TgKLK5) whereby human KLK5 is expressed under the control of the were predicted to be pathogenic. Functional studies were not performed. involucrin promoter. KLK5 immunostaining demonstrated high transgene Case: a 43 year-old female patient presented with a mild intellectual disa- expression in the granular layer of TgKLK5 epidermis. Increased proteolytic bility, autism-like behaviour and depression, congenital hypothyroidism, activity was detected by zymography, both for KLK5 and for two proteases it short hands and feet (but not too short, resembling most brachydactyly type is proposed to activate, KLK7 and elastase 2. Like in NS, TgKLK5 mice show D8),4 pectus excavatum, mild scoliosis, short statureE (S-1H.5GSD 2), 0st1ra3b i|s mPAusR aInSd, FRaA dNraCmEat i|c WskWin bWar.rEieSrH dGefe.Oct RwGith extensive scaling, accelerated filaggrinABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index A. Watanabe: None. R. Ogawa: None. M. Sasaki: None. A. Fujita: None. B.T. Naing: None. S. Akaishi: None. H. Hyakusoku: None. T. Shimada: None. processing and increased transepidermal water loss. The stratum corneum was also detached from the underlying epidermis through degradation of desmosomes. Additionally, TgKLK5 mice displayed hallmarks of cutaneous  P01
.138 inflammation and allergy including high expression of IL-1β, TNF-α and the Seeking pemphigus vulgaris causative variations in the ST18 gene pro-Th2 cytokine TSLP and infiltration of mast cells and eosinophils, over- E. Ben-Asher1, T. Olender1, A. Alkelai1, O. Sarig2, L. Zoller3, I. Goldberg2, S. Baum4, A. time leading to development of skin lesions due to persistent scratching. Barzilai4, H. Trau4, R. Bergman5, E. Sprecher2,6, D. Lancet1; Effects of inflammation extended to the systemic level with high serum IgE 1The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, and TSLP levels. As KLK5 overexpression is sufficient to replicate NS, these Tel-Aviv, Israel, 3Maccabi Health Care Services, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4Sheba Medical Center, findings establish KLK5 as the key initiator of the biological cascade under- Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 5Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 6Tel-Aviv University, Tel- p Li.n Fnuinrigo :t hNeo dneis. eSa.s dee. Veer: None. C. Deraison: None. A. Briot: None. C. Aviv, Israel. Bonnart: None. A. Robin: None. A. Hovnanian: None. Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a severe autoimmune blistering disease caused  P01
.136 by anti-epithelial antibodies, leading to disruption of cell–cell adhesion. The Genetic mosaicism associated with early Gorlin syndrome disease is exceedingly rare worldwide, but shows a 40-fold higher preva- E. Bueno Martínez1,2, A. Torrelo3, Á. Hernández Martín3, I. Palacios Álvarez4, L. López lence in Jewish populations. In a previous genome-wide association study Almeida1, I. Rivera3, R. González Sarmiento1,2; (GWAS) in a cohort of 100 PV patients, we identified a risk allele in the vici- 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Medicina. Universidad de Salamanca, nity of the Suppression of Tumorigenicity 18 (ST18) gene that was shown to Salamanca, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca IBSAL, confer a 6-fold increased risk for PV in Jews. ST18 regulates apoptosis and Salamanca, Spain, 3Hospital Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital universitario de inflammation, two processes of direct relevance to the pathogenesis of PV. Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. ST18 was also found to be overexpressed in the skin of PV patients as com- pared with healthy individuals, further supporting a role for this gene in PV (Sarig et al. 2012). In an attempt to identify ST18-associated causative vari- A 12 year old patient with multiple papular and nodular skin lesions since ants, we performed targeted next-generation sequencing of the entire ST18 birth, all of them located on the right side of her body, is presented. She has gene, including nearby regulatory regions (total of 0.47Mb) in 16 affected unilateral, segmentally arranged basaloid skin tumors, ipsilateral, palmo- subjects. A case-control association analysis of 789 variants, found within plantar pits of rather large size being distributed along Blaschko’s lines and the sequenced region, revealed a large genomic haplotype block strongly an ipsilateral odontogenic keratocyst. In addition, she presents a family hi- associated with the propensity to develop PV (p-value 0.003). This haplo- story of Gorlin Syndrome since her father suffers from this disease. type has a frequency of 50% in the sequenced cohort and only 8% in 1000 A molecular study of PTCH1 gene, which is associated with Gorlin syndro- genomes sequences. The block is located within an intron of the ST18 gene me, was performed by PCR and sequencing using patient‘s DNA extracted that harbors a lincRNA gene. A known SNP in this lincRNA that modifies its from peripheral blood and DNA extracted from biopsies of healthy and affec- secondary structure is enriched in the PV cohort and may be implicated in ted skin. In all cases was detected the c.3062A> G; p.Y1021C mutation. Fur- r Ee.g Buleant-iAonsh oefr S: TN1o8n ee.x Tp. rOelsesniodne.r: None. A. Alkelai: None. O. Sarig: None. L. thermore, the presence of a second novel mutation (c.543_549delGGCACTC; Zoller: None. I. Goldberg: None. S. Baum: None. A. Barzilai: None. H. Trau: p. S181
SfsX36) that produces a stop codon and generates a truncated protein None. R. Bergman: None. E. Sprecher: None. D. Lancet: None. was detected only in the DNA obtained from the affected skin. A family study Sample Result showed up that the father only had the mutation c.3062A> G; p.Y1021C.  P02
.001 Peripheral blood DNA c.3062A>G p.Y1021C Healthy skin biopsy DNA c.3062A>G p.Y1021C Duplication of the Rubinstein-Taybi region on 16p13.3 due to Affected skin biopsy DNA c.3062A>G p.Y1021C suspected germline mosaicism in two adult brothers c.543_549delGGCACTC p. S181
SfsX36 D. Bartholdi, F. Wenzel, K. Heinimann, S. Cichon, P. Miny; Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. We conclude that c.3062A> G; p.Y1021C mutation could be the cause of fa- miliar disease while c.543_549delGGCACTC; p. S181
SfsX36 mutation could be a de novo mutation that generates a genetic mosaicism since it does not Duplications of chromosomal region 16p13.3 encompassing the CREBBP appear in every patient’s cells. The presence of both mutations would make gene, which is mutated in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, have recently been the syndrome more aggressive and be responsible of the early appearance shown to cause a recognizable syndrome characterized by intellectual disa- o Ef. t Bheu ednisoe Masaer tiínn ecze:l lNs otnhea.t Ac.a Trroyrr beolot:h N mouneta. tÁio. nHse.rnández Martín: None. I. bility of varying degree and facial dysmorphisms. Here we report two brot- Palacios Álvarez: None. L. López Almeida: None. I. Rivera: None. R. González Sarmiento: None. hers aged 30-31 years carrying a 2.3 Mb duplication of the critical region of 16p13.3 detected by molecular karyotyping. Both patients show the facial features already described in the 16p13.3 du- plication syndrome including a long face, midfacial hypoplasia, pronounced  P01
.137 ptosis and microretrognathia with a dimple. However, the dysmorphic fea- A replication study for four keloid loci at 1q41, 3q22.3-23 and tures are more pronounced than in the younger patients described so far in 15q21.3 in the Japanese population the literature. Additional to the characteristic facial features the brothers A. WATANABE, R. OGAWA, M. SASAKI, A. FUJITA, B. T. Naing, S. AKAISHI, H. HYAKUSOKU, also show camptodactyly of the fingers and toes and contractures of the lar- T. SHIMADA; Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. ge joints. Both display a urogenital malformation and developed scoliosis and abdominal obesity in adolescence. While one of the brothers has mild intellectual disability the other is moderately to severely disabled, with no speech and only limited ambulation. This difference in severity is not explai- Keloid is a dermal fibroproliferative growth that results from ned by additional pathogenic copy number variants. dysfunction of the wound healing processes. A previous genome-wide asso- Analysis of the parents did not reveal any evidence for somatic mosaicism of ciateito anl .study (GWAS) reported four novel keloid-susceptibility loci at 1q41, the 16p13.3. duplication or a chromosomal rearrangement, thus suggesting 3q22.3-23 and 15q21.3 (Nakashima germline mosaicism as the underlying cause. Germline mosaicism for chro- M, Nature Genet. 2010;42,768-772). Here, we investigated mosomal rearrangements has rarely been reported, but the family described the association of these loci with keloid by using an independent Japanese here demonstrates that it has to be considered when several siblings appear sample set. We performed case-control association analysis using 204 pati- to be affected with the same condition. In addition, this report extends the ents with keloid subjects in Nippon Medical School Hospital. The four SNPs p Dh.e Bnaorttyhpoeld oi:f Nthoen e1.6 Fp. 1W3e.3n zdeul:p Nliocantei.o Kn. iHnteoin aimdualnthno: oNdo.ne. S. Cichon: None. P. at 1q41, 3q22.3-23 and 15q21.3 were genotyped using Small Amplicon Ge- Miny: None. notyping mNeEthDoDd4. In this study, the two from four loci identified by previous GWAS, rs873549 on chromosome 1 (odds ratio (OR) = 2.09) and rs8032158 located in on chromosome 15 (OR= 3.02) were significantly asso- ciated in keloid compared with control. Especially, the risk for keloid de- velopment (OR= 3.55) or the scar severity scale (OR= 4.73) increased with an increasing number of risk allele in rs8032158. Individuals with two risk alleles of the two loci showed higher risk of developing keloid than those with one risk allele alone. Our findings eluEcSidHatGed 2 th0e1 s3ig n|i fPicAanRcIeS o,f FgeRnAetNic CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 85 variation at these two loci in keloid in the Japanese population.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.002  P02
.004 Refinement of genotype-phenotype correlation in 3 patients with 22q11.2DS: MLPA and FISH results 1q24.3q25.1 microdeletion supports the role of CENPL and DNM3 Y. Kozlova1, N. Shilova1, M. Minzhenkova1, V. Antonenko1, N. Kotlukova2, E. Levchenko3, V. genes. Zabnenkova1, T. Zolotukhina1; N. Chatron1, A. Labalme1, M. Till1, M. Rossi2, P. Edery2,3, D. Sanlaville1,3, C. Schluth- 1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the Bolard1,3; Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Municipal 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Clinical Hospital №67, Perinatal cardiological Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, BRON Cedex, France, 2Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital 3Bakoulev Scientific Center for Cardiovascular Surgery of the Russian Academy of Femme-Mère-Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, BRON Cedex, France, 3INSERM, U1028 ; Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. CNRS, UMR5292 ; TIGER Team, Lyon, France. Aim: MLPA-analysis was performed on the group of probands with typical 1q24.3q25.1 microdeletion syndrome associates prenatal onset growth phenotype previously tested for 22q11.2 microdeletion by FISH in order to deficiency, intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism and small hands and confirm data, delineate deletion size and make an effort to reveal atypical feet. A 1.9 Mb minimal critical region (chr1: 171869242-173832704, Hg 19) distal deletions. Materials and methods: A group of 61 probands with phe- containing 13 genes was recently defined for this syndrome. Here we descri- notype suggestive of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) (CHD, facial be three new cases of 1q24.3q25.1 deletion, including the smallest deletion anomalies, cleft palate, hypocalcemia) was analyzed by MLPA-analysis with reported to date. Patients presented with the clinical common characteri- SALSA MLPA  P250
-B1 DiGeorge (MRC-Holland). All patients previously un- stics including small hands and feet, clinodactyly, absence of ear lobe, broad derwent standard karyotyping in order to exclude other chromosomal ab- nasal bridge and moderate intellectual disability. Homogeneous growth re- errations. FISH-analysis with TUPL E1
/ARSA (Abbott, Vysis) was performed tardation of prenatal onset was present in patients 1 and 2 whereas grow- in cultured lymphocytes. 37 patients were not deleted, 24 patients were th retardation appeared later in infancy in patient 3. Array CGH and FISH found to carry 22q11.2 deletion. DNA for MLPA-analysis was extracted from allowed the characterization of these deletions. Patients 1 and 2 showed EDTA-blood samples and from samples of Carnoy’s fixated lymphocytes left a 9.2 Mb and a 3 Mb deletion respectively, both encompassing completely over from karyotyping and FISH-analysis. Results: MLPA-analysis confirmed the minimum critical region containing DNM3 and CENPL genes. Patient 3 all 24 FISH-diagnosed cases of 22q11.2 deletion: in 19 cases A-B-C deletion carried a 6 Mb deletion overlapping only the proximal 1.2 Mb of the criti- was revealed, four patients had A-B deletion and one patient had A deletion. cal region and sparing the CENPL gene. These data combined with those In our study MLPA-test didn’t reveal nor atypical deletions neither duplica- of the literature strongly impute CENPL, encoding centromeric protein L, tions in the remaining 37 patients. DNA from EDTA-blood samples, Carnoy’s in fetal growth. They also allow to specify the supposed function of other cell suspension and samples from both materials analyzed simultaneously genes within the deletion: DNM3 (Dynamin3) involved in myelination could showed respective results. Conclusion: MLPA-analysis is considered to be a explain intellectual disability and microRNAs 214 and 199A2 may explain reliable, accurate and cost-effective method with high sensitivity and speci- facial dysmorphism based on knocked-out mice experiments. By describing ficity for 22q11.2 microdeletion detection. MLPA with DNA-samples extrac- the smallest deletion of the locus and cutting the minimum critical region, ted from Carnoy’s cell suspension showed reliable results. Thus, this materi- we were able to refine the genotype/phenotype correlation for 1q24.3q25.1 al can be used in cases when patient or EDTA-blood sample is not available, deletion and propose CENPL as main candidate gene for growth deficiency l Yim. Kitoezdl oavma:o uNnotnse .o Nf a. cScheislosvibal:e N monaete. rMia. lM ainndzh inen akrocvhaiv: eN coansee. sV.. Antonenko: i Nn .t Chihsa styronnd:r Nomonee.. A. Labalme: None. M. Till: None. M. Rossi: None. P. Edery: None. N. Kotlukova: None. E. Levchenko: None. V. Zabnenkova: None. T. None. D. Sanlaville: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None. Zolotukhina: None.  P02
.003  P02
.005 Short report: Delineation of a new chromosome 20q11.2 duplication Further delineation of the natural history of 49, XXXXY syndrome syndrome including the ASLX1 gene A. Collet1, J. Chatelin2, M. Valduga1, C. Bonnet1, N. Gospodaru3, L. Allou1, G. Weryha4, P. Jonveaux1; M. Avila1,2, M. Kirchhoff3, N. Marle4,5, H. D. Hove3, M. Chouchane2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,5, A. 1Laboratoire de Génétique, INSERM U-954, Université de Lorraine, Centre Hospitalier Masurel1, A. Mosca-Boidron4,5, P. Callier4,5, F. Mugneret4, S. Kjaergaard3, L. Faivre1,5; Universitaire de Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 2Service d’Endocrinologie et 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d‘Enfants, Gynécologie Médicale, Université de Lorraine, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de CHU, Dijon, France, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3Service de Neurologie, Université de Lorraine, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau Technique de Biologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nancy, Nancy, France, 4Service d’Endocrinologie et CHU, Dijon, France, 5EA 4271 GAD „Génétique des Anomalies du Développement“, IFR Gynécologie Médicale, Université de Lorraine, Centre Hospitalier de Nancy, Vandoeuvre 100-Santé STIC, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. les Nancy, France. The current use of microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization 49,XXXXY syndrome is a rare sex chromosome aneuploidy occurring in 1:85 allowed the iddeen ntiofvicoa tion of novel cytogenetic abnormalities. Partial triso- 000-1:100 000 male births. He has to be distinguished from Klinefelter syn- mies of the long arm of chromosome 20 are rare. Here we report on three drome. Data on this aneuploidy in adulthood are limited, with most of the males with a overlapping 7.5, 9.78 and 10 Mb duplication of chro- literature data based on paediatric patients. mosome 20q11.2. Together with another patient previously published in We report a new male patient whose 49,XXXXY diagnosis was formally the literature with overlapping 20q11 microduplication, we showed that made at the age of 54 years. A neurologist who examined for the first time such patients display common clinical features including striking similar the patient for tremor ordered the karyotype analysis. So far, no medical dysmorphic features with metopic ridging/trigonocephaly, full eyelids, epi- follow-up was performed specifically for his condition. This man presented canthal folds, moderate developmental delay, short hands, crypAtoSrLcXh1idism, with eunuchoid body habitus, facial features with epicanthus, hypertelo- and normal gro AwStLhX t1o mild growth retardation. The minimala csrxitical region rism, up-slanting palpebral fissures and features of chronic hypoandroge- of the duplication to 7.5e nMobv oencompassing 173 genes including gene nism with muscular weakness, sparse body hair, dry skin with abnormal (MIM612990). is a human homolog of the Drosophila gene which healing of skin wounds. Endocrine evaluation confirmed a hypergonadotro- is an homeotic gene. D heterozygous nonsense or truncating mutati- pic hypogonadism with two testes (one cryptorchid testis). Bone mineral ons have been reported recently in patients with Borhing-Opitz syndrome density showed an osteoporosis. There was no cardiac defect. He had mode- (MIM605039), a severe developmental and malformation disorder. rate intellectual deficiency with more affected verbal skills. There were no BecAaSuXsLe1 of craniofacial features in common with Borhing-Opitz syndrome, behavioural problems and he had social and occupational capabilities with in particular metopic ridging/trigonocephaly, we suggest that duplication adaptive functioning. A recent deep vein thrombosis was diagnosed in his of may contribute to the phenotype. These observations suggest a left leg. Unusually, in addition to moderate deafness, he developed progres- novel recognizable microduplication syndrome, and reporting of additional sively a severe vision impairment leading to blindness. patients with molecular characterization will allow more detailed genotype- p Mh.e Anvoitlay:p Ne ocnoer.r eMl.a Ktioirnchs.hoff: None. N. Marle: None. H.D. Hove: None. M. There have been very few reports of adult individuals with 49,XXXXY syn- Chouchane: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Masurel: None. A. Mosca- drome and to our knowledge only one 47-year-old male patient (Akiyama Boidron: None. P. Callier: None. F. Mugneret: None. S. Kjaergaard: None. L. et al, 2011, J Dermatol, 38: 414). This kind of report may contribute to im- Faivre: None. proved management of prospective medical healthcare associated with this c Ao.n Cdoitliloetn: iNno onled. eJr. iCnhdaivteidlinu:a lNso.ne. M. Valduga: None. C. Bonnet: None. N. Gospodaru: None. L. Allou: None. G. Weryha: None. P. Jonveaux: None. 86 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.006 Genetics Department, Guy‘s Hospital, Great Maze Pond, London S E1
 9RT, United 4q21 deletion syndrome: involvement of PRKG2 in short stature and Kingdom, 12Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et Biologie Cellulaire, CHU Pontchaillou, new boundaries for mental retardation and speech delay. Rennes, France, 13Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Bretagne Atlantique, Vannes, France, 14Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U-781, M. Dayem-Quere, F. Giuliano, C. Massol, V. Paquis-Flucklinger, H. Karmous-Benailly; Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 15Laboratoire de Génétique Hôpital de l‘Archet II, CHU de Nice, Nice, France. Chromosomique, CHU Timone enfants, AP-HM, Marseille, France, 16Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 17Service de Génétique Clinique CLAD-Ouest-CHU Rennes, université Rennes1, Rennes, France, 18Institut Jérôme Patients with interstitial 4q21-q22 deletions show several characteristic Lejeune, Paris, France, 19Laboratoire de Génétique, EA 4368, CHU de Nancy, Nancy- features such as neonatal muscular hypotonia, small hands and feet, severe Université Henri Poincaré, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 20Service de Neuropédiatrie, growth restriction, mental delay, severe psychomotor retardation, absent CHRU de Lille, Lille, France. or severely delayed speech and facial dysmorphism with a broad forehead, frontal bossing, hypertelorism, short philtrudme ,n aonvdo downturned corners of the mouth. Many cases were described in the literature, and, recently, a stu- 6q16 deletions are associated with a Prader-Willi-Like (PWL) phenotype. dy analysed nine patients with overlapping 4q21P dReKlGet2i,o RnAs SoGf EdFif1feB-, A role of several candidate genes has been suggested: SIM1 for obesity and rHeNnRt NsiPzDes, ,H rNanRgPiDnLg fromE 3N.O2 PMHb1 to 15.2 Mb (Bonnet, 2 P0
R1K0G)2. TheyR dAeSfGinEeFd1 Ba GRIK2 for behavioural problems. However, few patients have been precisely minimal critical interval of 1.37 Mb, containing 5 genes, described using high resolution microarray. We report 14 new patients with and . Two of these genes, and de novo 6q16 deletions all characterized by oligonucleotide or SNP microar- were considered to be thdee mnoovsot promising candidates for growth restriction, ray, among them the first fetus with a complete fetal examination. Nine pa- mental retardation, and absent or severely delayed speech. We present a tients display a PWL phenotype and allow refining of the critical region for study on a child with a 4q21.22 deletion, facial anomalies, develop- this condition. The fetus exhibits dysmorphic facial features and particular mental delay, and mental retardation. The deletion carried by our patient is cerebellar and cerebral abnormalities with neuronal ectopia. Deletion size the smallest described in this region. It overlaps the minimal critical region in living patients ranges from 2.20 to 7.84 Mb whereas the fetus carries the previously described thus defining new boundaries for this emergent 4q21 largest deletion (14 Mb). Genotype-phenotype correlations reveal a novel deletion syndPrRoKmGe2. Unlike all previously described cases, PouRrK Gp2atient is of minimal critical region for PWL phenotype comprising SIM1 and MCHR2 normal height and does not show any growth restriction. Interestingly, in genes. This study confirms, on the largest series reported to date, the strong hRiAsS cGaEsFe1, Bthe HNR NgPenDe is not deleted. We thus propose to be the association between PWL phenotype and 6q16 deletions as previously ob- gene responsible for the short stature of the patients when deleted, and served. The genes within the minimal critical region that we described seem and as candidate genes for the mental retardation and to play a critical role in the phenotype. Also, we presented a detailed report speech delay, two features present in all described patients without excep- o Lf. tEhle K fihrasttt afebtio: pNaotnheo. lEo.g Piciapli reaxsa:m Nionnaet.i oSn. Dorf uan faett:u Nso dneel.e Fte. dG ufoimr tiohti:s Nreognieo. nJ.. t Mio.n Dayem-Quere: None. F. Giuliano: None. C. Massol: None. V. Paquis- Andrieux: None. C. Baumann: None. S. Bouquillon: None. A.L. Delezoide: Flucklinger: None. H. Karmous-Benailly: None. None. B. Delobel: None. F. Demurger: None. H. Dessuant: None. C. Dubourg: None. C. Dupont: None. L. Faivre: None. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. S. Jaillard: None. H. Journel: None. S. Lyonnet: None. V. Malan: None. A. Masurel: None. N. Marle: None. C. Missirian: None. A. Moerman: None. A.  P02
.007 Moncla: None. S. Odent: None. A. Ravel: None. S. Romana: None. A.C. Tabet: 5q31.3 microdeletion syndrome: clinical and molecular None. M. Vadulga: None. M. Vermelle: None. A. Verloes: None. B. Benzacken: None. A. Delahaye: None. characterization of two further cases N. Brown1,2, T. Burgess1,2, R. Forbes1,2, G. McGillivray1,2, A. Kornberg3,4, S. Mandelstam3,4, Z. Stark1,2; 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Australia, 2Murdoch Children‘s Research  P02
.009 Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, Aarskog-Scott syndrome: cases with clinical and molecular diagnosis 4University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne, Australia. S. Avci, B. N. Satkin, Z. Uyguner, H. Kayserili, U. Altunoglu; Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. The 5q31.3 microdeletion syndrome has recently emerged as a distinct cli- nical entity, and we report two new patients with de novo deletions of this region, bringing the total to seven. The phenotype is characterized by mar- Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS) is an X-linked disorder characterized by ked hypotonia, apnoea, developmental delay and feeding difficulties. Both short stature, hypertelorism, shawl scrotum, and brachydactyly. There is patients had abnormal movements which did not correlate with epilepti- wide phenotypic variability. Additional features include joint hyperexten- form activity on electroencephalogram (EEG). Developmental brain chan- sibility, short nose, widow‘s peak, and inguinal hernia. While most patients ges on neuroimaging consist of abnormalities predominantly affecting the do not have mental retardation, they exhibit neurobehavioral features. Car- white matter and frontal lobes. The 5q31.3 deleted regions overlap those rier females are clinically diagnosed by widow‘s peak or short stature or by of previously reported cases, and allow further refinement of the shortest molecuFlGarD 1testing whenever there is an affected male in the family. Preva- region of overlap (SRO) to 101kb, including only three genes. Of these the lance of AAS is unknown, but less than 100 cases have been reported after purine-rich element binding protein A (PURA) gene has an established role 1970. gene was found responsible from X-linked AAS phenotype in in brain development, and we propose that haploinsufficiency for this gene 1994 by a group of researchers (Pasteris et al.). Thirty different mutations i Ns .p Brirmowarni:l yN roensep. oTn. Bsiubrlge efsosr :t hNeo nnee.u Rr.o Fdoervbeelosp: mNoennet.a Gl f.e MatcuGriellsiv orbayse: rNvoende.. A. including missense, frameshift, nonsense, splice site, in-frame and gross de- Kornberg: None. S. Mandelstam: None. Z. Stark: None. letions have been reported up till then in more than 40 families (HGMD, 14 December 2012). WFGeD h1ere present the clinical and molecular findings of four additional pa-  P02
.008 tients/families with Aarskog-Scott syndrome. Four different mutations in 14 new patients with 6q16 deletion: a new minimal critical region gene, including three novels, were identified in our study group. These and first fetopathological data novel mutations include two frameshift [(c.2034delA (p.Lys699LysfsX13), L. El Khattabi1,2, E. Pipiras1,3, S. Drunat2, F. Guimiot2,3, J. Andrieux4, C. Baumann2, S. c.1815dupG (p.Thr606AspfsX28)] and one missense mutation [(c.1555C>T Bouquillon5, A. L. Delezoide2,3, B. Delobel6, F. Demurger7, H. Dessuant8, C. Dubourg9, C. (p.Arg519Cys)]. The (c.1829G>A/p.R610Q) mutation has been previously Dupont2, L. Faivre10, M. Holder-Espinasse11, S. Jaillard12, H. Journel13, S. Lyonnet14, V. described. In three families, familial inheritance was observed, while one Malan14, A. Masurel10, N. Marle10, C. Missirian15, A. Moerman16, A. Moncla15, S. Odent17, A. Ravel18, S. Romana14, A. C. Tabet2, M. Vadulga19, M. Vermelle20, A. Verloes2,3, B. case was isolated. In total, 14 additional AAS cases and 13 obligate female Benzacken1,2,3, A. Delahaye1,3; carriers were ascertained by pedigree analysis. Further clinical/molecular 1Laboratoire d’Histologie-Embryologie-Cytogénétique-BDR-CECOS, Hôpital Jean studies are underway. Clinical findings of affected males and carrier females Verdier, AP-HP, Université Paris 13, Bondy, France, 2Département de Génétique et w Si.l Al bvec id: iNsocnues.s eBd.N a.l Sonatgk wini:t Nh omneo.l eZc. uUlayrg udnaetar: i Nn ovnieew. H o. fK tahyes leitreilri:a Ntuornee.. U. Biologie du développement, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Université Paris VII, Paris, Altunoglu: None. France, 3U676, Inserm, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 5Institut de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 6Centre de Génétique Chromosomique, Saint-Vincent de Paul, GHIC, Lille, France, 7Service de Génétique Clinique CLAD-Ouest- CHU Rennes, Université Rennes1, Rennes, France, 8Département de Cytogénétique, Laboratoire Biomnis, Paris, France, 9Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, UMR 6290 CNRS, IGDR, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 10Département de Génétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 11Clinical ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 87ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.010 An Alström Syndrome case with immunodeficiency T. Ozdemir1, N. Karaca2, J. Marshall3, R. Ozgul4, A. Ozanturk4, H. Ozdemir2, G. Aksu2, N. Fam20c were expressed as early as  E14
.5 cap tooth stage. Kutukculer2, S. Darcan2, F. Ozkinay5, O. Cogulu5; Grants by PHRC 2008-2013, Offensive Sciences Initiative of the Trinational 1Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Faculty of Medicine Metropolitan Region of the Upper Rhine, European Fund for Regional De- Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 3The Jackson Laboratory 600 Main Street Bar velopment (ERDF), Program INTERREG IV Upper Rhine, Project A27 „Oro- Harbor, Maine, ME, United States, 4Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 5Faculty of dAe.n Btalol cmha-Znuifpeasnta: tNioonnse .o Mf r. aHruec dkiesreta: sNeosn aen. dD .WA.e Pllacrormy:e N Tornues.t J..A. Poulter: Medicine Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey. None. F. Clauss: None. E. Karayigit: None. C. Schneider: None. S. Mokmued: None. V. Laugel-Haushalter: None. E. Ginglinger: None. M. Addor: None. S. Pajarola: None. G. Sparta: None. D. Bartholdi: None. A. Rauch: None. N. Alström syndrome (AS) is a very rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder Zouari: None. C.F. Inglehearn: None. C. Stoetzel: None. H. Dollfus: None. A. Mighell: None. characterized mainly by obesity, hearing loss, retinopathy, cardiomyopathy, recurrent pulmonary infections, progressive renal and hepatic dysfunction and endocrinological features. It is caused by mutations in the ALM S1
 gene. Here we present an AS female with immunodeficiency. The proband is a  P02
.012 4.5-year-old female born to nonconsanguineous parents. She was first ad- About 9 patients with ARC syndrome (Arthrogryposis-Renal mitted to the hospital at 6 months old because of developmental delay and dysfunction -Cholestasis syndrome): focus on prenatal findings pulmonary infection. She had a history of multiple hospitalizations because J. Fabre-Teste, L. Perrin, E. Serrano, O. Fenneteau, F. Muller, A. Verloes, C. Baumann; of recurrent pulmonary infections. Throughout this period immunodefici- Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France. ency, primary hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency were detected. Imaging analysis revealed cortical atrophy, ventricular dilatation and bitem- poral lobe hypoplasia in cranial MRI; patent foramen ovale in echocardio- ARC syndrome is a severe autosomal recessive multisystem disorder inclu- graphy; hepatomegaly with hepatosteatosis in USG; ulnar hypoplasia, short ding arthrogryposis, renal tubular acidosis and neonatal cholestatic jaun- upper limb, coxa valga, metaphyseal widening in distal femur and proximal dice. Other features variably reported are icthyosis, mild dysmorphic signs, tibia and Erlenmeyer flask bone deformity in both femur in X-Ray examina- anomalies of corpus callosum, recurrent infections, failure to thrive and grey tions; generalized osteoporosis in DEXA. Her physical examination showed platelets due to defect in platelet alpha-granules biogenesis. This syndrome generalized alopecia, blue sclera, jagged teeth, short neck, joint laxity, trun- affects newborns who usually die in the first year of life of infections or life- cal obesity and generalized hypotonia. Her developmental milestones were threatening haemorrhage due to platelet dysfunctions. Mutations in VP S33
B delayed. Eye examination revealed pigmentary retinopathy and salt-pepper and VIPAR genes have been reported in this syndrome. appearance. She had sensorineural hearing loss. Ankara Developmental We report on 9 patients from 5 pedigrees of various origins with this syn- Screening Inventory test showed 30 % delay in general, cognitive and lin- drome. We will particularly focus on prenatal findings. Transient intestinal guistic development areas. Her karyotype was 46,XX. Molecular analysis hyperechogenicity and hypomobility were frequent findings in our patients. revealed one heterozygous ALM S1
 mutation (c.5969C>G p.Ser1990X). This One patient presented with increased nuchal translucency. We will discuss result along with the clinical features, confirmed the clinical diagnosis of AS t Jh.e F aambrnei-oTteisct een: zNyomnea.t Lic. pPreorfriiln.: None. E. Serrano: None. O. Fenneteau: None. F. Muller: None. A. Verloes: None. C. Baumann: None. as it has been stated by Marshall et al. AS cases are suggested to be investi- g Ta. tOedzd feomr ciro: nNcoonme.i tNa.n Kt aimramcau:n Noodneef.i cJi.e Mncayr.shall: None. R. Ozgul: None. A. Ozanturk: None. H. Ozdemir: None. G. Aksu: None. N. Kutukculer: None. S. Darcan: None. F. Ozkinay: None. O. Cogulu: None.  P02
.013 Viennese “Fools Tower” Collection: Birth Defects and Malformation Syndromes in Archived Fetal Specimens  P02
.011 J. Behunova1, B. Patzak2, S. Kircher1, F. Laccone1, H. Rehder1; FAM20A mutations behind amelogenesis imperfecta and gingival 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2Pathologic- anatomical Collection in the Viennese Fools Tower of the Natural-Historical Museum, hyperplasia Vienna, Austria. A. Bloch-Zupan1,2,3, M. Huckert1,4, D. A. Parry5, J. A. Poulter5, F. Clauss1,2, E. Karayigit3, C. Schneider1, S. Mokmued1,3, V. Laugel-Haushalter3, E. Ginglinger6, M. Addor7, S. Pajarola8, G. Sparta8, D. Bartholdi8, A. Rauch8, N. Zouari9, C. F. Inglehearn5, C. Stoetzel4, H. Dollfus4, A. Mighell5; Background 1University of Strasbourg, Faculty of Dentistry, Strasbourg, France, 2Reference Centre for A Pathologic-anatomical collection of Viennese Natural-Historical Museum Orodental Manifestations of Rare Diseases, Service de Médecine et Chirurgie Buccale, has accumulated since 1796 a remarkable variety of exhibits, including a Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3IGBMC (Institute of Genetics rich collection of birth defects. Formerly, the specifications of birth defects and Molecular and Cellular Biology), INSERM, U964; CNRS, UMR7104, Illkirch, France, 4Laboratoire Physiopathologie des syndromes rares héréditaires, INSERM U112, were only descriptive; nowadays, many of them are syndromologically clas- Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, 5Leeds Institute of sifiable. Molecular Medicine, St James‘s University Hospital, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Aim Kingdom, 6Service de Génétique, Hôpital Emile Muller, Mulhouse, France, 7Service de Our aim is to closer determine the nature of developmental anomalies in Génétique Médicale, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Medical Genetics, The University of Zurich, some specified series of the Viennese Pathologic-anatomic Collection. This Zurich, Switzerland, 9Service de Pédiatrie, CHU SAHLOUL, Sousse, Tunisia. diagnostic work-up could help providing extraordinary learn-samples for health professionals dealing with birth defects/syndromes. Considering the rareness and age of this material, the work could be of a great international Amelogeneses imperfectae (AI) are a heterogeneous group of rare diseases importance as well. affecting the formation/mineralization of tooth enamel and transmitted ac- Material and Methods cording to various mode of inheritance (X-linked, autosomal dominant or re- Preliminary phase included an overall visual inspection of all (circa 1000) cessive). These diseases exist either in isolation, with clinical manifestations fetal/pediatric exhibits of the museum, in parallel with a key words-search limited to the oral cavity, or associated to other symptoms in syndromes as in the museum´s electronic database. Some exhibits already underwent de- for example AI and cone-rod dystrophy, AI and epilepsy. Mutations in many tailed objective evaluation. genes coding for either enamel matrix proteins, enamel matrix degrading Results proteins, or proteins involved in hydroxyapatite formation and growth, and The first inspection allowed us to select 5 main “working groups” accor- mineralization processes have been identified as being responsible for the ding to the leading type of external defect: 1. Orofacial clefts, non-midline, clinical enamel phenotypes (hypoplastic, hypomineralized, hypomature) 2. Middle-line facial defects, 3. Disorders of extremities and skeletal dys- encountered. We explored the genotype and orodental and extraoral phe- plasias, 4. Congenital tumors, 5. Miscellaneous syndromes. The number of notype in a cohort of patients presenting recessive hypoplastic amelogene- the selected exhibits counted circa 140. Already within this “first-look pha- sis imperfecta and gingival hyperplasia caused by FAM20A gene mutations. se” we have clinically specified some developmental pathologies that we DNA sequencing revealed two compound heterozygous and two homozy- present here as the initial findings; among them e.g. Rosenak-, Piepcorn-, gous FAM20A mutations in 6 affected individuals from 4 unrelated families Roberts-, OFD2-, Delleman-, Beckwith-Wiedemann-, Smith-Lemli-Opitz-, (2 of them consanguineous) of various ethnic backgrounds. The orodental Meckel-syndromes and others. phenotype was strikingly similar with absent enamel, gingival hyperplasia Conclusion/Plans but also intrapulpal calcifications, dental follicles hyperplasia, unerupted In further investigations all selected exhibits will undergo a detailed objecti- impacted teeth, root anomalies. Anatomopathology analysis of the gingiva ve reevaluation and documentation, including X-ray, autopsies, histological demonstrated signs of discrete leuco-parakeratosis and minimal chronic and eventually DNA analysis to identify or confirm a suspected chromoso- in 8fl 8ammation. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRmAaNl, mCiEcr o| dWeleWtioWn .oEr SmHonGo.gOenRicG syndrome. Mouse teeth transcriptome data indicated that Fam20a as well as Fam20b,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index J. Behunova: None. B. Patzak: None. S. Kircher: None. F. Laccone: None. H. Montaño1, R. Martín Arenas1, P. Lapunzina1; Rehder: None. 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid., Madrid, Spain, 2Unidad 753, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3IdiPaz. Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Unidad de  P02
.014 Endocrinología, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. The ARHGA P24
 gene is disrupted in two sisters with septate uterus G. Thierry1, S. Ploteau2, O. Pichon1, D. Poulain1, A. Briand1, C. Veluppillai2, P. Lopes2, F. Jossic3, M. Joubert3, B. Isidor1, C. Bénéteau1, C. Le Caignec1; We report a 6-year-old boy referred for clinical assessment because of fai- 1CHU Nantes Medical genetics department, NANTES, France, 2CHU Nantes Obstetrics lure to thrive, psychomotor delay, left renal agenesis and mild pulmonary and gynecology departments, NANTES, France, 3CHU Nantes Anathomy Pathology Laboratory, NANTES, France. stenosis. He presented with distinctive facial features: short and narrow pal- pebral fissures, ptosis, a bulbous nose and a small mouth. A customized 60.000 oligOonMuIcMleotide array-CGHF (OKXaCr1y.o Array®v3.0, Agi- lent) reveFaISleHd a partial tetrasomy of 6p25.1→6p25.3 of about 5.96 Mb. This Uterine malformations, among them septate uterus, are a frequent cause of region contains at least 5 genes including Subtelomeric me- recurrent miscarriages. We report here two sisters, both presenting with taphase analyFsISisH (RH40931, Kreatech) showed hybridization on both septate uterus, in whom we identified an apparently balanced reciprocal 6p subtelomeres, but a brighter signal pattern was observed on one homo- translocation t(2;4)(q35;q21.3). Array CGH analysis excluded a microdeleti- logue. Interphase with the same probe demonstrated four 6p signals. on/microduplication at breakpoints. Breakpoints were mapped bAyR FHISGHA Pan2d4 These findings are consistent with a 6p25.1→ 6p25.3 tandem triplication. seque nced by long-range PCR. The breakpoint in chromosome 2 occurred in Partial trisomy of 6p25 is a chromosome abnormality characterized by low a non-coding trhegion while AthRoHsGeA inP 2c4hromosome 4 disrupted thMeA PK10 birth weight, psychomotor delay, growth retardation, congenital heart de- genein the 7 intron. This translocation revealed two potential candidate fects, and renal anomalies. Affected individuals present with craniofacial genes iAnR 4HqG2A1P r2e4g ion: the disrupted gene and the gene dysmorphism consisting in blepharophimosis, palpebral ptosis, dysplastic located close to the breakpoint, which might be altered through a position and low set ears, small and prominent chin and a bulbous nose. Partial te- eMffAePcKt.1 0 is involved in the regulation of uterine contractions and trasomy of 6p25 is an extremely rare condition and up to date only one girl thus appeared to be the best candidate explaining uterine malformations. with a 6p25 tetrasomy has been described in the literature, interestingly is also a good caAndRiHdGaAteP s2i4n ce im MpAaiPrKm1e0nt in MAPK signalling was showing strikingly similar facial features. implicated in gonadal development disorders. Next, we performed qPCR We would like to highlight the distinctive facial features associated with and direct sequencing of and in 27 patients with isola- 6p25 tetrasomy and the need to consider 6p25 chromosome abnormali- ted septate uterus. No point mutations or intragenic deletions/duplications w Ge. rTeh iideerrnyt:i fNieodn.e. S. Ploteau: None. O. Pichon: None. D. Poulain: None. A. ties in the differential diagnosis of individuals with blephaBrPoEpShimosis and Briand: None. C. Veluppillai: None. P. Lopes: None. F. Jossic: None. M. psychomotor delay in addition to other more common entities such as Joubert: None. B. Isidor: None. C. Bénéteau: None. C. Le Caignec: None. Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome ( ) and Ohdo sMyn. Pdraolommea.res Bralo: None. M.A. Mori: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. J. Nevado Blanco: None. M. Torres Pérez-Hidalgo: None. A. Delicado Navarro: None. A. Coral Barreda: None. M. Crespo: None. V. Fernández Montaño:  P02
.015 None. R. Martín Arenas: None. P. Lapunzina: None. New critical region for recently defined 4q21 microdeletion syndrome O. Liaugaudiene, L. Cimbalistiene, Z. Ciuladaite, J. Kasnauskiene, E. Preiksaitiene, V. Kucinskas;  P02
.017 Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Microduplication of 17q22q23.2 due to a supernumerary marker Vilnius, Lithuania. chromosome in a girl with macrocephaly and global developmental delay K. Writzl1, A. Veble1, L. Lovrečić1, T. Liehr2, B. Peterlin1; 4q21 deletions have been reported in a number of patients with characte- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. ristic features (facial dysmorphism, hypotonia, small hands and feet, short fingers, mild-severe growth delay, ID, sDevee nreolvyo delayed speech). We report on a new case of 4q21.22 microdeletion and suggest a new critical regi- Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC), defined as additional on for 4q21 microdeletion syndrome. interstitial 724Kb deletion structurally rearranged chromosomes that cannot be identified by conven- of 4q21.22 (83273844 - 84097897 bp, hg18) was detected by arrayCGH tional chromosome-banding alone, are often seen in patients with develop- (105K) in a patient with considerable hypotonia, severely retarded psycho- mental disorders. The risk and severity of the abnormal phenotype depends motor development and delayed speech, short stature (3-10 centile) and on the size of the sSMC and extent of the mosaicism. Application of genome- dysmorphic features (slant up palpebral fissures, posteriorly rotated ears, wide array technology enables full characterization of sSMC. short concave nose with anteverted nostrils, short philtrum, prognathia, We report a 15-months old girl with sSMC derived from chromosome 17. downturned corners of the mouth, single transverse palmar crease, small The clinical features include global developmental delay, hypotonia, feeding hands and feet, short toes). problems, recurrent bronchiolitis, macrocephaly, and distinct facial features. Recently critical region for 4q21 microdeletion syndrome was defined by A 47,XX,+mar karyotype was found in all examined metaphases from peri- analyzing published cRaAseSsG EanFd1B DECIPPHREKRG 2reports 1571 and 4539 (Bonnet pheral blood. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies demonstra- et al., 2010). The overlapping region was from 82332981 to 83182488 bp ted that sSMC derived from chromosome 17 and showed no hybridization with candidate genes and . Our reported deletion does not signal for subcentromeric probes. Microarray analysis (185K array, Agilent overlap with defined region. However, clinical features of our patient coin- Technologies) showed two gains of about 2Mb at band 17q11, and 10,5 Mb cide with 4q21 microdeletion syndrome. We suggest other critical region at band 17q22q23.3 (arr[hg18] 17q11(22,367,302-24,320,006)×3,17q22 (chr4:83273844 - 84066553) for this syndrome, shared by previously re- q23.3(49,265,451-59,786,509)×3). FISH analysis using MPO probe confir- ported 4q21 deletionLs,I ND5 E4
CIPHER cases 4539 and 4665, and our rHeNpoRrPtDedL med that sSMC contains17q22 region. deletHioNnR. NThPiDs region includes up to 10 RefSeq genes. Strong candidate genes The clinical data of 17q11 and 17q22q23.3 microduplication are scarce. are brain expressed , heterogeneous nuclear riboproteins Alvarado et al. reported 17q23.1q23.2 microduplication as a potential CNV and - regulators of cell cycle, transcription and mRNR stabiliza- locus for isolated clubfoot and Radio et al. described a boy with 17q23.2 mi- tion. Further analysis of genes` candidates` function and expression is ne- croduplication who presented with intellectual disability, brain, heart and cessary for refining minimal deletion region leading to 4q21 microdeletion sOy.n Ldiraoumgaeu.diene: None. L. Cimbalistiene: None. Z. Ciuladaite: None. J. skeletal anomalies. Main candidate genes are TBX2 and TBX4. Although the Kasnauskiene: None. E. Preiksaitiene: None. V. Kucinskas: None. present patient has a duplication of both genes, she shares neither the club- foot nor the heart abnormalities. In conclusion, application of genome-wide array technology can reveal un- predicted complexity of the sSMC containing non-contiguous regions and  P02
.016 increases the knowledge of the clinical picture of interstitial microduplica- Blepharophimosis and multiple congenital alterations in a boy with a t Kio. nWs.ritzl: None. A. Veble: None. L. Lovrečić: None. T. Liehr: None. B. Peterlin: 6p25 tetrasomy. None. M. Palomares Bralo1,2,3, M. A. Mori1,2,3, S. García-Miñaúr1, J. Nevado Blanco1, M. Torres Pérez-Hidalgo1, A. Delicado Navarro1, A. Coral Barreda4, M. Crespo1, V. Fernández ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 89ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.018 Array-CGH analysis suggests genetic heterogeneity in Rhombencephalosynapsis more than 255 cases of CCRs involving three or more chromosomes have L. Pasquier1, F. Demurger1, C. Dubourg2,3, V. Dupé3, B. Leheup4, J. Lespinasse5, P. Loget6, P. been reported, although their incidence seems to be increasing because of Marcorelles7, A. Laquerrière8,9, S. Odent1,3, V. David2,3; tOhbej eimctpivaec:t of the application of new molecular technologies. Nevertheless, 1Service Génétique Clinique - CHU Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 2Laboratoire de CMCaRtse riniavlo alvnidng M twetoh cohdrso:mosomes are still very rare. génétique moléculaire - CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 3UMR 6061 CNRS, IFR 140 To identify the origin and chromosomes involved in a CCRs. GFAS - Université Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 4Service de Génétique, CHU Hôpital Brabois, Here we present a malformed newborn female with Nancy, France, 5Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier, Chambéry, France, a partial trisomy of the long arm of a chromosome 3, which at first was con- 6Laboratoire d’anatomopathologie, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 7Laboratoire d’anatomopathologie, CHU Morvan, Brest, France, 8Laboratoire d’anatomopathologie, sidered to be a derivative of a balanced maternal translocation and, after the CHU, Rouen, France, 9INSERM EA 4309, IFR PM 23, Université de Rouen, Rouen, France. application of high resolution cytogenetic techniques, array-CGH analysis, FClounocrleusscieonnc:e in situ Hybridization (FISH) and Multi Color Banding FISH (MCB), was found to be a CCR derived from a maternal insertion. Rhombencephalosynapsis (RS) is an uncommon, but increasingly recogni- With the presentation of this case, we would like to reinforce zed, cerebellar malformation defined by vermian agenesis with fusion of the the power of MCB and array-CGH for clarifying any type of CCRs, as previous- hemispheres. The embryologic and genetic mechanisms involved are still ly proposed by Pellestor et al. [2011] and Kang S-HHL [2010], but also to unknown, and to date, no animal models are available. support the value of a high resolution G-Band karyotype and the idea that “all To detect RS candidate genes, we performed Agilent oligonucleotidic ar- techniques are complementary and provide different information, essential rays throughout 57 RS patients. Four different unbalanced rearrangements to understand all kinds of CCR”.References: Kang S-HL et al., 2010; Lee et were found out: a 16p11.2 deletion, a 14q12-q21.2 delect1io6no,r af4n5 unbalNanDcEe1d. al., 2010; Madan K, 2012; Viaggi et al. 2012; Pellestor et al. 2011 and Kang translocation t(2p; c1106qo)r af4n5d particular one microdeletion of 2,7 Mb in the S FL- e.H rR nHo áL nd derít eg zau -le T.,z 2: 0 aN l1o 0n N.e o. M e.. SG .a Brc hí aa t- tC a Ns otr no e: N T.o Ln ie e. A r:. NPl oa ns ee .n Ec .i a A: N ao rcn ae :. NJ. o r : n : . h b o ne. 16p13.11 region containinin sgit 2u candidate genes for RS : and The sequencing of performed on the whole cohortdid N nDoEt 1reve- ac1l 6aonryf 4m5utation. Using hybridization to localize gene expression on a chick embryo model, we confirmed the neural expression of and  P02
.021 . Defining the minimal critical region for the 3p deletion syndrome. From this first microarray scan series of rhombencephalosynapsis, it could C. Pinato, C. Rigon, M. Cassina, L. Salviati, M. Clementi; b Le. sPuagsgqeusieterd: N thonaet .i tFs. gDeenmeutircg cear:u Nseosn ea.r eC .l iDkeulbyo huertge:r Noogneen.e Vo.u Ds.upé: None. B. Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Padova, Italy, Padova, Italy. Leheup: None. J. Lespinasse: None. P. Loget: None. P. Marcorelles: None. A. Laquerrière: None. S. Odent: None. V. David: None. The 3p deletion syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by mental and psychomotor retardation, microcephaly, short stature, hypotonia, postaxial  P02
.019 polydactyly and dysmorphic craniofacial features, such as ptosis and ble- Chromosomal microarrays in the clinical context: a critical appraisal pharophimosis. Most of the reported cases have a large terminal 3p deletion, of algorithms for results interpretation ranging from 6Mb to 12Mb, but the clinical use of microarray-based analysis F. Forzano1, G. Mandrile1, V. Uliana1, M. Malacarne2, S. Cavani2, D. Coviello2, C. Marciano1, has recently led to the identification of smaller interstitial deletions on 3p25, E. Di Maria1,3, F. Faravelli1; from 643Kb to 1.6Mb. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory of Genetics, Galliera We report the case of a 2 year old male patient with the typical features of Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, Italy. the 3p-syndrome: psychomotor retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism, po- staxial polydactyly and hypotonia. Array-CGH analysis detected a de novo 371 Kb deletion on 3p25.3, including few genes whose function is still par- Chromosomal microarray analysis has become a first tier examination in in- tially unknown. Among the deleted region, MTMR14 (myotubularin related tellectual disability, either isolated or combined with congenital malformati- protein 14) appears to be the best candidate gene to explain some of the cli- ons. The analysis of its results is still complex and often non-univocal though, nical features, such as hypotonia and some craniofacial dysmorphisms, since making its application in the clinical practice challenging. In the attempt to it plays a critical role in muscle calcium homeostasis and Mtmr14-null mice guide the interpretation, a number of algorithms have been proposed and showed muscle weakness and increased fatigue compared to wildtype mice. published over years.. In order to evaluate the clinical utility of the applicati- Few cases of 3p25 deletion with features of the 3p-syndrome have been re- on of array-CGH in our clinical practice, and to appreciate the extent of agree- ported so far in the literature. The deletion of 371Kb we observed in our ment on the evaluation of the CNVs in literature, we retrospectively analysed patient overlaps with those previously reported and enables to better define a cohort of 74 individuals affected by intellectual disability and malformati- t Ch.e P mininatiom: aNl ocnreit.i cCa. lR rieggoionn: Nreosnpeo. Mns. iCbales sfoinr a3:p N-soynne.d Lro. mSael.viati: None. M. ons, phenotypically and genotypically analysed in the years 2005-2010. We Clementi: None. compared our own evaluation against 6 algorithms published in the same time frame. We detected 41 CNV in 31 patients, with a CNV detection rate of 42%; 9.5% of patients had more than one CNV. In 47% of cases the CNV had  P02
.022 been deemed pathogenic, in 5% benign and in 48% some degree of uncer- Expanding the clinical phenotype at the 3q13.31 locus with a new tainty (VOUS) remained. When comparing our evaluation with the different case of microdeletion and first characterization of the reciprocal algorithms, and the algorithms themselves to each other, we found that only duplication. in a third of cases the assessment was fully concordant, in another third at M. Vuillaume1,2, S. Naudion1, M. Delrue1,2, J. Toutain1, P. Fergelot1,2, B. Arveiler1,2, D. least one algorithm was discordant, in the last third 2 or 3 algorithms were Lacombe1,2, C. Rooryck1,2; discordant. Furthermore, we noticed that over the years the CNVs’ categori- 1CHU Bordeaux, Service de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, France, 2Univ. Bordeaux zation is more and more cautious with a progressive widening of the VOUS Segalen, Laboratoire Maladies Rares : Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM), EA 4576, c Fa. tFeogrozraienso :a nNdo nae p. Gar.a Mllaenl ddericler:e aNsoen oe.f Vth. eU lciaenrtaa:i nNtoinees.. M. Malacarne: None. S. Bordeaux, France. Cavani: None. D. Coviello: None. C. Marciano: None. E. Di Maria: None. F. Faravelli: None. Congenital deletions of 3q13.31 region have been recently described as a no- vel microdeletion syndrome characterized by developmental delay, postna-  P02
.020 tal overgrowth, hypoplastic male genitalia and characDteRrDis3tic facZiBalT fBe2a0tures. Characterization of a new Complex Chromosome Rearrangement A common critical region of overlapping of 580 kb was delineated including (CCR) between chromosome 3 and chromosome 8 two strong candidate genes for developmental delay: and . L. Rodríguez1, M. García-Castro1, A. Plasencia2, J. Fernández-Toral2, S. Bhatt3, T. Liehr3, In this report, we describe a new case of 3q13.31 microdeletion identified by E. Abarca1; array-CGH in a 16 year-old girl sharing clinical features commonly observed 1Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética. Grupo Hospital de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2Unidad de in the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome. This girl had a microdeletion of 7.39 Genética del Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 3Jena University Hospital, Mb spanning the common critical region of overlapping. Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. More interestingly, we report for the first time the existence of a microdu- Background: plication reciprocal to the microdeletion syndrome. This familial 2.76 Mb microduplication identified by array-CGH was carried by two brothers and Complex Chromosome Rearrangements (CCRs) are defined as their father. The phenotype shared by the brothers was resembling to the structural chromosomal rearrangements with at least three breakpoints and phenotype related to the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome including espe- ex9c0hange of genetic material between two or moEreS cHhrGom 2o0so1m3e s|. PTAo RdaItSe,, FRcAialNly CdEev |e lWopWmeWnta.El dSeHlaGy, .bOehRaGvioral abnormalities and obesity. This mi-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ZBTB20, LSAMP GA P43
 croduplicDatRioDn3 involves three strong candidate genes for the developmental PML(SO). The genetic analyses with normal results included chromosome delay and . Further molecular characterization sho- analyses (550 band level) for PWS. wed that , another strong candidate gene for developmental delay, was Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was carried out on the not included in theF dISuHplicated region. A dosage alteration of this gene cannot SurePrint G3 Unrestricted CGH ISCA v2, 4x180K Agilent oligoarray CGH, ac- be completely excluded as the duplication was inverted at proximity of this cording to manufacture’s instruction and analyzed by CytoGenomics v2.0.6.0 gene, as shown by analysis. Finally, we hypothesized that the phenotype (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). ArrayCGH detected a 1.5Mb duplication on shared by the two brothers could be related to a gene dosage imbalance even 15q11 (chr15:22,373,313-23,889,744 GRCh37/hg19). We report and com- if gene expression could not be measured in target tissues such as brain or pare our propositus with previously reported patients with 15q11 duplica- aMd.i pVoucilylateusm.e: None. S. Naudion: None. M. Delrue: None. J. Toutain: None. P. t Vio. nB.elengeanu: None. M. Stoian: None. C. Popescu: None. S. Farcas: None. N. Fergelot: None. B. Arveiler: None. D. Lacombe: None. C. Rooryck: None. Andreescu: None. A. Belengeanu: None. D. Misceo: None.  P02
.023  P02
.025 The 3q13.31 Microdeletion syndrome: A new patient molecularly Confirmation of atypical features in auriculocondylar syndrome characterised using array-CGH caused by recessive PLCB4 mutations D. Trost1, A. Bazin1, P. Kleinfinger1, L. Lohmann1, J. Furioli2, G. Viot3; Y. Kido1, S. Sakazume1, C. T. Gordon2, E. B. Bdira2, S. Lyonnet2, N. Murakami1, M. L. 1Laboratoire CERBA, Saint Ouen l‘Aumone, France, 2Hôpital de Mantes, Pédiatrie, Mantes Cunningham3, J. Amiel2, T. Nagai1; la Jolie, France, 3Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France. 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Koshigaya, Japan, 2INSERM U781, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades and Université Paris Descartes–Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington and Seattle Children’s Hospital Microdeletions in 3q13.31 have been reported in only relatively few patients Craniofacial Center, Seattle, WA, United States. to date and only a subset of cases have been characterised at molecular reso- lution. The deletion size for most patients is larger than 5 Mb, some smaller deletions allowed previously to define a smallest region of overlap (SRO). Auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS; MIM 602483 and 614669) is a branchial Apart from intellectual disability / developmental delay (ID/DD) of varying arch syndrome typically inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Pati- degrees, which is common to all reported patients, the clinical spectrum ents with ACS display the following core symptoms with varying severity: comprises speech delay, muscular hypotonia, sdkeu nllo vmo alformations, ocular a specific malformation of the external ear, known as a ‘question mark ear’, malformations, skeletal malformations and dysmorphic features. micrognathia and mandibular condyle hypoplasia. Recently, phospholipase Here, we report a female patient with a 3.4-Mb deletion of 3q13.31. C, β 4 (PLCB4) mutations were identified as the major cause of autosomal She was born at 38 week of gestation, birth weight 3940g (+1 SD), birth dominant ACS, with mutations of the PLCB4 catalytic domain predicted to height 51cm (normal), occipiofrontal circumference (OFC) 37cm (+1 SD). have a dominant negative effect. In addition, one ACS patient born to related Her clinical presentation at the age of 21 month includes: weight 1100g (-1 parents harbored a homozygous partial deletion of PLCB4, and presented SD), height 82cm (normal), OFC 51cm (+2,25 SD), mild DD, severe muscular core features of ACS plus central apnea and macropenis; these features had hypotonia, macrocephaly, strabismus, hypermetropia and dysmorphic signs not been previously reported in association with ACS. This case suggested including hypertelorisme, anti-mongoloid slanted eyes, everted upper lip autosomal recessive inheritance of ACS, with complete loss of function of with a “tented‘‘ appearanc e and retrognathia. PLCB4. We herein describe two patients with ACS caused by PLCB4 com- The deleted segment of chromosome 3 (chr3:112.144.025-115.514.432) pound heterozygous splice site mutations. The patients were born to the contains 24 RefSeq genesand comprises the previously defined SRO.Our pa- same unrelated parents, and the parents did not show any features of ACS. tient with a relatively small deletion of 3.4-Mb confirms the pertinence of the Sequencing of PLCB4 revealed the compound heterozygous mutations c.854- previously delineated SRO and helps to identify the core phenotype of the 3Dq.1 T3ro.3s1t: m Niocnreo.d Ae.l eBtiaoznin s: yNnodnreo.m P.e K.leinfinger: None. L. Lohmann: None. J. 1G>A and c.1238+1G>C in both of the patients, with each parent harboring Furioli: None. G. Viot: None. one of the mutations, indicating autosomal recessive ACS. Both of the pati- ents reported here had central apneas, gastrointestinal transit defects and macroenis, in addition to typical craniofacial features of ACS. This is the first example of patients with ACS caused by compound heterozygous splice site  P02
.024 mutations in PLCB4, and the second autosomal recessive cases of ACS confir- 15q11 microduplication in a boy with psychomotor delay and PWS- m Y.e Kdi dboy :t hNeo nmeo. Sle.c Sualakra zaunmaley:s Niso.ne. C.T. Gordon: None. E.B. Bdira: None. S. like phenotype Lyonnet: None. N. Murakami: None. M.L. Cunningham: None. J. Amiel: None. T. V. Belengeanu1, M. Stoian2,3, C. Popescu1, S. Farcas3, N. Andreescu3, A. Belengeanu4, D. Nagai: None. Misceo5; 1„Vasile Goldis” Western University of Arad, Department of Genetics, Arad, Romania, 2Personal Genetics-Medical Genetics Center, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” of Timisoara, Department of Morphologic Microscopy,  P02
.026 Discipline of Genetics, Timisoara, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy Map of Autosomal Recessive Genetic Diseases in Saudi Arabia: “Victor Babes” of Timisoara, Department of Morphologic Microscopy, Discipline of Concepts and Future Directions Molecular and Cellular Biology, Timisoara, Romania, 5Olso University Hospital and M. A. Al-Owain1,2; University of Oslo, Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway. 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. In the literature, the duplications of Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome cri- tical region 15q11q13 are separate genomic syndrome (OMIM number: Saudi Arabia has a population of 27.1 million and an overall consanguini- 608636). The patients exhibit predominant different neurodevelopmental ty rate of 56%. Prevalence of many autosomal recessive disorders is higher disorders such as autism, seizures, developmental delay, clumsiness, schi- than other known populations. This is attributable to the high rate of con- zophrenia or schizoaffective patterns. Minor dysmorphic features such as sanguineous marriages, the tribal structure, and the large family size. Foun- macrocephaly, down-slanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, pouting der mutations have been recognized in many autosomal recessive disorders, lips, expressionless face, frontal tuft of hair were presented in many cases in many of which are oWveitrhre tphree saednotepdti wonit hoifn m ceorrtea iand tvraibnecse. dO nm tohlee ocuthlaerr hteacnhd-, various combinations. anlilqeulice sh einte trhoege cnoeuitnyt risy a ilnso r oebcesenrtv yeeda arms oinn gc ocnomjumncotnio ann dw riathre i anutetorsnoamtiaoln rae-l We report the 9 years old boy for developmental delay, only slight dysmor- cceosllsaivbeo croantidointi,o tns. phic facial features and obesity with a PWS-like phenotype. His height is 140 cm, weight 51 kg (>75thcentile) and OFC 54 cm (>90thcentile). He had facial he mapping of various autosomal recessive disorders has dysmorphisms reminiscent of PWS with small almond-shaped eyes, small dramatically increased. Different genetic concepts pertinent to this highly in- down-turned mouth, small hands and feet, generalized obesity (BMI=26, bred population are discussed here. Addressing such genetic diseases at the >97thcentile). He also presented developmental delay (QIP=96, QIG=87), national sltevel will become a cornerstone of strategic health care initiatives especially of speech (QIV=85) and he followed speech therapies. His mother in the 21 century. Current efforts are hampered by many socio-cultural and has similar dysmorphic phenotype: small stature (151 cm), obesity (102 health care related factors. Education about genetic diseases, establishment kg) and learning difficulties at school. The family history was significant for of a “national registry” and mutational database, and enhanced healthcare obesity (maternal grandfather).Tests for Prader syndrome were FISH using a Mcc.Ae.s sA la-rOew cariunc:i Nalo fnoer. success of any preventative campaign. Vysis-Abbott Prader-Willi/Angelman Region LSI SNRPN(SO)/CE P15
(SG)/ ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 91 PML(SO), LSI D15 S11
(SO)/CE P15
(SG) and LSI D15 S11
(SO)/CE P15
(SG)/ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.027  P02
.029 Baraitser-Winter syndrome: genotype-phenotype correlation and Trisomy 11p15.5 and monosomy 13q34 in a girl with Beckwith- clinical variability of the recurrent ACTB mutation Wiedemann syndrome and Factor VII deficiency. N. Di Donato1, A. Rump1, V. M. Der Kaloustian2, F. Halal2, K. Sonntag1, K. Hackmann1, G. D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Kugaudo1,2, A. Tańska1, A. Wawrzkiewicz-Witkowska3, A. Hahn3, E. Schrock1, J. Masliah-Planchon4, A. Verloes4; Tomaszewska3, M. Kucharczyk1, E. Ciara1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Montreal Children’s Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Institut und Poliklinik für 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Radiologische Diagnostik, Universitätsklinikum, Dresden, Germany, 4Department of Poland, 3Prenatal Diagnostic and Genetic Clinic, Medical University of Silesia, First Genetics, Robert-Debré hospital, Paris, France. Hospital, Zabrze, Poland. ACTB and ACTG1 mutations have recently been reported to cause Baraitser- Here we report an one-year-old patient recruited to genetic analysis be- Winter syndrome (BRWS) - a rare condition characterized by ptosis, colo- cause of developmental delay and the presence of specific for Beckwith- bomata, neuronal migration disorder, distinct facial anomalies, and intellec- Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) phenotype (five major and four minor clinical tual disability (Riviere et al. PMID:22366783). ACTB and ACTG1 code for criteria of BWS was stated). Moreover, she had reduced level of Factor VII. the beta- and Initial conventional karyotyping was normal. MS-MLPA (methylation spe- gamma isoforms of actin - two nearly identical highly conserved proteins cific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) revealed increased that differ only by four amino acids. hybridization signals as well as aberrant methylation of specific probes The ACTB mutations c.586C>T and c.587G>A, both affecting the Arg196 in 11p15.5. The duplication was than confirmed by aCGH indicating 4.68 codon, are recurrent. One of the patients carrying the ACTB Mb distal duplication in 11p15.5; besides 2.96 Mb distal deletion within mutation c.587G>A (p.Arg196His) was previously diagnosed with Fryns- 13q34 was identified. Most of the patient’s clinical findings are typical of Aftimos syndrome (FAS). Expanding our cohort of BRWS patients we ob- BWS, whereas developmental delay and distinctive craniofacial phenotype served the c.586C>T(p.Arg196Cys) mutation in four patients with classical (prominent occiput, flat forehead with frontal bossing, round face with full BRWS and in one of the severely affected patients assigned as having FAS, cheeks, hypertelorism, flat nasal bridge and short palpebral fissures) are who shows malformations beyond the BRWS spectrum, like double halluces the features typical of trisomy 11p15. Reduced level of Factor VII might be (Der Kaloustian et al. PMID:11311002). Furthermore, we identified a novel explained by deletion of 13q34 in combination with a mutation in the fac- ACTB mutation c.359C>T (p.Thr120Ile) in a patient strikingly resembling tor gene located in that region on the other chromosome 13, considering an individual reported by Der Kaloustian et al. This patient exhibits double that Factor VII deficiency is a recessive disorder. To our knowledge this is halluces. a first report of 11p15.5 duplication associated with deletion of 13q34 and The ACTB mutation c.359C>T (p.Thr120Ile) is analogous to the ACTG1 mu- Factor VII deficiency. The study underlines the importance of detailed cli- tation NM_001614.1:c.359C>T previously reported in a patient with classi- nical description and indicates that aCGH should be performed in all BWS cal BRWS (significantly milder affected than patient analyzed here).Taking patients with copy-number abnormalities detected by MS-MLPA and nor- together, BRWS and FAS represent the severity range of the same clinical mal conventional karyotype to avoid overlooking of a cryptic unbalanced entity. Despite the structural similarity of beta- and gamma-actins and their translocation. overlapping expression pattern, mutations in ACTB cause a distinctly more The study was financed by National Science Centre, project 1149/B/ severe phenotype than ACTG1 mutations. The recurrent ACTB mutation  P01
/2011/40 (NN407114940) and EU Structural Funds, project c.586C>T (p.Arg196Cys) may result in classical BRWS phenotype as well as P DO. IJGu.0rk2ie.0w1i.c0z0: -N1o4n-0e.5 M9/. 0K9u.gaudo: None. A. Tańska: None. A. Wawrzkiewicz- i Nn .s Devi eDroen BaRtoW: NSo fnoerm. Ae.r Rlyu kmnpo:w Nno naes. FVA.MS.. Der Kaloustian: None. F. Halal: Witkowska: None. A. Tomaszewska: None. M. Kucharczyk: None. E. Ciara: None. K. Sonntag: None. K. Hackmann: None. G. Hahn: None. E. Schrock: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. None. J. Masliah-Planchon: None. A. Verloes: None.  P02
.030  P02
.028 Different methylation patterns in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Bardet Biedel Syndrome in South Africa: The Clinical Phenotype of a due to mosaicism for UPD of chromosome11p15 Single Mutation in BBS 10. E. Ciara1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Kugaudo1,2, A. Tańska1, M. Ginalska-Malinowska1, D. K. J. Fieggen1, C. Milligan1, A. Esterhuizen1, B. Henderson2, A. Wonkam1, E. Heon3; Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. Pelc1, S. Łuczak1, J. Trubicka1, P. Kowalski1, M. Borucka- 1University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2University of Free State, Mankiewicz1, A. Jezela-Stanek1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; Bloemfontein, South Africa, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Background: Bardet Biedel syndrome (BBS) is a pleiotropic disorder cha- racterized by obesity, polydactyly, intellectual disability and a progressive Molecular abnormalities in the 11p15.5 imprinted gene cluster lead to retinopathy. It is a highly heterogenous autosomal recessive disease. Homo- Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), characterized by overgrowth, zOybgjoescittiyv efosr: single mutation in BBS 10 has been identified in a number of macroglossia, abdominal wall defects and embryonal tumors. The most affected individuals tested in South Africa. common defect in BWS is loss of methylation at imprinting 11p15 control To delineate the ethnic distribution and clinical phenotype in a region (~50% of cases). Approximately 20% of individuals fulfilling diagno- cohort of South African BBS patients with the K2431fsX15 mutation in BBS stic criteria for BWS have paternal UPD for 11p15 critical region. We report 1M0e tahnodd r: eview the implications for genetic testing and counseling in this eight cases with BWS due to patUPD of 11p15 with the aim to evaluate the disorder in South Africa. percentage of mosaicism. The diagnosis in our patients was established by A descriptive cross sectional study collating clinical data retro- methylation sensitive multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification sRpeescutlivtse:l y in a genetically homogenous group of BBS patients from South (MS-MLPA) on leukocyte DNA. Microsatellite analysis of chromosome re- Africa. gion 11p15, performed in 6 families, confirmed mosaicism for segmental A total of 38 patients from 37 families were tested. 27 of these isodisomy at the short arm of chromosome 11. Different methylation pat- (71%) were homozygous for the K2431fsX15 BBS 10 mutation. BBS is more tern in both, H19DMR and KvDMR, domains was observed for each patient, common in Black South Africans from different language groups (32 of 37 but there has been no correlation between the percentage of mosaicism and families). Of those homozygous for this mutation, 26 (96%) shared this eth- methylation index. Clinical presentation of our patients includes variable nicity. The phenotype showed characteristic variability. The onset of visual manifestation of BWS. Only macroglossia and hemihyperplasia were con- dCiosnacbliulistyio wnass: early in our cohort and renal abnormalities were infrequently stant symptoms in almost all cases. Clinical heterogeneity is likely due to encountered. the variable levels of mosaicism in different tissues. Testing of other tissues The high frequency of homozygosity for a single mutation in than blood in BWS individuals with complex clinical presentations could an ethnic subset of the South African population is suggestive of a founder be a valuable diagnostic tool to improve the detection rate of mosaic pater- effect. This has allowed establishment of a cost effective diagnostic test for nal UPD. Identification of individuals with mosaicism for paternal UPD is a single mutation with a high yield in our local population. Appreciation of an important goal as identifies individuals who require surveillance due to the phenotype may improve earlier recognition of the disorder to allow for increased tumor risk. a Kp.pJr. oFpiergiagteen i:n Nteornvee. nCt.i oMni.lligan: None. A. Esterhuizen: None. B. Henderson: Study was financed by National Science Centre, project 1149/B/ None. A. Wonkam: None. E. Heon: None.  P01
/2011/40 (NN407114940) and EU Structural Funds, project P EO. ICGi.a0r2a.:0 N1o.0n0e-. 1D4. -J0u5r9k/ie0w9i.cz: None. M. Kugaudo: None. A. Tańska: None. M. Ginalska-Malinowska: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. M. Pelc: 92 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index None. S. Łuczak: None. J. Trubicka: None. P. Kowalski: None. M. Borucka-  P02
.033 Mankiewicz: None. A. Jezela-Stanek: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. M. Study of 100 fetuses with syndromic brain malformations by aCGH. Krajewska-Walasek: None. E. Alix1, J. Martinovic-Bouriel2,3, J. Michel1, A. Delezoide4, M. Gonzales5,6, A. Labalme1, C. Abel7, F. Allias8, C. Antal5, B. Benzacken9, N. Bigi10, P. Blanchet10, D. Boggio11, A. Vichier- Cerf11, R. Bouvier12, A. Buénerd12, M. Cordier13, C. Coubes10, K. Dieterich14, F. Dijoud12, S. Frachon-Collardeau12, B. Gilbert-Dussardier15, R. Grigorescu5, F. Lebreton8, C. Mechler16, S.  P02
.031 Patrier5, F. Pelluard17, M. Perez10, L. Pinson10, M. Saint Frison5, J. Siffroi5,6, J. Massardier18, Beckwith-Wiedeman syndrome - diagnostic experiences in Slovakia P. Jouk14, L. Guibaud19, A. Vasiljevic12, F. Guimiot4,20, T. Attié-Bitach21, F. Encha-Razavi21, D. D. Durovcikova1, D. Durovcikova1, A. Krepelova2, I. Mlkva3, K. Vicianova4, M. Pechová1; Sanlaville1,22; 1Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Charles University, 2nd Faculty of 1Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, GHE, HCL, Lyon, France, 2Unité de Medicine, Dept of Biology and Med.Genet, Praque, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital, Foetopathologie, Laboratoire Cerba, Cergy, France, 3Unité de Foetopathologie, Hôpital Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Children´s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, Bratislava, Antoine Béclère, Clamart, Paris, France, 4Service de biologie du développement, Hôpital Slovakia. Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Service de génétique et embryologie médicales, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 6UPMC-Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 7Service de Génétique, Hôpital de la Croix Rousse, HCL, Lyon, France, 8Centre de Pathologie Nord, Hôpital de la Croix Rousse, HCL, Lyon, France, 9Service d‘Histologie Embryologie Beckwith-Wiedeman syndrome ( BWS) is a rare genetic disease associated Cytogénétique, Biologie de la Reproduction, CECOS, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, with owergrowth and predisposition to tumor development in childhood. 10Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, The incidence of BWS in different ethnic group is estimated to be 1 out of 13 11Diagnostic Prénatal, CHLS, HCL, Lyon, France, 12Centre de Pathologie Est, GHE, HCL, 700 (Weksberg, 2010). Lyon, France, 13Service de Génétique Clinique, GHE, HCL, Lyon, France, 14Département We present prevalence data in Slovakia, some of clinical data, diagnostic ap- de Génétique, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 15Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU proaches and testing strategy for patient with BWS phenotype. Basic infor- de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 16Service d’Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital mation about BWS prevalence in Slovakia was obtain from Genetic register Louis Mourier, Colombes, France, 17Service d’Anatomopathologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 18Service de Gynéco-Obstétrique, GHE, HCL, Lyon, France, and by personal communication with Slovak clinical geneticist. 19Service d’Imagerie Pédiatrique et Foetale, GHE, HCL, Lyon, France, 20Université Paris- The diagnosis of BWS was reported in 17 cases in 2006, determined solely Cité-Sorbonne, Paris, Austria, 21Service d‘Histo-embryologie et de Cytogénétique, Hôpital on the basis of clinical signs EMG syndrome. The total capture of BWS in Necker, Paris, France, 22CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Université Claude 2011 includes 25 cases. Early BWS clinical diagnosis within 1 year of life Bernard Lyon I, Lyon, France. and varying severity of clinical symptoms, different molecular pathology in 3 female cases is documented. Loss of methylation at KVDMR1 was confir- med in mild BWS phenotype with occurence of neuroblastoma. Mutation Congenital malformations affect approximately 2.5% of stillborns. Among CDKN1C - c.517dupG (p.Va1173GlyfsX68) was detected in newborn patient these defects, brain abnormalities are the main malformations detected pre- with serious omphalocele and renal dysplasia.Generally, in patient with natally. Mostly (60%) are sporadic without explanation. Improvements of BWS phenotype, except of chromosomal analysis, determination of altered ultrasound prenatal screening combined to 3rd trimester fetal Magnetic Re- methylation, microdeletion at imprinting center 1(I C1
)and/ or (I C2
) or mu- sonance Imaging (MRI) increase detection cerebral malformations. In most tation in CDKN1 by DNA tests helped confirm BWS diagnosis definitelly. Re- cases termination of pregnancy was elected. Foetopathological examination cent scientific findings and clinical experiences together with activities Eu identified other associated malformations in approximately 50% of the ca- in the field of the rare diseases pointed to an expanding range of medically ses. No explanation can be offered for about 50% of cases. indication for genetic testing, which may have important role for health care An increasing number of congenital malformations have been identified as m Da. nDaugreomvceiknot,v ian:c Nluodnien. gD B. WDuSr opvactiikeonvtsa: None. A. Krepelova: None. I. Mlkva: a result of a genomic disorder using new techniques analysis of a whole ge- None. K. Vicianova: None. M. Pechová: None. nome. We study a cohort of 100 fetuses with a syndromic cerebral malfor- mation divided into 4 groups (neural tube defects, cerebellum hypoplasia, commissural abnormalities, or microcephaly) by aCGH. The aim of this stu-  P02
.032 dy was to identify potential new genes involved in brain development. Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthosis inversus syndrome (BPES) The cases were included with the participation of fetal pathologists, cyto- with FOX  L2
 mutation and congenital hydronephrosis - a new genetics laboratories and biobanks and thanks to the collaboration of the association. French Society of fetal pathology (SOFFOET). Fetal DNA was extracted, and R. Gulati1, D. Halanaik2, V. Bhat1, E. De Baere3; aCGH was performed on 180K chips (Agilent). We identified 11 de novo pa- 1Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and thogenic CNVs and 3 inherited pathogenic CNVs. Several CNVs included a Research, Pondicherry, India, 2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Jawaharlal Institute of gene already known to be involved in the brain development such as ND E1
 Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry, India, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. or NFIA. In particular we described the first female fetus with cerebellar hypoplasia and partial de novo OPHN1 deletion. We also identified sever- al CNVs highlighting new interesting loci. Here, we present our results and d Ei.s cAulisxs: tNhoen nee. wJ. MCNarVtsin iodveinct-iBfioeudr.iel: None. J. Michel: None. A. Delezoide: Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthosis inversus syndrome (BPES) (OMIM None. M. Gonzales: None. A. Labalme: None. C. Abel: None. F. Allias: None. C. 110100) is an autosomal recessively inherited congenital malformation of Antal: None. B. Benzacken: None. N. Bigi: None. P. Blanchet: None. D. eyelids which can potentially lead to loss of vision. Squint, refractory errors Boggio: None. A. Vichier-Cerf: None. R. Bouvier: None. A. Buénerd: None. M. and amblyopia can develop as complications. Diagnosis is based on clinical Cordier: None. C. Coubes: None. K. Dieterich: None. F. Dijoud: None. S. findings of bilateral blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus and tele- Frachon-Collardeau: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. R. Grigorescu: canthus. Type includes these four major criteria. Type includes additional None. F. Lebreton: None. C. Mechler: None. S. Patrier: None. F. Pelluard: None. M. Perez: None. L. Pinson: None. M. Saint Frison: None. J. Siffroi: feature of premature ovarian failure and female infertility. We report for the None. J. Massardier: None. P. Jouk: None. L. Guibaud: None. A. Vasiljevic: first time a 1 year old male child with congenital hydronephrosis associated None. F. Guimiot: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None. F. Encha-Razavi: None. D. with typical features of BPES. He was the first-born to non-consanguineous Sanlaville: None. parents. His father had similar but less severe features. Growth and deve- lopment were appropriate for age. Echocardiogram was normal. Congenital bilateral hydronephrosis and reduced kidney function were confirmed by  P02
.034 renal dynamic scan. Sequencing was performed on FOX  L2
, the only gene Associated malformations among patients with CAKUT (congenital associated with BPES. The normal gene has 14 Alanine repeats. Sequencing anomalies of kidney and urinary tract) of the only intron of FOX  L2
 revealed the patient to be heterozygous for mu- C. Stoll, B. Dott, Y. Alembik, M. Roth; tation p.Ala225_Ala234dup (c.672_701dup) which is a recurrent 30 bp du- Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. plication, an expansion of the poly-Ala tract. It represents 30% of mutations found in BPES patients and is usually associated with Type. Some additional atypical findings like growth hormone deficiency, ventricular septal defect, Infants with congenital anomalies of kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) of- Burkitt’s lymphoma and Duane syndrome, associated with this mutation ten have other associated malformations. The purpose of this investigation have been reported previously. The atypical finding of hydronephrosis may was to assess the prevalence and the types of associated malformations in have resulted from a pleiotropic effect of the mutation. It is not possible to CAKUT in a defined population. Each affected child was examined by a ge- know the type of BPES in our patient as no female family member is affec- t Red. G. ulati: None. D. Halanaik: None. V. Bhat: None. E. De Baere: None. neticist, all elective terminations were ascertained, and the surveillance for malformations was continued until 2 years of age. The associated malfor- mations in CAKUT were collected in all livebirths, stillbirths and terminations of preg- nancy during 26 years in 347,810 consecutive births in the area covered ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 93 by our population based registry of congenital malformations. Of the 1252ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index infants with CAKUT born during this period (prevalence at birth of 36.0 complex formed by Cav1 and Cav2, or disturb cellular localization. We will per 10,000), 410 (32.7 %) had associated malformations. There were 142 therefore introduce MT and WT CAV1 in a stable cell line to study the effect (34.6%) patients with chromosomal abnormalities including 15 trisomies of the mutant protein on wild type function and localization. 18, and 72 (17.6%) nonchromosomal recognized dysmorphic conditions. In conclusion, we suggest that the severe phenotype observed in our patient There were no predominant recognised dysmorphic conditions, but VA(C) might be caused by a dominant-negative effect of MT CAV1, and that the TER(L) association. However, other recognised dysmorphic conditions were presence of a partial lipodystrophy phenotype found in some patients might registered including Meckel syndrome, osteochondrodysplasia, and cau- bI.e S dcehpreanudweennt: oNno nthee. Sty. pSeze olifn CgAeVr:1 N monuet.a Ati.oLn. .Siniard: None. A. Kurdoglu: dal regression syndrome. Hundred ninety six (47.8 %) of the patients had None. J.J. Corneveaux: None. I. Malenica: None. D.W. Craig: None. V. Narayanan: None. M.J. Huentelman: None. multiple congenital anomalies, non syndromic, non chromosomal (MCA). Malformations in the ear, the digestive, the central nervous, and the car- diovascular systems were the most common other malformations. Prenatal diagnosis was performed in 57.8 % of dysmorphic syndromes with CAKUT.  P02
.037 The overall prevalence of associated malformations, which was one in three Searching for the disease gene in a cerebellar ataxia family infants, emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation of infants with Ö. Ayhan1, B. Kara2, G. Gökçay3, N. Başboğaoğlu4, A. Tolun1; CAKUT. A routine screening for other malformations may be considered in 1Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, 3Istanbul i Cnf. aSnttosl la: nNdo nine .f eBt.u Dsoestt :w Nitohn eC.A YK. UATle.mbik: None. M. Roth: None. University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Düzce University, Düzce, Turkey. Autosomal recessive ataxia is characterized by progressive lack of coordi-  P02
.035 nation of muscle movements. We studied two brothers at the age of 38 and Congenital heart defect in a patient with a complex rearrangement 40 years with initial diagnosis of cerebellar ataxia. The parents were second and a 13q deletion: delineating a new critical region. cousins. The patients walked and spoke single words by the age of 2 years, L. Mouthon, M. Dayem-Quere, F. Giuliano, V. Paquis-Flucklinger, H. Karmous-Benailly; and progressive ataxic gait and visual impairment began in early childhood. Hôpital de l‘Archet II, CHU de Nice, Nice, France. At present the patients have ataxic gait, dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia, scanning speech and intellectual disability. Additionally, eye examination showed bilateral horizontal nystagmus, posterior subcapsular cataract, 13q deletion syndrome is a rare genetic disorder caused by deletions of the optic disk hypoplasia, optic atrophy, thinning of the retinal arterioles, and long arm of chromosome 13. Based on the size and location of the deletion, retinal bone spicule pigmentation. this syndrome can be divided into three groups, group 3 corresponds to the Genotyping data generated by SNP genome scan for the parents and the af- distal deletion of band 13q33-34. Patients with 13q deletion display a varie- fected sibs were used to calculate multipoint LOD scores. Four loci yielded ty of phenotypic features, including growth retardation, microcephaly, facial the highest score of 2.66. The largest locus was maximally 52 Mb at chro- dysmorphisms, congenital heart, brain and kidney defects. We report the mosome 4q12-24. The others were at 6q25.1-25.2, 12p13.31-p13.1, and case of a dysmorphic 7-year old male patient displaying polymalformative 22q12.1 and 0.55 to 5.5 Mb in size. We consider the largest locus (4q12-24) features and carrying a deletion of approximately 8.57 Mb on 13q33.1q34 the most likely disease locus but will search for the genetic defect under- (group3), including 20 genes. The phenotype of our patient includes intra- lying the disease in all four candidate loci. No similar diseases were mapped uterine growth retardation, developmental retardation, hypospadias, mi- to any of the loci. The four candidate loci harbor a total of 638 genes. The crocephaly, facial anomalies and a congenital heart defect. The deletion size abundance of the genes discouraged us from applying candidate gene ap- of our patient was further delineated by array-CGH, and precisely located proach, and we launched exome sequencing. Exome sequencing data will on chromosome 13: 103.941.149-112.512.705 (hg19). MFuYtOh1e6rmCoOrLe4, Aw1e cCaOn- be evaluated for those regions, and Sanger sequencing will be performed to Lre4dAu2ceIN thGe1 criticAaRl HreGgEioFn7 to 3 Mb instead of 6 Mb (Huang, 2012). This new v Öa.l iAdyahtea nc:a nNdoindea. tBe. m Kuartaa:t iNononse.. G. Gökçay: None. N. Başboğaoğlu: None. A. chromosomal region contains only 12 genes including , ; Tolun: None. , and . On a cytogenetic point of view, the chromosome 13 of our patient appeared to be a derivative chromosome 13 coming from a complex maternal chromo- somal rearrangement involving three chromosomes and four breakpoints.  P02
.038 The maternal formula is : 46,XX,t(7;8)(q36;p21),ins(8;13)(p21;q33.1q34). Disruption in TMCO1 causes autosomal recessive cerebro-facio- We will discuss the involvement of the deleted genes in the phenotype of thoracic dysplasia Y. Alanay1,2, B. Ergüner3, E. G. Utine1, O. Haçarız4, P. Ö. Şimsek Kiper1, E. Z. Taşkıran5, F. E. our patient and we will also describe the precise mechanisms leading to this r Le.a Mrroauntgheomn:e Nnto.ne. M. Dayem-Quere: None. F. Giuliano: None. V. Paquis- Perçin6, E. Uz5,7, M. S. Sağıroğlu3, B. Yüksel4, K. Boduroğlu1, N. A. Akarsu5; Flucklinger: None. H. Karmous-Benailly: None. 1Hacettepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetics Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2Acıbadem University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetics Unit, Istanbul, Turkey, 3TUBITAK, Informatics and Information Security Research Center, Gebze, Kocaeli, Turkey, 4TUBITAK, Genetic Engineering and  P02
.036 Biotechnology Institute, Gebze, Kocaeli, Turkey, 5Hacettepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey, 6Gazi A heterozygous frame-shift mutation in CAV1 is associated with a University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 7Duzce severe congenital lipodystrophy syndrome University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Düzce, Turkey. I. Schrauwen1,2, S. Szelinger1, A. L. Siniard1, A. Kurdoglu1, J. J. Corneveaux1, I. Malenica1, D. W. Craig1, V. Narayanan1, M. J. Huentelman1; 1Center for Rare Childhood Disorders and the Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 2Department of Medical Cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia (CFTD; MIM 213980) is a multiple congeni- Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. tal anomaly and intellectual disability syndrome involving the cranium, face and thorax. The characteristic features are cranial involvement with macro- crania at birth, brachycephaly, various CT/MRI findings frequently involving We investigated a single female patient and unaffected parents presenting corpus callosum and septum pellucidum, flat face, hypertelorism, epicanthal with a neonatal progeroid disorder, lipodystrophy, cutis marmorata, feeding folds, synophrys, broad nasal bridge, cleft lip and cleft palate, low-set, poste- disorder and failure to thrive by whole-genome sequencing. This revealed a riorly rotated ears, short neck, and multiple costal and vertebral anomalies. de novo, heterozygous, frame-shift mutation in the Caveolin1 gene (CAV1), The underlying genetic defect remains unknown. Using a combination of which introduces an immediate stop into the protein (c.385_386delTT; homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequencinTgM, wCOe1 identified a ho- p.Phe129X). Mutations in CAV1, encoding the main component of the ca- mozygous nonsense founder mutation, p.R87X (c.259 C>T), in the human veolae in plasma membranes, cause Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystro- transmembrane and coiled-coil domains protein 1 ( ) in four out of phy type 3. Although this disorder is recessive, heterozygous carriers either five famTiMlieCsO w1ith Turkish origin. RNA studies on lymphocytes indicated that show a reduced phenotype of partial lipodystrophy or no phenotype. We the mutated TMCO1 transcript is degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA could not identify a second mutation in CAV1 in our patient. Studying mRNA decay. gene on chromosome 1q24 was excluded by homozygosity extracted from whole blood from the patient revealed that both MT and mapping and DNA sequencing analysis in the fTifMthC Ofa1mily with characteristic WT CAV1 were transcribed, and that RNA from the mutant allele was not findings of CFTD. These data provided the first evidence for genetic hete- degraded by nonsense mediated RNA decay. We therefore hypothesize that rogeneity in this spectrum. Another founder mutation has recently the mutant protein is expressed in our patient and acts in a dominant nega- been reported to cause a unique genetic condition, TMCO1-defect syndrome tive fashion, leading to a severe lipodystrophy phenotype. Introduction of (MIM 614132), characterized by craniofacial dysmorphism, skeletal anoma- th9is4 mutant CAV1 could disturb the stable and funE ctS ioH nG al h2 e0 te1 ro3 -o | l iP goA mR eI rS ic, FR liA esN aC ndE i n| tW ellW ectW ua. lE dS isH abG ili. tO y R inG 11 individuals in the Old Order Amish ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.040 Transcriptome analysis of wildtype and Chd7Whi/Whi embryos reveals a northeastern Ohio. Phenotype comparison between Turkish and American misregulation of several genes involved in neural crest cell processes. families clearly demonstrated that TMCO1-defect syndrome meets diagno- Y. Schulz1, P. Wehner2, A. Borchers2,3, L. Opitz4, G. Salinas-Riester4, S. Pauli1; stic criteria for CFTD which was first described by Pascual-Castroviejo et 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37073 Göttingen, al. in 1975. Our study demonstrated that TMCO1-defect syndrome, initially Germany, 2Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Center for Molecular Physiology believed to represent a distinct disorder, indeed belongs to the genetically of the Brain, GZMB, University of Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany, 3Department of h Ye. tAelraongaeyn:e Noounse c. eBr.e Ebrrgoü-fnaecri:o N-tohnoer.a Eci.cG d. Uystipnlea:s iNao snpee. cOtr. uHmaç.arız: None. P.Ö. Biology, Molecular Embryology, Philipps-University Marburg, 35043 Marburg, Germany, Şimsek Kiper: None. E.Z. Taşkıran: None. F.E. Perçin: None. E. Uz: None. M.S. 4Department of Developmental Biochemistry, University Medical Center Göttingen, Sağıroğlu: None. B. Yüksel: None. K. Boduroğlu: None. N.A. Akarsu: None. 37077 Göttingen, Germany. c h a r g e CHARGE syndrome ( oloboma, eart defects, tresia of the choanae, etar-  P02
.039 ded growth and development, enital hypoCpHlaDs7ia and ar anomalies) is an An intriguing hotspot of recurrent mutations in CHD7 IV S25
 revealed autosomal dominant malformWahtiiorlnig siygn drome due toW hmi/+utations in the chro- by minigene assay is observed in CHARGE syndrome modomain helicase DNA-binding member Chd7. A well established mouse M. LEGENDR E1
,2, B. GILBERT-DUSSARDIER1,2, T. ATTIE-BITACH3,4, M. ROSSI5, N. REVENCU6,7, J. AMIE L3
,4, S. LYONNET3,4, V. ABADI E8
,4, P. JOUK9,10, M. DELRU E11
, Y. model for this disease is the mouse (Chd7 ), carrying a hetero- DOUBAJ12, G. VIOT13, D. BONNET14,4, M. HOLDER-ESPINASS E15
, S. MUR16,17, P. BLANCHET18, zygous nonsense mutation in exon 11 of the gene. TWoh ig/+e t moleculaWrhi /iWnh-i J. MELKI19, F. BRIOUD E20
, S. JULIA21,22, S. NAUDION11, Z. COLOSAFI1, M. RODRIGUEZ1, A. sights on the pathogenesis of CHARGE syndrome, we performed a genome- KITZI S1
,2, F. BILAN1,2; wide microarray expression analysis on wildtype, Chd7 and Chd7 1Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 2Université de Poitiers mouse embryos at day 9.5.We identified 98 genes showWhiin/Wgh igreater than 2 - Pôle Biologie Santé - IPBC - UMR 6187, Poitiers, France, 3Département de Génétique fold differences in expression (log2 fold-change) and a P-value to false dis- et INSERM U-781, Hopital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 4Université Paris covery rate (FDR) < 0.05 between wildtype and Chd7 embryos. The Descartes, Paris, France, 5Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires St Luc, validation of the microarray data was performed by quantitative real time Brussel, Belgium, 7Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de Duve Institute PCR (qRT-PCR). Interestingly, most genes are involved in neural crest cell of Cellular Pathology and University of Louvain Medical School, Brussels, Belgium, induction, formation and migration. 8Service de pédiatrie générale, Hopital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 9Service In summary, we could show that misregulation of genes involved in neural de génétique et procréation, Pôle Couple-Enfant, CHU de Grenoble - Hôpital Albert crest cell processes is a mechanism behind CHARGE syndrome, demonstra- Michallon, Grenoble, France, 10Faculté de Médecine-Pharmacie de Grenoble, Université t Yin. gS cthhautlz C: HNAonReG. EP .s Wynedhrnoemr:e N boenleo.n Ag.s B too rtchhee nrse:u Nroocnree. sLt.o Opaptihtzi:e Ns.one. G. Joseph Fourier, Domaine de la Merci, Grenoble, France, 11Service de génétique médicale Salinas-Riester: None. S. Pauli: None. CHU de Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 12Département de génétique médicale, Institut National d‘Hygiène, Rabat, France, 13Service de gynécologie-obstétrique 1, CHU Paris Centre-GH Cochin St Vincent de Paul - Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 14Service de cardiologie pédiatrique Centre de référence des malformations cardiaques complexes,  P02
.041 Hopital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 15Service de génétique clinique Guy Identification of the variations in CPT1B and CHKB genes in Turkish Fontaine - Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 16Département de Périnatologie, narcolepsy patients Hopital Jeanne de Flandre , CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 17Université Lille 2, Lille, France, S. Agılkaya1, S. Kaya1, I. Oztura2, D. Karadeniz3, A. Evlice2, B. Baklan2, S. Cingoz1; 18Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, CHU de Montpellier - Hôpital Arnaud 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylul de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 19Laboratoire de Neurogénétique moléculaire et University, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Neurology, Sleep Disorders Unit, Faculty of INSERM U-798, Université d’Evry-Val d’Essonne et Paris XI, Evry, Evry, France, 20Service Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, Izmir, Turkey, 3Sleep Disorders Unit, Cerrahpasa d‘exploration fonctionnelles endocriniennes, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Medical School, University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Izmir, Turkey. Hopital Trousseau, Paris, France, 21Service de génétique médicale - Pôle de biologie CHU de Toulouse - Hô CPT1B CHKB The rs55770917 varCiHatKioBn betwCPeTe1nB and genes in Japanese and Koreans are common genetic susceptibility factors to narcolepsy. In this CHARGE syndrome (CS) is a rare usually sporadic disorder with multiple congenital anomalies mainly due to de novo truncating mutations of CHD7 studyC, PvTar1iBations CinH KB and susceptibility genes were examined in Turkish narcolepsy patients. gene. The and genes were sequenced in narcolepsy patients (n= Here we report a series of 20 CS patients carrying a nucleotide variation 37), and, when available, their parents. Controls (n= 100) were tested for located in CHD7 IV S25
 (c.5405-7G>A, c.5405-13G>A, c.5405-17G>A or detected variations. rs5770911, rs2269381 and rs2269382 were detec- c.5405-18C>A). Among these 4 different variants, two of them (-13G>A and ted together in three patients and 11 controls, rs557709 C1
H7K bBeing suscep- -18C>A) were first isolated in our laboratory, the others were previously tibility SNP. In addition to this haplotype, we detected the indel variation classified as variants with unknown clinical significance (-7G>A) and pa- (rs144647670) in the 5’ upstream region of the human gene in the thogenic (-17G>A). In each case, bioinformatics tools clearly indicated an narcoleptic patients and control subjects carrying four variants togethepr. activation of a newly created acceptor splice site. Splicing defect was then There was no significant difference between patients and control subjects evaluated by minigene assays using an exon-trap derived construct: pSpli- regarding the presence of variant haplotype and allele frequencies of ( ceExpress (Kishore et al., 2008). Our study demonstrates that alternative =0.62). There was no significant association between rs5770917 and narco- acceptor splice sites generated by the four IV S25
 variants were exclusively lepsy in Turkish patients. However, in our study we found novel haplotype used by splicing machinery giving rise to a longer exon 26. With the excep- conCsHisKtBin/gC PoTf 1thBe indel variation, which had not been detected in previous tion of the -17G>A which preserves the normal ORF, the three others cor- studies on Japanese and Korean populations, as well as observing four SNPs respond to frameshift mutations. Although all patients fulfilled diagnostic i Sn. Agılkaya: Non .e. S. Kaya: None. I. Oztura: None. D. Karadeniz: None. A. criteria of CS we observed phenotypic variability, especially within 2 cases Evlice: None. B. Baklan: None. S. Cingoz: None. where the mutation (c.5405-17G>A) was inherited from a mildly affected parent. Recurrence of these variations could be explained by a particular genomic context: i) the weakness of the exon 26 natural acceptor site, ii) the  P02
.042 lack of a real lariat sequence detected within hundred nucleotides upstream ALG3-CDG (CDG-Id) presenting with chondrodysplasia punctata: a exon/intron boundary. case report. These data prove the pathogenicity of all the studied variants and indicate L. Lepais1, D. Cheillan2,3, S. Collardeau-Frachon4,5, S. Hays6, G. Matthijs7, C. Abel1, P. the presence of a mutation hotspot in CHD7 IV S25
 which is involved in 7% Edery1,5,8, M. Rossi1; o Mf .C LSe fgreenndchre p: aNtoiennet. sB.. Gilbert-dussardier: None. T. Attie-bitach: None. M. 1Service de Génétique, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, Rossi: None. N. Revencu: None. J. Amiel: None. S. Lyonnet: None. V. Abadie: 2Service Maladies héréditaires du métabolisme et dépistage néonatal, Groupement None. P. Jouk: None. M. Delrue: None. Y. Doubaj: None. G. Viot: None. D. Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 3INSERM U.1060/Université Bonnet: None. M. Holder-espinasse: None. S. Mur: None. P. Blanchet: None. J. Lyon-1, Lyon, France, 4Département de pathologie, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Melki: None. F. Brioude: None. S. Julia: None. S. Naudion: None. Z. Colosafi: Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 5Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 6Service de Réanimation None. M. Rodriguez: None. A. Kitzis: None. F. Bilan: None. néonatale et néonatologie, Hôpital Croix Rousse, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 7Center for Human Genetics, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 8INSERM, U1028; CNRS, UMR5292; TIGER Team, Lyon, France. Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) is defined by the radiographic appearan- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEc |e W of WabnWor.EmSalH cGart.OilaRgiGnous stippling. It is generally associated with s 9ho 5rt stature, maxillofacial hypoplasia and the possible occurrence of multipleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index congenital abnormalities (MCA). CDP has been reported in various congeni- ted condition while the remaining 30% are present in association with ab- tal disorders such as chromosomal abnormalities, disruptions of vitamin K normalities occurring outside the region of the cleft. Over 300 syndromes metabolism, and inborn errors of metabolism including peroxisomal disor- are known to be associated with CLP. ders, defects of cholesterol biosynthesis and lysosomal storage diseases. A retrospective analysis was done of the records of all patients who were We report two siblings presenting with skeletal dysplasia, CDP and MCA. Pa- registe red at the Facial Cleft Deformity Clinic (FCDC) of the University of tient 1 presented with severe skeletal abnormalities, stippling, vermis hypo- Pretoria since its founding in 1983. plasia, partial corpus callosum agenesis and hepatic fibrosis; the pregnancy Of the3971patients seen up to date 21% had associated abnormalities. was terminated. His sister (Patient 2), showing a similar phenotype (skele- These abnormalities were subdivided according to known described syn- tal dysplasia, dysmorphic features, cataract, cerebellar and corpus callosum dromes as par t of a Mendelian disorder, demonstrated chromosomal de- abnormalities, liver enlargement), died in the neonatal period. fects; facial oblique clefts; skull synostosis and other unspecified congenital A large metabolic assessment was performed in Patient 2. Screening for abnormalities. congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) by Western blot was consistent Advances in the understanding of the aetiology of CLP continue and will witPhM “Mty2pe I” CDG. Phosphomannomutase and phosphomannose isomerase prompt more accurate methods of genetic screening, molecular diagnosis enzymatic assays, performed on patient’s fibroblasts, were normal as well and identification of at risk individuals, genetic counselling and prenatal as moAlLeGcu3lar analysis. The analysis of the dolichol linked oligosaccha- dEi.aMg.n Hosoinse.y: None. H.J.S. van den Berg: None. S.M. du Plessis: None. K. ride precursors was consistent with ALG3-CDG (CDG-Id) and molecular ana- Butow: None. lysis of the gene found a homozygous mutation (p.G96R; c.286G>A), thus confirming the diagnosis. CDG are a group of metabolic disorders presenting with very heterogeneous  P02
.045 multisystem clinical manifestations. To the best of our knowledge, only Drawbacks of genotype-phenotype correlation in Cleidocranial seven other patients with ALG3-CDG have been described to date. This is Dysplasia in eleven families the first report of a CDG syndrome presenting with CDP. Screening for CDG F. Dincsoy1, N. Dinckan1, Y. Guven2, U. Altunoglu1, S. S. Kuvvetli3, F. Bas4, O. Z. Uyguner1, H. should be systematically performed in patients presenting with unexplai- Kayserili1; n Le. dL eCpDaPi.s: None. D. Cheillan: None. S. Collardeau-Frachon: None. S. Hays: 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, None. G. Matthijs: None. C. Abel: None. P. Edery: None. M. Rossi: None. Turkey, 2Department of Pedodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Pedodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Yeditepe University, Istanbul, Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.  P02
.043 Phenotypic spectrum and diagnostic considerations in children with somatic chromosomal mosaicism Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a dominantly inherited autosomal disorder E. R. A. Thomas, C. Deshpande, F. Connell, C. Ogilvie, D. Josifova; characterized by abnormally large, wide-open fontanels, delayed closure Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. of the cranial sutures, mid-face hypoplasia, abnormal dentition, clavicular hypoplasia/aplasia and other skeletal abnormalities. Diagnosis could easi- ly be determined by clinical and radiological findings. Affected individuals Chromosomal mosaicism typically presents with developmental delay, dys- are shorter than their unaffected sibs. It is reported to be a rare disorder morphic features, asymmetry and characteristic variation in skin pigmen- with a frequency of onReU NinX a2 million individuals but the incidence could be tation following Blaschko’s lines. Seizures and other congenital anomalies higher, since relatively mild or absent medical comlications may go under- may also be present. Array-CGH in blood detects mosaicism down to a level diagnosed. Presently, , encoding an essential transcription factor for of around 10%, but the abnormal cell line may not be present in blood cell osteoblast differentiation, is the only gene associated with CCD. Mutation lineages. In these circumstances the diagnosis can be confirmed by carrying dReUtNecXt2io n rate is reported to be 60%-70% in affected individuals describing out array-CGH on cultured skin fibroblasts. We present several cases which total of 177 mutations in the coding and important splice sites regions of exhibit the wide phenotypic spectrum of chromosomal mosaicism. This in- .The phenotypic spectrum of CCD ranges from a single clinical fin- cludes presentation with typical features such as pigmentary abnormalities ding of a primary dental anomalies to a full-blown CCD phenotype, no clear or hemihypertrophy, but also an unusual presentation with complex con- phenotype-genoRtUyNpeX 2correlation has yet been established. One recent arti- genital malformations and developmental delay with none of the canonical cle , suggested an association between dental alterations and mutations on features. Array-CGH in blood was normal in the majority of cases regardless runt domain of gene. RUNX2 of age at testing, and the investigative route to diagnosis was therefore va- We will report clinical/radiological and molecular findings of 15 affected riable and complex. The abnormal cell lines included mosaicism for diploid/ cases from 11 families. Novel mutations identified in gene will be triploidy, trisomy and large chromosomal imbalance. There was little or no discussed in view of the already reported mutations. phenotypic correlation with the precise chromosomal abnormality. We also We anticipate that our findings will help to gain more perspective for the discuss the differential diagnoses including Hypomelanosis of Ito, Inconti- investigations on genotype/phenotype corelation studies on CCD and its nentia pigmenti and Nevus depigmentosus. The low sibling recurrence risk d Fr. aDwinbcascokys:. None. N. Dinckan: None. Y. Guven: None. U. Altunoglu: None. S.S. attached to the diagnosis of mosaicism makes confirmation important for Kuvvetli: None. F. Bas: None. O.Z. Uyguner: None. H. Kayserili: None. affected families. Atypical clinical features may lead to a diagnostic odyssey before confirmation, frequently as a result of skin biopsy. This series of cases suggests that skin biopsy should be considered at an earlier stage in a wider  P02
.046 s Ep.eRc.tAr.u Tmh oomf calsin: iNcoanl ep.r eCs. eDnetsahtipoannsd teh:a Nno inse u. sFu. aClo innn ceulrl:r eNnotn pe.r aCc. tOicgei.lvie: None. D. Josifova: None. A de novo 6q25.3 deletion comprising ARID1B responsible for Coffin- Siris syndrome M. Holder-Espinasse1, C. Olgivie2, S. Mathur3, D. Anderson3, C. Deshpande1; 1Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Cytogenetics, Guy‘s Hospital,  P02
.044 London, United Kingdom, 3Paediatric Cardiology, Evelina Children‘s Hospital, St Thomas‘ Orofacial clefts associated with other congenital abnormalities seen Hospital, London, United Kingdom. at a South African multidisciplinary clinic E. M. Honey1, H. J. S. van den Berg2, S. M. du Plessis3, K. Butow3; 1Department Genetics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa, 2Department 6q25.3 microdeletions identified on array CGH have been reported in as- of Maxillo-facial and Oral Surgery, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa, sociation wAitRhI Din1tBellectual disability, acquired microcephaly, dysmorphic 3Department of Maxillo-Facial and Oral Surgery, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South features, structural anomalies of the brain and non specific multiple organ Africa. anomalies. , comprised in this deletion, had been identified as the potential candidate gene to explain this distinctive phenotype. Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare, clinically heterogeneous disorder often consi- Clefts involving the lip and/or palate (CLP) or isolated clefts of the palate dered in the setting of cognitive/developmental delay and 5th finger/nail (CP) are among the most common congenital anomalies and require com- hypoplasia. Due to the clinical variability, this diagnosis can be difficult to plex multi-professional treatment. The incidence varies according to geo- cAoRnIDfir1mB clinically and the existence of this disorder as a specific diagnosis graphical region, ethnicity and socio-economic status with a general accep- has even been at times an issue of debate. Recently, haploinsufficiency of ted incidence in the Caucasian population of 1:800 to 1:1000. The incidence ,now known as one of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex in the black South African population is unsure but estimated to be lower. A9pp6roximately 70% of CLP cases are non-syndromEiSc,H oGcc u2rr0in1g3 a s| aPnA isRoIlSa-, FRmAeNmbCeEr, h| aWs bWeeWn i.dEeSnHtifGied.O asR cGausing CSS. Therefore the 6q25.3 deletionABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index distinct phenotype should be considered as CSS too. 2 additional methodological approaches, the „chromosome walking“ and We report on an 8 months old male, born to healthy unrelated parents. Com- Array Painting, for the breakpoint studies. In our first case, karyotyping was plex heart malformation had been identified on antenatal scans and parents done following the discovery of a multiple malformation syndrome on ul- declined invasive testing. He was born with normal growth parameters. Ex- trasound examination. The fetal karyotype showed an unbalanced CCR with amination revealed slight dysmorphic features comprising a hirsute fore- 3 breakpoints. Subsequent analysis of the mother‘s chromosomes revealed head, down-slanting palpebral fissures, full lips, deep palmar and plantar an apparently balanced CCR with 4 breakpoints. For the second case, a male creases and small fifth toenails. Tight aortic coarctation was associated with carrier of a simple reciprocal translocation inherited through his mother a small mitral valve and poor function of the lateral left ventriAclReI wD1aBll. Brain fathered a girl with a more complex rearrangement involving a third chro- MARRIID r1eBvealed hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Array-CGH revealed a de mosome. In the 2 cases, a re-building of the initial rearrangement occurred novo 69kb deletion at 6q25.3, resulting in partial deletion of . Since through meiotic recombinations, giving rise to simpler or more complicated has also been involved in childhood neuroblastoma, we will discuss karyotypes. For both cases, breakpoint studies led to an understanding of aMb.o Huot lcdlienri-cEaslp minaansasgee: mNoennet. a Cn.d O glgeniveieti:c N coonuen. sSe.l lMinagth imurp: lNicoanteio. Dns. .Anderson: the involved mechanisms underlying the simplification or complexification None. C. Deshpande: None. oVf. tGhaet pinaoriesn: tNaol nreea. rGr.a Lnegfeomrt:e nNto.ne. C. Coubes: None. J. Puechberty: None. A. Schneider: None. S. Taviaux: None. M. Tournaire: None. M. Di Nicola: None. M. Girard: None. P. Sarda: None. F. Pellestor: None.  P02
.047 Apoptosis is responsible for neutropenia in Cohen syndrome L. Duplomb1,2, L. Faivre1,2,3, D. Picot1, A. Hammann4, G. Jego4, N. Droin5, E. Lopez1, B.  P02
.049 Aral1,2, N. Gigot1,2, S. El Chehadeh1,3, F. Huet1,2, P. Callier1,2, J. Thevenon1,2, V. Carmignac1, C. Prenatal diagnosis of paternal uniparental isodisomy of chromosome Capron6, M. Gougerot-Pocidalo7, F. Girodon2, J. Bastie2,4, E. Solary5, L. Delva4, C. Thauvin- 14 (patiUPD14) with chromosomal micro-array (CMA) in a fetus with Robinet1,2,3; multiple congenital abnormalities. 1GAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 2CHU, Dijon, France, 3Centre de Génétique A. Bazin1, D. Trost1, P. Kleinfinger1, L. Lohmann1, B. Bessières2, F. Guis3; et centre de références Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Dijon, 1Laboratoire Cerba, St Ouen l‘Aumone, France, 2Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Inserm UMR 866, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 5Institut Gustave France, 3Institut Mutualiste Montsouris, Paris, France. Roussy, Inserm UMR1009, Villejuif, France, 6Institut Cochin, Inserm UMR1016, Paris, France, 7Inserm UMR 773, Université Paris 7, Dijon, France. Case report The patient, a 43 years old primigravid woman was referred at 12 weeks Cohen syndrome (CS) is an autosomal recessive dVisPoSr1d3eBr, displaying intel- of gestation for prenatal diagnosis because an ultrasound scan identified lectual disability, microcephaly, truncal obesity, retinal dystrophy and inter- an increased nuchal translucency (3.8 mm, CRL 59 mm). The karyotype on mittent neutropenia. CS is due to mutations in the gene, encoding a uncultured chorionic villi was normal: 46,XX (15 cells, RHG banding). There crucial Golgi-membrane protein. Neutropenia being very rarely described were no particularities in the familial history nor consanguinity. in syndromology, we hypothesized that neutropenia could be a clue to ap- CMA was performed with PrecytoNEM (derived from Agilent 60K, resoluti- proach the pathophysiology of CS. According to studies in other congenital on 400 Kb) and didn’t show any unbalanced abnormality. neutropenias, it could be due to maturation arrest of neutrophils, dysfunc- At 23 WG, a subsequent ultrasound showed multiple abnormalities. The- tions or apoptosis of mature neutrophils. We confirmed that granulopoïesis re was a polyhydramnios, a generalized oedema, dysmorphic features with was normal in CS patients; neutrophils display normal morphology, chemo- long filtrum, small rounded ears and prefrontal oedema, a very short femur taxis, phagocytosis and generation of reactive oxygen species. Transmission length (<1° percentile) in contrast with the body weight estimated at the electron microscopy+ revealed a disrupted Golgi apparatus morphology. We 83° percentile, an abdominal wall eventration and large feet with abnormal then isolated CD16 neutrophils from CS patients and healthy donors and hallux implantation. showed by Annexin V-propidium iodide and Hoescht staining that CS neu- Amniocentesis was performed to exclude a tetrasomy 12p (Pallister-Killian trophils displayed an increased apoptosis rate compared to healthy donors. syndrome) possibly undiagnosed on chorionic villi because of a chromo- This exaggerated apoptosis was observ+ed only in neutropenic p+atients, and somal feto-placental discrepancy: the karyotype was again normal and the was specific of neutrophils, as CS CD3 lymphocytes and CD14 monocytes Fish analysis ruled out tetrasomy 12p. The parents opted for termination of were not affected. For most of CS pVaPtiSe1n3tsB, in contrast to healthy donors, pregnancy after counselling about the poor prognosis of the fetal malforma- GM-CSF had no protector effect despite normal GM-CSF serum level, recep- tions. Post-mortem examination evoked patUPD14. tor mRNA expression and signaling. ELA2, HPmNR3N, MA PeOxp ressLiYoZn dramatically The CMA with Affymetrix CytoScan (SNP-array) on the amniotic fluid again decreased during spontaneous apoptosis of normal neutrophils whereas did not show any pathogenic CNV but exhibited a complete isodisomy for mRNA expressions of 4 other genes ( and ) were stable, chromosome 14. Paternal iUPD14 was confirmed by parental microsatellite confirming the correlation between VP S13
B and apoptosis. As congenital segregation. neutropenia can result from increased endoplasmic reticulum stress, expe- Discussion riments are in progress to determine its involvement in CS. These results m L.a Dy ugpivloem clbu:e N foonr eu. nLd. eFrasitvarne:d Ninogn oe.t hDe. rP CicSo fte: aNtuonrees. .A. Hammann: None. G. We discuss the different underlying causes for patUPD. Although it’s an un- Jego: None. N. Droin: None. E. Lopez: None. B. Aral: None. N. Gigot: None. S. common finding in fetal malformations, SNP’s CMA allowing both UPD and El Chehadeh: None. F. Huet: None. P. Callier: None. J. Thevenon: None. V. C AN. VB adzeitne:c Ntioonne m. Da.y T broes ht:e Nlpofnuel .i nP .s Kulcehin cfionngdeirt:i oNnosn.e. L. Lohmann: None. B. Carmignac: None. C. Capron: None. M. Gougerot-Pocidalo: None. F. Girodon: Bessières: None. F. Guis: None. None. J. Bastie: None. E. Solary: None. L. Delva: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None.  P02
.050 Impaired embryogenesis (plurimalformative syndromes) as a  P02
.048 leading cause of altered anthropometric parameters in patients with When transmission modifies the complexity of familial complexe congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract rearrangements C. Daescu1,2, O. Marginean1,2, M. Puiu2,2, A. Craciun1,2, T. Marcovici1,2, A. Militaru1,2, O. V. Gatinois, G. Lefort, C. Coubes, J. Puechberty, A. Schneider, S. Taviaux, M. Tournaire, M. Belei1,2, D. Chiru1,2, C. Pienar2, A. Chirita-Emandi2; Di Nicola, M. Girard, P. Sarda, F. Pellestor; 1“Louis Turcanu” Emergency Hospital for Children Timisoara, timisoara, Romania, Chromosomal Genetics Laboratory, CHRU, Montpellier, France. 2„Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Complex Chromosome Rearrangements (CCR) are rare events, defined by Introduction: Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) the occurrence of at least 3 chromosome breakpoints. The degree of com- comprise all the defects that appear during the embryonic development of plexity of CCRs can be very high and the related meiotic disturbances result the kidney and lead to altered renal structure and/or function. Material and in important chromosomal imbalance in gametes. During meiosis, crossing- method: We studied 209 children with CAKUT admitted to our Nephrolo- overs between involved chromosomes can modify the complexity of the gy Department between January 1st 2004 and December 31st 2009. The rearrangement with numerous possibilities of chromosomal imbalance in mean age of patients at admission was 7.12 ± 5.88 years. We assessed the gametes. We report 2 familial cases in which meiotic events result in a new anthropometric status of our lot by calculating the Z score for weight and chromosome rearrangement. Chromosomal analyses were performed using height, we evaluated CAKUT that were associated with malnourishment, classical cytogenetic procedures (R- and G-banding) and various FISH tech- and how renal failure influenced height and/or weight. Results: Distributi- niques (chromosome painting and arrayE-CSGHHG). I2n 0a1dd3it |io PnA, wReI Sd,e vFeRloApeNd CEo |n W ofW theW p.aEtiSeHntsG a.cOcoRrdGing to sex and renal anomaly showed that the9 d7ia-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index gnosis of certain CAKUT is more frequent in the female sex: congenital hy- syndromic), and searched for genomic rearrangements of 1q21.1. A dup dronephrosis (17.22%), vesicouretheral reflux (14.35%), abnormal kidney 1q21.1 was detected in a single sporadic non-syndromic patient. Review of position (10.52%), renal dys/hypoplasia (7.17%), double collecting system the CHDs in published del 1q21.1 and dup 1q21.1 subjects showed a great (6.69%), renal agenesis (4.78%), only the ureteropelvic junction obstruc- heterogeneity in anatomic types. In conclusion, the present family illustra- tion (11.96%) was more frequent in the male sex. Analysis of anthropome- tes recurrent CHD in del 1q21.1, expressing either as syndromic in one fami- tric indices enabled us to obtain the weight and height Z score histogram, ly member or as non-syndromic in the another one. The spectrum of CHDs demonstrating the group’s uniformity and highlighting the cases (5.26%) aAs.s oDcei aLtuecda w: Nitohn de.e Ml 1.Cq2. D1.i1g ialinod: Ndounpe 1. Lq.2 B1e.1rn caarnd ioncic: aNsoionen.a Fll.y C ionnclsuodlie: PVS. with 2nd and 3rd stage malnourishment that were associated with:(a) the None. F.R. Lepri: None. M.G. Giuffrida: None. A. Baban: None. C. Surace: None. R. Ferese: None. A. Angioni: None. A. Novelli: None. B. Marino: following CAKUT: vesicoureteral reflux, renal dysplasia, neurogenic bladder, None. B. Dallapiccola: None. bladderepispadias extrophy syndrome, Prune-Belly syndrome, double coll- ecting system and polycystic kidney disease; and (b) renal failure stages 4 and 5. Conclusion: Two factors were implicated in altered anthropometric parameters in our patients: impaired embryogenesis (plurimalformative  P02
.053 s Cy.n Ddaroesmceus:) N aonnde .c hOr. oMnaicrg rienneaaln f:a Nilounree.. M. Puiu: None. A. Craciun: None. T. A second case of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome with mutation in the Marcovici: None. A. Militaru: None. O. Belei: None. D. Chiru: None. C. Pienar: SM C3
 gene confirms this gene as a cause of the syndrome. None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. F. J. Ramos1,2, M. Gil-Rodríguez1, L. Bomme-Ousager3, M. A. Deardorff4,5, C. Baquero1, M. Kibaek3, B. Puisac1, M. Hernández-Marcos1, E. Teresa-Rodrigo1, E. Queralt6, F. J. Kaiser7, P. Gómez-Puertas8, I. D. Krantz4,5, J. Pié1; 1University of Zaragoza Medical School, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Hospital Clinico Universitario  P02
.051 „Lozano Blesa“, Zaragoza, Spain, 3Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 4The Is Arg5 in HOX_DNA binding domain of HOXB1 hot spot for congenital Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5The University of facial paralysis mimicking Moebius syndrome? Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6Institut O. Z. Uyguner1, H. Ozgur1, U. Altunoglu1, G. Toksoy1, S. Basaran1, H. van Bokhoven2, H. d’Investigacions Biomèdicas de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L´Hospitalet de LLobregat, Kayserili1; Barcelona, Spain, 7Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität zu Lübeck,, Lübeck, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Germany, 8Center of Molecular Biology, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain. Turkey, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegan, Netherlands. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is an inherited disorder characterized classical al- by facial dysmorphism, growth and cognitive impairment, limb malforma- Cgoornigtehnmitsal facial paralysis (CFP) and Moebius syndrome (MB S; MIM tions and multiple organ involvement. MSuMtaCt3ions in five genes that encode 157900)H aorxeb h1ighly sporadic, formulating gene identification components of cohesin complex account for 70% of patients with CdLS-like difficult, assigning candidate gene approach compatible.Mutant phenotype. However, in one of the genes, , only one mutation in a mild- mice for were long before reported toH OpXreBs1ent features of facial nerve ly affected adult has been reported. defects, resembling MBS, only very recently associated with human pheno- Here, we report on the second novel mutation in the SM C3
 gene in a boy type. Currently, homozygous c.619C>T in revealed in the two CFP with CdLS. He showed classical CdLS phenotype with typical facial dysmor- aafrfgected individuals from two different families, both from the same geogra- phism, multiple musculoskeletal anomalies, hirsutism and severe develop- phic origin, altering arginine to cysteine at 207 (p.arg207cys) corresponds mental delay. He also had myopia, moderate hearing loss, mild puldmeo nnoavroy 5 resHidOuXeB 1of the HOXB1 homeodomain. and supravalvular aortic stenosis, pyloric stenoSsMisC, v3e rtebral anomalies, and We have screened our cohort of 33 sporadic MBS and CFP patients for muta- gastroesophageal reflux disease. Molecular analysis identified a tion on and identified homozygous c.620G>A in one consanguineous mutation in exon 22 (c.2494_2499del) of the gene, which predicted family. Alteration changes the same neutral-polar arginine, via second nu- in-frame deletions of two residues highly conserved and mapped to the C- cleotide, resulting to basic-polar histidine (p.arg207his). Clinical investiga- terminal coiled-coil domain, p.(Leu832_Asn833del). Structural analysis of tion of our case presented left esotropia, rightH flOaXttBe1ned/broad nasal bridge, the mutant SM C3
 protein showed a serious shift in the relative position of external ear defects, high arched palate, bilateral cranial nerve VII dysfunc- the accompanying residues, leading to the disSpMlaCc3ement of the correspon- tion, diagnosed as CFP. We further screened in 56 DNA samples of ding residues of the two antiparallel helices that form the coiled coil. MBS cases, referred to us from Radbound University Nijmegen-Holland, Our case demonstrates thatS MmCu1taAt ions in the gene may cause a mild none found to carry any patahroglogical alteration. It is surprising that, such a to moderate phenotypeS,M aCs3 it has been previously reported in some pati- rare disorder with three only identified mutation striking the same conser- ents with mutations in the gene. Finally, we recommend to perform ved amino acid, delegating 5 the achilles of HOXB1 protein. Up to date, mutation screening of in patients with CdLS phenotype in whom no out of 267 families with MBS or with the facial wHeOaXkBn1ess, component of mF.uJt. aRtaiomno iss: i dNeonntei.f iMed. G inil -tRhoed ortíghueer zk:n Noownne. CLd. LBSo gmemnees-O. usager: None. M.A. MBS (177 fromH OWXeBb1b et al.2012, 56 from Nijmegan group and 34 from our Deardorff: None. C. Baquero: None. M. Kibaek: None. B. Puisac: None. M. center), only three reported to carry mutations in gene, figuring the Hernández-Marcos: None. E. Teresa-Rodrigo: None. E. Queralt: None. F.J. p Or.eZv.a Uleyngcuen oerf : None. H m. uOtzagtuiorn: Nfroenqeu. eUn. cAyl ttuon boeg l1u.:1 N2%on.e. G. Toksoy: None. S. Kaiser: None. P. Gómez-Puertas: None. I.D. Krantz: None. J. Pié: None. Basaran: None. H. van Bokhoven: None. H. Kayserili: None.  P02
.054  P02
.052 SNP arrays in the diagnostic strategy of corpus callosum agenesis Congenital heart defects in recurrent reciprocal 1q21.1 deletion associated with intellectual disability. and duplication syndromes: Rare association with pulmonary valve B. Keren1,2, M. Moutard3, C. Mignot1, A. Jacquette1, S. Chantot-Bastaraud4, P. Charles1, stenosis S. Whalen1, E. Fonteneau1, C. Mach1, M. Gérard5, A. Faudet1, A. Brice1,2, C. Depienne1,2, T. A. De Luca1, M. C. Digilio2, L. Bernardini1, F. Consoli1, F. R. Lepri2, M. G. Giuffrida1, A. Billette de Villemeur6, D. Héron1; Baban2, C. Surace2, R. Ferese1, A. Angioni2, A. Novelli1, B. Marino3, B. Dallapiccola1; 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2CRicm 1Mendel Institute, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Medical UPMC Inserm UMR_ S975
/CNRS UMR 7225, Paris, France, 3Service de Nruropédiatrie, Genetics, Cytogenetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 3Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza University, Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Département de Génétique, Hôpital Robert and Eleonora Lorrillard Spencer Cenci Foundation, Rome, Italy. Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France. Microdeletion 1q21.1 (del 1q21.1) and the reciprocal microduplication Corpus callosum agenesis is the most common cerebral malformation in 1q21.1 (dup 1q21.1) are newly recognized genomic disorders, characteri- patients with intellectual disability (CCA-ID) with a prevalence of 2-3%. zed by developmental delay, dysmorphic features and congenital malforma- Known genetic causes are heterogeneous and in most cases, the etiologies tions. Congenital heart defect (CHD) is a major feature of del 1q21.1, and has remain unknown. been occasionally reported in dup 1q21.1. We report here a family segrega- In order to achieve a genetic diagnosis, we performed chromosome analyses ting del 1q21.1 in 3 members. Two of the affected family members had CHD, on microarrays (CMA) on 51 patients with CCA-ID and no known causes. We including the proband with syndromic atrial septal defect, pulmonary valve used Illumina CytoSNP-12 SNP arrays which contain 300k probes. stenosis (PVS), and muscular ventricular septal defects, and the maternal We found 21 different CNVs (41%) not reported in control subjects of the uncle with non-syndromic PVS. This finding prompted investigation of the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV). Among these CNVs, 8 deletions (16%) role of recurrent rearrangements of chromosome 1q21.1 in the pathogene- 98 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRwAerNe CdEe n| oWvoW anWd .cEoSnsHidGer.eOdR toG be likely pathogenic, with sizes varying sis of PVS. We gathered 38 patients with PVS (11 syndromic and 27 non-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.057 The First Reported Surviving Patient with Skeletal Abnormalities and from 1,3Mb to 24Mb. No de novo duplications were found. Craniosynostosis due to Homozygous Mutations in the CY P26
B1 Gene Moreover, 10 CNVs were also carried by healthy parents, and therefore, could J. E. V. Morton1, S. Frentz2, S. P. Robertson2; not be considered as the main causes of the phenotype. We were not able to 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham, United recover blood samples of the parents to verify the 3 remaining CNVs. Kingdom, 2Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, Thus, CMA seems to be a powerful tool in the diagnostic strategy of patients University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. with CCA-ID and no etiological diagnosis. However, the causes of CCA-ID remain unknown in most patients. In a near future, new techniques such CY P26
B1 as exome sequencing, or massively parallel sequencing on selected genes In 2011, Laue et al reported two families with a lethal syndrome of craniosyn- panels, will certainly improve the detection rate of the genetic causes of ostosis and multiple skeletal abnormalities due to mutations in the C BC. AK-eIDre.n: None. M. Moutard: None. C. Mignot: None. A. Jacquette: None. S. gene which encodes the retinoic acid-degrading enzyme CY P26
B1. Chantot-Bastaraud: None. P. Charles: None. S. Whalen: None. E. Fonteneau: We present a 22 year old female who is the first child of consanguineous None. C. Mach: None. M. Gérard: None. A. Faudet: None. A. Brice: None. C. parents. She was born with craniosynostosis involving the coronal and lamb- Depienne: None. T. Billette de Villemeur: None. D. Héron: None. doid sutures, together with limited elbow extension and finger contractures. She was thought to have hypoplastic external genitalia. CT scan of the head showed complex craniosynsotosis with a large unossified area of skull and  P02
.055 multiple craniolacunae along the fused lambdoid sutures and in the occiput. Molecular Test Results of Syndromic Craniosynostosis Patients: Urinary steroid profile was normal. An initial diagnosis of Antley Bixler syn- genotype-phenotype correlations drome was made. Early milestones were normal, but she later had moderate V. Karaman, U. Altunoglu, G. Toksoy, B. Karaman, H. Kayserili, Z. O. Uyguner; developmental delay. She attended a school for moderate learning disabili- Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey. ties, and has since studied life skills at college. She is currently seeking em- ployment and hopes to live independently. She menstruates normally. She hCYasP 2h6adB 1o ne fracture, following a fall, but no other fractures. She has bilateral Synostosis is the premature fusion of cranial sutures in the brain vault conductive hearing loss and has bone anchored hearing aids. producing continued growth at the position of the open cranium suture analysis showed novel homozygous c.1303G>A (p.Gly435Ser) mu- in parallel to brain growth resulting in morphological deformation called tations. Both parents were confirmed as heterozygotes. Craniosynostosis. It is observed in 1/2100-1/2500 live births, occurring in This patient is only the third reported case worldwide and the only case to both syndromic and non-syndromic forms and addressed in approximately survive beyond infancy. The diagnosis is important because it allows accura- 1FG80FR d2iffFerGeFnRt3 syTnWdrIoSmT1es. RecEeFnNt Bs1tudies have shown that notably in 20% of te genetic counselling and may have implications for on-going management cases are caused by single gene mutations or chromosome abnormalities. since continued elevated retinoic a8c9id may lead to decreased bone mineral FGFR1, MSX2 , and are listed to be the most common cau- density. sative genes in craniosynostosis, thoFuGghF Rr2arFeGlyF Rin3voTlvWeIdS Tm1any others like RJe.Efe.Vre. nMcoer:t oLnau: Ne oent ea.l SA.J FHrGe n(t2z0: 1N1o)n e. S 5. P9
.5 R-6ob0e6rtson: None. , are already known and growing number of no EvFeNl gBe1nes are in- tensely being identified. Mutations in , , are involved in syndromic and lesser extent in non syndromic forms while are solely  P02
.058 recognized to be associated with Craniofrontonasal Syndrome (CFNS). A novel ALM S1
 splice mutation in a non-obese juvenile-onset insulin- Thirty craniosynostosis patients, except CFNS, where chromosomal abnor- dependent syndromic diabetic patient malities werFe GpFrRev2iouslyF eGxFcRlu3d, ed, are recruited to our research study with M. Sanyoura1,2, C. Woudstra1,2, G. Halabi3, P. Baz4, V. Senée1,2, P. Guillausseau1,2,5, P. their families. Our workflow will be targeted mutation screening for com- Zalloua6, C. Julier1,2; mon geneMs, SX2 and mutation negative patients will FbGeF sRu1bject 1INSERM U958, Paris, France, 2University Paris 7 Denis-Diderot, Paris, France, 3Division to deletion/duplication analysis by craniofrontonasal MLPA kit, which will of Endocrinology, Hôtel Dieu Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Department of Ophthalmology, follow by sequencing and targeted mutation screening for . Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 5AP-HP, Department of Internal Medicine B, Lariboisière Hospital, Paris, France, 6Lebanese American University, School of Medicine, Our investigation is ongoing presently. We anticipate that our results will Beirut, Lebanon. foster the acknowledged molecular diagnostic flow charts in craniosynosto- sis and further delineate genotype-phenotype relationship. Undefined cases will be esteemed subjects for novel gene identification by next generation s Ve.q Kuaernacminagn.: None. U. Altunoglu: None. G. Toksoy: None. B. Karaman: Insulin-dependent juvenile-onset diabetes may occur in the context of rare None. H. Kayserili: None. Z.O. Uyguner: None. syndromic presentations suggesting monogenic inheritance rather than common multifactorial autoimmune type 1 diabetes. We report the case of a Lebanese patient diagnosed with juvenile-onset insulin-dependent dia- betes presenting ketoacidosis, early onset retinopathy with optic atrophy,  P02
.056 hearing loss, diabetes insipWidFuSs1, epilepsy, and normal weight and stature, A new syndrome of intellectual disability, postnatal microcephaly, who later developed insulin-resistance. Despite similariAtiLeMs Sw1ith Wolfram progressive ataxia and spasticity and hair anomalies caused by syndrome, we excluded the gene as responsible for this disease. Using CTNNB1 haploinsufficiency. combined linkage and candidate gene study, we selected , responsib- E. Dubruc1, A. Putoux1,2, A. Labalme3, C. Rougeot4, D. Sanlaville3,2, P. Edery5,2; 1Department of Genetics, Bron, France, 2Neuroscience Research Centre of Lyon, Inserm le for Alström syndrome, as a candidate gene. We identified a novel splice U1028, UMR CNRS 5292 Claude Bernard University, Lyon, France, 3Est biology and mutation in intron 18 locatedfs 3 bp before the intron/exon junction (IV S18
- pathology Centre, Bron, France, 4Neuropediatric Service, hopital Femme Mère Enfant, 3T>G), resulting in exon 19 skipping and consequent frameshift generating Bron, France, 5Department of Genetics, Hopital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France. a truncated protein (V3958 3964X). Alström syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by retinal degeneration, deafness, truncal obesity, short stature, type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance. The patient’s clinical We report on a 5 ½ year-old girl patient with a new syndrome characteri- presentation significantly differed from typical Alström syndrome by the zed by developmental delay, postnatal microcephaly, progressive ataxia and absence of truncal obesity and short stature, and by the presence of keto- spasticity, light skin and sparse, fair hair, caused by a small de novo 3p22 mi- acidotic insulin-dependenAt LdMiaSb1e tes from onset, optic atrophy and diabetes crodeletion encompassing the entire genomic sequence of the gene CTNNB1. insipidus. Our observation broadens the clinical spectrum of Alström syn- CTNNB1 encodes β-catenin which has been shown to be essential for dendri- drome and suggests that mutations may be considered in patients tic development of postnatal neurons in vivo and is also required in the skin who initially present with an acute onset of insulin-dependent diabetes. Our for the differentiation of stem cells into hair follicles. Conditional β-catenin study outlines the value of alternative strategies targeting patients who do knock out mice have brain malformations, neuronal loss, impaired craniofa- not present the typical disease manifestations, in order to identify new mu- cial development and hair follicle morphogenesis defects, a phenotype remi- t Mat.i oSnans yroesuprao:n Nsiobnlee. fCo.r Wvaoruiadnsttr par: eNsoennet.a Gtio. Hnsa loafb tih: Ne odnisee. aPs. eB.az: None. V. niscent of that of the patient presented here. In addition, point mutations of Senée: None. P. Guillausseau: None. P. Zalloua: None. C. Julier: None. CTNNB1 have been recently reported in 3 patients with intellectual disabili- ty, using an exome sequencing strategy. Altogether, the data presented here provide compelling evidence that haploinsufficiency of CTNNB1 in human causes a new syndrome combining intellectual disability, postnatal microce- p Eh. aDlyu, bprruocg: rNeossniev.e A a.t Paxuitao uaxn:d N sopnaes.t Aic.i tLya, baanldm sek: iNn oanned. Ch.a Riro aungoemota:l Nieosn.e. D. Sanlaville: None. P. Edery: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 99ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.059  P02
.061 Does epigenetics contribute to the phenotypic variability in the A corepressor gene mapping to chromosome 21 affects mitochondrial DiGeorge syndrome function in Down syndrome fetuses C. Badja1, M. Artufel1, M. Deveze1, E. Barruet1, C. El-yazidi1, A. Tasmadjian1, B. Binetruy1, A. Izzo1, R. Manco1, T. De Cristofaro2, R. Scrima3, F. Bonfiglio1, G. Calì2, A. Conti1, L. Nitsch1; N. Philip1,2, F. Magdinier1; 1University Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 2Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and 1Laboratoire Genetique Medicale et Genomique Fonctionnelle, UMR S_910,Aix-Marseille Oncology, Napoli, Italy, 3University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy. Universite, inserm. Faculte de Medecine de la Timone., Marseille, France, 2Service de Genetique Medicale, Hopital de la Timone Enfants, Marseille, France. The upregulation of chromosome 21 (Hsa21) genes causes the downregula- tion of several nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes (NEMG) in heart tissue The 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS), also known as velocardiofacial of human fetuses with Down syndrome (DS). We investigated the conse- (VCFS) or DiGeorge (DGS) syndrome, is a common microdeletion syndrome quences of NEMG downregulation on the mitochondrial function in trisomic in human, occurring with a prevalence of one in 4000 live births. Phenotype human fetal fibroblasts (DS-HFF). is highly variable among patients, independentely of the size of the deletion. Together with the upregulation of Hsa21 genes and the dysregulation of mi- Symptoms include congenital heart defects, atypical face appearance, cleft tochondrial genes in DS-HFF we found an impairment of the mitochondrial palate, hypocalcemia, immunodeficiency due to thymus aplasia or hypopla- function characterized by decreased respiratory activity, enhanced ROS pro- sia and cognitive and behavioral abnormalities. duction, increased levels of intra-mitochondrial calcium and abnormal cri- The deletion results from non-allelic homologous recombination during stae morphology. The mitochondrial dysfunction was more pronounced in meiosis and involves highly homologous sequences called Low Copy Re- fibroblasts derived from cardiopathic trisomic fetuses suggesting that an al- peats (LCRs). Approximately, 87% of patients carry a 3-Mb deletion, known tered bioenergetics background might induce a more severe DS phenotype. as the Typically Deleted Region (TDR). In 8% a smaller deletion of 1.5-Mb To unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying the mitochondrial dys- is observed, with the same clinical signs, delimiting the 22q11DS minimal function we focused on the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1α, which con- DiGeorge Critical Region (DGCR). trols the expression of several NEMG, and on its repressor RI P140
, which The involvement of epigenetic mechanisms has never been described in the maps to Hsa21 and is known to affect oxidative metabolism and mitochon- DiGeorge syndrome. We hypothesize that epigenetic changes at the site of drial biogenesis. We found that PGC-1α was downregulated while RI P140
 recombination, inside and outside of the TDR may play an important role was upregulated in all independent DS-HFF cultures we tested. RI P140
 si- in this pathology and could contribute to phenotype variability. We wish to lencing in DS-HFF caused a time- and siRNA concentration-dependent in- determine the impact of haploinsuffciency of different genes deleted by the crease of PGC-1α expression and the decrease of ROS production. microdeletion such as HIRA and DGCR8 at early differentiation stage using These findings suggest that the upregulation of the Hsa21 gene RI P140
 con- induced pluripotent stem cells derived from patients. More specifically, we tributes to the mitochondrial dysfunction observed in DS and have potential will investigate their role during the neuronal differentiation in order to un- therapeutic implications since drugs affecting the RI P140
-PG C1
α pathway derstand their contribution to the mental manifestation of DGS. m Ai.g Ihzzto r:e Nscounee .t hRe. Mimapnacior:e Ndo mneit.o Tc. hDoen Cdrriisatlo pfahreon:o Ntyopnee.. R. Scrima: None. F. P Cr.e Bliamdijnaa: rNyo rnees. uMlt.s A wrtiullf eble: Nporensee. nMt.e Dd eavnedz ed:i sNcounses.e Ed.. Barruet: None. C. Bonfiglio: None. G. Calì: None. A. Conti: None. L. Nitsch: None. El-yazidi: None. A. Tasmadjian: None. B. Binetruy: None. N. Philip: None. F. Magdinier: None.  P02
.062 Exome sequencing identifies a novel E P300
 frame shift mutation in a  P02
.060 patient with features reminiscent of Cornelia de Lange syndrome Down Syndrome associated with neonate infectious pathology M. M. Khalifa1, S. A. Woods1, H. B. Robinson1, D. Agamanolis1, L. J. Kohler2, G. George M. Boia1, D. Iacob1, A. Manea1, I. Andrei2; Sterbenz2; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Emergency 1Akron Children‘s Hospital, Akron, OH, United States, 2Summit County Medical Children Hospital ‚‘L.Turcanu‘‘, Timisoara, Romania. Examiner’s Offices, Akron, OH, United States. Introduction: The Down syndrome represents a complex and interdiscipli- Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) anCdR CEoBrBnPe lia d eE P L3
a0n0ge syndrome (CdLS) nary pathology during the infant period, and even more so for the neonate. are genetically heterogNenIPeBoLu,s S mMCu1ltAip, lSeM aCn3o, mRAalDie2s1 syndrHoDmAeCs8, each has a Aim: The authors are set to analyze the pathology associated with Down distinctive facial gestalt. Two genes ( and ) are known to cau- syndrome, that lead to increase in hospitalization, complications, as well as se RTS and five genes ( and ) have been the immediate and long term prognosis of the patients. associated with CdLS. A diagnosis of RTS or CdLS is molecularly EcPo3n0fi0rmed Material and method: The study took place in the our Department over a iCnR oEnBlByP 65% of clinically identified cases. This suggests that other causati- four year period. 36 patients were included, with clinical characteristics ve genes must exisEt Pfo3r0 0both conditions. In addition, although and associated to specific caryotype alterations: trisomy 21 in 34 children enEcoPd3e0 0homologous proteins and perform similar functions, only (94,44%) and only 2 cases (4,46%)with mosaicism. eight patients with mutations have been reported. This suggests that Results: The study group contained 22 neonates with gestational age below RTS due to could be escaping clinical recognition. 37 weeks and 12 full term neonates, 77.77% presenting intrauterine growth We report on a child with multiple congenital abnormalitiesE aPn3d0 i0ntellectual retardation. disability whose complex phenotype is highly reminiscent of CdLS. However, The pathology associated was: ventricular septal defect - 44.44%, atrial sep- no mutations in CdLS genEePs3 w00e re identified. Rather, a novel mutation tal defect - 19.44%, atrio-ventricular canal defect - 16.66%, musculoskel- was found EoPn3 w00h ole e HxoDmACe 8sequencing. etal malformations (congenital foot deformity - 30.55% cases, polydactyly Possible links between and genes causing CdLS are evident in the - 8.66%, syndactyly - 5.55%). literature. and are involved in the regulation of p53 transcrip- All patients presented feeding deficit, absence of sucking reflex - 72.22%, tional activity. In addition, p300 anEdP 3o0th0er chromatin associated proteins suck-swallow incoordination. including NIPBL, SMCA1, SM C3
, have been found at enhancer regions in dif- Neonatal sepsis occurred in 36.11%, infectious pneumonia - 16.66%, ulce- ferent cell types. This suggests that and CdLS-related genes might be ro-necrotic enterocolitis - 11.11%. In 16 cases (44.44%) with gestational involved in a shared pathway, and their phenotypic effects might overlap. age below 32 weeks, and birth weight below 1500g the evolution was slow, AEPs 3w00hole exome sequencing becomes more widely utilized, we will like- with hospitalization between 45-60 days, and 3 cases (8.33%) deceased ly have a better understanding of the diverse phenotypes associated with with associated pathology: heart malformations, neonatal sepsis and ulce- mutations. In the meantime, our findings suggest that E P300
 is likely ro-necrotic enterocolitis. aMn.oMth. Kerh caalinfad:i Ndaotnee .g Sen.Ae. fWoro CoddLs:S .None. H.B. Robinson: None. D. Agamanolis: Conclusions: Extreme prematurity associated with cardiac or digestive mal- None. L.J. Kohler: None. G. George Sterbenz: None. formations, and/or neonatal sepsis represented the major cause of death. In the absence of associated infectious pathology the evolution was favorab- lMe, .r Beqouiai:r iNnogn fee.w De. rIa dcaoybs: oNfo hnoes. pAi.t aMl acnaerea.: None. I. Andrei: None. 100 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.063  P02
.065 Unusual combination of epilepsy phenotypes and a SCNM1 mutation Molecular genetic testing of Fanconi anemia: experience of the Italian in a three - generational family: photosensitivity, persistent at high Research Group on Fanconi Anemia age, and talking induced myoclonic jaw- jerks D. De Rocco1,2, M. Faleschini1,2, R. Bottega1,2, E. Cappelli3, J. Svahn3, P. Farruggia4, D. D. Kasteleijn- Nolst Trenité1, H. Schippers2, W. Perquin3, G. de Haan4, C. de Kovel1, G. Longoni5, V. Poggi6, M. Pillon7, C. Dufour3, A. Savoia1,2; Capovilla5, B. Jocic-Jakubi6, T. Covanis7, M. Brinciotti8, B. Baykan9, P. Parisi8, E. Brilstra1, A. 1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Gaslini Bader1, B. Koeleman1; Hospital, Genova, Italy, 4A.R.N.A.S. Ospedali Civico-Di Cristina-Benfratelli, Palermo, Italy, 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2St. Antonius Hospital Utrecht, 5San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 6Santobono-Pausilipon Hospital, Napoli, Italy, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Bronovo Hospital, Den Haag, Netherlands, 4SEIN, Heemstede, 7University of Padova, Padova, Italy. Netherlands, 5C. Poma Hospital, Mantova, Italy, 6Pediatric Clinic, Nis, Serbia, 7Aghia Sophia Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 8Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 9University of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey. Fanconi Anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disorder of hematopoiesis where 15 complementation groups have already been described. Previous studies of FA genes mutations revealed high heterogeneity and interpopulation diffe- We analysed the clinical phenotypes, evolution, and genetics of a large fami- rences but an extensive analysis has not be documented in Italian popula- ly presented through a single proband who suffered increasingly from jerks tion. In this work we characterized 104 consecutive Italian patients with a in her jaw especially when speaking in front of the classroom and who ap- suspected clinical diagnosis of FA. Using a strategy based on complementa- peared to be photosensitive, both clinically and in EEG recordings. Speaking tion and Western blot analyses in lymphoblast cell lines, we defined candi- provoked this phenomenon, and it was not present on awakening. We as- date genes for the mutation screening. This allows us to detect 178 mutant certained eighteen family members of whom eight had either similar jaw or alleles and to identify 94 families with mutations in the FANCA (81), FAN- limb jerks. Nine family members (including the eight affected by epilepsy) CG (9), FANCD2 (2), FANCB (1) and FANCC (1) genes. Consistent with the showed photosensitivity in the EEG in all but two younger cases (14 and 24 wide spectrum of mutations already reported for FA, we identified 39 novel yrs respectively), and this biomarker was (still) present at older age (ave- mutations that were almost all “private”. Regarding FANCA, we detect 15 rage 55; range 50 - 58 years). We performed a linkage scan using PPR as (11,1%) intragenic deletions. Western blot analyses show that in all cases affection status and detected complete segregation for four chromosomal with al least one missense mutation the FANCA protein is stably expressed. regions. The proband was then investigated by Whole Exome Sequencing, Moreover, in cell lines with a defective FANCG, the expression of the FANCA which identified 4 novel, predicted damaging mutations in different genes, protein was always reduced consistent with the stabilizing effect of FANCG all located in one of the four linkage peaks. An Arg267Cys mutation in the on FANCA. Eleven patients with negative DEB test but a strong FA suspicion SCNM1 gene was carried in heterozygous state in all photosensitive family resulted to be hematopoietic mosaics. In conclusion this approach led to the members. The gene regulates splicing of voltage gated ion channels and the identification of FA mutations in the majority of cases, allowing us to cor- mutation indeed affected the level of splicing of the SCN1A splice variant rectly diagnose patients and to expand the spectrum of Italian mutations. It that was also carried by 7 of the affected family members. No other SCNM1 would be interesting to understand whether expression of the FANCA pro- mutations were found in unrelated PPR European patients, suggesting that t Dei.n D, ee vReonc icfo m: Nutoantee.d M, c. oFrarleelsacthesin wi: iNtho nae m. Ril.d B pohtteengoat:y Npoen.e. E. Cappelli: SCNM1 is a private mutation of this family and may be causing this unique None. J. Svahn: None. P. Farruggia: None. D. Longoni: None. V. Poggi: c Do.m Kbaisntaetleioijnn -o Nf polhset nToretynpiteés: .None. H. Schippers: None. W. Perquin: None. G. None. M. Pillon: None. C. Dufour: None. A. Savoia: None. de Haan: None. C. de Kovel: None. G. Capovilla: None. B. Jocic-Jakubi: None. T. Covanis: None. M. Brinciotti: None. B. Baykan: None. P. Parisi: None. E. Brilstra: None. A. Bader: None. B. Koeleman: None.  P02
.066 Sex reversal associated with Fanconi Anemia. A case report. W. Ayed1, F. Talmoudi1, W. Hammami1, O. Kilani1, S. Hentati1, S. Abdelhak2, S. Makni3, A.  P02
.064 AMOURI1; Copy number variation profiling of patients with Esophageal Atresia 1Cytogenetics Department and Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and Oncogenetics, and VACTERL. Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and E. Brosens1,2, H. P. Zaveri3, E. M. de Jong1,2, H. Eussen1, R. M. van der Helm1, C. H. Wouters1, Oncogenetics, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Hôpital d‘Enfants, Tunis, Tunisia. A. R. M. van Opstal1, Y. van Bever1, A. Brooks1, H. IJsselstijn2, R. Wijnen2, D. A. Scott3,4, D. Tibboel2, A. de Klein1; 1Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Fanconi anemia (FA) is one of the best defined inherited bone marrow failu- Netherlands, 2Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia Children’s Hospital, re syndromes. It is usually inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, but in a Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Molecular Physiology & Biophysics, Baylor College of small subset of FA cases it can be X-linked. FA patients show marked clinical Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. heterogeneity. Characteristic features include a progressive bone marrow failure (BMF) and an increased predisposition to malignancy. Affected in- dividuals may also exhibit one or more congenital/developmental abnor- Esophageal Atresia (EA) with or without Tracheo-Esophageal Fistula (TEF) malities including abnormal skin pigmentation, skeletal, genitourinary and are common congenital anomalies whose cause is unknown in over 90% gastrointestinal abnormalities. of affected patients. EA/TEF can be present either as an isolated defect or We report a 4 year-old girl presented for thrombopenia associated with in association with other developmental defects: e.g. as one of the core fea- skeletal malformations referred to our Cytogenetic Laboratory of Pasteur tures of the VACTERL (Vertebral, Anal, Cardiac, TEF, Renal and Limb ano- Institute of Tunis for suspicion of FA. The main clinical feature was growth malies) association. The hypothesis that genetic defects contribute to both failure and radial agenesis. EA/TEF and VACTERL etiology is supported by the fact that EA/TEF is a va- Induced chromosomal breakage study was performed using mitomycin riable feature of several known monogenetic syndromes. Among these pos- (MMC). It was carried out on peripheral blood samples obtained from the sible defects are Copy Number Variations (CNVs). As de novo CNVs can help patient and a counterpart culture of control. to identify causal genes or affected biological pathways, the recurrence of Cytogenetic test showed a significantly elevated level of chromosome bre- unique and rare inherited CNVs may, in combination with other factors, pre- akage compared to controls with a percentage of unstable mitoses of 100%. dispose for the development of EA/TEF and other features of the VACTERL According to this sensitivity to MMC, this patient was diagnosed as FA, but association. We therefore profiled 255 affected individuals with SNP-arrays. the RHG-banded metaphases showed a 46,XY karyotype suggesting a state All had one or more large CNV, most of them were known polymorphisms. of an unusual sex reversion associated with FA disorder. We observed six unique loci with a de novo CNV: 4p15, 4q35, 5q11, 6q23, As our knowledge, this is the first reported case with a 46,XY girl associated 7p22 and 8q13. We also identified over 300 inherited CNVs which were w Wi.t hA yFeAd.: None. F. Talmoudi: None. W. Hammami: None. O. Kilani: None. S. Hentati: None. S. Abdelhak: None. S. Makni: None. A. Amouri: None. either absent or uncommon in published control cohorts and our in-house database. Interestingly, 45 of these inherited variants were recurrent in our patient cohort. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed enrichment of several biological functions including embryonic and digestive tract development. Using our genome-wide approach we identified several loci that may impact b Eio. Blorgoisceanl sp:a Nthownea.y Hs .dPi.s Ztuavrbeerid: Nino nEeA. /ET.MEF. doer JVoAnCgT:E NRoLn ea.s Hso. cEiuatsisoenn p: atients. None. R.M. van der Helm: None. C.H. Wouters: None. A.R.M. van Opstal: None. Y. van Bever: None. A. Brooks: None. H. IJsselstijn: None. R. Wijnen: None. D.A. Scott: None. D. Tibboel: None. A. de Klein: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 101ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.067  P02
.069 Clinical and genetic study of Brazilian patients with fetal alcohol Mutations in FLNA cause different disorders. Report of two novel spectrum disorders mutations and associated phenotypes G. Antonialli, B. Coprerski, R. Minillo, M. MIGLIAVACCA, D. Brunoni, A. B. Perez; J. Pilch1, S. P. Robertson2, T. Morgan2; UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DE SÃO PAULO, SÃO PAULO, Brazil. 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 2Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. Introduction: The teratogenicity of alcohol comprises a spectrum of ano- malies known as Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders - FASD; the most seve- re phenotype is the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. Objectives: 1) Study patients Filamin A is an actin binding protein, a product of X-linked FLNA gene. It in- with FASD according to the Washington Criteria Diagnosis; 2) Establish teracts with multiple cellular components including intracellular signalling the frequency of the polymorphisms of the genes of the enzymes ADH molecules, channels, receptors and transcription factors. The protein plays (ADH1B*3, ADH1B*3, ADH1C*2) and ALDH (ALDH2*2) in FASD patients; an important role in stabilisation of cytoskeleton, cell signalling, adhesion, 3) Compare the FASD patients genotype to the control group. Results: 28 migration, transcription and organ development. Mutations in FLNA resul- Brazilian patients aged 11 months to 17 years were evaluated according ting in a loss-of-function cause defective neuronal migration in the form of to the Washington Criteria protocol: 35,7% (10 patients) were classified in periventricular nodular heterotopia. Mutations resulting in a gain of func- the A category; 32,1% (9 patients) category C ; the remaining patients were tion underlie a diversity of otopalatodigital spectrum of disorders featuring classified in the categories E, F, H and J. The distribution of the polymor- a skeletal dysplasia and various cardiac, genitourinary and intestinal mal- phisms were: ADH1B*2: genotype ADH1B*1/1 85,19% and ADH1B*1/2 formations. To a large extent the pathogenic mechanisms leading to these 14,81%. ADH1B*3: genotype ADH1B*1/1 52,17%, ADH1B*1/3 43,48% and phenotypes are still unresolved and new patients with different mutations ADH1B*3/3 4,34%. ADH1C*2: genotype ADH1C*1/1 65,38%; ADH1C*1/2 allow better understanding of these processes. 19,24% and ADH1C*2/2 10,89%.ALDH2*2: genotype ALDH2*1/1 98,02% We present two families with different disorders caused by mutations in and ALDH2*1/2 15,38. There were no significant differences in the distribu- FLNA. In one family mother and daughter both developed epilepsy during tion of genotypes ADH1B*2 and ALDH2*2 between patients and the Brazili- childhood associated with bilateral prominent periventricular nodular he- an population. The ADH1B * 3 allele was significantly more frequent among terotopia. In the second family a 15-years-old boy was diagnosed with fron- patients (p<0,001) and the ADH1C * 2 allele was significantly less frequent tometaphyseal dysplasia without inner organ abnormalities. Sequencing of among patients (p=0,0058) compared to the healthy Brazilian population. FLNA confirmed presence of missense mutations. In the former we found Conclusion: Although it is a small sample, we may suggest that the ADH1B both affected individuals were heterozygous for c.82A->G. In the second * 3 allele may be a risk factor and the ADH1C * 2 allele a protective factor to case the proband was hemizygous for a c.745G->T mutation that predicts the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum disorders in the Brazilian population. Sponsor: the substitution p.D249Y. Both are novel mutations with the first being pre- F GA.P AEnStPo n2i0a1lli1: /N0o8n9e6. 0B-.8 Coprerski: None. R. Minillo: None. M. Migliavacca: dicted to substitute an initiator methionine residue for one transcript of None. D. Brunoni: None. A.B. Perez: None. FLNA. The second mutation predicts the substitution of a residue in the ac- tin binding domain in a manner very similar to other FMD causing variants. F Ju. nPciltciohn: aNlo innev.e Sst.Pig. aRtoiobnesr tisno bno: tNho fnaem. Til.i eMso argrea no:n Ngoonineg..  P02
.068 New Italian patient with Filippi syndrome: a rare condition of unknown genetic origin  P02
.070 G. Vitiello1, A. Lo Castro2, C. Galasso2, P. Curatolo2, G. Novelli3, F. Brancati1; Isolated urogenital malformations caused by novel biallelic FRA S1
 1Medical Genetics Unit, Policlinico Tor Vergata University Hospital, Rome, Italy, mutations 2Department of Neuroscience, Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Tor Vergata D. Niedrist1, K. Steindl1, P. Joset1, P. Bode2, J. Wisser3, A. Rauch1; University, Rome, Italy, 3National Agency for the Evaluation of Universities and Research, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach - Zürich, Switzerland, ANVUR, Rome, Italy. 2Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland. Filippi syndrome is a very rare condition described so far in no more than 30 patients. The most likely way of inheritance is autosomal recessive but the Fraser syndrome (FS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized molecular defect is still unknown. by cryptophthalmos, syndactyly, and urogenital malformations. So far muta- We describe a 12-year-old girl, first child of non-consanguineous healthy tions in the genes FRA S1
, FREM2 and GRI P1
 have been identified in humans parents, born at term after uncomplicated pregnancy. She has typical facial with FS, while FREM1 biallelic mutations were reported in “bifid nose, renal dysmorphism including deep-set eyes, synophrys, broad nasal bridge, thin agenesis, and anorectal malformations” (BNAR) syndrome and Manitoba- alae nasi, thin upper lip and prognathism. Her ears are small with promi- oculo-tricho-anal (MOTA) syndrome. nent helix. Bilateral syndactyly of fingers 3-4 (including osseous) and toes We report on two female foetuses of healthy, unrelated parents diagnosed 2-3 was evident. Growth is constantly delayed with short stature (-3SD) and with bilateral renal and ureteral agenesis. Additional findings were vaginal postnatal microcephaly, while cognitive and speech delay is in the moderate atresia and tracheobronchial forgut duplication in the first fetus and hypo- range. Ectodermal features included abnormal teeth, hypodontia and thin plastic bladder, uterus unicornis (left side) and aplasia of the right tube and hair. Additional features included congenital heart defects (Ebstein’s ano- dislocation of the right ovar into the upper segment of the abdomen. This maly and inter-atrial septal defect) and generalized epilepsy responsive to spectrum of urogenital anomalies fit well into the Fraser syndrome spec- drugs treatment. trum, but characteristic features such as cryptophthalmos or syndactyly We matched her clinical characteristics with those of 26 patients reported in were absent. We therefore performed exome sequencing in one fetus and the literature with Filippi syndrome and noticed a broad overlap with a re- revealed novel compound heterozygous FRA S1
 mutations: a 2bp deletion stricted group of them (n=20), including the first reported patients with this resulting in a premature stop codon (c.1146_1147delTG) and a missense condition. Tentative diagnostic criteria for Filippi syndrome are proposed: mutation affecting a highly conserved amino acid (c.2017T>G). IUGR/postnatal growth deficiency (including microcephaly), typical facial Since the majority of FS mutations represent premature stop mutations, we dysmorphism, syndactyly of fingers and toes (mainly involving fingers 3-4 assume that compound heterozygosity with this specific missense mutati- and toes 2-3) and cognitive impairment with speech delay. Ectodermal de- on may explain the atypical phenotype in our family. Notably, single hete- fects and abnormal genitalia support the diagnosis. rozygous FRA S1
 and FREM2 missense mutations were recently described The identification of a homogeneous group of patients sharing features of in unilateral non-syndromic CAKUT (congenital abnormalities of the kidney Filippi syndrome will ease genetic investigations aimed at the identification and urinary tract). o Gf .t hVeit ideilsloe:a Nseo-ncea.u As.a Ltiov eC gaesntreo(:s N).one. C. Galasso: None. P. Curatolo: None. G. Our finding therefore expands the phenotype of biallelic FRA S1
 mutations to Novelli: None. F. Brancati: None. non-syndromic congenital malformations of the genitourinary tract, which i Ds .i mNipeodrrtisatn: tN foonr ep. rKe.n Satteailn ddila: gNnoonseis. Pa.n Jdo gseent:e Ntiocn ceo. uPn. Bseoldineg: .None. J. Wisser: None. A. Rauch: None. 102 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.071 Molecular and expression analysis extends the phenotypic spectrum of GLI3 mutations Mutations in ZI C3
, which have been reported in mice with heterotaxy and F. DEMURGER1, A. Ichkou2, S. Mougou-Zerelli3, M. Le Merrer2,4, G. Goudefroye2, A. L. NTDs, have been ruled out. These cases add support to the hypothesis that Delezoide5, C. Quélin1, G. Baujat2, S. Manouvrier6, L. Pasquier1, A. Megarbané7, L. Faivre8, the mid-line development plays a significant role in establishing laterality C. Baumann9, S. Nampoothiri10, J. Roume11, M. Fradin1, B. Isidor12, M. A. Delrue13, S. and that there are common mechanisms involved in both heterotaxy and Mercier12, N. Philip14, E. Schaefer15, M. Holder-Espinasse16, F. Laffargue17, M. Sinico18, D. nJe.Aur. aPli eturrbee-L doeufeisc:t sN.one. C.A. Campagnolo: None. S. Goobie: None. Amram19, G. André20, A. Liquier21, M. Rossi22, J. Amiel2,4, F. Giuliano23, O. Boute6, A. Dieux- Coeslier6, M. L. Jacquemont24, A. Afenjar25,26, L. Van Maldergem27, M. Lackmy-Port-Lis28, C. Vincent-Delorme29, M. L. Chauvet2,4, V. Cormier-Daire2,4, L. Devisme30, D. Geneviève31, A. Krause32, A. Munnich2,4, G. Viot33, O. Raoul2, S. Romana34,4, M. Gonzales35, F. Razavi2, S.  P02
.073 Odent1, M. VEKEMANS&T.ATTIE-BITACH2,4; New candidate genes in holoprosencephaly: results from 1Service de génétique clinique, centre de référence Anomalies du développement CLAD- homozygosity mapping in six inbred families Ouest, Rennes, France, 2Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, M. de Tayrac1,2, M. Babron3,4, C. Dubourg1,2, C. Mouden2, R. Bouvet5, S. Gazal3,4, M. AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Inserm U781, Sahbatou6, L. Ratié1, V. Dupé1, J. Mosser1,2,5, S. Odent1,7, V. David1,2; Paris, France, 5Service de foetopathologie, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Service 1UMR 6290 CNRS, IGDR, University Rennes1, Rennes, France, 2Service de génétique de génétique clinique, centre de référence Anomalies du développement CLAD-NdF, moléculaire et génomique, CHU pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 3Inserm UMR 946, Genetic Lille, France, 7Unité de génétique médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université St Joseph, variability and human diseases, Paris, France, 4Institut Universitaire d‘Hématologie, Beyrouth, Lebanon, 8Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d‘enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 5Plateforme Biogenouest, Rennes, France, 9Département de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 10Département de 6Fondation Jean Dausset CEPH, Paris, France, 7Service de génétique Clinique, CHU Génétique pédiatrique, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Kerala, Hopital Sud, Rennes, France. India, 11Unité de génétique médicale, CH Poissy -St-Germain en Laye, Poissy, France, 12Unité de génétique clinique, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 13Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 14Département de génétique médicale, CHU de Marseille, Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 15Service de génétique Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a congenital malformation of the human brain médicale, CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 16Service de génétique clinique, centre due to an imperfect division of the forebrain during early development. Mul- de référence Anomalies du développement CLAD-NdF, lille, France, 17Service de génétique tiple genetic defects have been identified as involved in this process. SIHt His, médicale, CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 18Service d‘Anatomie Pathologique, nZIoCw2 , cSuIXrr3ently TaGdImFitted that HPE is a multihit pathology caused by at least Créteil, France, <sup two or more dysfunctional events involving at least 4 major genes ( and ) and 10 minor genes belonging to different signaling pa- thways. However, the mutations and deletions in these genes represent only The phenotypic spectrum of GLI3 mutations includes Greig cephalopolysyn- 30% of HPE cases. Recessive inheritance of HPE can also be suspected in dactyly (GCPS) and Pallister-Hall (PHS) syndromes. PHS first described as a consanguineous families with intrafamilial recurrence. Homozygosity map- neonatally lethal condition associates hypothalamic hamartoma, bifid epi- ping was undertaken in six families with history of consanguineous marria- glottis, postaxial or central polydactyly, intrauterine growth retardation and ge to search for regions harboring mutations that are identical by descent. anal atresia. GCPS is less severe and combines polysyndactyly of hands and Parents and affected children were genotyped on HumanCytoSNP-12 arrays feet and craniofacial features. Phenotype-genotype correlations have been (Illumina). We first determined the population ancestry of each family with found both for the location and the nature of GLI3 mutations, suggesting OriginMineR [de Tayrac, ASHG 2012] to estimate their speecti faicl. SNP allele fre- different roles of GLI3 during development. quencies. Inbreeding coefficients of affected children were estimated from Here we report on the molecular and clinical study of 71 cases from 51 fa- their genomic data by the FEstim method [Leutenegger , 2003]. Using milies with either a GLI3 mutation (66 GCPS or PHS), or a large deletion the genomic inbreeding coefficient we performed homozygosity mapping encompassing the GLI3 gene (5 GCPS cases). Most of mutations are novel without relying on the genealogical information. In parallel we detected the and consistent with the genotype-phenotype correlation. We describe PHS runs of homozygosity across the genome for each individual (PLINK). Three patients ranging from a mild/incomplete phenotype to severe malformati- regions of interest were detected by both methods on chromosomes 1,D 6L aLn1d ons extending the phenotype to agnathia with absent oral cavity, skeletal 10. We applied Endeavor software to prioritize genes in these regions. One anomalies with oligosyndactyly. GLI3 expression studied by in situ hybridi- of them was previously identified by CGH array on chromosome 6 ( ) sation during human development confirmed its early expression in target a Mn.d d oet hTaeyr rgaoco: dN ocnaen.d Mid. aBtea bgreonne:s N wonilel .b Ce. p Druebseonutregd: .None. C. Mouden: tissues including in pharyngeal arches, and later in mandible. Our results None. R. Bouvet: None. S. Gazal: None. M. Sahbatou: None. L. Ratié: None. V. emphasise on the possible lethality of GLI3 mutations, extend the phenoty- Dupé: None. J. Mosser: None. S. Odent: None. V. David: None. pic spectrum of malformations to severe craniofacial and reductional limb defects and further show the overlap between PHS, SLO and OFD syndro- m F.e Ds.emurger: None. A. Ichkou: None. S. Mougou-Zerelli: None. M. Le Merrer:  P02
.074 None. G. Goudefroye: None. A.L. Delezoide: None. C. Quélin: None. G. Baujat: Molecular investigation in a group of patients with None. S. Manouvrier: None. L. Pasquier: None. A. Megarbané: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Baumann: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. J. Roume: None. M. Holoprosencephaly Fradin: None. B. Isidor: None. M.A. Delrue: None. S. Mercier: None. N. Philip: L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo1, B. F. Gamba2, A. B. Rocha1, A. C. Gaspar1, V. T. do Ó1, A. Richieri- None. E. Schaefer: None. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. F. Laffargue: None. M. Costa1; Sinico: None. D. Amram: None. G. André: None. A. Liquier: None. M. Rossi: 1Hospital de Reabilitacao de Anomalias Craniofaciais, Bauru, Brazil, 2Universidade None. J. Amiel: None. F. Giuliano: None. O. Boute: None. A. Dieux-Coeslier: Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, Brazil. None. M.L. Jacquemont: None. A. Afenjar: None. L. Van Maldergem: None. M. Lackmy-Port-Lis: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. M.L. Chauvet: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. L. Devisme: None. D. Geneviève: None. A. Krause: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common forebrain developmental None. A. Munnich: None. G. Viot: None. O. Raoul: None. S. Romana: None. M. anomaly in humans. Classic HPE occur with a prevalence of 1 in 250 during Gonzales: None. F. Razavi: None. S. Odent: None. M. Vekemans&t.attie- early embryogenesis, decreasing throughout gestation to a frequency of 1 in bitach: None. 16000 live births. The etiology of HPE is complex, with both environmental and genetic factors being implicated. Three levels of increasing severity are described in HPE: lobar, semilobar and alobar. Another milder subtype of  P02
.072 HPE called the middle interhemispheric variant (MIHF) or syntelencepha- Two cases of Heterotaxy with Neural Tube Defect: Further evidence of ly, has now been recognized. In the present work we analySzHeHd, aS IgXr3o, uTpG IoFf an uncommon association 70 inZdICiv2iduals within the spectrum of holoprosencephaly through molecu- J. A. Pierre-Louis, C. A. Campagnolo, S. Goobie; lar techniques. We firsSt HpHe,r fZoIrCm2ed SaSnIgXe3r sequencing for London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada. and genSHesH. ThenT, GwIFe performed MLPA andZ aICrr2ay-CGH. The sequencing showed mSuItXa3tions on , and genes. MLPA analysis showed a deletion on and , and a duplication on . Array-CGH showed de- Heterotaxy is a multiple congenital anomaly syndrome characterized by letions on as well as in other regions of the genome. From the total of 70 complex cardiovascular malformations and visceral situs anomalies. It re- individuals, 29% presented a variation. Whereas the etiology of HPE is not sults from failure to establish normal left-right asymmetry during embryo- completely defined our data are consistent with the literature. A new study nic development. Multiple anomalies have been reported in associated with is being designed and will use Next Generation Sequencing, and bioinforma- heterotaxy; however, there have been few studies considering the relation- tLic.As .t oRoiblse tiroo a-Bniacluydzeo :g Nenonees .t Bha.Ft. hGaavme bnao:t Nboeneen. sAt.uBd. iRedo cthhaa:t Nmoanye .v Aar.Cy .i n HPE. ship between heterotaxy and midline anomalies in general, and heterotaxy Gaspar: None. V.T. do Ó: None. A. Richieri-Costa: None. and neural tube defect specifically. We describe two cases, one prenatal and one pediatric, with the combination of heterotaxy and neural tube defect. At present, the genetic basis of the phenEoStHypGes 2in0 o1u3r |c aPsAesR isI Su,n FknRoAwNn. CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 103ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.075  P02
.077 Investigation into the genetic basis of holoprosencephaly- Comprehensive methylation testing broadens the epigenetic and diencephalic hypothalamic hamartoma clinical description of Imprinting Disorders. J. P. Casey1, P. McGettigan2, C. Keohane3, E. Dempsey4, D. McKenna5, T. J. Browne6, N. D. J. G. Mackay1,2, R. L. Poole1,2, L. E. Docherty1,2, A. Al Sayegh3, A. Caliebe4, C. L. S. Turner5, Bermingham3, S. A. Lynch7,8, A. Green7, S. Ennis9,7; E. L. Baple6, E. L. Wakeling7, S. E. Flanagan8, A. T. Hattersley8, S. Ennis1, I. K. Temple1,9; 1National Children‘s Research Centre, Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, Dublin 12, Ireland, 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics 2School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, University College Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Alkoudh, Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 3Department of Neuropathology, Cork University Hospital, Oman, 4Institut für Humangenetik des Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Cork, Ireland, 4Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Cork University Maternity Germany, 5Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 6St Hospital, Cork, Ireland, 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Cork University George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 7North West London Hospitals Maternity Hospital, Cork, Ireland, 6Department of Histopathology, Cork University NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 8University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, Hospital, Cork, Ireland, 7National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady‘s Children‘s 9Wessex Genetics Service, Southampton University Hospitals Trust, Southampton, and Hospital, Dublin 12, Ireland, 8Children‘s University Hospital, Temple Street, Dublin 1, Salisbury Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom. Ireland, 9School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland. Imprinting disorders (IDs) are associated with mutations and epimutations affecting imprinted genes, whose expression is restricted by parent of ori- Holoprosencephaly-diencephalic hamartoma (HDH) is a rare disorder in- gin. ID diagnosis is challenging because their clinical features are hetero- volving a hypothalamic hamartoma (benign embryonic tumour of the hy- geneous and partially overlapping, and their underlying molecular defects pothalamus), holoprosencephaly and various cephalic and extra-cephalic include mutation, epimutation, copy number and chromosomal errors, and anomalies. Only a few cases of HDH have been reported, most of which can be further complicated by somatic mosaicism and multi-locus methyla- are sporadic. The etiology of this syndrome remains unknown and specific tion defects. It is currently unclear to what extent the phenotypic hetero- causative genes have yet to be identified. We report on two siblings from a geneity of IDs reflects their underlying molecular pathophysiology, particu- non-consanguineous Irish family with a syndrome consistent with familial larly for multilocus methylation defects (MLMD). To address these issues we HDH causing early neonatal death. Externally, both children had bilateral se- performed comprehensive methylation analysis of imprinted genes in 285 vere microphthalmia with a central cleft lip and cleft palate. Internally, both patients with clinical features of IDs, with or without a positive molecular babies had an abnormal skull base, holoprosencephaly and a hypothalamic diagnosis. hamartomatous mass. One child also had cardiac anomalies. Recurrence of 20 of 91 (22%) ID patients had MLMD - ie, additional imprinting anomalies HDHG iLsI 3exStrOeXm2eSlyT RraAr6e, RaOndR 2suHgOgeXsDt1s 3a SreHcHes ZsiIvCe2 dSisIXe3ase geTnGeI iFn the family independent from their primary clinical presentation - including 6/35 SRS described here. Diagnostic mutation screening was performed and exclu- patients (17%), 8/29 BWS patients (28%), 4/8 (50%) TND patients and ded , , , , , , , and as possible 1/11 (9%) PH P1
b patients. causative genes in this family. Whole exome sequencing of DNA from the The frequency of developmental delay was higher (67%) in MLMD than two affected siblings and their parents has been performed. Analysis of the ‘isolated’ SRS (26%), and 5/6 SRS-HIL cases had atypical clinical features, exome data is in progress to identify recessive variants that segregate with compared with 23% of isolated SRS. Compared to 3/11 of ‘isolated’ BWS tJh.eP .m Cualsteipyl:e N monaelf.o Pr.m MactGioentt sigyannd:r Nomonee .i nC t. hKies ofahmaniley:. None. E. Dempsey: (hypomethylation of ICR2), 8/8 of BWS-MLMD had developmental delay (P None. D. McKenna: None. T.J. Browne: None. N. Bermingham: None. S.A. Lynch: None. A. Green: None. S. Ennis: None. = 0.004); and 6/8 BWS- MLMD had atypical congenital anomalies compared with 4/13 ‘isolated’ BWS. While glycaemia was similar in all TND patients, congenital anomalies were more frequent in those with MLMD, as was as- sisted reproduction. These findings highlight the heterogeneous molecular  P02
.076 anomalies and variable clinical phenotypes of IDs and indicate the value of A case of hypomyelination - oligodontia - extrapyramidal signs - c Do.mJ.pGr.e Mhaecnksaivye: Nmoonlee.c uRl.aLr. Pinovoelset:i gNaotnioen. Ls..E. Docherty: None. A. Al Sayegh: ataxia syndrome (Pol3 - associated hypomyelinating disorder) None. A. Caliebe: None. C.L.S. Turner: None. E.L. Baple: None. E.L. Wakeling: M. A. Bulatnikova1,2, A. A. Vasilishina1,2, A. B. Smolyaninov1,2, V. I. Larionova1,3; None. S.E. Flanagan: None. A.T. Hattersley: None. S. Ennis: None. I.K. Temple: 1North-Western State Medical University named after I.I. Mechnikov, St.Petersburg, None. Russian Federation, 2Stem Cell Bank Pokrovski, Medical Center Pokrovski, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3The Turner Scientific and Research Institute for Children‘s Orthopedics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.  P02
.078 Molecular study of Incontinencia Pigmenti in two males D. Martín-Sánchez1, E. Bueno-Martínez2, A. Torrelo3, E. Fernández-López4, J. Cañueto4, Á. A 4-year-old girl was born to non-consanguineous Caucasian parents. Her Hernández-Martín3, R. González-Sarmiento5; physical and psychomotor development was normal until the age of 8 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad de Medicina Molecular. months, but moderate muscle hypotonia and slight convergent strabismus Facultad de Medicina. IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de Dermatología. Hospital were noted by a neurologist. At 8 months of age, short periods of postural Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 4Servicio de Dermatología. Hospital Clínico Universitario tremor of the head and hands appeared. The girl began sitting indepen- de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Unidad Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Medicina. dently at about 9 months old, walking with holding at 1 year 1 month, and IBMCC-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain. speaking at the age of 1 year. When she began walking, constant postural tremor of head and legs and titubation were observed. The dentition was significantly delayed and abnormal. The central incisors were unerupted for Incontinencia Pigmenti (IP) is a genodermatosis disease associated with almost 4 years, and the first canine erupted when she was two. Since the mutations in NEMO gene which is situated on X chromosome. A pathogenic age of 2 years, the patient was walking independently, but ataxia was pre- mutation on this gene is usually lethal in males. We have analyzed NEMO sent. She was speaking single sentences with dysarthria. At 3 y.o. strabismus gene in two males with a suspect of IP in order to look for some alterations increased and myopia was diagnosed. Neurological examination revealed which could explain the altered phenotypes. convergent strabismus, horizontal nystagmus when she focused to the left We have studied two males that present an IP phenotype. The first one (A) is and right, early signs of supranuclear gaze palsy - vertical nystagmus and less than 1 year old, the second case (B) is 20 months old. We have analyzed need to lift up the head to focus on a floor. The head, hands and body postu- the 10 exons of the NEMO gene by PCR and direct sequencing. ral tremor, moderate muscle hypotonia and bilateral Babinsky signs were In case A, we have observed that one of the two copies of the NEMO gene is observed. MRI demonstrated diffuse hypomyelinization with prevalence of deleted from 4 to 10 exons. In case B, we have only observed a heterozygous low T2 signal from frontal lobe white matter and optic radiation. Hypomye- codon 326 deletion (exon 8 p.K325_327delK). This mutation has lination and/or hypodontia syndrome is caused by mutations of POLR3A not been found in his parents. The karyotypes of both patients showed alte- and POLR3B genes. In this case we performed a sequencing of exon 15 of rations. In case A, a Klinefelter syndrome (XXY) was detected. In case B we P MO.ALR. B3Bul.a Ttnhiek ohveate: rNooznyeg.o Au.sA m. Vuatsaitliioshni nc.a1:5 N6o8nTe>. AA .(Bp.. VSaml5o2ly3aGnliun)o wv:a Ns ofoneu.n Vd..I. observed a trisomy XXY in the 2%, a XYY in the 1% and a XXYYY in the 1% Larionova: None. of the total cells. We present two unusual cases of males carrying NEMO mutations. One of them carry Klinefelter syndrome with two copies of chromosome X. In pati- ent B, the trisomy can not invalidate the possible lethal effect of the mutati- on found, due to the few percentage of cells with trisomy. T Dh. eMreafrotírne- Swáen ccahnez s:p Neocnuela. tEe. tBhuaet nao m-Moasratiícnieszm: Nmoingeh. tA e.x Tpolarrienl oth: iNso cnaes.e E.. Fernández-López: None. J. Cañueto: None. Á. Hernández-Martín: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. 104 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.079 Mosaic 8p interstitial deletion with absent nails: genotype/phenotype correlation mutation-positive children with Kabuki syndrome (ages, 4-13 years). The A. K. Kamel1, A. M. Mohamed1, M. S. Zaki1, N. A. Helmy1, A. Fayez1, J. G. Gleeson2, M. O. flexion angle of the DIP joint ranged from 120 to 170 degrees, with a visible Elruby1; limitation of flexion in 2 patients and a moderate limitation of flexion in 2 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Department of Neurosciences and Paediatrics, other patients. The flexion crease of the DIP joint on the third and fourth Rady Children‘s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States. fingers was absent in 5 of the 6 patients. Radiographs of 4 patients revealed The aim no morphological abnormality in the third and fourth fingers. In this study, disappearance of the flexion crease of the DIP joint was obser- of this study was to correlate genoty pe/phenotype in interstiti- ved in 5 of the 6 patients, and limitation of flexion was found in 4 patients. al deletion of chromosome 8p and to comp are the sensitivity of FISH and There was no distinctive finding in any of the other small joints. Laboratory array CGH in detection of low mosaic cell line.We reported on a male pa- findings during the clinical course revealed no morphological abnormality tient presented at the age of 40 days withCHD and recurrent chest infec- of the osteoarticular joints. Since there has been no report of a syndrome tion. He was lethargic with infrequent myoclonic spasm. Patient had facial characterized by the contracture and disappearance of the flexion crease on dysmorphism ,microcephaly.He suffered of CHD with VSD, ASD, pulmonary the third and fourth fingers, we propose that the distal interphalangeal joint stenosis and dilated right ventricle. He had intractable convulsions, hypoge- contracture of the 3rd and 4th finger and disappearance of flection crease nesis of corpus callosum, defects in myelination and mild reduce cerebellar aSr.e M diizaugnnoo:s Ntiocn fee.a Ytu. rMeusr oafm Kaatsbuu:k Ni soynned. Nro. mMeiy.ake: None. N. Matsumoto: None. size for his age. Both hands and feet showed absent nails (total anonychia) and abnormal increasing palmar and planter creases. He had a karyotype 46,XY,del(8)(p21.2p23). Both parents had normal karyotype. FISH analysis  P02
.082 using subtelomere 8 and locus specific identifier for LPL at 8p22 revealed Kabuki Syndrome: genotypic spectrum and genotype-phenotype interstitial deletion involving (8)(p22) and presence of subtelomere 8p and correlations in a cohort of 200 KS patients. 15% normal cell line. Nimblegen microarray analysis indicated 18.5Mb in- A. D. C. Paulussen, M. J. Blok, K. E. van Roozendaal, A. P. A. Stegmann, H. J. Smeets, C. T. terstitial deletion of chromosome 8p spanning cytoband (8)(p23.2-p21.3) R. M. Schrander-Stumpel; and involving GATA4 gene. Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. We concluded that a post zygotic deletion occurred in this infant, FISH ana- lysis is a powerful tool in detection of low mosaic cell lines. The array CGH can identify precisely the break points and the exact deleted region. We sug- Kabuki syndrome (KS, MIM: 147920) is a clinically recognizable syndrome gest that the gene responsible for nail formation lies within chromosome 8p of multiple congenital anomalies and mental retardation affecting approxi- cytoband p23.2-p21.3. DNA sequencing for the other allele is recommended mately 1:30,000 live births. Key features are a characteristic face, growth to delineate the cause of absent nails whether it is due to haploinsufficiency retardation, developmental delay and additional features such as hypodon- o Ar. Kau. tKoasmomela: lN roencee.s Asi.vMe.. Mohamed: None. M.S. Zaki: None. N.A. Helmy: tia and persistent foetal fingertip MpaLdLs2. Earlier, a major gene causing KS was None. A. Fayez: None. J.G. Gleeson: None. M.O. Elruby: None. identified through exome sequencing, repKoDrtMin6gA mutations in the histone methyl transferase (HMT) gene in 40-70% of KS patients. Recently deletions and mutations in a second gene were identified as a rare  P02
.080 cause of KS. MInL tLh2e current large cohort of >200 suspected KS patients from Growth pattern in Kabuki Syndrome mKDoMst6lyA European descent we evaMluLaLte2d the significance of mutations and/or C. Schrander-Stumpel1, N. Schott1, N. Cramers1, W. Gerver1, C. Fauth2, K. Devriendt3; deletions in and tested a subset of the ML L2
 negative patients for the 1Academic Hospital Maastricht, 6202AZ Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of gene. Several potential splice-site variants were assessed at clinical genetics and clinical pharmacology,, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Center for Human the RNA level and allele-specific PCR was used to determine parental origin Genetics,, Leuven, Belgium. of some mutations. Phenotypic characteristics were compared between car- r Aie.Drs.C a.n Pda nuoluns-sceanrr: iNerosn ea.s Mw.eJl.l B also bk:e tNwoeneen. K th.Ee. dviafnfe Rreonotz teynpdeasa ol:f Nmountea. tAio.Pn.sA.. Stegmann: None. H.J. Smeets: None. C.T.R.M. Schrander-Stumpel: None. Kabuki syndrome is a multiple congenital anomaly/mental retardation syn- drome including characteristic facial dysmorphology, developmental delay and postnatal growth retardation. Kabuki syndrome is caused by mutations  P02
.083 in the ML L2
 gene in about 75% of cases. One of the key features in indi- A comprehensive study on Kabuki syndrome: diagnostics, modeling, viduals with Kabuki syndrome is postnatal growth restriction. However, and therapy information on the specific growth pattern of children with Kabuki syndro- B. Mandriani1,2, L. Micale1, C. Fusco1, B. Augello1, M. Pellico1, F. Zucchetti3, S. Maitz3, E. me is scarce. Only one Japanese report summarizes data in a growth chart Biamino4, M. Silengo4, A. Selicorni3, L. Zelante1, G. Merla1,5; (Niikawa et al., 1988). We present a limited report on growth data in a group 1IRCCS Casa sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2University of Brescia, of individuals with a genetically confirmed diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome. Brescia, Italy, 3Clinica Pediatrica, Università Milano Bicocca, Milano, Italy, 4University of The data showed that postnatal growth retardation is a clinical feature in Torino, Torino, Italy, 5University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. all cases. Postnatal height SDS ranged from -2,5 to 3,3 (mean -2,3) and the current height SDS ranged from -6,24 to -0,09 (mean -2,8) in all individuals. ML L2
 26 (=70,3%) patients had a height SDS below -2 SD and thus fulfilled the de- Kabuki syndrome (KS) is characterizedd bey n poevcou liar facial gestalt, mental re- finition of short stature. Since all Kabuki syndrome patients have a growth tMaLrdLa2tion, and congenital multiorgan anomalies. is mutateKdD inM 660A% of deflection during childhood and a growth spurt deficiency, a defect in the KS patients. The majority of them are mutations, and in few cases growth hormone/IGF-I axis is very likely. Further research is warranted to exons microdeletion/duplication. A second gene for KS is ML L2
. For clarify the cause of this postnatal growth restriction. We hypothesize an al- 3K0D%M 6oAf patients the underlying genetic cause remains unidentified. tered body composition similar to that in children with Prader-Willi syndro- We have eMnrLoLll2e d nearly 400 KS patients; all were subjected to and me. Therefore, we will start a study including growth hormone therapy in screening. In agreement with prevKiDouMs6 rAe ports we found that about c Ch.i lSdcrherna wnditehr- KSatubmukpie sl:y Nnodnreo.m Ne. .Schott: None. N. Cramers: None. W. Gerver: 65% have mutations, mainly nonsense and frameshift mutations, lea- None. C. Fauth: None. K. Devriendt: None. dMiLnLg2 to a premature termination codon. alterations were found in a very few patients. RT-PCR and direct sequencing from KS patients with splice site mutations showed that these variants cause aberrant spli-  P02
.081 cing resulting in Ma LtrLu2ncating and not functional protein. Using a large coll- Distal interphalangeal joint contracture and disappearance of flexion ection of KS cell lines (skin fibroblast and EBV-immortalized lymphocytes) crease in paediatric patients with Kabuki syndrome we showed that mRNAs bearing premature stop codon are degraded S. Mizuno1, Y. Muramatsu1, N. Miyake2, N. Matsumoto2; by the NMD contributing to ML L2
 protein haploinsufficiency. The high num- 1Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 2Yokohama City ber of protein truncation mutation suggests that aM nLLu2m ber o fK KDSM p6aAt ients University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. may benefit from a readthrough therapy that could restore the endogenous levels of ML L2
 and KDM6A proteins. We tested 14 and 2 non- sMeLnLs2e mutatioKnDsMfo6rA their response to drug readthrough treatment by a As orthopaedic complications of the Kabuki syndrome, scoliosis, abnorma- reporter luciferase vector system. We found that 11/14 (79%) of analyzed lity or dislocation of the hip joint, patellar dislocation, and a shortened fifth and 1/2 mutations displayed a significant level of readthrough finger have been reported. However, there has been no report on Kabuki pa- in response to gentamicin suggesting that this strategy is effective and has tients with abnormalities of the finger joints. We examined the contracture, important implications for therapy. flexion angle, and flexion crease on the tEhiSrdH aGnd 2 f0ou1r3th |f iPnAgeRrsI So,f 6F RMALLN2 CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 105ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index B. Mandriani: None. L. Micale: None. C. Fusco: None. B. Augello: None. M.  P02
.086 Pellico: None. F. Zucchetti: None. S. Maitz: None. E. Biamino: None. M. Kleefstra syndrome: the rediscovery of an old syndrome through Silengo: None. A. Selicorni: None. L. Zelante: None. G. Merla: None. array Comparative Genome Hybridization technology (array-CGH) A. A. Syrmou1, M. Tzetis1, K. A. Kosma1, V. Oikonomakis1, K. Giannikou1,2, H. Fryssira1, E. Kanavakis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, «Aghia Sophia» Childrens  P02
.084 Hospital,Greece, Athens, Greece, Greece, 2Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation, A de novo 3.5 Mb microdeletion of 8p11 explains hypogonadotropic Αthens, Greece, Athens, Greece. hypogonadism in a 19 years old male E. Kuchinskaya; Clinical genetics, University hospital, Linköping, Sweden. High resolution allowing the identification of Copy Number Variations (CNVs), greatly assisted the recognition of Kleefstra syndrome. Previously named 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome (9Qstds), Kleefstra syndrome is GnRH deficiency with anosmia is characterized by absent or incomplete pu- either caused by a submicroscopic deletion in chromosomal region 9q34.4 bFGerFtRy,1 low or normal LH/FSH in the context of low testosterone and normal or an intragenic mutation in the euchromatin histone methyltransferase pituitary function and is known as KallmaFnGnF sRy1ndrom (KS). Mutations in the 1 (EHMT1) gene, resulting in EHMT1 haploinsufficiency. Since the early gene are associated with Kallmann syndrome type 2, with and wit- 1990s, 85 patients have been described, of which the majority (85%) had hout anosmia. However, deletions of the as a cause of KS have been a 9q34.3 microdeletion). described in only a few patients. We present eight newly diagnosed patients who were referred for genetic Here we report a case of KS in a 19 years old male due to a 3.5 Mb contigious evaluation due to developmental delay (DD), mental retardation (MR), va- deletion of chromosome 8p11. At 17 years he was referred for investigation rious congenital anomalies and/or dysmorphic features. In all cases pre- due to absence of pubertal spurt. Clinical investigation revealed pubertal vious standard karyotype was negative. Agilent arrays 4x180k and 1x244k development in accordance to Tanner I, stature -3SD, low FSH, LH and te- (>170.000 and > 236.000 probes respectively, average resolution 8.9kb) stosterone, and normal finding on MRT. There was no effect on the testicles were used. The analysis revealed seven patients with an interstitial 9q34.4 size after treatment with testosterone and investigation was completed with microdeletion (two de novo and one maternal) ranging in size from 0.6Mb microarray analysis due to suspicion of Kleinfelter synFdGrFoRm1e. The microar- to 5.41Mb and in 5 of 7 patients comprising the EHMT1 gene. One patient ray analysis with 6.0 SNP chip (Affimetrix) revealed a 3.5 Mdbe ndoevleotion of had a duplication (1 Mb). Other important genes in the same area are the chromosome 8p11.21p11.23 encompassing 35 genes. was one of the following: AGPAT2 (congenital generalized lypodystrophy), NOTCH1 (aor- deleted genes. The deletion was later shown to have arisen in the tic valve disease), LHX3 (pituitary hormone deficiency with rigid cervical patient. The clinical picture with anosmia, delayed skeletal age, history of spine). Additional pathogenetic aberrations which were also observed in cleft lip and palate and absentF GpuFRbe1rty is in agreement with the diagnosis our patients (del3p14.1, del6p13.3, del8q24.3, del10q26.3, del15q11.1, of Kallmann syndrome. del18p11.32-p11.21) might contribute to the patients‘ severe phenotype, In conclusion, deletions of the gene are a rare cause of Kallmann syn- acting as additional modifiers of their clinical manifestations. Alternatively drome but should be excluded in patients with Kallmann syndrome and no mE.u Ktautciohnin isnk oanyae: o Nf otnhee. Kallmann syndrome connected genes. t b Ah a.e bA l9 .y q S t3 yh4 rem d coae usfe :e c Nwt o a intc het . s tM ha e.s T pa za em ttiieo snd : ti N f ci oe anr re ro .y f Ki nt .h Age .t hKm eoa s9i mn q 3ac 4:l i N n di ouc npa el l. i p cVah . te Oin oikno ot .y np oe m a as k ii ss : p ro- None. K. Giannikou: None. H. Fryssira: None. E. Kanavakis: None. S. Kitsiou- Tzeli: None.  P02
.085 Case report of a patient with KID syndrome associated with Dandy- Walker malformation and generalized contractures  P02
.088 S. Scheidecker1,2, V. Pelletier2,3, Y. Alembik2, D. Lipsker4, M. Louha5, L. Jonard5, H. Elevated Congenital Malformations Rates and Chornobyl Ionizing Dollfus1,3,2; Radiation in Rivne-Polissia, Ukraine 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale - Unité INSERM U1112, 67085 Strasbourg Cedex, W. Wertelecki1, L. S. Yevtushok2, S. F. Lapchenko3, N. O. Zymak-Zakutnia4; France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale Centre Hospitalo-universitaire de Strasbourg, 1OMNI-Net Ukraine Birth Defects Programs, Rivne, Ukraine, 2Rivne Province Diagnostic Strasbourg, France, 3CARGO Centre de référence pour les affections rares en génétique Center Medical Genetics Service, Rivne, Ukraine, 3Volyn Province Territorial Children‘s ophtalmologique Centre Hospitalo-universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, Hospital, Lutsk, Ukraine, 4Khmelnytski Perinatal Center, Khmelnytski, Ukraine. 4Service de Dermatologie Centre Hospitalo-universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie Hôpital d‘Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. In 2000, population-based epidemiological surveillance of congenital mal- Keratitis-Ichthyosis-Deafness (KID) syndrome is a rare congenital disorder formations (CM) implementing methods and reporting data to the European characterized by the triad: vascularizing keratitis, skin lesions and hearing network of companion registries (EUROCAT) was initiated in several provin- loss. Other rare madne infeosvtoations have been also described such as Dandy- ces in Ukraine. Analysis of Rivne (R)-Volyn provinces combined 2000-2002 Walker malfGoJrBm2ation (DWM). About 100 patients have been described and data and later of 2000-2006 solely R data, demonstrated elevated rates of most of them have or, less frequently, inherited heterozygous muta- neural tube defects (NTD) and microcephaly. An analysis of 2000-2009 R tions in the gene encoding connexin 26. data of 145,437 pregnancy outcomes confirms the prior observations and DWM suspected at the end of the pregnancy leading to the birth of our pa- indicates that these CM are statistically significantly more prevalent in the tient who presented with congenital ichthyosis. No ocular or hearing ano- Rivne-Polissia (RP) region, an ecologically distinct zone (wetlands) inhabi- malies were noted. He developed progressively severe contractures of the ted by a population isolate (Polischuks). The RP region is among the most upper and lower limbs. Progressively others symptoms were detected: vas- severely impacted zones by Chornobyl ionizing radiation (IR) in Ukraine. cularizing keratitis, deafness and enamel deGfeJBct2. We examined the boy aged Analysis of stillbirths shows higher rates in RP than non-RP and higher rates 9 in our Center for Rare Genetic Ophthalmologic Diseases (CARGO) because than in the adjoining province to the south of R. of severe keratitis. Direct sequencing of the revealed a de novo p.D50A The rates in R of NTD, microcephaly, conjoined twins and teratomas are mutation, confirming the diagnosis of KID. among the highest in Europe. All four categories of CM are prevalent among KID syndrome is defined by Keratitis, Ichtyosis and Deafness, but other rare females. Surveys indicate that alcohol use by pregnant women is not a likely features are described. To date, DWM was reported in 10 KID patients and cause of microcephaly. Analyzes of 6026 recordings of whole body counts of initially considered as a coincidental finding rather than a real association. incorporated IR, including from 1157 pregnant women indicate that incor- Some cases of lower limb contractures have been reported but seem to be poration levels are substantially higher among those residing in RP. much less severe compared to our patient. We conclude that the data is sufficiently robust to continue the CM surveil- The patient reported herein revealed atypical features and widened the ma- lance and expand current international partnerships to include prospective nifestations of KID syndrome clinical spectrum. Moreover, mutation identi- investigations of specific teratogenic risks posed by persisting IR in RP and fication optimized the genetic counseling of the family and helped in the cli- o Wth. eWre tretrealetocgkei:n Nico nries.k Ls. Sfa. cYteovrtsu.shok: None. S.F. Lapchenko: None. N.O. Zymak-Zakutnia: None. n Si.c aSlc chaeried eacltkheor:u Ngho nteh.e V k. ePrealtliettiise ra:n Ndo cnoen. tYr.a Actleumrebsi kc:o Nnotrnoel. rDe.m Laipins kdeirff: icult. None. M. Louha: None. L. Jonard: None. H. Dollfus: None. 106 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.089 A novel EFTUD2 splice mutation causing Mandibulofacial Dysostosis - Microcephaly lator of iron, and this practice (linked to traditional medicine), is responsible M. F. Smeland1, H. F. Riise Stensland1, A. Jørgensen1, U. Hehr2; for a high incidence of severe anemia of pregnancy in this area. We report 1University Hospital of Northern Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2University of Regensburg, on two sibs born to a pemba-eater mother. The first child was born at term Regensburg, Germany. with IUGR severe microcephaly. Intracranial „calcifications“ were observed by ultrasound screening during the second trimester. CT scan confirmed massive radio-opaque deposits in the brain basis. The clinical diagnosis of Mandibulofacial DysostosiEsF -T MUDic2rocephaly (OMIM #610536) is a rare cra- TORCH or Aicardi-Goutières syndromes were suggested initially. The child niofacial dysostosis accompanied by microcephaly, intellectual disability survived with major developmental delay. At age 7y, she has an OFC of 39 cm and other malformations. , a spliceosomal gene, was recently iden- (-10 SD) and a height of 10 cm (-4SD). CSF interferon and TORCH screening tified by exome sequencing as causal of this multiple malformdea tnioovno syndro- were negative. Recurrence of microcephaly during the second pregnancy me in several publications. 28 cases have been published so far. All mutati- lead to TOP, after diagnosis of a similar microcephaly. Neuropathological ons are private, and all with available parental samples are , except examination confirmed severe microcephaly, with extensive microcalcifica- one. We describe a 3,5years old boy with progressive microcephaly but no tions dispersed throughout the brain. Electron microscopy made it possible structural abnormalities on cerebral MRI. He has psychomotor delay, espe- to visualize intraneuronal aluminium silicate deposits, resembling alumini- cially expressive language delay, and walked at 36 months of age. His ears um deposition observed in post-vaccinal myofasciitis. The most likely me- have a characteristic appearance with microtia, square ear lobes, ear fistu- chanism to explain this recurrence is an association of IUGR secondary to las and a preauricular tag presEeFnTt UaDt b2irth. He has generalised epilepsy and severe maternal anemia combined with accumulation of exogenous silica- unilateral hearing loss. There are no other malformations. His phenotype tes in the neural cells. This appears to be the first description of fetal brain will be thoroughly described. sequencing revealed a heterozygous disruption secondary to ingested clay. The syndrome superficially mimics mutation in intron 25. This sequence variadnet nhoavso n.ot been reported earlier, AAi.c aVredrlio-Geso:u Ntioènrees. Vs.y Lnadmrobmeret,: aNnodn ec.o Gnv. eCya ral ehsi:g hN ornisek. Sof. Preacsusrermenacrde:. None. J. but interference with splicing is expected. mRNA analyses are in progress. Goullé: None. A. Laquerrière: None. Parental samples are normal, thus proven New publications alsoE lFinTkU Dth2i s syndrome to esophagal atresia, and a wide range of other malformations. Patients without microcephaly are also de-  P02
.093 scribed. Importantly, mutations will be a differential diagnosis to Congenital primary microcephaly and type B-like brachydactyly , a well known syndromes in the group of craniofacial dysostoses and the ocu- new syndrome? l Moa.Fu.r Sicmuelolavnedrt:e Nbornael .s pHe.Fc.t rReii.se Stensland: None. A. Jørgensen: None. U. A. LAVILLAUREIX, J. Masliah-Planchon, S. Passemard, S. Drunat, A. Verloes; Hehr: None. Department of Genetics and INSERM U676, robert debre hospital, PARIS, France.  P02
.090 We report a 10 year-old girl with primary microcephaly and brachydactyly. Marshall syndrome: A recessive form caused by CO L11
A1 gene Microcephaly was suspected during the pregnancy by echography. At birth, mutation at term, head circumference was 29cm (-5 SD), weight 2770g, length 50cm O. A. Khalifa1, F. Imtiaz1, R. Allam1, Z. Al-Hassnan1,2, A. Al-Hemidan1, K. Al-Mane1, G. . Pregnancy was normal (no drug nor alcohol) and there were no perina- Abuharb1, A. Balobaid1, N. Sakati1, J. Hyland3, M. Al-Owain1,2; tal problems and no feeding difficulties. She is the first child of unrelated 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2College parents none of the members of this family have brachydactyly or micro- of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Connective Tissue Gene Tests, cephaly. Allentown, PA, United States. She started walking at 8 month-old, first words were around 1 year. She followed mainstream schooling. In 2nd grade, problems with motricity CO L11
A1 and writing fatigability were observed. Clinical examination at 8 year-old: Marshall syndrome is a form of skeletal dysplasia due to several gene mu- showed a child of medium stature with generalised amyotrophy and mi- tations. Recently, compound heterozygous mutations in the gene crocephaly 41,5cm (-8 SD). Neurological examination was normal. She had was described in two unrelated patientsC OasL 1a1 cAa2use of fibrochondrogenesis. facial dysmorphism with upslanted palpebral fissures and microdontia. She Subsequently, dominant and recessive CfoOrLm2sA 1of fibrochondrogenesis resul- has bilateral brachydactyly ressembling type B of hands and feet, respecting ting from mutations at a second locus, , were also described. Mu- thumbs but involving halluces, discovered at birth. tations in these two genes along with COwLe1r1e Ap1reviously reported to On X rays, the terminal phalanges were missing on most digits, intermediate cause autosomal dominant forms of both Stickler and Marshall syndromes. phalanges were hypoplastic or aplastic, with anonychia and cone-shaped Here we report the first evidence that adds defect as a cause of epiphyses. MRI revealed a brain of reduced volume but normal structure Marshall syndrome with a recessive mode of inheritance. The clinical fin- and gyration. CGH array (180 k), caryotype and mitomicyn-induced chro- dings in the two brothers of deafness, flat midface, myopia, and ectoder- mosome breakage test were normal. mal abnormalities (patient 1) are highly suggestive of Marshall syndrome. To our knowledge it is the first described case of severe congenital micro- Among their remaining five family members, the parents and 2 adult siblings cephaly with normal IQ associated with brachydactyly and anonychia. This wCOeLre1 1hAe1te rozygote carriers. All the four carriers had mild short stature and disorder is clinically distinct from Jawad syndrome (due to mutations in thick calvaria. In addition, the parents had mild mixed hearing loss. Direct RBB P8
/CTIP - currently under sequencing), which shows mental retarda- gene sequencing of our patients revealed a homozygous missense tion and ungual hypoplasia, and Teebi anonychia-microcephaly syndrome, mutation c.2702G>A (p.Gly901Glu) in exon 35. CO- w Ah. iLcahv hillaasu mreuixc:h N moniled.e Jr. aMnaosmliaahli-ePsl.anchon: None. S. Passemard: None. S. LIn1 1cAon1clusions, these findings expand the list of autosomal recessive genes Drunat: None. A. Verloes: None. of the clinically overlapping Stickler and Marshall syndromes to include . Furthermore, it broadens the clinical spectrum of the recessive form o Of .tAy.p Keh XaIl icfoa:l lNagoenneo. Fp.a Itmhtyi atzo: iNnoclnued. eR M. Aalrlasmha: lNl soynned. Zro. mAle-H.assnan: None. A. Al-Hemidan: None. K. Al-Mane: None. G. Abuharb: None. A. Balobaid:  P02
.094 None. N. Sakati: None. J. Hyland: None. M. Al-Owain: None. Evaluation of recurrent microdeletions and microduplications of 16p A. J. Clarkson, K. M. Abbott, C. Dunn, L. Sparnon, J. Staines, I. Simonic; Genetics, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom.  P02
.092 Maternal consumption of clay during pregnancy: an unexpected cause Chromosome 16 is rich in segmental duplications that mediate recurrent of recurrent congenital microcephaly with intracranial calcifications genomic rearrangements and the proximal short arm of chromosome 16 is in babies from French Guyana (pseudo-Aicardi-Goutière syndrome) particularly susceptible to such rearrangements. In the last few years, se- A. Verloes1, V. Lambert2, G. Carles2, S. Passemard1, J. Goullé3, A. Laquerrière4; veral patients with recurrent deletions and duplications from 16p11.2 to 1Department of Genetics, R DEBRE Hospital, Paris, France, 2Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Regional Hospital, Saint Laurent du Maroni, French Guiana, 3laboratoire de 16p13.11 have been described, with the 16p11.2 locus alone encompassing toxicologie, groupe hospitalier, Le Havre, France, 4Rouen Institute for Medical Research several distinct copy number changes. and Innovation, School of Medicine, University of Rouen, Rouen, France. Interestingly, the reported phenotypes within the distinct deletion and du- plication regions are not consistent and the copy number changes have been observed in ‚phenotypically normal‘ individuals. The inconsistencies in cli- Eating clay („pemba“) during pregnancy is a traditional behavior in the Bu- nical presentation and the presence of the copy number change in unaffec- shinengue population living on the bordeEr SofH thGe M2a0r1on3i r| ivPeAr, RinI Sth,e F FRreAncNh CEt |e d W fa Wmi Wly .m Ee Sm Hb Ger .s O co Ru Gld be due to factors such as incomplete penetr 1an 0c 7e, department of Guiana. Clay consist in aluminium silicate. It is a powerful che- variable expressivity or a failure to recognise subtle manifestations of theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index phenotype. There is recent evidence to suggest that recurrent rearrange- been recently reported to cause cardiac defect. Our patients share some ments such as these may be influenced by a two hit model for a neurodeve- clinical features with other patients previously described with partially lopmental phenotype, where a sequence variant is unmasked by the copy overlapping deletions. AmonTgA Bth2em, all patients (6) analysed by CGH array number change. Whatever the mechanism may be, this region poses a chal- present a facial dysmorphism with similar features to ours and 5 patients lenge for diagnostic interpretation. whose deletion encompass have a cardiac defect. All patients, except Due to the diversity of published clinical features for these recurrent rear- one familial case, have mild or moderate developmental delay. Hypermobile rangements and reports of asymptomatic parental inheritance, we present joints and redundant skin have only been reported twice in patients with a retrospective evaluation of published cases and our own clinical patient 6q24-q25 deletion in studies where the mapping of breakpoints was not data to identify the common clinical features, assist with genetic counselling performed preventing from targeting a causative gene. This observation al- and to standardise the reporting of 16p copy number changes within the lows us to describe a new recognizable (6q24.3-6q25.1) microdeletion syn- d Aia.Jg.n Colsatrikcs loanb:o Nraotnoer.y K..M. Abbott: None. C. Dunn: None. L. Sparnon: None. J. drome without developmental delay, characterized by dysmorphic features, Staines: None. I. Simonic: None. c Mon.Lg. eJnaictaqlu heemaornt td: eNfeocnte a. nAd.C l.o Toasbee stk: iNno anned. H jo. iRnatsn dinri achnialidvhoo: oNdo.ne. P.Y. Robillard: None. D. Caillet: None. S. Drunat: None.  P02
.095 Molecular and clinical characteristics of three patients with partially  P02
.097 overlapping interstitial deletion at 13q12.11-13q12.12. Xp11.23p11.22 microduplication: genotype - phenotype correlations A. Skórka1,2, M. Kucharczyk2, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,2, M. Jędrzejowska3,2, M. Kugaudo2,4, in 17 new patients A. Cieślikowska2, K. Chrzanowska2, M. Krajewska-Walasek2; M. Nizon1, J. Andrieux2, C. Rooryck3, O. Boute4, B. Delobel5, B. Duban-Bedu5, C. Le 1Department of Pediatrics Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department Caignec6, O. Pichon6, M. de Blois1, A. David6, E. Le Galloudec7, F. Giuliano8, A. Goldenberg9, of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, S. Grotto9, D. Héron10, H. Karmous-Benailly11, B. Keren12, D. Lacombe3, J. Lapierre1, M. 3Neuromuscular Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Le Merrer13, D. Martin-Coignard14, M. Mathieu-Dramard15, A. Le Moing16, E. Bourel- Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Medical Ponchel16, R. Nabbout17, S. Nusbaum1, C. Turleau1, O. Raoul1, M. Rio13, M. Vekemans1, S. University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Romana1, V. Malan1; 1Service de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Institut de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 3Service de Génétique There are only a few descriptions of a deletion at 13q12.11. Here we report Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Bordeaux, France, 4Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 5Service de Cytogénétique, Groupe the molecular and phenotypic description of three unrelated patients with Hospitalier de l’Institut Catholique, Lille, France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre partially overlapping microdeletions at 13q12.11-q12.12. Hospitalier Universitaire, Nantes, France, 7Service de Néonatologie, Centre Hospitalier, The first patient, with the smallest, 1.55 Mb, deletion at 13q12.12, presented Beauvais, France, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital l’Archet, Nice, France, with moderate developmental delay, dysmorphic features, muscular hypo- 9Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 10Département de tonia and bilateral coloboma of the iris and retina. The second patient, with Génétique, Hôpital La Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 11Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, larger, 3.12Mb deletion, at 13q12.11, presented with narrowed palpebral Hôpital l’Archet, Nice, France, 12Service de Cytogénétique, Hôpital La Pitié Salpêtrière, fissures, developmental delay, café-au-lait spots, small teeth, cryptorchidism Paris, France, 13Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 14Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier, Le Mans, France, 15Service de and multicystic right kidney. Recently, in the same region, 2.1 Mb deletion Génétique Médicale, CHU Nord, Amiens, France, 16Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU Nord, have been described by der Kaloustian VM [2001]. His patient resembled Amiens, France, 17Service de Neurologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, our case but no renal defects were revealed. Paris, France. The last patient presented with the most striking dysmorphic features in- cluding blepharophimosis, pronounced developmental delay, microcephaly (-4.3SD), muscular hypotonia, cardiac malformation (PDA that required car- Array CGH has improved the detection of submicroscopic chromosome X diac surgery in the first year of life). He was suspected of Down syndrome in imbalances such as duplications of the short arm of the X chromosome. They infancy then Coffin-Lowry, ATRX and Cohen syndromes were considered in can result either from an intrachomosomal rearrangement of the X chromo- his differential diagnosis. Application of array CGH reveled the 5.7Mb dele- some or from an unbalanced translocation between an X chromosome and tion at 13q12.11-q12.12 overlapping with both deletions presented in our an autosome or with a Y chromosome. In 2009, Giorda et al. identified an previous two patients. He had no renal or retinal defects. inherited or de novo recurrent Xp11.23p11.22 microduplication in eight pa- We hope that our detailed description of 13q12 deletion phenotype will tients (two males and six females) from a large cohort of patients presenting contribute to the further genotype-phenotype delineation of that microde- with syndromic intellectual disability. This 4.5 Mb microduplication is me- letion. diated by nonallelic homologous recombination between D-REP and P-REP The study was supported by MNiSW Grant No. 0605/B/ P01
/2009/37. Ac- segmental duplications. This duplicated region contains many genes such as quiring of the Roche NimbleGen microarray platform was co-financed by PQB P1
, FTSJ1, SYP and SHROOM4 responsible for intellectual disability and E AR. DSFk óprrkoaj:e Ncto PneO.I MG..0 K2u.0c1h.a0r0c-z1y4k-:0 N5o9n/e0. 9D.. Gieruszczak-Białek: None. M. BM P15
 involved in ovarian dysgenesis. Jędrzejowska: None. M. Kugaudo: None. A. Cieślikowska: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. So far, fourteen females and five males with this microduplication have been reported in the literature. Associated clinical manifestations include language impairment, mostly severe, moderate to severe intellectual disa- bility and abnormal electroencephalogram. Other features such as epilepsy,  P02
.096 overweight and early puberty have also been reported. Here, we report on Deletion 6q24.3-q25.1: a recognizable phenotype with facial seventeen new patients (nine females and eight males) presenting with an dysmorphism, cardiac defect, loose skin and joints without cognitive Xp11.23p11.22 microduplication detected by array CGH. The 4.5 Mb recur- impairment. rent duplication was identified in five patients whereas twelve patients har- M. L. Jacquemont1, A. C. Tabet2, H. Randrianaivo1, P. Y. Robillard3,4, D. Caillet5, S. Drunat2; bor an atypical duplication with various breakpoints. These new patients 1Unité de Génétique Médicale, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 2Département de offer the opportunity to better define the phenotype associated with this Génétique, CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Service de Réanimation Néonatale, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 4Centre d‘études périnatales, CHU La Réunion, Saint- microduplication and to identify minimal critical regions highlighting some Pierre, France, 5Service de Cardiologie, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France. p Mo.s Nsiibzolen c: aNnodnied.a Jt.e A gnednreie(su)x f:o Nr osnpee.c Cif.i cR coloinryiccakl: fNeaotnuer.e O(s. )B.oute: None. B. Delobel: None. B. Duban-Bedu: None. C. Le Caignec: None. O. Pichon: None. M. de Blois: None. A. David: None. E. Le Galloudec: None. F. Giuliano: None. A. Goldenberg: None. S. Grotto: None. D. Héron: None. H. Karmous- Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 6 are rare and asso- Benailly: None. B. Keren: None. D. Lacombe: None. J. Lapierre: None. M. ciated with variable phenotype depending on breakpoints, localization and Le Merrer: None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. M. Mathieu-Dramard: None. A. size of the deletion. From approximately sixty cases reported in the litera- Le Moing: None. E. Bourel-Ponchel: None. R. Nabbout: None. S. Nusbaum: ture, only a minority have been characterized with high resolution techni- None. C. Turleau: None. O. Raoul: None. M. Rio: None. M. Vekemans: None. S. Romana: None. V. Malan: None. ques, making genotype-phenotype correlations difficult. We report a fami- lial 6q24.3-q25.1 deletion, identified by CGH array, spanning 1.7 Mb (chr6 (hg18):148 727 249-150 400 356), transmitted from an affected father to his affected daughter. Congenital polyvalvular disease, dysplastic ears, long philtrum, thin upper lip, redundant skin, hypermobile joints in childhood, early delayed motor milestones with normal cognitive deveTlAoBp2m ent were the most remarkable clinical features shared by both patients. Sixteen OMIM 108 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG genes are included in the deleted region. One of them, the gene, hasABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.098  P02
.100 Mosaic Variegated Aneuploidy syndrome: a new case of CE P57
 ZEB2 zinc-finger missense mutations lead to hypomorphic alleles and mutation in a 4-years-old girl and review of the literature. a mild Mowat-Wilson syndrome L. Pinson1, L. Mannini2, M. Willems1, G. Lefort3, A. Schneider3, P. Blanchet1, C. Coubes1, E. J. Ghoumid1,2, L. Drévillon1, M. Alavi-Naini3, N. Bondurand2, M. Rio4, A. Briand-Suleau1, M. Haquet1, D. Geneviève1, P. Sarda1,3, J. Puechberty1,3, F. Cucco2,4, A. Musio2,5; Nasser1, L. Goodwin-Swahs5, P. Raymond1, C. Yanicostas3, M. Goossens1,2, S. Lyonnet4,6, D. 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, Mowat7, J. Amiel4,6, N. Soussi-Yanicostas3, I. Giurgea1,2; 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pisa, Italy, 1AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Service de Biochimie et Génétique, Créteil, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, 2Inserm U955 équipe 11, Créteil, France, 3Inserm U676, Paris, France, 4Département France, 4Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 5Istitiuto Toscano de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 5Department of Clinical Tumori, Florence, Italy. Genetics, Nepean Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 6Inserm U781, Paris, France, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children‘s Hospital, Sydney, Australia. Mosaic Variegated Aneuploidy (MVA) syndrome is a rare autosomal reces- sive disorder characterized by constitutional aneuploidy and predisposition Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is an intellectual disability (ID) - distinctive to cancer. Typically, individuals with MVA display gBrUowB1thB retarCdEaPti5o7n, facial facial gestalt -multiple congenital anomaly syndrome, with features of micro- dysmorphism, variable congenital defects and developmental delay. MVA is cephaly, epilepsy, corpus callosum agenesis, conotruncal heart defects, uro- a heterogenetic condition caused by mutations in and genes, genital malformations and Hirschsprung disease (HSRC). MWS is caused by both involved in mitotic spindle and microtubule stabilization. de novo heterozygous mutations in the ZEB2 gene. The majority of mutations We report a 4-year-old girl, second child of first cousin parents, presenting lead to haplo-insufficiency through premature stop codons or large gene de- with pre and post natal growth retardation, dysmorphic features including letions. Only three missense mutations have been reported so far, none of mild rhizomelic shortening of the upper limbs and mild mental delay. Du- which resides in a known functional domain of ZEB2 protein. ring follow-up, the proband does not show tumor development. In this study, we report and analyze the functional consequences of the first DCEiaPg5n7o sis of MVA syndrome was suspected based on cytogeneti cC EdPa5ta7. missense mutations, p.Tyr1055Cys, p.Ser1071Pro, and p.His1045Arg, iden- Molecular investigations identified a homozygous 11 base pCaEiPr5 i7nsertion in tified in the highly conserved C-zinc finger (C-ZF) domain of ZEB2, in three gene. This insertion, reported in three of the four previously unrelated patients. Their phenotypes included a facial gestalt reminiscent of mutation-positive individuals, is the most common causal mutation MWS and moderate ID, but no microcephaly, heart defects, or HSRC. In-vitro in MVA sCyEnPd5r7o me. studies showed that all three mutations prevented binding and repression When compared to the literature, our report confirms certain clinical fea- of the E-cadherin promoter, the best-characterized ZEB2 target gene. Taking tures in mutated MVA cases, such as growth retardation with reClEaPti5v7e advantage of zebrafish morphant technology, we performed rescue experi- sparing of the head and normal or mildly delayed development. Rhizomelic ments using wild-type and mutant human ZEB2 mRNAs. Variable, mutation- shortening of uppers BliUmBb1sB has already been observed in two other dependent, embryo rescue, correlating with the severity of patients’ pheno- mutation caCrrEiPer5s7 and may be a specific feature. type, was observed. In contrast with the mutated probands, so far no CcEaPn5ce7r has been Our data provide evidence that these missense mutations cause a partial loss reported in mutation-positive individuals. of function, suggesting that ZEB2 role is not restricted to repression of E- Since few cases of patients with MVA syndrome caused by mutations cadherin. Functional domains other than C-ZF may play a role in early em- have been reported, the careful description of further cases is important to bryonic development. Finally, these findings broaden the clinical spectrum better delineate the phenotypic spectrum and confirm phenotype genotype- of ZEB2-mutations, indicating that MWS ought to be considered in patients cLo.r Preinlastoinon: N. one. L. Mannini: None. M. Willems: None. G. Lefort: None. A. w J.i tGhh mouomdeidra: tNeo InDe, .s Lu.g Dgreésvtiivlleo nfa: cNiaoln gee. sMt.a Altl, aavni-dN naoin ci:o Nnogneen.i tNa.l Bmoanldfourrmanadti:o n. Schneider: None. P. Blanchet: None. C. Coubes: None. E. Haquet: None. D. None. M. Rio: None. A. Briand-Suleau: None. M. Nasser: None. L. Goodwin- Geneviève: None. P. Sarda: None. J. Puechberty: None. F. Cucco: None. A. Swahs: None. P. Raymond: None. C. Yanicostas: None. M. Goossens: None. S. Musio: None. Lyonnet: None. D. Mowat: None. J. Amiel: None. N. Soussi-Yanicostas: None. I. Giurgea: None.  P02
.099  P02
.101 Lines of Blaschko as a manifestation of (functional) mosaicism in 4 New case supporting the evidence that LAPS and Myhre syndromes female cases with different disorders J. van den Ende1,2, N. Van der Aa1,2, B. Loeys1,2; are clinical variants of the same disorder caused by mutations in 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem (Antwerp), SMAD4 Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. A. Topa1, F. Sewon2, A. Fasth3,4; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Department of Paediatrics, Gävleborg Regional Hospital, Gävle, Sweden, 3Department of Paediatric Immunology, Queen Silvia Children‘s Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, Patterned pigmentary disturbances are seen in a large variety of human ge- 4University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. netic disorders. Cytogenetic studies have provided evidence that such skin lesions often reflect chromosomal mosaicism. In women X-inactivation results in functional mosaicism, and in X-linked We report the case of a boy of Scandinavian descent diagnosed with Myhre skin disorders this can manifest itself by the appearance of pigmented skin syndrome (MS) at the age of ten years. The patient was initially diagnosed striations following Blaschko`s lines. This has been reported for several with CHARGE syndrome based on the association of unilateral choanal atre- X-linked diseases, like Incontinentia Pigmenti, caused by mutations in the sia, patent ductus arteriosus, soft cleft palate with swallowing difficulties NEMO gene, Focal Dermal Hypoplasia, caused by PORCN mutations, Christ- necessitating PEG, growth retardation, cryptorchidism, bilateral hearing loss Siemens-Touraine syndrome etc. In these conditions heterozygous females and immunoglobulin deficiency explaining his recurrent bacterial respira- often show a Blaschko-linear pattern of Lyonization. tory tract infections. The absence of iris- and/or retinal coloboma, normal With techniques like SNP array copy number variations can be detected con- semicircular canals and no typical dysmorphic features, however, made taining genes on the X-chromosome, that lead to severe diseases in males, CHARGE a less likely diagnosis. Furthermore, the patient has progressive but in females can lead to the typical skin changes. restrictive pulmonary disease, not explained by his immunodeficiency, as Also mosaics of other (cryptic) chromosome abnormalities can lead to the well as delayed wound healing and chronic pericarditis requiring permanent same skin lesions. immune suppression. MS was suspecSteMdA bDa4sed on the presence of typical We show four female patients with streaky hyperpigmentation following dysmorphic features, short stature, hearing impairment and limited joint the lines of Blaschko, with or without accompanying symptoms; one with a mobility. A heterozygous mutation in affecting the codon for Ile500 de novo deletion on Xq26.2-26.3, containing the PHF6 gene, responsible for (c.1498A>G, p.Ile500Val) confirmed the diagnosis. He also has signs of preco- the Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome in males, and the HPRT1 gene, cious puberty with so far no evidence of hormonal imbalance. This is in line responsible for the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome in males. The second patient with a previous report suggesting hypothalamic-hypophyseal malfunction in shows a hypomorphic mutation in the NEMO gene, giving rise to Hypohy- MS [ALsakura et al., 2012]. The pAresence of rePspiratory problemSs and chronic drotic Ectodermal Dysplasia with Immune-deficiency in males. The third pericarditis supports a previously reported observation that LAPS syndro- patient is a girl with a mosaic trisomy 14, and in the fourth patient a mosaic me ( aryngotracheal stenosis, rthropathy, rognathism, and hort stature) mJ.a vtearnn dael nis Eodnidseo:m Nyo n1e1.q N1.3 V.4an-q dteerr Awaa:s N foounen.d B b. yL SoNeyPs a: rNroanye a.nalysis. and MS are in fact phenotypic variants of the same disorder [Lindor et al., 2012]. This case is particular by the finding of immunoglobulin deficiency, chronic immune pericarditis and delayed wound healing indicating a role for t Ah.e T SoMpaA:D N4o anne.d F T. GSFew Boenta: NSiognnea. lAin. gF ains tihm: mNounnee. and inflammatory response. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 109ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.102  P02
.104 A new autosomal recessive disorder with hydrops fetalis, Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome: a possibilities of postnatal and arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, neuronal migration disorder, prenatal diagnostics in Belarus adrenal and pulmonary hypoplasia and renal abnormalities N. Rumiantsava1, I. Naumchic1, S. Sharapova2, T. Egorova1, K. Mosse1, A. Polityko1, V. T. Uster1, P. Shannon1, J. Michaud2, D. Chitayat1,3; Kulak1, R. Chmel1, O. Zobikova1, S. Golubeva1; 1Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2St-Justine Hospital Research Centre, 1Republican Medical Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Research Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. Center for Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, Minsk, Belarus. Objectives: We report male and a female siblings, born to a consanguineous “Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome” (NBS, MIM 251260) is autosomal recessive Turkish couple, with hydrops fetalis (HF), neuronal migration disorder, joint disorder with distinct phenotype. Patients selected for moleqular testing contractures, pulmonary and adrenal hypoplasia and renal abnormalities. based for well-known criteria: microcephaly, mental, growth delay, typical To our best knowledge this is a hitherto new, autosomal recessive condi- facial features, immunodeficiency, chromosome instability (CIN). We pre- tion. sent the scheme of NBS diagnostics used in Belarus. Results. Patients (4 The parents were healthy and first cousins of Turkish descent. Patient A, a sporadic cases, 2 sibs) were born at term. Variations of birth weight were male, was born at 31.8 weeks gestation following a pregnancy complicated 2300-3330g; length 48-52cm; OFC 28-31cm. Age of diagnosis detection with HF, mild ventriculomegaly, misalignment of the skull bones and lumbar was: at infancy (1), first year (3), during 3-6 years (2). All showed severe lordosis. He died shortly after delivery and autopsy showed HF, cleft palate, microcephaly, characteristic facial appearance, growth, mental retardati- ambiguous genitalia, bilateral talipes equinovarus, camptodactyly of the fin- on, anemia, sinopulmonary infections, humoral/cellular immunodefici- gers and clenched fists. There was a butterfly T5 vertebra and hypoplastic ency, normal karyotype. One had polydactyly. Frequency of chromosomal lungs, kidneys and adrenal glands. The brain showed megalencephaly, ab- rearrangements was 13-23%; typical aberrations presented were inv(7); normal gyration and an unusual pattern of cytoarchitextural disturbance in t(7;14); t(14;14); del(14); dic(7;7). DNA testing revealed mutations in exon the cerebral cortex. The karyotype was 46, XY. 6 NBS gene: c.657_661del5 (2 sporadic cases); c.764-768delAAAАС (familial Patient B, a female, the product of the couple’s second pregnancy, was found case). All patients were homozygous. Prenatal DNA study was performed in to have an increased nuchal translucency and body edema on ultrasound one family: fetus was heterozygous for mutant allele c.657_661del5. Fami- at 12 weeks gestation. Ultrasound at 20 weeks gestation showed bilateral lial case. Proband - fetus (G2) with ventricular erlangement, microcephaly talipes equinovarus, flexed wrists, echogenic kidneys, pericardial effusion detected by sonography during 1-2st trimesters (karyotype 46,XX). Parents and an abnormal cerebral configuration. The pregnancy was terminated refused from pregnancy termination. Newborn presented low weight, mi- at 21 weeks gestation and the autopsy showed the same findings as in her crocephaly. Elder child (6 years old), firstly counseled at same time, sho- late brother apart from her female internal and external genitalia. Microar- wed microcephaly, dysmorphisms, growth and mental delay, recurrent in- ray analysis was normal and female. Extensive investigations done on both fections, CIN. We have established NBS based on characteristic pattern of siblings failed to identify an eatiology. The couple subsequently had three clinical, cytogenetical, immunological data, confirmed by mutation analysis. unaffected pregnancies. Investigations are currently ongoing to identify the Patients care: follow-up to monitor mentality, growth, immunological sta- c Ta. uUssatteivr:e N goennee.. P. Shannon: None. J. Michaud: None. D. Chitayat: None. tus, malignancy. Diagnostics. Genetic counseling of affected children with normal karyotype>NBS suspected>CIN investigation>Test positive>DNA investigation>NBS confirmation>Genetic prognoses>Prenatal NBS diagno- s Nti.c Rs uinm fiaamntislaievsa w: Nitohn ke.n Io. wNanu mmucthaitci:o Nnos.ne. S. Sharapova: None. T. Egorova:  P02
.103 None. K. Mosse: None. A. Polityko: None. V. Kulak: None. R. Chmel: None. O. Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome due to a large intragenic SMARCA2 Zobikova: None. S. Golubeva: None. deletion V. Y. Voinova1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov3,1; 1Institute of Paediatrics and Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow State University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian  P02
.105 Federation, 3Mental Health Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Identification of two novel mutations in the NOG gene in patients with Moscow, Russian Federation. Symphalangism syndrome A. Ganaha1, T. KANAM E2
; 1Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nishihara Okinawa, Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NBS) is usually caused by SMARCA2 mu- Japan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan, tations and is characterized by short stature, hypotrichosis, mental retar- Nishihara Okinawa, Japan. dation and typical facial appearance. We report a case of NBS due to an in- tragenic SMARCA2 deletion detected by oligonucleotide SNP array CGH. A 24-month-old girl is the only child of healthy parents born from the second Background pregnancy at 37 weeks with low birth weight. She had poor appetite and NOG maps to human chromosome 17q22, which encodes a protein named low weight gain. Her parents have noted hair loss, short stature and deve- noggin that is essential to bone and joint development. The NOG gene mu- lopment delay. Physical examination showed low height (3d percentile) and tations, which lead to aberrant functions of the noggin protein, give rise to weight (<3rd percentile) and small head circumference (<3rd percentile). different digit anomaly syndromes. One of these syndromes is a syndrome The child had pectus excavatum, umbilical and bilateral inguinal hernia. with autosomal dominant proximal symphalangism and congenital conduc- She presented with sparse and thin (vellus) hair over the scalp with nor- tive hearing impairment. We investigated the NOG gene in 3 patients from 3 mal eyebrows/eyelashes, partial alopecia (occipital region), triangular face, unrelated families, who were clinically diagnosed with proximal symphalan- downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal tip with anteverted alae nasi, gism and conductive hearing loss. thin upper and thick prominent lower lip, broad and long philtrum, wide Result mouth, large protruding tongue. The patient had diffuse muscle hypotonia. All patients had bilateral conductive hearing loss and symphalangism. Ex- She was sociable, good-natured and smiling. Seizures, speech delay, enlar- ploratory tympanotomy was done in two patients. Stapes ankylosis was ged kidneys with a thickened renal parenchyma and incomplete myelinati- identified in both patients. Hyperopia was identified in two out of three pa- on were observed. High-resolution (~1kb) oligonucleotide SNP array (CGH) tients. Syndactyly was identified in one patient. analysis has shown the presence of a deletion within 9p24.3. The size of the Mutation analysis of the NOG gene was performed in all patients. Missense deletion was estimated as 88 kb spanning 21 exons of SMARCA2. To date, mutations of the NOG gene were identified in two out of three patients. The this is the first NBS case associated with such a large intragenic SMARCA2 mutations were causing p. P187
A and p. C228
S, respectively. We could not deletion. The index case shows that high-resolution oligonucleotide SNP find any pathological mutations of NOG gene in one patient. array analysis is able to detect intragenic deletions causing extremely rare Conclusion m V.oYn. oVgoeinnoicv ac:o Nndoniteio. Sn.sG.. Vorsanova: None. Y.B. Yurov: None. I.Y. Iourov: We identified two novel mutations causing p. P187
A and p. C228
S in patients None. with symphalangism spectrum disorder. The NOG gene mutations give rise to a various spectrum of clinical findings. These two novel mutations and cli- nical manifestations in patients will contribute to understanding genotype/ p Ah.e Gnaontyaphea :c Noorrneel.a Tt.i oKna noaf mthee: NNOonGe m. utations. 110 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.106  P02
.108 Multiple hemangiomatosis in a child with Noonan syndrome due to a Further expanding both the genotype and phenotype associated with SHO C2
 mutation germline NRAS mutation C. Colson1, M. Decamp1, A. Molin1, C. Mignot2, H. Cavé3, M. Kottler1, G. Plessis1, A. J. Gillis, S. MacKay, A. Crowley; Dompmartin4, M. Gérard1; IWK Health Centre/Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. 1Service de Génétique, Caen, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Service de Dermatologie, Caen, France. We present a case of a female infant who presented small for gestational age with multiple abnormalities including; polyhydramnios, intracerebral arachnoid cyst, bilateral cystic hygroma and hydronephrosis on prenatal Noonan syndrome (NS) and RASopathies are recognizable on clinical hi- ultrasound. She had a normal karyotype on amniocentesis. Mother declined story and characteristic dysmorphologic features, with usual skin expres- prenatal genetic testing for Noonan syndrome. On follow up after birth she sion. Classical skin features are deep plantar and palmar creases, icthyosis, was notably dysmorphic with wide sutures, reddish blonde and sparse hair eczema, keratosis pilaris, cafe-au-lait spots, and lentigines. Skin vascular which was abnormal in texture. She struggled with hypoglycemia and de- abnormalities are not commonly described. We report an atypical case of veloped apneic spells and episodes of seizure. She was hypotonic, did not NS with multifocal hemangiomatosis and a SHO C2
 mutation. The girl is the feed well and required NG tube placement. Further investigations revealed first born of non-consanguineous parents without family history of vascular duplication of the collecting system with moderate hydronephrosis, ure- anomalies. The pregnancy was marked by enlarged nuchal translucency. At teroceles and small cortical cysts bilaterally. Brain imaging was abnormal birth, macrosomia and disseminated small infantile hemangiomas was no- and echocardiogram identified an ASD and bicommissural aortic valve. She ted, with more than 50 millimetric angiomas. No hepatic or brain angiomas failed her newborn hearing screen and suffers from numerous urinary tract were found by US and MRI. Clinical examination of the girl showed widely and skin infections. Her milestones are delayed and she has ongoing GI is- spaced nipples, short neck and posteriorly rotated ears. Sequential gene sues. Molecular genetic testing for Noonan syndrome identified a previously exploration of RASopathies found a mutation in SHO C2
 gene. SHO C2
 is as- uncharacterized germline mutation in the neuroblastoma RAS viral (v-ras) sociated with the phenotype of Noonan syndrome with loose anlagen hair. oncogene (NRAS). Previously thought to be restricted to somatic mutations, Multifocal hemangiomatosis is not associated at our knowledge in Noonan three novel germline NRAS mutations have recently been reported in nine syndrome or other rasopathies, but PTPN11 (SHP-2) has been shown to patients presenting with features suggestive of the Noonan syndrome spec- regulate vascular signalling and angiogenic events in MAP Kinase pathway trum. Although our patient shares many of the previously reported charac- (Mannell and Krötz, 2012). Vascular malformations have already been de- teristic features, our patient is the tenth world wide to be reported, harbors scribed in Noonan’s syndrome : multiple pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas, yet another novel de novo NRAS mutation and demonstrates a more severe moya-moya, aneurysms and aortic dilatation, additionally to the known car- p Jh. eGnilolitsy:p Neo wneh.i cSh. MwaacsK eavyid: eNnotn per. eAn. aCtraollwy.ley: None. diac malformations. Vascular tumors, such as hemangiomatosis, especially d Cif. fCusoels, omna: yN boen ea.n Mo.t hDeerc pamarpt :o Nf oRnAeS. oAp. aMthoileins: sNpoencetr. uCm. M. ignot: None. H. Cavé: None. M. Kottler: None. G. Plessis: None. A. Dompmartin: None. M. Gérard: None.  P02
.109 Molecular spectrum in a group of Spanish and German patients with RASopathies V. López-González1, M. J. Ballesta-Martínez1, G. Glover-López2, R. Moya-Quiles2, B.  P02
.107 Ezquieta-Zubicaray3, F. Lepri4, J. C. Czeschik5, A. Küchler5, B. Albrecht5, D. Wieczorek5, M. Prevalence and frequency monogenetic syndromes of multiple Zenker6, E. Guillén-Navarro1; congenital malformations in population of Rostov region (Russia) 1Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Clínico Universitario T. Ponomareva1, S. Amelina2, R. Zinchenko3; Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica. 1Scientific Research Institute of Biology, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Scientific Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3Laboratorio de Research Institute of Biology „Southern Federal University“, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Diagnóstico Molecular. Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Federation, 3Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Spain, 4Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 5Institut für Humagenetik, Moscow, Russian Federation. Universtitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany. A medical genetically study of the population of the Rostov region was carried out (12 districts - 497,460 total surveyed persons, 97,345 survey- INTRODUCTION: RASopathies, including Noonan (NS), Cardiofaciocuta- ed children (aged 0 to 18 years)). Information on births in the studied 12 neous (CFCS), Costello (CS), LEOPARD (LS), Legius syndromes and Neuro- districts of the Rostov region allocated for the period 2000-2011, of the fibromatosis type I (NF1), are due to mutations in twelve different genes of accounting monitoring of congenital malformations (CМ) (born alive and the RAS/MAPK pathway. Our aim is to know the genotype in a RASopathy stillborn 64,215 people). Monogenic syndromes of multiple congenital mal- group of patients. formations (MSMCM) was examined. The overall prevalence of MSMCM was MATERIAL AND METHODS: We reviewed the charts of 67 patients with 1:2211 persons. The proportion of children was 58%, the share of adult age RASopathy (36 from Spain and 21 from Germany) and analyzed its mole- was 42%. As the severity of the CМ is variable, children with this condition cular basis. may not survive to adulthood. Therefore, a more reliable assessment of the RESULTS: 35 males and 32 females. Median age at referral: 1.5 years. Posi- prevalence of MSМСМ for the child population. The overall prevalence of tive family history: 13 (19.4%). Phenotype: NS 52 (77.6%), CFCS 9 (13.4%), MSMCM was 1:716 children. Among the syndromes MSMCM with autosomal LS 2 (3%), CS 2 (3%), and Legius syndrome 2 (3%). In 57 patients (85 %) dominant (AD) inheritance type was identified 29 diseases in 85 children, a pathogenic mutation was identified. In 10 PTPN11 mutation negative pa- with autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance type - 17 diseases in 44 child- tients (9 NS / 1 CFC) molecular analysis is ongoing (15%). Mutations were ren, with X-linked type of inheritance - 4 of diseases in 7 children. Among indentified in 43/52 NS (82.7%): 36 PTPN11 (83.7%), 4 NF1 (9.3%), 2 patients with MSMCM with AR inheritance type children are predominat SO S1
 (4.6%) and 1 SHO C2
 (2.3%); 8/9 CFCS (89%): 4 BRAF (50%), 2 KRAS (72%). Population frequency of MSMCM was 160:100,000. Рopulation fre- (25%), 1 MEK1 (12.5%) and 1 RAF1 (12.5%). Y279C PTPN11 mutation was quency were revealed for some MSMCM: Noonan syndrome (frequency of in both LS, HRAS in 2 CS and SPRED1 in 2 Legius syndrome. Higher propor- 9:100,000), hemifacial microsomia (8:100,000), constricting bands, conge- tion of PTPN11 mutations was in exon 3, 8 and 13 (34.3%, 28.6% and 22.9% nital (8:100,000), DiGeorge syndrome (8:100,000), Tel Hashomer campt- respectively). odactyly syndrome (6:100,000), Coffin-Siris syndrome (6:100,000), Waar- CONCLUSION: Compare to previous reports, we find higher PTPN11 muta- denburg syndrome, type I (5:100,000), Holt-Oram syndrome (5:100,000), tion detection rate (83.7% vs 50%), maybe due to stringent criteria, and Dubowitz syndrome (5:100,000), Cousin syndrome (5:100,000), Seckel similar molecular CFCS data and PTPN11 hotspots. The lower rate of SO S1
 syndrome (5:100,000), CHARGE syndrome (5:100,000), VATER-association mutations might be associated to the previous lack of access to the study of (5:100,000). These results agree with data previously surveyed populations other RAS/MAPK genes. o Tf. RPuosnsoiam.areva: None. S. Amelina: None. R. Zinchenko: None. This work has been supported in part by a grant from the DAAD (Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst - German Academic Exchange Service) and „ VF.o Lnódpoe dz-eG Ionnvzeáslteigza: cNioonnee.s M S.aJn. iBtaarllieasst (aP-MI 0ar6t/ín1e1z7: 9N)o“.ne. G. Glover-López: None. R. Moya-Quiles: None. B. Ezquieta-Zubicaray: None. F. Lepri: None. J.C. Czeschik: None. A. Küchler: None. B. Albrecht: None. D. Wieczorek: None. M. Zenker: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 111ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.110 Novel substitutions in patients with a RASopathy phenotype: aPp. pFreorpgreilaotte: Ngeonnee.t iSc. cNoauundsieolnin: gN foonre f.u St.u Mreo purtteognn:a Nnocniees. .I. Coupry: None. J. pathogenic mutations or benign polymorphisms? Deforges: None. M. Delrue: None. B. Bessieres: None. M. Cordier: None. A. M. Pelc1, E. Ciara1, S. Łuczak1, M. Kugaudo1,2, M. Jędrzejowska1,3, A. Cieślikowska1, Delezoide: None. A. Goldenberg: None. P. Loget: None. J. Melki: None. S. A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk4, J. Trubicka1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, D. Jurkiewicz1, P. Odent: None. A. Verloes: None. G. Viot: None. B. Arveiler: None. D. Lacombe: Kowalski1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; None. C. Goizet: None. 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Neuromuscular Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Pediatric Laboratory  P02
.112 Diagnostics, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. Further Delineation of the Johnston-Biesecker Multiple congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome caused by a single PIGA mutation The RASopathies are a group of congenital syndromes with multiple anoma- K. Steindl1, P. Joset1, D. Bartholdi1, S. Pajarola1, S. Böhm2, J. Micallef2, A. Rauch1; lies, including dysmorphic craniofacial features, cardiac, skin and musculos- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, keletal defects and developmental delay. The RASopathy disorders involve 2Eastern Swiss Pediatric Hospital, St. Gallen, Switzerland. such syndromes as: Noonan (NS), Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFCS), LEOPARD (LS) and other. They result from germline mutations in genes encoding com- ponents of the Ras/MAPK signaling cascade. We present a group of eight un- Somatic mutations in the X-linked PIGA gene [MIM 311770] encoding phos- related patients with novel substitutions inP dTiPffNe1re1nt Ras/MAPK genes, cau- phatidylinositol glycan class A are known to cause paroxysmal nocturnal sRaAtFiv1e of NS, LS o,r CFCS phenotySpOeS. 1The identified variants were heterozy- hemoglobinuria, while germline mutations were assumed embryonic lethal. gouBsR mAFissense substitutions: c.166A>G in , c.784A>T, c.1913C>T in Johnston and colleagues only recently described a PIGA nonsense mutation , c.2165G>A c.2371C>A in and c.785A>C, c.1502A>C, c.1783T>C p.Arg412* with residual function in a family segregating with an X-linked le- in . All were absent in the control alleles. To predict whether the no- thal disorder involving cleft palate, neonatal seizures, contractures, central vel variant is tolerated or deleteBrRioAuFs, we used the combinReAdF 1results of four nervous system structural malformations and other anomalies (Johnston et computer algorithms: SIFT, PMut, PolyPhen-2 and Mutation Taster, which al. Am J Hum Genet 2012). While confirmeSdO pSa1thogenicity of all mutations and one substitution three boys of this family were affected, two carrier females with 100% ske- (c.784A>T), in accordance to observed CFCS and LS symptoms, respectively. wing of X-inactivation were healthy. We now identified the same p.Arg412* The two substitutions, found in two patients and their parents, were mutation in an unrelated boy by whole exome sequencing. recognized recently as SNPs of unknown clinical consequence. The results Like the previous cases this boy was born with macrosomia, short neck, fa- for the remaining two variants (c.166A>G and c.1913C>T) were ambiguous, cial dysmorphism and cerebral anomalies such as hypoplastic cerebellum mostly suggesting them as possibly benign. Nonetheless, the detailed clini- and immature white-matter. The neonatal course was complicated by ab- cal manifestations of all patients suggest a Ras/MAPK pathway defect. We sence of spontaneous movements, respiratory insufficiency and intractable presume that introduction of novel mutations in the Ras/MAPK genes might myoclonic-tonic seizures. The boy developed sepsis from necrotizing ente- contribute to defining possible differences in the features presented by the rocolitis and deceased at the age of 15 days. patients and enable more precise phenotype-genotype correlations in the In addition to the reported features this boy showed hepatosplenomegaly RASopathies. The research was supported by NCN Project UMO-2011/03/N/ and remarkable short tubular brodnes verified by X-ray measurements to ap- NMZ. 2P/e0lc0:5 N1o6n aen. dE .E CUi aSrtar:u Nctounrea. lS F.u Łnudcsz aPkr:o Njeocnt eP. OMI.G K.0u2g.0au1d.0o0: -N1o4n-0e.5 M9/. 09. proximately correspond to the 3 centile. The healthy carrier mother showed Jędrzejowska: None. A. Cieślikowska: None. A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk: None. J. only mild skewing of X-inactivation in blood (83:17). The family history was Trubicka: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. P. Kowalski: None. M. Borucka-Mankiewicz: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. M. remarkable for one male stillbirth of the sister of the maternal grandmother. Krajewska-Walasek: None. We therefore confirm that boys with the PIGA p.Arg412* mutation show a distinct pattern of morphological anomalies and are prenatally viable, but dKie. Sstoeoinnd al:f tNero nbeir. tPh. Jdousee tto: Nreosnpei.r Dat. oBrayr tfhaioluldrie: Nanonde i.n Str. aPcatjaabrloel as:e Nizounree.s S.. Böhm: None. J. Micallef: None. A. Rauch: None.  P02
.111 Refinement of diagnostic criteria and molecular study of the FLNA gene in fetal OPD spectrum disorders  P02
.113 P. Fergelot1,2, S. Naudion1, S. Moutton1, I. Coupry2, J. Deforges1, M. Delrue1, B. Bessieres3, M. Cordier4, A. Delezoide5, A. Goldenberg6, P. Loget7, J. Melki8, S. Odent9, A. Verloes10, G. A clinical and molecular study of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome in Japan VIOT11, B. Arveiler1,2, D. Lacombe1,2, C. Goizet1,2; N. Okamoto, Y. Yamamoto, K. Ohmachi; 1Service de Génétique Médicale CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2MRGM, Université Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center for Maternal and Child Health, Bordeaux Segalen, Bordeaux, France, 3Institut de Puériculture et de Périnatalité, Paris, Osaka, Japan. France, 4Génétique Clinique Hôpitaux de Lyon, Bron, France, 5Biologie du Développement Hôpital Robert debré APHP, Paris, France, 6Génétique Clinique CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 7Cabinet d’anatomie et cytologie pathologiques Richier, Rennes, France, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is characterized by severe motor and men- 8Réanimation pédiatrique Hôpital de Bicêtre, APHP, Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 9Service de tal retardation, a characteristic facial features and episodic hyperventilati- Génétique CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 10Génétique Clinique Hôpital Robert Debré on. Language development is almost absent. Characteristic facial features APHP, Paris, France, 11Maternité Port-Royal , Hôpital Cochin, APHP, Paris, France. include a coarse fa TcCe,F a4 broad nasal bridge and a wide mouth with promi- nenTtC CFu4pid’s bow. Researchers TrCevFe4aled that microdeletion of chromosome 18q21.1 including in patients with PTHS. De novo missense mutations Otopalatodigital syndrome type 1 (OPD1), and 2 (OPD2), FMLeNlAnick-Needles in gene were identified. is a claCsNs TIN bAaPs2ic helix-loop-helix tran- syndrome (MNS), and frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD), belong to OPD scription-factor and involved in neuronal development. Pitt-Hopkins-NlikRe- syndrome spectrum disorders, caused by mutations in the gene. Over- XsyNn1drome-1 is caused by mutation in the gene on chromosome lapping phenotypes are described. Males are more severely affected thaFnL NfeA- 7q35, and Pitt-Hopkins-like syndrome-2 is caused by mutation in the males, up to perinatal death of affected males with MNS. We report the first gene on chromosome 2p16.3. series of 9 fetuses (1 female and 8 males) sFeLnNtA to our laboratory for The number of the patients with PTHS increased. So far, reports of Japanese analysis with a phenotype belonging to the OPD spectrum. patients with PTHS were few. We studied Japanese patients with PTHS and We studied the whole coding sequence of by using either dHPLC or found 10 novel mutations. Most of them have been diagnosed as atypical Rett HRM and PCR-sequencing on both strands. A missense mutation was iden- syndrome or Angelman syndrome. We studied patients by direct sequencing tified in 3 male fetuses: the MNS recurrent mutation p.Ser1199Leu and 2 of coding regions and MLPA analysis for deletions. Most of the mutations novel variants in exons 4 and 34. A synonymous variant was identified in 2 generated premature stop codons. Some missense mutations were localized brothers but RNA studies did not show any splicing effect. in the highly conserved amino acid in the bHLH domain. All patients showed In our series, the mutation rate is lower than that of postnatal series. The typical features of PTHS and had severe inteTllCecFt4ual disability. Incidence of diagnosis is probably more difficult to refine clinically given the absence of breathing abnormality and epileptic seizures were low among our patients. certain diagnostic criteria. Hypertelorism, cleft palate, abnormal hands and However, some typical patients did not have mutations. Further gene- feet, heart defects and brain anomalies are relevant criteria for fetal OPD2 tNic. aOnkaalmysoisto i:n Ncloundei.n Yg. nYeaxmt agmenoetora: tNioonne s.e Kq.u Oenhmcinacgh isi: pNrooncee.eding. diagnosis. Radiological signs are more difficult to identify. For the MNS, ab- normality of the anterior segment of the eye seems to be a good criterion for the diagnostic orientation. Cleft palate may also be seen, although not origi- nally described in this syndrome. The diagnosis of OPD spectrum disorders 112 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG is important in fœtopathology because it will provide affected families toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.114 BB S1
 BB S16
 Towards the identification of genetic mechanisms underlying Poland Anomaly to genes, 89% had at least one extra dLiZgTitF tLh1a t BwBaSs1 a7lways po- C. Vaccari1,2, I. Musante1,2, G. Gimelli1, E. Tassano1, M. Lerone1, M. T. Divizia1, M. Torre3, staxial. M. V. Romanini4, M. F. Bedeschi5, N. Catena6, F. M. Senes6, M. G. Calevo7, M. Valle8, M. Recently, we reported on a BBS family mutated in ( ) presen- Acquaviva1,2, A. Baban1,9, A. Barla10, M. Squillario10, R. Ravazzolo1,2, A. Puliti1,2; ting with mesoaxial polydactyly as an outstanding manifestation (Marion et 1Medical Genetics Unit, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 2DiNOGMI Dept. of Neurosciences, aLlZ.,T 2F0 L112
). Herein, we report on twin sisters presenting with classical BBS Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, University of aBnBdS 1m7.esoaxial polydactyly. They are compound heterozygotes for novel Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 3Pediatric Surgery Unit, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 4Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oncological Institute-San Martino Hospital, LZTF L1
 mutations confirming this clinical finding as highly suggestive for Genoa, Italy, 5U.O.D. Genetica Medica, Dip. Salute della donna, del bambino, del neonato, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 6Dept. was identified as an iLmZpToFrLt1ant negative regulator of the BBSome of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 7Epidemiology and ciliary trafficking and SHH pathway signaling. The association of mesoaxial Biostatistics Service, Scientific Direction, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 8Radiology polydactyly and mutations in confirms the impact of SHH pathway Department, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 9present address: Medical Genetics, iEn. t Shceh daeevfeelro: pNmoneen. tJ o. fL tahuee lri:m Nbosn ea.n Md .p Dauttrearnndi:n Ng oonfe t.h Ve. dPiegliltest.ier: None. C. Cytogenetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy, Obringer: None. A. Claussmann: None. J. Braun: None. C. Redin: None. C. 10DIBRIS Dept. of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and Systems Engineering, Mathis: None. J. Muller: None. C. Schmidt-Mutter: None. E. Flori: None. V. University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy. Marion: None. C. Stoetzel: None. H. Dollfus: None. Poland Anomaly (PA) is a congenital disorder presenting with agenesis/hy-  P02
.116 poplasia of the pectoralis major muscle variably associated with thoracic Clinical features in patients with PTEN germline mutation diagnosed and/or upper limb anomalies, incidence 1/30000 births, higher prevalence in childhood, except familial Cowden syndrome and Autism Spectrum in males. Most cases are sporadic, but familial recurrence, with different Disorder. inheritance patterns, has been observed. The PA genetic etiology remains T. BUSA1, B. CHABRO L1
, M. MILH1, N. DEGARDIN1, M. LONGY2, S. SIGAUDY1, N. PHILI P1
; unknown. Since PA involved structures may originate from the same em- 1Hopital de la Timone Enfants, Marseille, France, 2Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France. bryonic tissues, genes controlling cell proliferation, migration, and diffe- PTEN PTEN rentiation of these tissues might be involved. Alternatively, one common as- sumption is that PA may origin from an embryonic vascular insult indicating gene (MIM 601628) is implicated in hamartoma tumor syndro- genes controlling vessels development as indirectly involved. mes (PHTS) including Cowden syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruval- We recruited a large cohort of PA patients (more than 200, about 10% fa- caba syndrome (BBRS). BBRS, considered as the childhood form, is charac- milial) classified into homogeneous subgroups based on their phenotype terized by macrocephaly, intestinal hamartomatous polyposis, lipomas and features. Karyotype analysis performed in 128 patients has not shown any pigmentation macules of the penis. Half of the patients have also mild to relevant alterations. The arrayCGH revealed the presence of chromosome severe mental retardation. Recently, children with macrocephaly and autism anomalies in 19 out of 119 analyzed patients: 10 genomic duplications, spectrum disorders (ASD) withouPtT oEtNher symptoms of PHTS have been re- some of which overlap common copy number variant (CNV) regions, and 9 ported. heterozygous deletions in different regions outside evident CNVs. We report 6 children carrying a mutation, in the absence of ASD or Bioinformatic analysis of arrayCGH data indicates gene enrichment in dif- family history of CS, who were diagnosed from 1 January 2009 to 31 De- ferent pathways including those involved in cell-cell adhesion and muscle cember 2012. The raison of referral was lipoma (1/6), isolated macroce- structure development. phaly (1/6), developmental delay (3/6) and severe facial arteriovenous The screening of these genes in our cohort of patients will contribute to con- malformation (1/6). Only three patients partially met the clinical diagnosis firm their roles in PA. Although clinical and genetic heterogeneity make the of BBRS. All patients had macrocephaly at the time of diagnosis (average at task difficult, the use of next generation sequencing (NGS), the availability of +6.5DS). Three patients had also overgrowth without advanced bone age. a large cohort of patients and familial cases with dominant inheritance and Four patients had cerebral MRI that showed enlarged cerebral ventricles or f Cul. lV paecnceatrri:a nNcoen,e w. Ii.l lM bues haenltpef:u Nl otone i.d Gen. tGifiym PeAlli :c aNuosnaet.i vEe. Tgaesnseasn.o: None. M. prominent subarachnoid spaces (4/4), abnormal periventricular white mat- Lerone: None. M.T. Divizia: None. M. Torre: None. M.V. Romanini: None. M.F. Bedeschi: None. N. Catena: None. F.M. Senes: None. M.G. Calevo: None. M. ter (2/4), abnormal cortical pattern (2/4) and thick corpus callosum (1/4). Valle: None. M. Acquaviva: None. A. Baban: None. A. Barla: None. M. Concerning the mutations, 2 patients carried a nonsens mutation, 4 patients Squillario: None. R. Ravazzolo: None. A. Puliti: None. a missense mutation. The mutation occurred de novo in 3 patients. The two others related patients had a familial history of macrocephaly and milPdT dEeN- velopmental delay without cancer history. This report emphasizes the variability of phenotype associated with  P02
.115 mutation in children. Only half of the patients presented several criteria of Ciliopathies polydactyly variability illustrated by LZTF L1
 related BBRS. Macrocephaly was the most constant manifestation. Cerebral MRI phenotype s Th. oBwuesda: n Noonnsep.e Bc.i fCich aanboroml:a Nlioens.e. M. Milh: None. N. Degardin: None. M. E. Schaefer1, J. Lauer1, M. Durand1, V. Pelletier2, C. Obringer1, A. Claussmann1, J. Braun3, Longy: None. S. Sigaudy: None. N. Philip: None. C. Redin4, C. Mathis5, J. Muller4,6, C. Schmidt-Mutter5, E. Flori7, V. Marion1, C. Stoetzel1, H. Dollfus1,2; 1Laboratoire Diagnostic Génétique, U1112. Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre de Référence pour les Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique (CARGO),  P02
.117 Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Service Oto-Rhino- Intra- and inter-familiar variability in Saethre-Chotzen syndrome Laryngologie et Chirurgie Cervico-Faciale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, A. Beleza1, L. Ramos1, F. Ramos1,2, J. Sá1,3, S. B. Sousa1,4, M. Venâncio1,2, J. Saraiva1,2; Strasbourg, France, 4Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1Clinical Genetics Department - Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Département de Neurobiologie et Génétique, Laboratoire de Bioinformatique et Portugal, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Portugal, Coimbra, Portugal, Génomique Intégratives, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 5Inserm, Centre d’Investigation 3CGC Genetics- Centro de Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 4Institute of Child Health, Clinique de Strasbourg, CIC-P 1002, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, University College London, London, United Kingdom. France, 6Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 7Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. Background: Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) is a rare syndromic cranio- synostosis, commonly involving the coronal suture and usually associated Polydactyly is a common skeletal feature in ciliopathies and recognized as a with facial craniofacial dysmorphism and digit abnTorWmISaTli1ties. Hearing loss, hallmark diagnostic feature such as for example in Bardet-Bield syndrome ophthalmologic complications and increased intracranial pressure may oc- (BBS). Polydactyly is mainly postaxial in ciliopathies, except in syndromes cur. SCS is caused by loss-of-function mutations in and is inherited related to the GLI3 pathway (such as Greig, acrocallosal and hydrolethalus in an autosomal dominant manner. Many individuals diagnosed with SCS syndromes) for which lower limb polydactyly is prTeaCxTiNal3 whereas postaxial have anT aWffeIScTte1d parent. for the upper limb. This presentation has also been reported for Oro-Facial- Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed on all patients with a con- Digital (OFD) syndromes in particular type IV, with mutations known firmed gene abnormality who attended our department over a 15- to impact the transGdLuIc3tion of SHH signaling. Moreover, mesoaxial polydac- year period. Each patient‘s mutation and clinical features, as well as surgical tyly has been reported mainly in other ciliopathies: Pallister-Hall syndrome interventions and sequelae, were recorded. TWIST1 with mutations in and several types of OFD syndromes in particular Results: Eleven patients were identified. Eight cases were familiar (corre- type VI (unknown genetic basis to date). sponding to two families) and three cases were sporadic. point mu- In our cohort of patients presenting witEhS BHBGS a2n0d 1ca3r r|y PinAg RmIuSt,a tFioRnAs Nin CEt |a tWionWs wWe.rEe SfoHunGd. OinR teGn cases and one had a 7p21.2-p15.3 deletion1. T1h3eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Abstract clinical phenotype was highly variable. Craniosynostosis was confirmed in most cases (mostly bi- or uni-coronal; but complex craniosynostoses were The development of bladder tumors has been associated with a number of reported in 3 cases). Half presented the classic craniofacial dysmorphism. causative agents, including schistosomiasis. Schistosome-related bladder In one case, only mild ear abnormalities were detected. One sporadic case tumors show different epidemiological, histopathological, and clinical cha- was detected prenatally and resulted in an early termination of pregnancy. racteristics compared with non schistosome-related bladder cancers, occur- Five patients had received surgical intervention. Learning difficulties and/ ring in younger patients, and being predominantly of squamous cell type. or developmental delay were found in five patients and hearing loss in three. The present study was carried out to investigate whether there are signi- Intracranial hypertension and ophthalmologic complications were not com- ficant genetic differences between schistosome transitional and squamous mon. subgroups of bladder carcinoma. We have used dual color FISH to determine Conclusion: Our patients displays an extreme intra- and inter-familiar va- the cellular copy number of three recognized tumor-related genes (HER-2/ riability. Many cases may be mild and not identified before the birth of a neu, MYC, and p53) in relation to chromosomes 8 and 17 centromeres in 75 more severely affected child. Molecular testing is recommended for genetic Egyptian patients with schistosomal associated bladder carcinoma. Forty- c Ao.u Bnesleelzinag: Naonnde d. eLt.e Rcatimono so:f Naot-nreis. kF .r Relaamtiovse:s .None. J. Sá: None. S.B. Sousa: one of these tumors were squamous cell carcinomas; the remaining 34 were None. M. Venâncio: None. J. Saraiva: None. of transitional cell carcinoma. Our results demonstrated that, different histological subgroups of bladder tumors are characterized by distinct patterns of genetic alterations. Transi-  P02
.118 tional cell carcinoma showed 1.54 and 2.02 times of Her-2/neu and c-myc LMX1B mutation and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis without gene amplification respectively as squamous cell tumors. For p53, TCC sho- extra-renal involvement wed 0.67 times susceptible to p53 deletion as the SCC group. O. Boyer1,2,3, S. Woerner2, F. Yang4, E. J. Oakeley5, B. Linghu4, O. Gribouval2, M. Tête2, J. The genetic changes found in transitional cell group are similar to those S. Duca4, L. Klickstein4, A. J. Damask4, J. D. Szustakowski4, F. Heibel6, M. Matignon7, V. reported in the non-schistosome-related transitional cell tumors, but differ Beaudoin8, F. Chantrel9, J. Champigneulle10, P. Nitschké11,3, M. Gubler2, K. J. Johnson4, S. f Mro.Sm. Atulym: oNrosn eex. hHi.bMit.i Kngh aslqeuda: mNoonues. dTi.fDfe. rHeunstsiaetiino:n N.one. A.A. Mahmoud: Chibout5, C. Antignac12,2,3; None. 1Néphrologie pédiatrique - Hôpital Necker - Enfants malades - MARHEA, Paris, France, 2Inserm U983 - Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland, 6AURAL  P02
.120 et Service de Néphrologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, A Simpson-Golabi-Behmel patient with biliary cirrhosis and 7Service de Néphrologie, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Faculté de Médecine Paris XII, APHP, successful hepatic transplantation Paris, France, 8Néphrologie pédiatrique - Hôpital Robert Debré - Enfants malades - B. Demeer1, A. Mellos2, G. Jedraszak1, S. Irtan3, A. Vanrenterghem4, G. Morin1, V. MARHEA - Université Denis Diderot, Paris, France, 9Service de Néphrologie et médecine Verkarre5, H. Sevestre6, D. Djeddi7, C. Chardot3, F. Lacaille2; interne, Centre Hospitalier de Mulhouse, Mulhouse, France, 10Service de Pathologie, CHU 1genetics department, amiens, France, 2Pediatric gastroenterology, hepathology and Nancy Brabois, Vandoeuvre, France, 11Plateforme de bioinformatique - Hôpital Necker nutrition unit, Necker hospital, Paris, France, 3department of pediatric surgery, Necker - Enfants malades - MARHEA, Paris, France, 12Génétique médicale - Hôpital Necker - hospital, Paris, France, 4Gastroenterology unit, pediatric department, amiens, France, Enfants malades - MARHEA, Paris, France. 5department of pathology, necker hospital, Paris, France, 6department of Pathology, amiens, France, 7Gastroenterology unit, Pediatric department, amiens, France. Primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a clinicopathological entity characterized by sclerotic glomerular lesions and isolated proteinuria Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) -OMIM 312870- is a rare X-linked or steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. The recent identification of cau- inherited overgrowth syndrome caused by mutation in GP C3
 or GP C4
 gene. sative podocyte gene mutations in familial forms of FSGS, some of which Affected patients present a variable phenotype with pre- and post-natal ma- are associated with various extra-renal features, has helped decipher the crosomia, distinctive facial dysmorphism and numerous congenital anoma- glomerular filtration barrier pathophysiology. LMX1B mutations lead to lies such as diaphragmatic hernia, heart defect, renal defect, genito-urinary Nail-Patella syndrome (OMIM#161200), characterized by dysplasia of the tract malformations, gastrointestinal abnormalities, skeletal and hands ab- patellae, nails and elbows, and FSGS with specific glomerular basement normalities Intelectual disability is not constant. About 10% of patients membrane lesions by electron microscopy. Using a combination of linkage hGaPvCe3 an increased risk of developing embryonic tumors in early childhood. analysis and exome sequencing, we unexpectedly identified a novel LMX1B Only one case of biliary disease (choledocal cyst) has been described. mutation segregating with the disease in a pedigree of 5 patients with au- is localised on Xq26 and encodes for Glypican-3 protein, a glycosyl- tosomal dominant FSGS but no glomerular basement membrane anomaly phosphatidylinositol-linked cell surface heparin sulphate proteoglycan suggestive of Nail-Patella-like renal disease by electron microscopy, and no We report here a SGBS patient, who harbours a GP C3
 mutation, with neona- extra-renal features. Subsequently, we screened 73 additional unrelated fa- tal liver disease, and who developed an early biliary cirrhosis. Liver trans- milies with FSGS and found mutations of the same residue that segregate in plantation was discussed, together with the risk of cancer and developmen- 2 families. LMX1B encodes a homeodomain-containing transcription factor t Bal. dDeelmaye, earn: dN osunecc. eAs.s Mfuellllyo sp:e Nrfoonrem. eGd. Jwehderans hzea kw: aNso 1n9e. mS.o Inrttahns: o Nldo.ne. A. that is essential during development. To make functional predictions, we Vanrenterghem: None. G. Morin: None. V. Verkarre: None. H. Sevestre: mapped the mutated residue onto a LMX1B in silico homology model. This None. D. Djeddi: None. C. Chardot: None. F. Lacaille: None. residue is predicted to belong to a homeodomain. The model suggests this residue plays an important role in strengthening the interaction between the LMX1B homeobox domain and DNA molecule. Both mutations are ex-  P02
.121 pected to diminish such interactions. This novel finding demonstrates that Sirenomelia in Cali, Colombia. isolated FSGS could be due to mutations in genes also involved in syndromic W. Saldarriaga, C. Isaza de Lourido, J. Ramirez; forms and highlights the need to include these genes in all next-generation Universidad del Valle, Cali., Colombia. sOeq. Bueonyceirn: gN doniaeg. nSo. sWiso aeprnperro:a Ncohnees. i Fn. FYSaGnSg.: None. E.J. Oakeley: None. B. Linghu: None. O. Gribouval: None. M. Tête: None. J.S. Duca: None. L. Klickstein: None. A.J. Damask: None. J.D. Szustakowski: None. F. Heibel: Sirenomelia is a very rare limb anomaly in which the normally paired lower None. M. Matignon: None. V. Beaudoin: None. F. Chantrel: None. J. limbs are replaced by a single midline limb, with a prevalence of 0.98 per Champigneulle: None. P. Nitschké: None. M. Gubler: None. K.J. Johnson: None. S. Chibout: None. C. Antignac: None. 100,000. One hospital in the city of Cali, Colombia, of the ECLAMC (Latin- American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) network, re- ported the unusual occurrence of 4 cases of sirenomelia within a 55-day period in 2005. The follow-up to 2013, shows 4 new cases from that state, in  P02
.119 483,524 births, yielding a prevalence of 0.83 per 100,000 births in the fol- Comparison of genetic changes in schistosome-related squamous and lowing years. It further describes the characteristics of the cases: according transitional bladder cancers using FISH to the Foster Classification 4 Were Dipus, 2 unipus and 2 Apus; according to M. S. Aly1,2, H. M. Khaled3, T. D. Hussein4, A. A. Mahmoud1; Stocker and Heifetz Were Clasification 2 type I, 1 type III, 1 type IV, 1 type V, 1Biology Department, Faculty of Science, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia, 22Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef University, Cairo, Egypt, 3 type VI; 3 of cases had other anatomical defects; none of the studied cases 3Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Cairo, Egypt, 44Zoology had chromosomal abnormalities. Conclusion. The findings suggest that the Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. first 4 cases were a cluster of sirenomelia in Cali, Colombia. We report 8 c Was. eSsa oldf asrirrieangoam: Neolinae, .a C r.a Irsea czoa ndgee Lnoituarli ddoe:f eNcot.ne. J. Ramirez: None. 114 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.122 None. J. Bouron: None. J. Toutain: None. A. Vigouroux: None. G. Novel phenotypic features associated with increased dosage of SOX3 Bourrouillou: None. L. Bouneau: None. B. Arveiler: None. D. Lacombe: T. Y. Tan1,2, B. Shugg3,4, P. G. Farlie2,5, T. Burgess1; None. P. Barat: None. B. Jouret: None. G. Diene: None. E. Bieth: None. S. 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 2Murdoch Children‘s Research Julia: None. M. Tauber: None. M. Delrue: None. C. Rooryck: None. Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 3Department of Paediatrics North West Area Health Service, Burnie, Australia, 4University of Tasmania, Burnie, Australia, 5Department of Paediatrics University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.  P02
.124 A rare combination of Syntelencephaly, Hemiparesis and Wormian bone SOX3 belongs to the Sry-related-HMG-box-containing group of transcription A. Koparir1, H. Aydin1, E. Koparir1, H. Ulucan1, E. Yosunkaya1, M. Seven1, A. Yüksel2, M. factors critical in vertebrate development. SOX3 plays a key role in the deve- Özen1; lopment of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and gonadal differentiation. Dis- 1Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical School Department of Medical Genetics, ruption of SOX3, either by direct involvement or copy number variation of Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey. its regulatory region, has been implicated in several human conditions. Du- plications of chromosome Xq27.1 involving the SOX3 gene result in X-linked panhypopituitarism in males, with some phenotypic variability depending Syntelencephaly is a rare anomaly characterized by fusion of the hemisphe- on the extent of the copy number change. Additionally, duplications of the res in the posterior frontal and parietal regions and is considered a new regulatory region surrounding SOX3 have been observed in patients with variant of holoprosencephaly. XX male sex reversal. We present a boy with partial absence of the corpus Wormian bones are accessory bones that occur within cranial suture and callosum, dyslalia, mild developmental delay, divergent strabismus and bila- fontanelles, most commonly within the posterior sutures. They occur more teral retinal colobomas associated with a complex duplication/triplication frequently in disorders that have reduced cranial ossification, hypotonia or of chromosome Xq27.1 involving only the SOX3 gene. His mother, a carrier of decreased movement, thereby resulting in deformational brachycephaly. the SOX3 change, has normal intellect and development, but also had bilate- Here, we report a one-week- old male who presented with abnormal head ral retinal colobomas and mild dyslalia. This is the first time a CNV involving shape and concern for craniosynostosis. He had brachycephaly, alopecia, SOX3 has been reported with an ocular phenotype. This may suggest that right hemiparesis and closed anterior fontanelle. Three dimentional CT ocular development is more tolerant of SOX3 dosage changes than the hypo- scan revealed absence of the anterior fontanelle, sagittal wormian bone and thalamus and pituitary gland. Our data are consistent with Sox3 transgenic split metopic suture. Alopecia was noted in the skin overlying the wormi- animal models and underscores the importance of Sox3 dosage in the deve- an bone. MRI scanning showed deficient formation of the interhemispheric l oTp.Ym. Teannt :o Bf .t hRee sberaaricnh, eGyreasn ta (npdri nhcyippaolt ihnavleasmtigiac-topri,t cuoitllaarbyo raaxtiosr. or consultant fissure with fusion of parietal lobes and agenesis of corpus callosum. We and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; National designed an array which includes 44K ISCA probes covering whole geno- Health and Medical Research Council Australia. B. Shugg: None. P.G. Farlie: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending me and 14,217 additional probes for intronic and exonic regions of the all grants as well as grants already received); Significant; National Health and known 226 skeletal dysplasias genes. We detected no significant copy num- Medical Research Council Australia. T. Burgess: None. ber changes in our patient. To our knowledge, there is no published report showing syntelencephaly with wormian bone referring our case as the first r Ae.p Korotp ianr itrh: iNs ornaer.e H c.o Amybdiinna: tNioonn.e. E. Koparir: None. H. Ulucan: None. E. Yosunkaya: None. M. Seven: None. A. Yüksel: None. M. Özen: None.  P02
.123 Use of Array-CGH to identify new candidate loci in a cohort of 89 children presenting with syndromic obesity S. Naudion1, M. Vuillaume1,2, G. Banneau2, D. Cailley1, J. Bouron1, J. Toutain1, A.  P02
.125 Vigouroux3, G. Bourrouillou3, L. Bouneau3, B. Arveiler1,2, D. Lacombe1,2, P. Barat4,5, B. Ectrodactyly in Townes-Brocks syndrome: expanding the phenotype Jouret6, G. Diene6,7, E. Bieth3, S. Julia8, M. Tauber6,7, M. Delrue1,2, C. Rooryck1,2; to limb abnormalities 1CHU Bordeaux, Service de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, France, 2Univ. Bordeaux A. Guerrot1, G. Pinto-Cardoso2, T. Hazelzet3, F. Louillet3, Y. Lerosey4, I. Gilles5, S. Segalen, Laboratoire Maladies Rares : Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM), EA 4576, Manouvrier6, F. Escande7, T. Frebourg1,8, S. Abu Amara9, A. Goldenberg1; Bordeaux, France, 3CHU Toulouse, Service de Génétique Médicale, Toulouse, France, 4CHU 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Department of Bordeaux, Service d‘Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, Bordeaux, France, 5Univ. Bordeaux Neonatalogy , Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Department of Pediatrics, Segalen, Laboratoire NutriNeuro, UMR 1286, Bordeaux, France, 6CHU Toulouse, Hôpital Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centre des enfants, Unité d‘Endocrinologie Pédiatrique, Obésité, Maladies osseuses, Génétique Hospitalier Intercommunal Eure-Seine, Evreux, France, 5Department of Pediatrics, et Gynécologie Médicale, Toulouse, France, 7CHU Toulouse, Hôpital des enfants, Centre de Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal Eure-Seine, Evreux, France, 6Department of Genetics, Référence du Syndrome de Prader Willi, Toulouse, France, 8Univ. Toulouse III, UMR1027 Lille University Hospital, Lille, France, 7Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Lille University Epidémiologie et analyses en santé publique, risques, maladies chroniques et handicap. Hospital, Lille, France, 8Inserm U1079, Rouen, France, 9Department of Pediatric Surgery, Equipe 4 : Génomique, biothérapie et santé publique : approche interdisciplinaire, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. Toulouse, France. Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS) is a variable autosomal dominant condition Syndromic obesity is defined by the association of obesity (BMI>30 in adults characterized by external ear anomalies with hearing loss, hand anomalies, and above IOTF 30 chart in children) with one or more abnormalities inclu- and anorectal malformations. Other features are renal and urogenital ano- ding predominantly developmental delay, dysmorphic features and/or con- malies, cardiac malformations, mild feet anomalies and intellectual disabili- genital malformations. Over 25 syndromic forms of obesity have been iden- ty has been reported in some cases. We report a patient with bilateral split tified. However, most of cases remain of unknown etiology. The aim of this feet. Other abnormalities included long and thin thumbs, anal imperforati- study was to identify new candidate loci associated with syndromic obesity on, renal hypoplasia with cysts, and bilateral preauricular tags. A ventricular in order to trigger new candidate genes and to better understand molecular septal defect and a profound bilateral deafness were subsequently identi- mechanisms involved in this pathology. To achieve our objectives, we per- fied. Townes-Brocks syndrome was suspected on the association of renal, formed high-density oligonucleotide array-CGH in a cohort of 89 children auricular, anal and hand abnormalities, although ectrodactyly is usually not presenting with syndromic obesity of unknown etiology, after exhaustive a feature in TBS. A de novo SAL L1
 mutation, c.826 C>T, leading to a prema- clinical, biological and molecular studies. Chromosomal aberrations were ture stop codon, was indeed identified, confirming therefore the TBS dia- detected in 36/89 children (40%) occurring throughoutd teh neo gveonome. Con- gnosis. To our knowledge, ectrodactyly has only been described once in TBS sidering aberrations greater than 500 kb, this rate was reduced to 19/89 (Van Bever et al, 2009). This description of the second case of ectrodactyly (21%). Among the entire cohort, only 4/89 (4.5 %) had anomalies. in a TBS patient confirms that the diagnosis of TBS should be considered However, we could not exclude every inherited anomaly as some of the when such limbs abnormalities are associated with other classical features parents carriers presented with obesity and/or intellectual disability. Even o Af .t Gheu esryrnodt:r oNmonee.. G. Pinto-Cardoso: None. T. Hazelzet: None. F. Louillet: if no recurrent locus was identified (except for the 16p11.2 locus), our re- None. Y. Lerosey: None. I. Gilles: None. S. Manouvrier: None. F. Escande: sults further support that chromosomal rearrangements are more frequent- None. T. Frebourg: None. S. Abu Amara: None. A. Goldenberg: None. ly associated with syndromic obesity with a variety of contributory genes having relevance to either obesity or developmental delay. Pathogenicity is however difficult to assert in these disorders suspected to be multifactori- al. In conclusion, these findings show the importance of array-CGH in the etiological diagnosis of syndromic obesity allowing an appropriate genetic c So.u Nnasuedliinogn :in N soonme.e M f.a Vmuiillileasu.me: None. G. Banneau: None. D. Cailley: ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 115ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P02
.126  P02
.128 Townes-Brocks syndrome: Clinical and molecular analyses in a series Unexpected exome sequencing result: De novo trichorhinophalangeal of 12 patients with SAL L1
 mutations. syndrome type I (TRPS I) mutation in an infant with congenital A. Brahimi1, F. Escande2, F. Petit1,3, B. LeHeup4, T. Homfray5, A. Goldenberg6, D. Martin- scoliosis, mild developmental delay, and history of consanguinity. A Coignard7, C. Francannet8, F. Giulano9, C. Coubes10, V. Drouin-Garraud6, G. Morin11, O. clinical diagnostic problem solved by this new technique Boyer12, S. Manouvrier1,3; Y. Lacassie1, I. Casci2, W. K. Accousti3; 1Clinical Genetic Department. Rare Developmental Diseases Reference Center. University 1Department of Pediatrics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New hospital, Lille, France, 2Molecular genetic Department. University Hospital, Lille, France, Orleans, LA, United States, 2Department of Genetics, Louisiana State University Health 3Nord de France University, Lille, France, 4Genetic Department, University Hospital, Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, United States, 3Department of Orthopaedics, Louisiana Nancy, France, 5Medical genetic unit St Georges University, London SW17, United State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, United States. Kingdom, 6Clinical Genetic Unit. Genetic Department, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 7Genetic Department, Le Mans Hospital, Le Mans, France, 8Genetic Department, University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 9Genetic Department, University Hospital, Nice, France, 10Genetic Department, University Hospital, Montpellier, France, We report a 7½ mo WF with congenital scoliosis, a family history of con- 11Genetic Department, University Hospital, Amiens, France, 12Rare Diseases Reference sanguinity and physical findings which raised suspicions of an autosomal Center for hereditary renal diseases. Necker University hospital, Paris, France. recessive disorder. However the exome sequencing showed an unexpected autosomal dominant syndrome. The proband was considered normal until SAL L1
 age 5m when congenital scoliosis with some developmental delay and GER We report on a series of 12 patients presenting with Townes-Brocks syndrome was detected. Good growth, wide face, nevus flammeus in forehead, promi- (TBS) and mutations. nent philtrum, epicanthus anrdd tendency to telecanthus, minodre s nyonvdoa, ctyly TBS is an autosomal dominant Multiple Congenital Anomalies (MCA) conditi- toes 2-3, and RL in the right 3 finger were found. on. It is classically characterized by a triad associating dysplastic ears and/or TTRheP Se1xome sequencing demonstrated that the proband has a pre- hearing loss (90% of cases); thumb anomalies (81%) and anal defects (68%). viously unreported, single nucleotide missense mutation in exon 5 of the OSAthLeLr1 features may include foot anomalies (50%), renal and genitourinary gene (c.2627 C>T). The result of this mutation is a phenylalanine re- malformations (39%) and congenital heart defects (12%). placing the normal serine at position 876 (p. S876
F) of the TRP S1
 protein. encodes a zinc finger transcriptional repressor implicated in hSeAteLrLo1- This transition, from a polar serine to a non-polar, aromatic phenylalanine, chromatin-dependent silencing process. may affect the function of one of the protein’s two nuclear localization si- Here we report on 12 patients (3F/9M from 10 families) with identified gnals (NLSs). This signal is located ten residues away from the mutation. mutations and very variable phenotypes. Most mutations (8/10) are novel. Rossi et al. (2007) reported a missense mutation within the other TRP S1
 Two index patients carry the recurrent Arg276X mutation. The typical triad NLS of a patient with mild TRPS I. The mutation prevented the TRP S1
 prote- was found in only 50% cases (6/12). However 100% had ears anomalies in (a transcription factor) from being transported into the nucleus, reducing (12/12), which were unilateral in 2 patients. Other malformations were thumb the amount available for transcription initiation. We hypothesize that our malformations (7/12 = 58%), anal (6/12 = 50%), renal (6/12 = 50%) and car- patient has a similar situation. However, since the mutation is not within the diac (1/12 = 8%) defects. Feet anomalies were observed in 4 cases (33%). NLS, it is hindering transport into the nucleus to an even lesser extent, pro- Furthermore one female patienStA uLnLd1erwent pregnancy termination because of d Yu. cLiancga asns ieev: eNno nmei.l dI. eCra pshcei:n Nootynpe.e W w.iKth. Aoucct othues tci:l aNsosnicea.l features of TRPS. renal agenesis/dysplasia with oligohydramnios in her fetus. We confirm in this series that mutations cause a range of very variab- le phenotypes. However, in our series dysplastic or malformed ears and/or  P02
.129 hearing loss were constant, even if very mild in some cases. We conclude that A case of non-penetrance in an 8-year-old with a pathogenic TS C2
 ears have to be carefully examined in patients with either anal or renal mal- mutation: re-thinking the spectrum of TSC associated disease formations, and that TBS have to be considered event if the classical triad is L. Badalato, J. E. Allanson, S. M. Nikkel; nAo.t B furallhyi mpri:e Nseonnte.. F. Escande: None. F. Petit: None. B. LeHeup: None. T. Department of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Homfray: None. A. Goldenberg: None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. C. Francannet: None. F. Giulano: None. C. Coubes: None. V. Drouin-Garraud: None. G. Morin: None. O. Boyer: None. S. Manouvrier: None. Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant genetic con- dition with widely variable expressivity, and is generally considered 100% penetrant. Here, we present a three-generation family in whom a novel 2bp  P02
.127 deletion in TSC-2 was found following the diagnosis of a proband. Six family Large segment pure trisomy 3q resulting from a familial 3;14 members tested positive for the deletion. Of these, five showed either clini- balanced translocation cal or radiographic features of TSC, although only one met full diagnostic L. S. Penney1, L. M. Currie2; criteria aside from the proband. One family member - an 8-year-old boy - 1Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2Maritime Medical showed non-penetrance of TSC features after thorough evaluation, inclu- Genetics Service, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada. ding MRI brain, echocardiogram, abdominal ultrasound, and full dermato- logic and ophthalmologic exams. This example adds to the growing body of literature suggesting a broader spectrum of TSC associated disease than Partial trisomy 3q has been reported in the literature on many occasions but was previously appreciated, and presents the second reported case of non- less frequently without additional chromosomal abnormalities. Cases typi- penetrance of TSC in an individual with a familial pathogenic mutation after cally involve 3q21 to qter with a proposed critical region of 3q26.3 to 3q29 a full diagnostic workup. These findings illustrate the importance of mole- with the resulting phenotype including facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly, cular testing for all first-degree family members of individuals with known heart defects, genitourinary abnormalities, malformations of the extremities, TSC mutations, even in the absence of clinical or radiographic findings. A intellectual disability and growth failure. positive result necessitates further screening for TSC related complications Here, we report on a prenatally detected case of pure, partial trisomy 3q i Ln. tBhaedsea liantdo:iv Nidounea.l sJ, .aEn. dA lalallnoswosn f:o Nro anpep. rSo.Mpr. iNatikek geeln: Netoinc ec.ounseling. involving 3q13.2 to qter [46,XY,der(14)t(3;14(9q13.2;p13) in a pregnancy of a woman known to be a balanced translocation carrier [46,XX,t(3;14) (q13.2;p13)]. A prenatal ultrasound identified numerous abnormalities in- cluding an increased nuchal translucency, symmetrically small growth, a  P02
.130 complex heart defect, a bilateral cleft lip and palate, hypospadias, a small sto- When one is not enough: why we need a much longer follow-up to rule mach bubble and a small cerebellum. The male baby was born at 38.5 weeks out tuberous sclerosis after a prenatal diagnosis of rhabdomyoma F. Natacci1, C. Cesaretti1,2, G. Melloni1, S. Salmona3, G. Lista4, F. Lalatta1, M. Mastrangelo5; by a spontaneous vaginal delivery. The prenatal abnormalities were confir- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, med postnatally and the heart defect was confirmed to be Tetralogy of Fallot Milano, Italy, 2Hereditary Anemia Center, Internal Medicine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS with pulmonary stenosis. The genitalia were ambiguous and the testes were Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 3Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, not identifiable on ultrasound. Additional findings included hip dysplasia, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 4Neonatal unusual hands and feet, dysmorphic facies, anemia and thrombocytopenia. Intensive Care Unit, „V. Buzzi“ Children’s Hospital, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, The child survived to 2.5 months of age. Milano, Italy, 5Neurology Unit, „V. Buzzi“ Children’s Hospital, Istituti Clinici di To our knowledge, this is one of the few reported cases of partial trisomy 3q Perfezionamento Milano, Milano, Italy. involving such an extensive segment of 3q and the only case reported in more recent literature. Additionally, it is one of the few reported cases of pure tri- somy 3q. The phenotype reported here is consistent with previous reports, In recent years, improvements in prenatal ultrasound screening techniques p Lr.oSv. iPdeinngn efuy:r tNhoenre e. vLi.dMe.n Cceu rfroier :a N porneed.ictable partial trisomy 3q phenotype. have led to increasingly early detection of foetal cardiac tumors. After their 116 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRdAiaNgnCosEis | aWppWropWri.aEteS mHuGlt.iOdisRcGiplinary counselling to parents should beABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index made available to explain prognosis, management options and perinatal Weaver syndrome is a rare, mostly sporadic, overgrowth syndrome charac- treatments. Counselling may be challenging after a diagnosis of foetal car- terized by prenatal onset overgrowth, macrocephaly, typical face, frequent diac rhabdomyomatosis, for its frequent association with tuberous sclerosis mild intellectual impairment and marked advanced bone age. EZH2, the complex (TSC). Thus when foetal cardiac tumors are detected, an additio- gene primarily involved in this syndrome, was recently identified [Tatton- nal diagnosis of TSC have to be searched, and TS C1
 and TS C2
 gene analysis Brown et al. (2011); Oncotarget 2:1127-1133]. Since the first delineation by could be prompted up. Weaver et al. in 1974, approximately 50 patients have been reported. Twen- From then on, in the absence of any other signs, only careful and periodic ty-three of them have been ascertained by genetic studies. For most of them, evaluations could allow to determine whether the cardiac tumor is isolated clinical features are not detailed and no follow-up data are available. or is associated with TSC. We report here on phenotypic evolution from birth of 2 sporadic cases of But even in newborns the diagnosis of TSC may be confounded: many fin- Weaver syndrome in patients originating from Reunion Island harbouring a dings traditionally regarded as among the most specific for TSC become ap- different EZH2 mutation, and describe previously unreported features. parent only in late childhood or adulthood, limiting their usefulness for ear- Case 1 was born with 3 parameters above the 97th centile, in a context of ly diagnosis. In the absence of an overt TSC diagnosis it is therefore essential gestational diabetes. She is now 2 years old, has typical overgrowth, hyper- to begin a regular schedule of follow up examinations, aimed at recognizing telorism, retrognathism and advanced bone age. She has normal neurologi- the onset of typical signs of TSC and to diagnose possible complications cal development. which might otherwise escape notice. Case 2 was born with normal weight and height, macrocephaly and arthro- We propose, starting from the description of two illustrative cases, a proto- gryposis. She subsequently developed generalized overgrowth with advan- col for a follow up, which includes a complete evaluations at birth and one ced bone age and mild learning disability, which evoked the diagnosis of years of age, followed by neurological yearly examination until age 5, when Sotos syndrome. By her teens, we observe a normalization of her growth a comprehensive clinical and instrumental negative revaluation can allow to parameters and bone age. She is now 14 years old. Atypical findings are bifid c Fo. nNsaidtaecrceid: Nnoengeli.g Cib. lCe etshaer reitstik: oNfo dneev. eGl.o Mpienllgo onti:h Nero nseig. nSs. oSfa tlmheo ncoan: dNiotnioen. .G. uvula, sandal gap, abnormally shaped teeth and multiple fractures despite Lista: None. F. Lalatta: None. M. Mastrangelo: None. normal calcium metabolism. Frequency of the disease on Reunion Island (2 cases out of 839 500 inhabi- tants), the possibly normal final height, and inconstant intellectual disability  P02
.131 t Mog. eIrtahbeer: sNuogngee.s Lt .a Hno uunddoenr:e Nstoinmea. tDio. nD uobf oWise:a Nveorn esy. Mnd. rLoinmaerd.: None. J.C. Ruzic: None. K. Tatton-Brown: None. N. Rahman: None. M.L. Jacquemont: Loss of function of the  E3
 ubiquitin-protein ligase UB E3
B causes None. Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome E. Flex1, A. Ciolfi1,2, V. Caputo2, V. Fodale1, C. Leoni3, D. Melis4, M. Bedeschi5, L. Mazzanti6, A. Pizzuti2, G. Zampino3, M. Tartaglia1; 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 3Università  P02
.133 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 4Università Federico II, Naples, Italy, 5Fondazione Whole exome sequencing unravels the molecular bases of OFD IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 6Università degli Studi di syndromes Bologna, Bologna, Italy. E. Lopez1, J. Rivière1,2, J. Thevenon1,3, J. Lee4, N. Elkhartoufi5, A. Mégarbane6, B. Reversade7, S. Saunier8, M. Avila1, S. Phadke9, I. Kaori10, J. Takanashi10, T. Shida4, J. Bazan11, D. Lacombe12, P. Kleinfinger13, L. Pasquier14, P. Loget15, M. Le Merrer5,8, M. Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome (KOS) is a developmental disorder Holder16, J. Martinovic5,17, C. Noël18, F. Razavi5,8,19, L. Devisme20, B. Doray21, N. Gigot1,22,3, characterized by reduced growth, microcephaly, ocular anomalies (mi- B. Aral1,22, L. Jego1, V. Carmignac1, F. Huet1,23, V. Cormier-Daire24,8,19, L. Burglen25, S. crocornea, strabismus, myopia, and pale optic disk), distinctive facial fea- Lyonnet5,8,19, C. Le Caignec26, L. Faivre1,3, T. Attié-Bitach5,8,19, B. Franco27,28, M. Nachury4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3; tures (narrow palpebral fissures, telecanthus, sparse and laterally broad 1Equipe émergente EA4271 Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Dijon, France, eyebrows, preauricular tags, and micrognathia), mental retardation, and 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU, Dijon, generalized hypotonia. KOS is a rare, probably under-recognized condition, France, 3Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies de Développement et with less than ten cases reported to date. Here we investigate the molecular Syndromes Malformatifs de l’interrégion Grand-Est, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, Dijon, cause underlying KOS. France, 4Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University We used an exome sequencing approach on a single affected individual of School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 5Département de Génétique, Hôpital an Italian consanguineous family coupled to mutation scanning by Sanger Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 6Unité de Génétique Médicale. Faculté de sequencing on a second unrelated subject with clinical features fitting the Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 7Laboratory of Human Embryology, Institute of Medical Biology, Singapore, Singapore, 8Plateforme de génomique, Fondation disorder. UB E3
B IMAGINE, Hôpital Necker-Enfant Malades, Paris, France, 9Department of Medical Exome sequencing identified homozygosity for a novel truncating mutation Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India, (c.556C>T, p.Arg186stop) in , which encodes for a widely expressed 10Department of Pediatrics, Kameda Medical Center, Kamogawa, Japan, 11NeuroScience, HECT domain  E3
 ubiquitin-protein ligase. Homozigosity for a different non- Inc., Osceola, WI, United States, 12Service de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies sense lesion affecting the gene (c.1166G>A, p.TrpU3B8 E93
sBtop) was documented du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, in the second affected subject, supporting the recessive mode of inheritance 13Département de génétique, Laboratoire Cerba - Saint-Ouen l‘Aumone et Service de of the disorder. Mutation scanning of the entire coding sequence on Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hopital R. Dubos, Pontoise, France, 14Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes malformatifs » de l’Ouest, a opportunely selected cohoUrtB oEf3 sBubjects with features overlapping, in part, Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rennes, France, 15Laboratoire those recurring in KOS did not reveal disease-causing mutations, suggesting d’Anatomie-Pathologie, CHU, Rennes, France, 16Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital phenotypic homogeneity of lesions. Jeanne de Flandre e Our data provide evidence that KOS is caused by UB E3
B loss of function, and further demonstraUtBe Et3hBe impact of misregulation of protein ubiquitination on development and growth. The available clinical records, including those Oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFD) are characterized by malformations of referring to four mutation-positive subjects recently described as the face, oral cavity and extremities. Various forms give rise to clinical diffe- belonging to a previously unreported entity, which fit KOS, document the rentiation in 13 subtypes. While OFD I presents with an X-linked dominant c Eli.n Ficleaxl :h Noomnoeg. Aen. eCiitoyl fio:f Nthoinse d. iVs.o Crdaepru. to: None. V. Fodale: None. C. Leoni: mode of inheritance and lethality in males, other subtypes occur sporadical- None. D. Melis: None. M. Bedeschi: None. L. Mazzanti: None. A. Pizzuti: None. G. Zampino: None. M. Tartaglia: None. ly or with autosomal recessive transmission. To date, a causative gene has only been found for OFD I with the OFD1 ciliary gene. In order to determine the molecular basis of OFD syndromes, we performed exome sequencing on 16 OFD cases: 2 OFD II, 8 OFD VI, and 6 unclassified types (4 with cerebellar  P02
.132 hypoplasia, 1 with severe microcephaly, 1 with chondrodysplasia), combi- Natural course of Weaver syndrome : about two cases ned with homozygosity mapping in 4 consanguineous families. Causative M. Irabe1, L. Houdon2, D. Dubois3, M. Linard4, J. C. Ruzic5, K. Tatton-Brown6,7, N. Rahman6, mutations in 4 genes were uncovered in 11 out of 16 cases. M. L. Jacquemont1; First, we found two OFD1 mutations undetected by Sanger sequencing in 1Unité de Génétique Médicale, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 2Service de Pédiatrie, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 3Centre d‘Action Médico-Sociale Précoce, two patients with cerebellar hypoplasia. We also identified mutations in 2 Saint Louis, France, 4Service d‘Imagerie, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 5Service genes previously reported in Joubert syndrome, one of them being the ma- de Chirurgie Infantile, CHU la Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 6Division of Genetics & jor OFDVI disease causing gene (6/8 cases). A novel gene mutated in the Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 7Medical Genetics, patient with chondrodysplasia is involved in intraflagellar transport. Finally, St George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom. in the patient with microcephaly, we identified a homozygous nonsense mu- tation in a novel ciliary gene that, similarly to OFD1, binds to the BBSome ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 117 and localizes to centriolar satellites. Congruently, altering levels of this geneABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in a cellular model impacts the pericentrosomal distribution of centriolar patients with larger and smaller WBS deletion have been reported. They satellites. show clinical features that vary between isolated SVAS to the full spectrum Altogether these results confirm centriolar satellites dysfunction as a major of WBS phenotype, associated with epilepsy or autism spectrum behavior. pathomechanism of OFD syndromes, their large genetic heterogeneity and We describe four patients with atypical 7q11.23 deletions identified by mul- e Ex.t eLnospievze: oNvoenrela. pJ .w Riitvhiè orteh: eNro cnieli.o Jp. aTthheievse.non: None. J. Lee: None. N. tiple-ligation probe amplifiHcaItPi1on anaYlyWsiHsA aGnd fine mapping by quantitative Elkhartoufi: None. A. Mégarbane: None. B. Reversade: None. S. Saunier: real-time PCR. Two carry an approximately 3.5 Mb larger deletion towards None. M. Avila: None. S. Phadke: None. I. Kaori: None. J. Takanashi: None. T. Shida: None. J. Bazan: None. D. Lacombe: None. P. Kleinfinger: None. L. the telomere that BinAcZlu1Bdes FZD a9nd genes. Other two carry a shor- Pasquier: None. P. Loget: None. M. Le Merrer: None. M. Holder: None. J. ter deletion of approximately 1.2 Mb at centromeric side that excludes the Martinovic: None. C. Noël: None. F. Razavi: None. L. Devisme: None. B. Doray: distal WBS genes and , respectively. HI P1
 None. N. Gigot: None. B. Aral: None. L. Jego: None. V. Carmignac: None. F. AlonYg WwHitAhG p reviously reported cases, genotype-phenotype correlation in Huet: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. L. Burglen: None. S. Lyonnet: None. C. the patients described here further suggests that haploinsufficiency of Le Caignec: None. L. Faivre: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None. B. Franco: None. M. BanAdZ 1B FZmDi9ght cause the severe neurological and neuropsychological Nachury: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. deficits including epilepsy and autistic traits and that the preservation of and genes may be related to mild facial features and moderate neuropsychological deficits. This report highlights the importance to cha-  P02
.134 racterize additional patients with 7q11.23 atypical deletions and to com- Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum pare neuropsychological and clinical features between individuals with lar- of individuals with MLL mutations, identified through clinician ger and smaller WBS deletion to shed light on the pathogenic role of genes phenotyping versus the DDD project w Ci.t Fhuins caon:d N folannek. iLn.g M tihcea lWe:i Nllioanme.s B B.e Auurgenel lsoy:n Ndornoem. eM r. ePgeilolinc.o: None. D. W. D. Jones1, M. McEntagart2, C. Deshpande3, M. Holder-Espinasse3, S. Smithson4, F. V. Menghini: None. P. Alfieri: None. M. Digilio: None. B. Mandriani: None. S. Elmslie5, K. Tatton Brown6, D. R. FitzPatrick7, D. D. D. Project1, M. A. Simpson8; Vicari: None. G. merla: None. 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, Guy’s and St. Thomas’ National Health Service Foundation Trust, Guy’s Hospital,  P02
.136 London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 5SouthWest Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George’s Atypical interstitial deletion of 7q11.23 containing whole ELN Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, and partial LIMK1: Phenotype comparison with typical Williams St George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 7South East Scotland Clinical Genetics syndrome Services Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 8Division of Genetics Y. Muramatsu1,2, H. Kakizawa3, K. Shimizu4, H. Ohashi4, S. Hayashi5, J. Inazawa5, S. and Molecular Medicine, King’s College London School of Medicine, Guy’s Hospital, Mizuno1; London, United Kingdom. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan, 3Division of Neurology, Aichi Children‘s Health and Medical Center, Obu, Japan, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Saitama Children‘s Medical Center, Saitama, In 2000 Steiner & Marques reported a girl with short stature, unusual faces Japan, 5Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute and School of and intellectual disability who developed hypertrichosis cubiti and hyper- Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. trichosis of the legs and back. They reported similarities to an individual previously reported by Wiedemann with pre- and post- natal growth defici- ency, developmental delay and a distinctive facial appearance. Three further Williams syndrome (WS) is a contiguous gene syndrome commonly caused individuals were subsequently reported with a distinctive facial appearance, by a 1.5-Mb deletion involving ELN located at 7q11.23. Over 99% of indivi- hypertrichosis and severe developmental delay under the classification of duals with WS can be diagnosed using a commercially available fluorescence Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. in situ hybridisation (FISH) probe for ELN and LIMK1. This report docu- In 2012 our group reported that de novo mutations in the histone methyl- ments the case of a 7-year-old girl with a WS-like phenotype. Commercial transferase MLL underlie a distinct phenotype of hypertrichosis cubiti, short FISH failed to detect the deletion, but subsequent analysis revealed an aty- stature, intellectual disability and a distinctive facial appearance consistent pical interstitial 1.1-Mb deletion of 7q11.23 containing the whole ELN gene with a diagnosis of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. Other associated features and a part of the LIMK1 gene. were feeding difficulties, behavioural difficulties, skeletal abnormalities and She was born of healthy parents at 40 weeks gestation. She had failure to cardiac defects. However due to the small number of individuals with MLL thrive and severe developmental delay. Her craniofacial dysmorphology was mutations, information regarding the associated phenotypic and mutational slightly different from that seen in WS, but she had a history of peripheral spectrum was limited. pulmonary stenosis, rectal prolapse, and skeletal features similar to those We have screened further individuals for mutations in MLL and recruitment seen in WS. She also had hyperacusis, tactile hyperesthesia, and extreme to our study is on going. We have also identified individuals with MLL mu- fearfulness, but did not have overfriendliness. Her motor, cognitive, and lan- tations through the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) project, guage delays were universal, and at the chronological age of 5 years and 11 which utilises array CGH analysis and exome sequencing in individuals with months, her developmental age was 1 year and 8 months. developmental disorders. Microarray analysis demonstrated that more genes were involved in the The expansion of the clinical spectrum including detailed information on upstream region and were conserved in the downstream region in this case growth, behaviour and feeding together with the mutational spectrum seen than in cases of typical WS. FISH and microarray analysis should be perfor- in individuals with MLL mutations will be presented. The phenotype of tho- med even when an individual shows subtle features of WS. Such analyses se individuals identified through non-targeted screening, as part of the DDD w Y.i lMl aulrsaom haetlspu d: eNfoinnee. t Hhe. Kpahkeinzaowtyap: eN-ogneen.o Kty. pSeh icmorizrue:l aNtioonne .i nH .W OSh.ashi: project, will be compared with the phenotype of those individuals identified None. S. Hayashi: None. J. Inazawa: None. S. Mizuno: None. f Wol.lDow. Jionnge csl:i nNicoinaen. Mph. eMncoEtnyptaignagr.t: None. C. Deshpande: None. M. Holder- Espinasse: None. S. Smithson: None. F.V. Elmslie: None. K. Tatton Brown: None. D.R. FitzPatrick: None. D.D.D. Project: None. M.A. Simpson: None.  P02
.137 Williams-Beuren syndrome in the Tunisian population: A cohort of 33 patients  P02
.135 I. Ouertani, M. Chaabouni, F. Maazoul, M. Trabelsi, L. Kraoua, R. Meddeb, R. Mrad, H. Smaller and larger deletions of the Williams Beuren syndrome region Chaabouni; implicate genes involved in mild facial phenotype, epilepsy and Department of congenital and hereditary disorders, tunis, Tunisia. autistic traits C. Fusco1, L. Micale1, B. Augello1, M. Pellico1, D. Menghini2, P. Alfieri2, M. Digilio3, B. Mandriani1,4, S. Vicari2, g. merla1,5; Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a rare multi-system genomic disorder, 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2IRCCS Children Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 3IRCCS Children Hospital Bambino Gesù, San caused by 7q11.23 microdeletion with a prevalence of 1/7500-1/20,000 Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 5University of Trieste, live births. Trieste, Italy. Clinical phenotype includes typical facial dysmorphism (elfin face), mental retardation associated with a peculiar neuropsychological profile and con- genital heart defects. Other signs are occasional like ocular, skeletal, renal Williams Beuren syndrome is a multisystemic disorder caused by a hemizy- and dental anomalies. g 1o 1us 8 deletion of 1.5Mb on chromosome 7q11.23 EspSaHnnGin g2 2081 g3e n| ePsA. AR feISw, FRH Aer Ne Cin E, w | e W pr Wes Wen .t E 3  S3
 H W GB .S O T Run Gisian patients. The mean age at diagnosis was 4,7 years. All patients showed facial dysmorphisms.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 67% (21/33) have cardiovascular anomaly, supravalvular aortic stenosis plasma membrane, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria and peroxysomes. (10/21) and peripheral pulmonary stenosis (11/21) are equally found. No particular deposits were noted in the cytosol and intracellular compart- Various degrees of mental retardation were present and a normal intelli- ments. The girl died at the age of 20 months after a severe infectious respi- gence was found in a single patient; evaluation of developmental milestones ratory distress. revealed various grades of developmental delay in all the patients younger Interestingly, similar clinical conditions have been reported (two unrelated than 6 years. The unique cognitive profile was found in 15/25 of our pati- Polish children (1) and two sibs born to consanguineous Jewish parents ents. (2)). This highlights the existence of a common genetic defect, more likely Ocular anomalies (12/33) were less frequent than described, the skeletal tRoe bfeer etrnacnessm:itted in an autosomal recessive pattern, underlying this novel anomalies too (10/33). Dental malformations are frequent (23/28). syndrome expanding the spectrum of the Zellweger phenotype. Idiopathic hypercalcemia was present in 50% of children less than one year (3/6). 1. Pietrzyk JJ et al. Two siblings with phenotypes mimicking peroxisomal WBS is a rare disorder, cardinal signs (facial dysmorphism, mental retardati- disorders but with discordant biochemical findings. Clin Pediatr 1990;29: on and cardiovascular defects) were found in our patient n the same propor- 479-484 tions than described. The occasional clinical signs have proportion different 2. Ahn JK et al. A new autosomal recessive syndrome with Zellweger-like of precedent reported like hypercalcemia, ocular and dental anomalies. mE.a Cnihfeasbtcahtoiounbs:. NAomn eJ .M I. eCdh Gabencheot uAb. :2 N00on3e ;.1  L1
.9 GAh(o3r)b:3a5l:2 N-5o.ne. A. Peeters: The identification of the different clinical signs in WBS patients permits to None. P.P. Van Veldhoven: None. J.P. Fryns: None. e I.s tOaubelirsthan ai :s Ntroantee.g My .o Cf fhoalalobwou unpi:. None. F. Maazoul: None. M. Trabelsi: None. L. Kraoua: None. R. Meddeb: None. R. Mrad: None. H. Chaabouni: None.  P03
.01 Gene conversion by non-allelic homologous recombination between CRYBB2 and CRYBB2P responsible for autosomal-dominant  P02
.138 congenital cerulean cataract in a Bulgarian child Translocation of X;autosome and pattern of X-inactivation L. T. Balabanski1, S. Ivanov1, R. Vujarova1, I. Petkova2, A. Popova2, P. Vasileva3, M. A. M. Mohamed1, M. S. Zaki1, A. K. Kamel1, G. Gillesson2, A. Caliebe3, M. Mekkawy1, P. Malinov1, D. Toncheva4,1; Safwat1, R. Siebert3, I. Mazen1; 1Malinov Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Aleksandrovska Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Akademik 1National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität Pashev Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. zu Luebeck, Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Christian- Albrechts-University Kiel & University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel,, Kiel, Germany. Congenital cataracts are among the most common causes of blindness in children world-wide. We report on a 3-year old Bulgarian girl with an auto- somal-dominant cerulean cataract. After obtaining informed consent from The aim of this study was to correlate genotype/phenotype in Xp terminal her parents, genomic DNA was isolated from blood and was scanned on an deletion and to reveal the pattern of X inactivation in X autosome transloca- IlluminaL iRSPca5nL system using a HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip as a scanning tion. We report on a 4 years old girl and presented with developmental delay, panel. AL RlaPr5g,e ~200-kb deletion was detected in chromosome 22 encompas- seizures and obvious autistic behavior .She had dysmorphic facies and large sing the gene. Although mutations in the gLeRnPe5 tLhat it shares similarity hairy nevus in her forearm. Her Brain CT showed complete agenesis of the with - lead to another ophthal mological disorder, familial exudative corpus callosum and EEG records showed bilateral epileptogenic focus. She vitreoretinopathy, it is unlikely that the loss of itself has resulted in has a karyotype of 45,X,t(X;14)(p22;p11), both parents had normal karyo- the observed phenotype, as this geneencodes only one of thLeR fPo5uLr extracel- type. FISH analysis using Xp subtelomere, Shox, XIST gene, and subtelomere lular beta-propeller domains oCfR LYRBPB52, and does not have the other functio- 14 revealed Ish t(X;14)(Xpter-,Xp22-). The active centromere belongs to the nal domains, nor the extracellulaCrR YsiBgBn2aPl peptide sequence. is, howe- chromosome 14. Array CGH using Agilent detected a 2Mb loss in Xp22.33 ver, locatedC RjuYsBt Bb2etween the , mutations in which lead to cerulean and 4,5Mb gain in Xp22.2p22.12. The deleted region contains 12 genes of cataracts, and the pseudogene CRYBB2P, which shares 97% sequence ho- which CSFRA and Shox are known as OMIM Morbid Genes. The duplicated mCRoYloBgBy2 to . Non-allelic homologoLuRsP r5eLcombination introducing the region contains 7 OMIM morbid Genes. We used late replicating chromatin accumulated mutations of the pseudogene into the sequeLnRceP 5oLf technique to detect the pattern of X inactivation. we found that 70% of the would lead exactly to the loss of situated between them. RT- translocated X is the inactive one, in the same time the translocated chro- qPCR analysis ofC tRhYeB pBa2rents showed that both ChRaYdB twB2oP copies of the mosome 14 escape inactivation, while in 30% the normal X is the inactivate gene, while the girl had only one. This proves that gene conversion between one leaving the abnormal X as the active one. The clinical picture may be the paralogous and the pseudogene is the mechanism affected by the haploinsufficiency of the genes that are known to escape X cLa.uT.s iBnagl acbearunslekai:n N coantaer. aSc.t Isv, aanso pvr:e Nvoionues. lRy. t Vhuejoarriosvead:. None. I. Petkova: inactivation and lie within the deleted region (Xp22.33), or it is affected by None. A. Popova: None. P. Vasileva: None. M. Malinov: None. D. Toncheva: duplicated genes (Xp22.2p22.12) on the abnormal X when it was the active None. o An.eM. .W Meo rheacmoemdm: Neonnde s. tMud.Sy. oZfa gkei:n Neo enxep. rAe.sKs.i oKna mofe tlh: Nosoen eg.e Gne. sG.illesson: None. A. Caliebe: None. M. Mekkawy: None. P. Safwat: None. R. Siebert: None. I. Mazen: None.  P03
.02 Identification of Novel Homozygous Deletions in Consanguineous Pedigrees as a Shortcut to Candidate Gene Discovery in Hereditary  P02
.139 Blindness Developmental delay , facial dysmorphism and hypotonia in a 9 K. Van Schil1, T. De Ravel2, B. P. Leroy3,1, H. Verdin1, F. Coppieters1, F. Meire4, E. De Baere1; month old Tunisian girl: a Zellweger-like syndrome? 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for E. Chabchoub1, I. Chabchoub2, L. Ghorbal3, A. Peeters4, P. P. Van Veldhoven4, J. P. Fryns5; Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 3Center for Medical 1Department of Immunogenetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sousse, Sousse, Genetics, Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Tunisia, 2Department of Peadiatric Oncology, University Hospital Farhat Hached, Sousse, 4Department of Ophthalmolgy, Huderf, Brussels, Belgium. Tunisia, 3Department of Radiation therapy, University hospital Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Department of cell metabolism, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. Purpose: To identify the underlying genetic cause in 25 pre-screened pati- ents of consanguineous origin, diagnosed with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (ARRP) or Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) using identity-by- A 9 month old girl born by caesarean section to non consanguineous Tuni- descent (IBD) mapping. To demonstrate the power of mapping of homozy- sian parents is referred for developmental delay, hypotonia, failure to thrive gous deletions as a shortcut to candidate gene identification in retinal dys- and dysmorphic features with high forehead, broad nasal bridge hyper- trophies (RDs). telorism and micrognathia. These clinical features are typically seen in the Methods: IBD mapping was performed by genome-wide SNP chip analysis, Cerebro-hepato-renal syndrome (also known as Zellweger syndrome(ZS)). data analysis by PLINK. Deletions were confirmed by conventional PCR, se- However, she had no hepatosplenomegaly. She was hospitalised since birth gregation analysis was performed by qPCR. for recurrent respiratory distress. Brain imaging showed agenesis of the REYesSults: Homozygous deletions were identified in 3 out of 25 famREilRieGs. The corpus callosum and karyotype was normal. Metabolic investigations sho- first deletion (133 kb) removes the first noGnR-IcDo2ding exon of the known gene wed normal very long chain fatty acids and normal plasmalogen synthesis. . The second deletion (112 kb) disrupts the last 3 exons of . The No mitochondrial defect could be detected. Transmission electron micro- ultrastructE uS raH mG r2 p0 ho1 l3 | P alA cR haI nS g, F R ofA thN CEt |h iWrd WonWe (.4 E1
S6 H kbG) .iOs aR pGartial deletion of , which leads to an in-f1ra1m9e scopy did not show abnormal l o og ic e s eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index EYS RERG dGeRlIeDti2on (p.Gly30_Glu81del). p.Cys759Phe=34.2yr (p=0.06) Non-coding delReEtiRoGns of have not yet been described. As to the and Night blindness onset: Usher I=9.8yr; Usher II=17.8yr; c.2299delG=19.1yr; genes, both are regulated by the transcription factor GCRRIXD 2(Corbo et p.Cys759Phe=25.2yr (p=0.08) al., 2010). The deletion was found in a homozygous state in unaffected Visual field loss onset: Usher I=11.7yr; Usher II=22.4yr; c.2299delG=21.4yr; siblings however, whose clinical status needs to be revisited. encodes p.Cys759Phe=27.7yr (p=0.07) a neurotransmitter receptor. While a homozygous mutation in mouse was Visual acuity loss onset: Usher I=13.7yr; Usher II=25.5yr (p<0.00); found to be lethal, the in-frame deletion found here might represent a hy- c.2299delG=24.2yr; p.Cys759Phe=30.7yr pomorpEhYiSc allele. Hearing loss age and severity: c.2299delG=8.5yr; mild 15.4%, moderate Conclusions: This study revealed involvement of a homozygous 5’UTR dele- 71.8% and profound 12.8%; p.Cys759Phe=29.2yr; mild 45.5% and mode- tion of in ARRP, and uncovered potential novel candidate genes for RDs. rated 55.5%. Onset p<10-4. We demonstrated that homozygous deletion detection in consanguineous Conclusions families might be a powerful approach for gene discovery in hereditary Visual and audiological impairment is more severe on Usher type I than on bKli.n Vdanne Sssc.hil: None. T. De Ravel: None. B.P. Leroy: None. H. Verdin: None. F. type II, p<10-4 for every item analysed. Coppieters: None. F. Meire: None. E. De Baere: None. c.2299delG associated phenotype is similar to the general phenotype found on Usher II patients. Although is only significant for audiological impair- ment (p<10-4), p.Cys759Phe seems to be associated with milder Usher II 
P03 .03 pFh. eBnlaontycpoe-K.elly: None. T. Jaijo: None. E. Aller: None. A. Avila Fernandez: None. P. Fernández San José: None. B. García Sandoval: None. A. Giménez: Correlation between phenotype and genotype in diabetic retinopathy None. M. Corton: None. J. Millán: None. C. Ayuso: None. M. J. Simões1, S. Carmona1, S. Nunes2, C. Lobo2,3, J. Cunha-Vaz2, C. Faro1, C. Egas1; 1Genoinseq, Biocant – Biotechnology Innovation Center, Cantanhede, Portugal, 2AIBILI - Association for Innovation and Biomedical Research on Light and Image, Coimbra, Portugal, 3IBILI / FMUC - Institute of Biomedical Research on Light and Image / Faculty 
P03 .06 of Medicine, Coimbra University, Coimbra, Portugal. Disease mechanism in the Usher syndrome S. Dad1, N. D. Rendtorff2, M. Larsen3, L. Tranebjærg4, L. B. Møller1; 1Rigshospitalet-Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Copenhagen University, Diabetic retinopathy (DR), a microvascular complication of diabetes, is one Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Rigshospitalet-Kennedy Center- Glostrup Hospital-Copenhagen of the most frequent eye diseases in the world. Different patterns of progres- University, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Copenhagen University- Bispebjerg Hospital, sion are observed in patients with similar metabolic control and duration of Copenhagen, Denmark. the disease, suggesting the involvement of genetic components. Aim: A case-control association study was performed to identify genetic biomar- kers that can predict DR progression in type 2 diabetic patients. To obtain a better understanding of the unknown disease mechanisms, A population of 307 type 2 diabetic patients with DR, followed-up during wBahcickhg rleoaudnsd t:o development of blindness and deafness in Usher syndrome a 2 years prospective study, was classified in 3 different phenotypes of DR (USH). progression (phenotypes A, B, C) based on non-invasive methods. .USH is clinically is divided into three types, USH1, USH2 and The genes ACE, AGER, AKR1B1, ICAM1, MTHFR, NO
S1 , NO
S3 , PPARG
C1 A, USH3. To date 9 genes and 3 novel loci have been identified for USH syn- TGFB1, TNF and VEGFA were chosen as candidates based on literature sear- drome. ches. The SNPs described for these genes were filtered through bioinfor- 1) At the Kennedy Center we have a database with Usher affected persons matics tools to identify the polymorphisms with a high probability of as- and many of these have not been genotyped. We will try to genotype as many sociation with pathogenic traits. The 172 SNPs selected were genotyped in as possible by screening the DNA for all known USH mutations. the 307 patient samples using the TaqMan OpenArray Genotyping Platform 2) We have a Danish consanguineous family of Dutch descent with 5 affec- from Life Technologies. The genotype distribution was analyzed for the 3 ted. We performed homozygosity mapping with SNP array and identified a phenotypes using the Pearson test and/or the Fisher’s exact test. Phenotype homozygous region, where all affecteUdS Hw1eHr e homoDzFyNgoBu4s8 and tUhSeH n2on-af- A, the one with a lower DR progression, was used as the reference. fected heterozygous. The region was located at chr 15: 60.51 Mb- 67.84 Mb. Statistically significant differences between the reference and the worst Some of this region overlapped both locus, and locus phenotypes were found for SNPs in ACE, AGER and NO
S1 . The identification and we screened all the genes in this overlapped region but did not identi- of these biomarkers, associated with a more rapid DR progression and visi- fied any pathogenic variants. We performed then a targeted Next Generation on worsening, could open new perspectives for the clinical management of Sequencing of the region and did not identify any mutation either. Exome t Mhe.Js.e S pimatõieenst:s N.one. S. Carmona: None. S. Nunes: None. C. Lobo: None. J. sequencing has also been performed. Cunha-Vaz: None. C. Faro: None. C. Egas: None. 3) For the purpose of making a new treatment with aminoglycoside, which can suppress a prematuinre v isttroopcodoinn vsiovo t.he translation will continue and a partial functionally protein will be made. We will try this setup with two kSn. oDwand :U NSoHn eg.e Nn.eDs. bRoetnhd torff: N oanned. M. Larsen: None. L. Tranebjærg: 
P03 .05 None. L.B. Møller: None. USHER Syndrome Clinical Aspects in Spain: Genotype-phenotype correlation of USHA2 gene frequent mutations F. Blanco-Kelly1, T. Jaijo2, E. Aller2, A. Avila Fernandez1, P. Fernández San José1, B. García Sandoval1, A. Giménez1, M. Corton1, J. Millán2, C. Ayuso1; 
P03 .07 1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. CY
P1 B1 mutational screening in a portuguese cohort of primary congenital glaucoma patients S. Carmona1, M. J. Simões1, E. Silva2, C. Egas1; Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by reti- 1Genoinseq, Biocant – Biotechnology Innovation Center, Cantanhede, Portugal, nitis pigmentosa and bilateral sensorineural hearing loss with (type I), wit- 2Department of Ophthalmology, Coimbra University Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal. hout (type II) or variable (type III) impairment of vestibular function. We aim to describe: 1-the cardinal phenotypic characteristics and diffe- rences among Usher I and II of a Spanish Usher patients cohort and 2-to Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), a rare but severe form of glaucoma, is perform a phenotype-genotype correlation for most frequent mutations in characterized by a high intraocular pressure during the neonatal or early USHA2 gene. infantile period. If not promptly treated, the optic nerves are irreversibly Methods: 201 unrelated Usher Spanish families (271 patients) were studied damaged, causing permanent vision loss. using genotyping microarray (Usher, Asper-Biotech) and/or automatic se- Mutations in CY
P1 B1 gene are the major cause of PCG. To determine the quencing of Usher genes. incidence and spectrum of CY
P1 B1 mutations in Portuguese PCG patients, Diagnosis and type classification was based on pedigree data, ophthalmolo- translated and untranslated regions from 29 affected individuals were ana- gic, audiological and vestibular examination. lyzed by direct sequencing. Phenotype (Usher I -N=56- or Usher II -N=215- clear diagnosis patients) Nine disease causing mutations were identified in 69% (20/29) of the pa- and phenotype-genotype correlation for c.2299delG and p.Cys759Phe were tients. CY
P1 B1 mutations were homozygous in 31% (9/29) and compound assessed. heterozygous in 38% (11/29). Found mutations included 5 frameshifts Results: Frequent USH2A gene mutations, carrier frequencies: (c880delG, c1410del13, c1546dup10, c1691delG, c1749dup27), 3 missen- c.2299delG=36.9% (31/84) and p.Cys759Phe=15.5% (13/84). ses (Leu378Gln, Glu387Lys, Pro437Leu) and 1 nonsense (Arg444Term). A1g2e0s at Diagnosis: Usher I=14.6yr; Usher II=27E.4SyHr; Gc. 2220991d3e l|G =
P2 A7R.5IySr;, FRTAheN c
C8 E80
 |d WelGW mWut.aEtiSoHn Gwa.Os iRdGentified as a predominant CY P1
B1 alleleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.10 Run of homozygosity and candidate gene sequencing identify the among the Portuguese patients. All mutations segregated with the disease first unequivocal stop mutation in CNGB1 responsible for retinitis phenotype, being consistent with the autosomal recessive form, described pigmentosa 45 for the disease, in complete penetrance. M. Fradin1, A. Ziegler2, D. Hannouche-Bared3, E. Colin2, S. Biskup4, C. Wilhelm4, A. Despite the high incidence of CY P1
B1 mutations in our patients, 31% (9/29) Guichet2, S. Odent1,5, D. Bonneau2,6; were negative for mutations in this gene. These patients represent an exci- 1Service de Génétique Clinique, centre de référence CLAD-Ouest, CHU Rennes, ting opportunity to explore alternative pathogenetic mechanisms involved Rennes, France, 2Service de Génétique, CLAD-Ouest, CHU d‘Angers, Angers, France, 3Ophtalmologie, Clinique Saint Laurent, Rennes, France, 4CEGAT, Tübingen, Germany, in PCG and, therefore, their whole exomes are now being sequenced. 5Faculte de Medecine, Universite Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 6Faculte de Medecine, Since mutations in CY P1
B1 gene are the major cause of PCG in the Portugue- Universite d‘Angers, Angers, France. se population, CY P1
B1 mutational screening in PCG patients and at-risk re- latives, should be performed as a tool to assist the medical community in the management of this disease. Early diagnosis, along with prompt and surgi- Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of inherited disorders in which abnor- c Sa.l Cinatremrvoennat:i oNno,n ree. sMu.lJt .i nS ibmeõtteesr: pNroongen. oEs. iSs.ilva: None. C. Egas: None. malities of the photoreceptors or the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) of the retina lead to progressive visual loss. RP are genetically heterogeneous disorders caused by more than 40 different genes for isolated RP and more  P03
.08 than 50 different genes for syndromic RP. Prevalence of RDS peripherin mutations in Tunisian families with Mutations in CNGB1 encoding the beta-subunit of the rod cGMP-gated chan- autosomal retinal dystrophies nel are responsible for an autosomal recessive form of RP (R P45
). However, F. Ouechtati1,2, K. Baklouti1,3, S. Abdelhak2, L. El Matri1; mutations in CNGB1 have been reported only three times in the literature. 1Institut Hedi Rais d‘Ophtalmologie de Tunis, Bab Saadoun, Tunisia, 2Institut Pasteur, We studied a 51-year-old patient of French origin affected with an isolated Tunis, Tunisia, 3Hopital Régional, Nabeul, Tunisia. RP and born to consanguineous parents (f = 1/32). Run of homozygosity (ROH) was done using SNP-array (CytoSN P12
, Illu- mina, with 300,000 markers including 200,000 SNP) in the proband and Purpose: To evaluate the relevance of RDS gene in Tunisian families dis- her 2 healthy brothers. After segregation analysis, the largest LOH that was playing an inter- and intra- familial clinical heterogeneity in retinal dystro- only present in the affected patient was a 23MB region at chromosome phies. 16q12.1q23 containing CNGB1. Methods: Blood samples were obtained from four families including 12 avai- Sequencing of CNGB1 evidenced a homozygous stop mutation, p.W313X. lable patients presenting with 6 retinal dystrophies, and 3 healthy relatives. Until now, only 3 homozygous mutations have been reported in CNGB1: two Each patient underwent a detailed clinical examination. Genomic DNA was missense mutations (Bareil et al, 2001;Simpson, 2011) and one frameshift extracted from the blood samples and screened for mutations in RDS peri- mutation in exon 32 (Kondo et al, 2004; Becirovic, 2010). pherin gene. The mutation reported here is therefore the fourth pathogenic mutation in Results: Sequence analysis of the human RDS/peripherin gene led to the CNGB1 and the first unequivocal stop mutation in this gene confirming its identification of five non disease-causing changes Vall06Val, Glu304Gln, i Mm.p Flircaadtiino:n N ionn ReP. A 4.5 Z.iegler: None. D. Hannouche-Bared: None. E. Colin: Lys310Arg, Gly338Asp and IV S3
+15 C>T. None of them could explain the None. S. Biskup: None. C. Wilhelm: None. A. Guichet: None. S. Odent: significant phenotypic differences between retinitis pigmentosa, fundus fla- None. D. Bonneau: None. vimaculatus, bull’s eye maculopathy, related Stargardt disease retinopathies and retinitis punctata albescens. Conclusions: This study showed that RDS mutations have a low prevalence  P03
.11 in retinal dystrophies. The frequency of peripherin mutations appears to be Isolated dominant familial ectopia lentis and FBN1 mutation: similar to Italian (0-1.4%), Indonesian and Japenese populations (0-1.9%). variability of expression and interest in clinical surveillance To our knowledge, this is the first report to identify frequencies of RDS mu- E. Halimi1, E. Laumonier2, C. Decaesteckere1, N. Hanna3, C. Boileau3, S. Manouvrier1, C. t Fa.t iOounesc ihnt aretit:i Nnaoln dey. sKt.r Bopakhlioeus tpi:a Ntioennet.s S in. A Tbudneilshiaa.k: None. L. El Matri: None. Vincent-Delorme1; 1Clinique de génétique médicale « Guy Fontaine », Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Service d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital Claude Huriez, Lille, France, 3Département de génétique, IFR 94 - Institut de Recherche Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.  P03
.09 Genome-wide association study in animal model of vision disorders S. J. Ahonen1,2,3, H. Lohi1,2,3; 1Department of Basic Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Most of the time, congenital ectopia lentis (EL) are part of syndromic diseases 2Research Programs Units, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, such as Marfan Syndrome, Homocystinuria, Weill-Marchesani Syndrome, Finland, 3The Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland. etc. However, in 8% of cases, some can be isolated and are mostly familial. Both inheritance are observed: 64% of them, autosomal dominant, are lin- ked to FBN1 while 18%, autosomal recessive, are linked to ADAMTS L4
. Purebred dogs suffer from hereditary vision disorders, which resembles We report the case of a FBN1 mutation associated with a familial isolated corresponding disorders in humans. Our study has focused on the genetics EL. of retinal dysplasia (RD) and vitreous degeneration (VD) in two different The diagnosis of isolated EL was made in a ten years old propositus, du- dog breeds, American Cocker Spaniel (ACS) and Italian Greyhound (IT), re- ring a routine eye examination. The dominant character of the disease was spectively. Both disorders are known to be inherited in the breeds, but the established through the production of the Pedigree. Therefore, an ophthal- genetic background has remained unknown. Both disorders may cause visi- mologic examination was performed in the first-degree relatives and FBN1 on deterioration and secondary complications may include glaucoma, lens molecular analysis was performed in the propositus. luxation and retinal detachment, which in turn may lead to a complete blind- A heterozygous missense mutation was identified. This mutation was pre- ness. We have established a large sample cohort for multifocal RD in ACS and viously described in another Chinese family by positional cloning. There- for VD in IT. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed using fore, this is the first time it is reported in a Caucasian family, using direct canine specific SNP array to map the associated loci in both disorders. FBN1 sequencing. Then, it was researched in relatives at risk of developing The GWAS data identified a genome-widely significant association for MRD an EL, especially in asymptomatic subjects who also received ophthalmolo- in ACS on canine chromosome 22 (CFA22) with praw=1.9*10-5, pgenome=0.01 gic examination. and a tentative association, with a 2 Mb homozygous haplotype, for VD in IT Because this affection can go unnoticed to become evident and symptomatic on CFA15 with praw=5.1x10-5, pgenome=0.27. Further replication studies are at a variable age, the molecular diagnosis allowed us, in this case, to provide being performed to confirm and to define the associated regions. a better surveillance of mutated patients, together with an early detection Two novel loci were mapped for two canine vision disorders. Ongoing can- of EL, then to prevent them from serious complications, and, on the other didate gene sequencing is likely to open new insights to the molecular back- h Ea.n Hda, ltiom ri:e Nasosnuer. eE n. oLnau-mmuotnaiteerd: Nsounbeje. cCt.s D. ecaesteckere: None. N. Hanna: ground of the studied conditions. The identification of genes behind these None. C. Boileau: None. S. Manouvrier: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. disorders will establish a large animal model for the corresponding human disorders and the associated genes can be studied in humans. While the as- sociated genes will become candidates for human studies, a genetic test can b Se. Jo.f Afehroende fno:r Nthoen es.t uHd. iLeodh bi:r Eee. dOsw.nership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Genoscoper Ltd. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 121ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.12 Severe Congenital High Myopia Mapped to Chromosome 1. VDR Y. Perez1, L. Gradstein2, O. S. Birk1,3; multivariate statistics. RESULATPSO: AT1he medium myopia was associated with 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, the carrying of -3731A-allele and +6196V8DTRT-genotype. Also, it was as- Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Department of socAiPatOeAd1 with the carrying of -75A-aClOleLl1eA, a1nd the female sex. The high Ophthalmology, Soroka Medical Center and Clalit Health Services, Faculty of Health myopia was associated with the carrying of -3731A-allele, the carrying Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Genetics Institute, of -75A-allele, and the carrying of -1997T-allele. Collagen ty- Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel. peI alpha1 is the main component of the eye sclera matrix, and is known as an eye growth GO-signal. Apolipoprotein A1 is the transporter of chole- sterol, a precursor of the 25(OH)2vitaminD3, and is supposed to be a STOP- Myopia is the most common human eye disorder and constitutes a signi- signal of eye growth. The function of the vitam.in D receptor in eye tissues ficant public health concern. Specifically, high myopia is a leading cause of is not clear. But it is known, that receptor activated with 25(OH)2 VviDtaRminD3 visual impairment and blindness worldwide because of its associated ocu- inhibits indirectly expression of collagen typeI So, we hypothesize that vit- lar comorbidities of retinal detachment, macular degeneration, premature amin D receptor might be a STOP-signal of the eye growth, and poly- cataract, and glaucoma. We have previously demonstrated that monogenic morphism together with vitamin D or ultraviolet deficiency might be a cause high myopia can be caused from mutations in LEPRE L1
, encoding a collagen o Af .aNx. iVaol mitoyvoicphia: Nino cnhei. lRdr. eBna.nnour: None. T.S. Razorenova: None. V.V. hydroxylase. Two remotely related consanguineous Israeli Bedouin fami- Brzheskii: None. V.I. Larionova: None. lies presented with an apparently autosomal-recessive phenotype of non- syndromic severe myopia. Using polymorphic markers, homozygosity of af- fected individuals at loci of candidate genes, including LEPRE L1
, was ruled  P03
.15 out. Genome wide linkage analysis identified a ~4 Mb disease-associated Molecular Analysis of TYR, P, TYR P1
 , SL C45
A2 and GPR143 Genes in locus on chromosome 1 between rs1970168 and rs636877. Whole exome s Ye.q Pueerneczi:n Ngo onfe a. fLfe. cGtreadd isntediinv:i dNuoanles. iOs .uSn. dBeirrkw: aNyo.ne. the Italian Reference Centre for Patients with Oculocutaneous and Ocular Albinism. P. Primignani1, L. Mauri1, S. Penco1, L. Barone1, A. Del Longo2, M. Mazza2, G. Marsico2, M. C. Patrosso1, E. Piozzi2;  P03
.13 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Niguarda Ca Granda Hospital., Milan, Italy, 2Pediatric A genome-wide association study provides evidence for association of Ophtalmology, Niguarda Ca Granda Hospital., Milan, Italy. chromosome 8p23 (MY P10
) and 10q21.1(MY P15
) with high myopia W. Meng1, J. Butterworth2, D. Bradley1, A. Hughes1, V. Soler3, P. Calvas3, F. Malecaze3; 1Queen‘s University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2Newcastle University, Newcastle, Since April 2006 a cohort of 216 OCA or OA subjects were recruited from the United Kingdom, 3Purpan Hospital, Toulouse, France. Medical Genetic Unit and the Department of Pediatric Ophtalmology of the Niguarda Ca’ Granda Hospital of Milan (Italy). TYR, P-protein, TYR P1
, SL C45
A2 and GPR143 genes, associated to the diffe- PURPOSE. Myopia is a complex trait affected by both genetic and envi- rent phenotypes OCA1, OCA2, OCA3, OCA4 and OA1, have been characteri- ronmental factors. High myopia is associated with increased risk of sight- zed by sequencing analysis. threatening eye disorders such as retinal detachment. The purpose of this Furthermore in order to detect the presence of TYR and P genomic rear- genome-wide association study was to identify susceptibility genes contri- rangements (deletion/duplication), MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent buting to high myopia in the French population. Probe Amplification) assay was performed. METHODS. High myopic cases were genotyped using Affymetrix SNP 6.0 After clinical examination and instrumental evaluation by our Ophthalmo- chips and population controls were selected from GABRIEL French dataset logic Centre, all patients received a genetic counselling and signed an infor- in which samples were genotyped by Illumina Human610 quad array. The med consent. association study was conducted using 152,234 single nucleotide polymor- Up to date the complete analysis of the four genes associated with OCA phe- phisms that were present on both manufacturers’ chips in 192 high myopic notype was performed on 117 patients. We identified TYR mutations/dele- cases and 1064 controls to identify associated regions. tions in 84 patients, P mutations/deletions in 19 patients, TYR P1
 pathologi- RESULTS. Statistical risk associations were found in the 8p23 (MY P10
) and cal alterations in 2 children, SL C45
A2 mutations in 5 patients. 10q21.1 (MY P15
) regions. Rs189798 (8p23) and rs11005665 (10q21.1) Only 7 OCA patients (6%) remained molecularly undiagnosed showed the strongest associations in the associated regions (P=6.64x10-7 We also analyzed for GPR143 gene 8 male patients with a probable OA1 phe- and P=2.77x10-5, respectively). The imputed results at 8p23 showed 2 notype, possibly X-linked segregating, we found pathological DNA variation peaks of interest. One region spanned 130kb including rs189798 between in all of them. MIR4660 and PP P1
R3B with the most significant association at rs17155227 The mutations identified in this study are missense and nonsense, small de- (P=1.12x10-10). The second novel peak located in the middle of MIR124-1 letions/duplications, splicing defects and gross deletions. and MSRA gene was only 4kb in length with the highest association at TYR gene sequencing has already been performed on the remaining 91 OCA rs55864141 (P=1.36x10-7). The peak of the imputed 10q21.1 region was patients and no mutations have been identified. The analysis of the other ge- located in the same region as non-imputed dataset between ZWINT and nes is currently in progress. Our preliminary results indicate that the OCA1 MIR3924, and was 160kb in length with rs3107503 having the lowest P va- f Pre. qPuriemnicgyn arenai:c Nheosn ea.t Lle. aMsat utrhie: N4o0n%e. iSn. oPuern ccoou: nNtorny.e. L. Barone: None. A. lue (P=1.62x10-7). Del Longo: None. M. Mazza: None. G. Marsico: None. M.C. Patrosso: None. E. CONCLUSION. we found that 8p23 (MY P10
) and 10p21.1 (MY P15
) are as- Piozzi: None. sociated with high myopia in French population and significantly refined 2 a Wss. oMceiantge:d N looncie.. J. Butterworth: None. D. Bradley: None. A. Hughes: None. V. Soler: None. P. Calvas: None. F. Malecaze: None.  P03
.16 Peripapillary Chorioretinal Lacunae in an Autosomal Microdeletion Syndrome  P03
.14 R. Gavrilova, E. M. Broomall, D. L. Renaud, R. Ghadban, M. C. Brodsky; Vitamin D receptor signaling and the axial myopia in children Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. A. N. Voitovich1, R. Bannour1, T. S. Razorenova2, V. V. Brzheskii1, V. I. Larionova2,3; 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2North-Western State Medical University n.a. I.I. Mechnikov, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Chorioretinal lacunae (PCRL) consist of well-circumscribed, full-thickness Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian defects of retinal pigment epithelium and choroid, with intact overlying re- Federation. tina. Although pathognomonic for Aicardi syndrome (AS), PCRL are seen in other conditions including microcephaly with chorioretinal degeneration, oral-facial-digital, oculo-auricular syndromes. The main reason for myopia in CcOhLil1dAr1en is the eyeball ove,r VgrDoRw th in the AS is characterized by agenesis of corpus callosum, seizures and PCRL. Inhe- anteropost,e riorA dPirOeAc1ti on. The aim of this study was to investigate an asso- ritance is presumed X-linked dominant but causative gene is unknown. We ciation of gene polymorphisms G-1997T, G+1245T А-3731G, present girl without the classic AS triad who had PCRL due to chromosome T+61968С and G-75A, C+83T with the development and severity of 3 microdeletion. axial myopia in children. We examined 53 girls and 24 boys aged 4 to 17 yo: 18 month old girl was evaluated for speech, motor delays, staring spells. She 19 (38 eyes) - with high myopia, 44 (88 eyes) – with medium myopia, and 14 was born at 32 weeks gestation to pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia. (28 eyes) - with emmetropia. Data of medical history, family history of my- At birth, was noted to have left hand preaxial polydactyly, atrial-septal de- o1p2ia2, ocular tonometry, and A-scan ultrasound bioEmSeHtrGy w2e0re1 c3o l|l ePcAtedR IfoSr, FRfeActN, pCuElm |o WnaWry Wval.vEuSlaHr Gste.OnoRsiGs. Examination disclosed flat nasal bridge,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index epicanthal folds, wide mouth, retromicrognathia, truncal hypotonia. Retinal %, AG 47.2 %, AA 26.4% genotypes were determined for patient and con- examination showed bilateral PCRL, which consisted of depigmented areas trol groups, respectively. Evaluations of results have revealed that there is with variably pigmentated borders, surrounding optic discs. MRI revealed meaningful difference in distruption of genotype for rs11200638 polymor- mild thinning of corpus callosum and diffuse hypomyelination. phism between patient and control groups (p=0.0001). But no meaning- Genomic hybridization microarray demonstrated 6-megabase interstitial ful difference has been observed for distruption of genotypes between deletion of chromosome 3, spanning 3q21.3 to 3q22.1. patient and control groups when rs2230199 polymorphism is considered Conclusions: PCRL are not unique to Aicardi syndrome. (p=0.981). A meaningful difference has been obtained for distruption of ge- AS is thought to arise from gene mutation on X-chromosome. Our patient’s notypes between patient and control groups for rs1410996 polymorphism large autosomal deletion comprised 66 genes, none known to be associated (p=0.013). Rs2230199 has given statistically meaningless results in our stu- with chorioretinal lacunae. It is possible that PCRL in our and patients with dy on the contrary to the findings obtained for Caucasians. The results that AS may result from complex gene interactions between the X chromosome we obtained during this study will be useful for scientific studies which are and autosomes. concentrated on geriatric diseases because of ageing world population in Because our patient had autosomal microdeletion, we recommend chromo- tYh.e S soeynssael :o Nf otrnaen. sÜfe.Ur.r iİnngan t:h Ne odnaet.a F o.Mf T. uİçrdkuisyhg up:o Npounlaet. iAon. A.kıllı: None. N. somal microarray be performed in patients with PCRL when neurological İmirzalıoğlu: None. f Rea. tGuarversi ldoov an:o Nt ocnoer.r eEs.Mpo. nBdro toom thaolls: eN ionn eA.S D..L. Renaud: None. R. Ghadban: None. M.C. Brodsky: None.  P03
.19 Investigating the complex genetic architecture of Age-Related Hearing  P03
.17 Impairment by a Genome-Wide Association Study in the European Early-onset neurological presentation of OPA1- associated autosomal population dominant optic atrophy with variable expressivity S. Bonneux1, E. Fransen1,2, J. J. Corneveaux3, J. D. Ohmen4, R. A. Friedman4, M. J. C. Vinkler1, Y. Cohen Rappaport2, E. Leshinsky-Silver3, S. Cohen3, T. Lerman-Sagie4, L. Huentelman3, G. Van Camp1; Blumkin4, M. Michelson1, D. Lev1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2StatUa 1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Metabolic Center for Statistics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Neurogenomics Division, Nerogenetic clinic Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 3Genetics Lab, Wolfson Medical Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 4, Gonda Research Center, Holon, Israel, 4Pediatric Neurology, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel. Center for Cell and Molecular Biology,House Ear Institute, Los Angeles, CA, United States. OPA1 OPA1 encodes a protein involved in regulation of mitochondrial inner mem- Age-Related Hearing Impairment (ARHI) or presbyacusis is the most com- brane fusion and cristae remodeling. Mutations in the gene are the mon sensory impairment in elderly and the leading cause of adult-onset most common identifiable cause of autosomal dominant optic atrophy hearing loss. It is a severe social and health problem. ARHI is a complex (DOA), which is characterized by childhood-adulthood onset of selective re- disease with both genetic and environmental factors contributing to the tinal ganglion cell loss, temporal pallor of the optic nerve and a typical color degeneration of the cochlear cells, but remains poorly studied from the vision deficit with reduced acuity. Dominant optic atrophy plus applies to a genetic side. To further elucidate the genetic factors for ARHI, we perfor- subgroup of patients manifesting extraocular neurologic signs. med a Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) using the Illumina CNV370 We describe a girl presenting with infantile onset optic atrophy, develop- quad chip and the Illumina HumanOmniExpress BeadChip on 1560 samples, mental delay, ataxia, tremor and hypotonia. representing the 20% extremes of a population of 2161 Antwerp subjects She was born at term to unrelated healthy parents. Her mother noticed ab- aged 55-65 years for 3 audiometric phenotypes, as scored by principal com- normal eye movements since early infancy. Strabismus, hypotonia and mo- ponent (PC) analysis. We tested association with ARHI by linear regression tor delay were diagnosed at the age of 1y. At 18m optic atrophy, reduced between each genotype and each PC-score. In addition, we adjusted for en- visual acuity, eye lid retraction and developmental delay were diagnosed. At vironmental factors (PLINK software) and for population stratification (EM- 2y ataxia and tremor were noted . Brain MRI at 4 years showed atrophy of MAX software). Previously reported susceptibility genes for ARHI could not the optic nerve andO PchAi1asm. be replicated. To more deeply investigate the genetic architecture of ARHI, A known disease causing heterozygous missense mutation A1146G (I382M we executed pathway-analysis (MAGENTA software), examined the role of ) was found in the gene by exome sequencing. Her heaOltPhAy1 mother and rare variants per gene (SKAT software) and analysed gene-gene interaction aunt carry the same mutation. (SIXPAC software). GCTA (Genome-wide Complex Trait Analysis software) This is a description of an unusually early infantile onset, associated estimated that 16 % of the phenotypic variance could be explained by the optic atrophy plus, in a girl whose asymptomatic mother carries the same SNPs analysed in our GWAS. This analysis proves for the first time that ARHI mutation. There is one report regarding early onset severe clinical manife- is a highly complex disease, involving many genetic factors with small effect station of OPA1+ associated with compound heterozygosity for OPA1 muta- sizes, while there is no evidence for major genetic risk factors with high ef- tions. We postulate that a further explanation could be involvement of ano- f Sec. tB soinzense.ux: None. E. Fransen: None. J.J. Corneveaux: None. J.D. Ohmen: t Ch.e Vr igneknleer a: nNdo neep.i Yg.e Cneothice nfa Rctaoprpsa ipno trht:e N moenceh. Ean. iLsemsh oinf tshkey -dSiislveears:e N.one. S. None. R.A. Friedman: None. M.J. Huentelman: None. G. Van Camp: None. Cohen: None. T. Lerman-Sagie: None. L. Blumkin: None. M. Michelson: None. D. Lev: None.  P03
.20 Heterozygous mutation IV S1
+1G>A (GJB2 gene) is associated with  P03
.18 age-related hearing impairment (ARHI) in the Yakut population Age related macular degeneration and association of CFH Y402H, isolate (Eastern Siberia) rs1410966, LO C387715
 A69S, rs11200638 and complement N. A. Barashkov1,2, F. M. Teryutin1,3, V. G. Pshennikova1, A. V. Soloviev3, L. A. Klarov4, component 3 (R102G) polymorphisms in Turkish Population A. A. Kozjevnikov5, L. M. Vasilieva6, E. E. Fedotova6, M. V. Pak7, S. N. Lekhanova8, N. A. Y. Soysal1, Ü. U. İnan2, F. M. İçduygu1, A. Akıllı1, N. İmirzalıoğlu1; Solovieva1, A. M. Rafailov9, A. N. Alexeev10, O. L. Posukh11,12, L. U. Dzhemileva13, S. A. 1Afyon Kocatepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Fedorova1,3, E. K. Khusnutdinova13,14; Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Eye Diseases, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Biology and Geography Faculty, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Biology and Geography Faculty, M.K. Ammosov Age related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex multifactorial disea- North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, Yakutsk, Russian se. In this study, it is aimed to establish a relation between single nucleotide Federation, 4Department of Radiology, Republican Hospital #2 – Center of Emergency polymorphisms of genes (in Complement Factor H (CFH) rs1061170 and Medicine, Ministry of Public Health of the Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, rs1410966, in HTRA1 rs11200638 and rs10490924, in  C3
 gene rs2230199) 5Republican Centre of Professional Pathology, Republican Hospital #2 – Center of which are among the suspected genes in AMD disease. 100 healthy control Emergency Medicine, Ministry of Public Health of the Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 6Audiology-Logopaedic Center, Republican Hospital #1 - National Medical individuals and 199 patients who have long AMD history were involved in Centre, Ministry of Public Health of the Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, this study. Statistically meaningful difference has been observed (p=0.002) 7Department of Pediatric, Medical Institute, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal between patient and control groups when 183 AMD patients were evalu- University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 8Department of normal and abnormal anatomy, ated for Y402H polymorphism. The difference between groups has been operative surgery with the topographic anatomy and forensic medicine, Medical found statistically meaningful for LO C387715
 (rs10490924). In our study Institute, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, on R S11200638
 , 56.4% GG, 34.3 %AG,E 9S.3H%G A 2A 0g1en3o t|y PpeAs RaInSd, GFGR 2A6N.4 CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 123ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 9Department of Biology, Biology and Geography Faculty, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern  P03
.22 Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 10Institute of Humanitarian Research Diagnosis of Bardet-Bield Syndrome by a custom multiplexing and Indigenous Peoples of the North, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of mutation panel Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 11Laboratory of Genetic Recombination and J. Sá, P. Rendeiro, A. Lopes, L. Lameiras, L. Dias, A. Palmeiro, P. Tavares; Segregation, Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal. Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 12Department of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 13Department of Introduction: Genomics, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 14Department of Genetics and Fundamental Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS) is a pleiotropic ciliopathy Medicine, Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. characterized by inducing alterations in diverse body systems leading to a wide range of clinical features. Its prevalence is estimated at 1/150,000. Its main features are obesity, progressive pigmentary retinopathy, post-axial Age-Related Hearing Impairment (ARHI 1 and ARHI 2: OMIM 612448, polydactyly, polycystic kidneys, hypogenitalism, and learning disabilities. 612976) is one of the frequent sensory disorders registered in 50% individu- Pigmentary retinopathy is always present in adults. Progressive vision loss, als to the age of 80 years. ARHI is multifactorial disorder due to environmen- some degree of intellectual deficit and obesity can severely impair the life tal and poor-known genetic components. In this study, we present the data quality of the affected persons. BBS is a genetically heterogeneous disease on age-related hearing impairment of 48 carriers of mutation IV S1
+1G>A transmitted in most families as autosomal recessive disease. To date, four- (GJB2 gene) and 166 subjects with GJB2-genotype wt/wt in the Yakuts, Si- tMeeenth goedn:es have been associated with BBS, representing up to 80% of the berian population isolate (Eastern Siberia). The GJB2 gene resequencing and cases. detailed audiometric analysis in the frequency range 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0 We developed a custom multiplex mutation panel (CGC Mutation kHz were performed in all examined subjects. Comprehensive molecular and Panel - Pat. Pending) that contains a total of 129 point mutations identified audiological analysis of all individuals allows examination for the presence on the 13 principle genes involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome: BB S1
, BB S2
, of genotype-phenotype correlations of mutation IV S1
+1G>A and hearing of BRBesSu3l/tAsR L6
, BB S4
, BB S4
, BB S6
/MKKS, BB S7
, BB S8
/TT C8
, BB S9
/B1, BB S10
, subjects from examined groups. We revealed the linear dependence between BB S11
/TRIM32, BB S12
 and BB S13
/MK S1
. increase of average hearing thresholds at speech frequencies (0.5,1.0,2.0,4.0 : From the 30 samples tested we detected the following mutations kHz) and age of individuals with genotype IV S1
+1G>A/wt (r=0.571, p=0.001 on 4 cases: for males and r=0.523, p=0.000007 for females). Moreover, the average hea- c.1169T>G (p.Met390Arg) mutation in heterozygosity in the BB S1
 gene ring thresholds on high frequencies (4.0 and 8.0 kHz) in individuals with ge- c.1015A>G (p.Ile339Val) in heterozygosity was detected in the MKKS gene notype IV S1
+1G>A/wt (both sexes) were significantly worse than in individu- cC.o1n1c6l9uTs>ioGn (:p.Met390Arg) in homozygosity was detected in the BB S1
 gene als with genotype wt/wt (p<0.05). Age of hearing loss manifestation in indivi- c.951+1G>A mutation in homozygosity was detected in the BB S1
 gene duals with genotype IV S1
+1G>A/wt was estimated to be ~ 40 years (r=0.572, This approach is a valuable diagnostics tool, since it detects p=0.0001). These findings demonstrate that the IV S1
+1G>A mutation (GJB2) the most common mutations associated with Bardet-Bield syndrome. This is associated with age-related hearing impairment (ARHI) of the IV S1
+1G>A panel reduces time and costs to achieve a diagnosis and improves its capabi- carriers in the Yakuts. lity, independently of the sample type, allowing an earlier decision-making This study was supported by RFBR grants (#11-04-01221-а), (#12-04- p Jro. Sceás: sF i. nC ponastiuelntatn mt/Aadnvaisgoermy eBnota.rd; Modest; CGC Genetics. P. Rendeiro: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; CGC Genetics. A. Lopes: A. Employment 00342-а), (#12-04-98520-р), (#12-04-97004-р), (#12-04-31230), and the S Na.kAh. aB Rareapsuhbkloicv :P Nreosnied.e Fn.tM G. rTaenryt ufotirn :Y oNuonnge .R Ve.Gse. aPrschheenrsn ifkoorv 2a0: 1N3o nyee.a Ar..V. (full or part-time); Modest; CGC Genetics. L. Lameiras: A. Employment (full or Soloviev: None. L.A. Klarov: None. A.A. Kozjevnikov: None. L.M. Vasilieva: part-time); Modest; CGC Genetics. L. Dias: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. E.E. Fedotova: None. M.V. Pak: None. S.N. Lekhanova: None. N.A. Modest; CGC Genetics. A. Palmeiro: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; CGC Solovieva: None. A.M. Rafailov: None. A.N. Alexeev: None. O.L. Posukh: Genetics. P. Tavares: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other None. L.U. Dzhemileva: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. intellectual property); Modest; CGC Genetics.  P03
.21  P03
.23 Mutations in PXDN cause complex microphthalmia, anterior segment Nation-wide genetic screening for patients with bilateral dysgenesis, hypotonia and developmental delays nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) in Slovakia A. M. Slavotinek1, R. Lao2, P. Tang2, E. Wan2, T. Bardakjian3, P. Kwok2,4,5, A. Schneider3; I. Mašindová1, L. Varga2,1, M. Hučková1,3, M. Balogová1, &. Šuchová4, M. Profant2, I. 1Dept. Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United Klimeš1,3, D. Gašperíková1,3; States, 2Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San 1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Francisco, CA, United States, 3Division of Medical Genetics, Einstein Medical Center, Slovakia, 2I. Otorhinolaryngology Clinic, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Centre for Molecular Medicine, Slovak California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 5Department of Dermatology, Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Phoniatry, University University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. Introduction: Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (A/M) are common birth defects that are Etiology of hearing impairment is very heterogeneous. Ap- significant because of visual loss. Mutations in SOX2 and other genes can cau- proximately 50% of all deaf born cases are atthteri bauimte do ft oo ugre snteutdicy causes. se A/M, but there is high genetic heterogeneity and more than 50% of affec- Exact data about genetic etiology of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in ted individuals do not receive a molecular genetic diagnosis. We used exome our country are not fully available. Therefore, was to sequencing to study a Caucasian family with two children who had complex cPaartriye notust athned gMeneethtioc dssc:r eening for selected genes in patients with bilateral A/M with anterior segment dysgenesis, sclerocornea, microphthalmia, deve- nonsyndromic SNHL throughout Slovakia. lopmental delays and hypotonia. The older male sibling had glaucoma. Analy- Since 2010 we have recruited more than 560 sub- sis with ANNOVAR revealed both sibs shared 262 sequence variants. 11 genes jects from all boarding schools for children with hearing disabilities in Slova- had two novel variants and 4 of these genes were expressed in the eye. Sanger kia and UnivGerJBsi2ty Hospital in Bratislava. For genetic testing, 418 unrelated sequencing showed two Peroxidasin (PXDN) mutations in both sibs - a mater- iGnJdBi6v,i GduJBa3ls withP OclUin3iFc4ally manifested bilateral SNHL were selected and se- nally inherited nonsense mutation, c. C1021
T predicting p.R341* and a pater- qRueesnucltesd: for gene. In 206 patients, we have also carried out analyses of nally inherited, frameshift mutation, c.2375_2397del, predicting premature and G JgBe2nes using the MLPA methodology. protein truncation. Mutations in the PXDN gene were previously described in We identified 14 already known mutations, six polymorphisms three families with congenital cataracts, microcornea, sclerocornea and de- and one variant in the gene. Homozygous and compound heterozygous velopmental glaucoma that had no extraocular anomalies (Khan et al., 2011). mutations were present in 21% and 11% of the subjects, respectively. Pro- The gene is expressed in corneal epithelium and is secreted to the extracel- poGrtJiBo6n of the suGbjJeBc2ts without having any pathogenic allele, reached 61%. lular matrix, thus the eye defects may result from impaired adhesion in the In one individual, a simultaneous occurrence of the 309 kb large deletion anterior segment or an inability to metabolize reactive oxygen intermediates. iCno nclu swioitnhs t:he mutation was identified. No mutations GwJeBr2e/ GfoJuBn6d in Our finding of a broader phenotype for PXDN than previously appreciated is other genes investigated. characteristic for exome sequencing, which has proven to be highly effective 1. We have established the mutation profile of ge- for mutation detection in “atypical” presentations. We conclude that PXDN nes in subjects identified across whole Slovakia, and 2. we have confirmed mutations should be considered in complex microphthalmia with anterior the genetic etiology of hearing impairment in 32% of individuals studied. sAe.gMm. eSnlat vdoytsingeekn:e Nsiosn. eK.h Ra.n L eato a: lN., oAnme. JP H. Tuamn gG:e Nnoente 2. 0 E1
. 1W;8a9n::4 N6o4n.e. T. 3Su. pOpuorr ftiendd binyg: sA PseVrVv/e0 a1s4 8k-e1y0 i,n VfEorGmA/a1ti/o0n4 f6o5r/ g1e1n, Tetriacn csomuends2e/li2n6g2 a4n0d1 2c0li0n3ic0a l Bardakjian: None. P. Kwok: None. A. Schneider: None. prognosis of SNHL. 124 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index I. Mašindová: None. L. Varga: None. M. Hučková: None. M. Balogová: None. &.  P03
.26 Šuchová: None. M. Profant: None. I. Klimeš: None. D. Gašperíková: None. A novel mutation (p.Asp171Asn) in wolframin gene, in a patient presenting Low-Frequency Hearing Loss A. C. Gonçalves1, T. D. Matos1, H. R. Teixeira1, M. Pimenta Machado2, M. Simão2, O. P. Dias2, M. Andrea2, G. Fialho1, H. Caria3;  P03
.24 1Centre for Biodiversity, Functional, and Integrative Genomics (BioFIG), Lisbon, Cytokine Genes Polymorphisms and Expression Pediatric Cochlear Portugal, 2Hospital Santa Maria (Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Norte, E.P.E.), Lisbon, Implant Patients: No Association with TNF-α (-308), and IL-6 (174), Portugal, 3School of Health, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal ; Centre for Biodiversity, but the IFN-γ (+874) in Associated with the Disease in Turkish Functional, and Integrative Genomics (BioFIG), Faculty of Science, University of Lisbon, Patients Lisbon, Portugal. E. Baysal1, S. Oguzkan Balcı2, F. Celenk1, M. Kahraman2, M. Deniz1, O. Tunc1, C. Durucu1, S. Mumbuc1, M. Kanlıkama1, S. Pehlivan2; 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology, Gaziantep, Nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss predominantly affecting the high Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology frequencies is a genetically heterogeneous common disorder. On the contra- and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey. ry, low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL) is an unusual type in which frequencies at 2000 Hz and below are predominantly affected. Most of the families with LFSNHL carry mutations in WF S1
 gene that maps to The aim of this study was to explore the association between polymorphis- chromosome 4p16 and codes for wolframin, a membrane glycoprotein loca- ms and expressions of three cytokine genes and clinical parameters in pati- lized in the endoplasmic reticulum. ents in children who underwent cochlear implantation because of congeni- A Portuguese NSHL patient was shown to display LFSNHL after evaluation tal profound sensorineural hearing loss. by pure tone audiometry. Blood sample was collected after signing written We analyzed three cytokine genes (IL-6, IFN-γ and TNF-α) in 64 cases with informed consent. Sequencing of exons 5 and 8 of WF S1
 gene was perfor- congenital sensorineural hearing loss and in 70 healthy controls. Cytokine med after previous testing for mutations in the GJB2 coding exon and for the genotyping was performed by the PCR-SSP method. All data were analyzed common GJB6 deletions using sequencing and multiplex-PCR, respectively. using de Finetti program and SPSS version 14.0 for Windows. One hundred hearing Portuguese controls were sequenced for exon 5. No significant differences were detected between the patient group and the No mutations were found in GJB2 and GJB6 genes. A novel mutation, healthy controls with respect to the distributions and numbers of genotypes c.511G>A, was found in heterozygosity in the exon 5 of the WF S1
 gene. At and alleles in TNF-α and IL-6. However, the TT genotype associated with protein level, it causes an alteration of residue 511 of wolframin, occurring high expression in IFN-γ and T allel frequency were found to be significantly in the extracellular N-terminus domain of the protein, by changing an aspar- more frequent in the patients group as compared to the controls (p=0.016, tic acid to an asparagine (p.Asp171Asn). This mutation was not present in 0.023, respectively). 100 Portuguese hearing controls. The relationship between cytokine genotypes/expressions and clinical pa- Since LFSNHL presents a dominant pattern, the auditory phenotype obser- rameters in patients with congenital hearing loss has not been investigated ved in this heterozygous patient might probably be due to the novel muta- before. Our results suggest that high expression of IFN-γ gene may be as- tion p.Asp171Asn. Functional characterization will be performed in order sociated with susceptibility to disease. Consequently, IFN-γ may be a use- to assess its effect on the mutated protein and to clarify in which way this f h Eu e.l a Bm riana yr gsk ale olr :s Nsfo .or n ee .t h Si .o Op gat uh zo kg ae nn Be as li cs ı :i n N p ona eti .e Fn . t Cs ew lei nth k :c Non ong ee .n Mit .a Kl s ae hn raso mr ain ne : ural c MAh a.aC cn h. gG ae do l one :ça Nad olsv n et eos . :L M NF .oS SnN ie mH. L ãT o..D : . N M oa nt eo . s O: .N P.o Dne ia. sH :. R N. o T ne ei .x Mei .r Aa: n N dro en ae :. NM o. nP ei .m Ge .n Fta ia lho: None. M. Deniz: None. O. Tunc: None. C. Durucu: None. S. Mumbuc: None. M. None. H. Caria: None. Kanlıkama: None. S. Pehlivan: None.  P03
.27  P03
.25 Loss-of-function mutations in SOX10 cause Kallmann syndrome with Clinical and genetic characteristics of patients with POU3F4 X-linked deafness deafness V. Pingault1,2,3, V. Bodereau2, V. Baral1, S. Marcos4, Y. Watanabe1, A. Chaoui1, C. Fouveaut5, R. Birkenhäger, E. Prera, S. Arndt, W. Maier, R. Laszig, A. Aschendorff; C. Leroy5, O. Vérier-Mine6, C. Francannet7, D. Dupin-Deguine8, F. Archambeaud9, F. Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center Kurtz10, J. Young11, J. Bertherat12, S. Marlin13, M. Goossens1,2,3, J. Hardelin14, C. Dodé5,4, N. Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Bondurand1,3; 1Inserm U955, Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique, Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 3Université Paris Est, Faculté de Hearing impairment is the most common sensory disorder in humans, affec- Médecine, Creteil, France, 4INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin and Université Paris- ting approximately one to three in 1000 newborns, with 50 % due to genetic Descartes, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de biochimie et génétique moléculaire, Hopital Cochin, Paris, France, 6Endocrinologie, Centre hospitalier, Valenciennes, France, causes. The majority of these cases (70 %) are non-syndromic, about 2 % of 7Génétique médicale, Hôtel Dieu, Clermont Ferrand, France, 8Génétique médicale, these are X-linked. So far five different X-linked loci have been mapped, the Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 9Médecine et d’endocrinologie, Hôpital du Cluzeau, causative gene POU3F4 (MIM 300039) has been identified for the gene locus Limoges, France, 10Pédiatrie, Hôpital Bel Air, Thionville, France, 11Endocrinologie, DFNX2. This hearing loss is often progressive, with temporal bone abnorma- Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 12Endocrinologie, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, lities and stapes fixation. Temporal bone anomalies include dilation of the France, 13Génétique, INSERM U587, Hopital Trousseau, Paris, France, 14INSERM U587, fundus of the internal acoustic canal (IAC), that can increase the risk of CSF Institut Pasteur, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France. gusher during stapes or cochlear implant surgery. POU3F4 belongs to a sub- family of transcription factors, which are characterized by two conserved DNA binding domains, a POU and a HOX domain. Several molecular gene- The SOX10 transcription factor plays a role in the maintenance of progenitor tic studies have identified mutations in the POU3F4 gene, including parti- cell multipotency, lineage specification, cell differentiation, and is a major al or complete deletions of the gene, as well as deletions, inversions, and actor in the development of the neural crest. It has been implicated in Waar- duplications of the DFNX2 genomic region not encompassing the POU3F4 denburg syndrome (WS), a rare disorder characterized by the association coding sequence. Here we present the clinical characteristics of four pati- of pigmentation abnormalities and deafness, but SOX10 mutations cause a ents from independent families. Mutations analysis in the POU3F4 gene was variable phenotype that spreads over the initial limits of the syndrome de- brought by direct sequencing. Sequence analyses revealed a novel deletion finition. Based on recent findings of olfactory bulb agenesis in WS patients, of 2600 bp [TAG (Stop) +21nt - 2620nt] and two novel missense mutations we suspected SOX10 was also involved in Kallmann syndrome (KS). KS is c.902C>T, (p. P301
L) and c.973 T>A, (p.W325R) and in a fourth patient an al- defined by the association of anosmia and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism ready known missense mutation c.907C>T, (p. P303
S). Until now three novel due to incomplete migration of neuroendocrine GnRH (gonadotropin-relea- strongly conserved mutations in the HOX-domain of the POU3F4 transcripti- sing hormone)-cells along the olfactory, vomeronasal, and terminal nerves. oRn. fBaicrtkoern whäegreer i:d Neonntief.i eEd. Pleraedrain: gN oton ea.n S e. fAfercntd itn: Nthoen ep.r Wot.e Mina ifeurn: cNtioonne.. R. Mutations in any of the nine causal genes identified to date account for only Laszig: None. A. Aschendorff: None. 30% of the KS cases. KS can be either isolated or associated with a variety of other symptoms including deafness. We report SOX10 loss-of-function mu- tations in approximately one-third of KS patients with deafness, which defi- nes this gene as the first one with a substantial involvement in this clinical condition. Study of SOX10-null mutant mice revealed a new developmental role of SOX10 in a subpopulation of glial cells called olfactory ensheathing cells. These mice indeed showed an almost complete absence of these cells along the olfactory nerve pathway, as well as defasciculation and misrouting ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE o | f W theW neW rv. eE fS ibH erG s, . imO pR aG ired migration of GnRH-cells, and disorganizati1o2n 5ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.30 Simultaneous Screening of 100 Mutations Associated with Non- t Vh.e P oinlfgaacutoltr:y N noenrev. eV l.a Byoedr eorfe tahue: oNlofancet.o Vr.y B bauralbl:s .None. S. Marcos: None. Y. Syndromic Hearing Loss in Brazil Watanabe: None. A. Chaoui: None. C. Fouveaut: None. C. Leroy: None. O. M. C. M. Svidnicki, S. M. da Silva-Costa, P. Z. Ramos, F. T. A. Martins, N. Z. P. Santos, A. M. Vérier-Mine: None. C. Francannet: None. D. Dupin-Deguine: None. F. Castilho, E. L. Sartorato; Archambeaud: None. F. Kurtz: None. J. Young: None. J. Bertherat: None. S. UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. Marlin: None. M. Goossens: None. J. Hardelin: None. C. Dodé: None. N. Bondurand: None. Recent advances in molecular genetics have allowed the determination of the genetic cause of non-syndromic hearing loss, but a large percentage of  P03
.28 patients still remain with unidentified cause. It points an imminent need for Exome sequencing and linkage analysis identifies novel N714H new methodological strategies for the detection of an increased number of mutation in WF S1
 as a cause of autosomal dominant hearing loss mutations in multiple genes. In this work we screened a set of 100 muta- A. Pollak1, U. Lechowicz1, M. Oldak2, M. Mueller-Malesinska1, L. Korniszewski1, H. tions previously described in 20 different genes, using mass spectrometry Skarzynski1, R. Ploski3; 1The Institute if Phisiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of system MassArray, Sequenom® followed by Sanger sequencing, to evaluate Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department the contribution of selected changes in the etiology of deafness in Brazil. We of Medical Genetics, Medical University in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. analyzed a group of 45 individuGaJBls2 with GnJoBn6-syndromic hearing loss that were previously screened for mutatiSoLnCs2 i6nA m4ain dCeDafHn2e3ss genes, SaLnCd2 t6hAa4t showed recessive mutations in and in po.n C2
ly8 2oYne allele. We found Hearing loss (HI) is a significant medical problem in Poland and worldwide, additpi.oVn6a0l9 mGutations in two genes: CDH a2n3d . In the occurring in 1 of every 500 newborns. The cause of hearing loss can be ge- were identified two mutations in heteropz.Ry3g0o1uQs, in one individual netic or environmental. Currently the background of genetic hearing impair- and in two other individuals. In two pm.Ris1s7e4n6sQe mutations ment is an area of intensive research conducted by many groups. Because were found in different individuals, the SL C26
 mAu4tationC wDHas2 3found in ho- of more than 40 genes involved in pathogenesis of nonsyndromic hearing mozygous, explaining the etiology of deafness, and the was found loss, it is also an extremely heterogeneous trait. The most common variants in heterozygous. These results show that and mutations responsible for an isolated recessive HI are mutations in the GJB2 gene, but are frequentC iDnH i2n3dividuSaLlsC 2w6iAth4 non-syndromic hearing lossG JiBn 2BrazilG aJBnd6 there is no single gene accounts for the majority of cases of autosomal do- emphasize the necessity of considering these two genes for diagnosis. The minant (AD) HI. To date, more than 60 loci of ADHI were mapped, but par- presence of and mutations associated with and ticular genes were identified for only 25. However mutations in 4 of these mutations might suggest gene interaction, producing deafness in a digenic genes (WF S1
, KCNQ4, COCH, and GJB) are more frequent as a causes of ADHI mMo.Cd.eM o. fS ivnihdenricitkain: cNeo, nbeu. tS t.hMe. pdoa iSnitl vnae-eCdo tsota b: eN pornoev. ePd.Z i.n R faumrtohse:r N sotuned.y .F.T.A. Martins: None. N.Z.P. Santos: None. A.M. Castilho: None. E.L. Sartorato: in comparison to the other. None. For searching the reason of HI among family members with AD pattern of inheritance, we performed linkage analysis using Affy 10K chip and exome sequencing on Illumina platform. Data analysis revealed novel N714H mu- tation in WF S1
 gene as a plausible reason for HI. Direct sequencing of frag-  P03
.31 ment of 8th exone of WF S1
 gene showed perfect co-segregation between Audiologic characteristics of carriers of a dominant WF S1
 mutation N714H mutation and HI among members of this family. N714H mutation is U. Lechowicz1, M. Oldak2, A. Pollak1, M. Mueller-Malesinska1, L. Korniszewski1, H. Skarzynski1, R. Ploski3; localized in exon 8, which contains the conserved C-terminal domain. Consi- 1The Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of dering fact that the majority of deafness causing mutations have been iden- Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department tified particularly in exon 8, this domain seems to have a crucial function in of Medical Genetics, Medical University in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. t Ah.e P coolclahkle: aN.one. U. Lechowicz: None. M. Oldak: None. M. Mueller-Malesinska: None. L. Korniszewski: None. H. Skarzynski: None. R. Ploski: None. The WF S1
 with chromosomal 4p16.1 position, encodes an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-embedded protein, called wolframin, which has  P03
.29 physiological functions in membrane trafficking, secretion, processing and/ Mutations in GJB2 gene - a main cause of non-syndromal hearing loss or regulation of ER calcium homeostasis. A proper calcium balance plays among Belarus patients crucial role in many different cellular functions, including cell-to-cell com- O. Oleinik1, M. Siniauskaya1, E. Merkulava2, A. Levaya-Smaliak2, N. Danilenko1; munication, the tensing (contraction) of muscles, and protein processing. 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, National Academy of Sciences, Minsk, Belarus, Disturbances in the balance of calcium in the inner ear might interfere with 2Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus. the hearing process. Mutations in WF S1
 gene cause both autosomal dominant low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL) at the DFNA6/14/38 locus and Wolf- About 50% of congenital non-syndromal hearing loss (SNHL) are caused by ram syndrome, characterized by autosomal recessive hearing loss, diabetes mutations in GJB2 gene. The spectrum and frequencies of the GJB2 muta- mellitus, diabetes insipidus and optic atrophy. The hearing loss caused by tions depend on ethnic origin; in Europe 35delG recessive mutation is the dominant WF S1
 mutations has been reported to be very characteristic, pre- most frequent. According to our previous data, the carrier rate of 35delG in ferentially affecting the low frequencies without significant influence on the Belarus is twice higher than European average (5.68%). Screening of 391 high frequencies. patients revealed that 35delG is the main cause of SNHL in Belarus: 45.5% Using whole exome sequencing we recently found novel WF S1
 mutation were homozygous, 13.1% heterozygous and for 41.4% the major GJB2 mu- (p.N714H) segregating in a large family with autosomal dominant HI. The tation was not found. purpose of this study was to evaluate the audiograms in mutation carriers in Among 35delG heterozygotes with SNHL six other mutations in the GJB2 co- order to validate the association between WF S1
 mutations and low frequen- ding exon 2 were found (combining single-strand conformational polymor- cy HI. So far we obtained three audiograms. Whereas one of the audiograms phism analysis and sequencing methods). However, for 40 patients - 35delG was typical with low frequency HI (0.5KHz 45 dB, 8KHz 5 dB) two other heterozygotes - still only one mutant GJB2 allele was detected while for 139 were not (0.5KHz 90 dB, 8KHz 70 dB; 0.5KHz 55 dB, 8KHz 120 dB). The- patients we did not find any exon 2 GJB2 mutations. Therefore, the aim of se data indicate that a flat down-sloping audiograms do not exclude WF S1
 the present study was to determine still undetected genetic lesions causing d Ue.f eLcetcsh.owicz: None. M. Oldak: None. A. Pollak: None. M. Mueller-Malesinska: SNHL in these patients. We screened them for the mutation IV S1
+1G>A in None. L. Korniszewski: None. H. Skarzynski: None. R. Ploski: None. splicing site (5’ UTR of GJB2 gene). Mutation IV S1
+1G>A was detected in 5 out of 179 patients, that indicates its high frequency. As a result, for five 35delG heterozygote patients the second mutation was detected; thus, the  P03
.32 genetic nature of SNHL for them was proved. Moreover, we estimated that Association of Mitochondrial Uncoupling Protein Gene 2 with for deaf patient cohort IV S1
+1G>A is a third most common GJB2 mutations Congenital Sensorineural Hearing Loss in Pediatric Patients in Belarus, after 35delG and 312del14. The results obtained are necessary S. Pehlivan1, E. Baysal2, O. Tunc2, M. Nacak3, F. Çelenk2, M. Deniz2, C. Durucu2, S. for further genetic testing of Belarus patients with non-syndromal hearing Mumbuc2, M. Kanlıkama2, S. Oguzkan Balcı1; l Oos. sO.leinik: None. M. Siniauskaya: None. E. Merkulava: None. A. Levaya- 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Smaliak: None. N. Danilenko: None. Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, 126 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Department of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, Turkey. by exonic sequencing techniques. Here we demonstrate for the first time Recently findings suggest that uncoupling proteins (UCPs) may play a pro- that deep-intronic mutations in the most common nuclear ION gene OPA1 tective role against reactive oxygen species in neuron and a thermal signa- cause optic atrophy and “optic atrophy plus” phenotypes in so far unresol- ling role for neuron modulating in vestibular nevre. Uncoupling protein ved ION patients. 2 (UC P2
) is expressed in inner ear periphery, but the function of UC P2
 in Using cDNA analysis of puromycin treated patient-derived fibroblasts of an inner ear tissues has not been determined yet. The aim of this study was index family with a severe multisystemic “optic atrophy plus” phenotype, to examine whether UC P2
 gene variations are associated with congenital we identified a deep-intronic OPA1 mutation in intron 4b. The mutation sensorineural hearing loss. creates a novel splice acceptor site, leading to inclusion of a cryptic exon. In this study, 64 congenital sensorineural hearing loss children and 80 age This aberrant splice product induces frameshift and subsequent nonsense- and sex matched healthy controls were detected for promoter -866G>A and mediated mRNA decay (NMD) of the mutated transcript. RFLP screening of exon 8 insertion/deletion (I/D) variations of UC P2
 gene by using PCR and/ intron 4b in 369 patients with unexplained ION (negative for exonic OPA1 or RFLP methods. mutations) revealed 3 further families with deep-intronic mutations around Promoter and exon 8 variations of UC P2
 gene were showed statistically si- the same site. In the affected siblings of the index family, the intronic mutati- gnificant association with congenital sensorineural hearing loss patients. on occurred in conjunction with a known compound heterozygous mutation The distribution of II, ID and DD genotypes for the gene was 54.7 %, 26.7 (I382M), which explains the observed severe phenotype. The I382M variant % and 18.6 % in patients compared with 8 %, 30.7 % and 61.3 % in the acts as a modifier that might be used as a hint for compound heterozygous controls. Insertion homozygote genotype and I allele were found higher in mutations in non-coding regions of “optic atrophy plus” patients. We con- patients (p<0.0001). The distribution of UC P2
 gene promoter variation GG, clude that deep-intronic OPA1 mutations might explain a substantial share GA and AA genotypes was 10.9 %, 45.3 %, 43.8% in patients compared with of so far unexplained cases with optic atrophy or “optic atrophy plus” phe- nTo. tByopneisfe.rt: None. M. Synofzik: None. L. Schöls: None. B. Wissinger: None. 21.1 %, 62.5 %, 16.3 % in the controls. Statistically, AA genotype and A allele were found to be increased in patients (p=0.0003, p=0.0010, respectively). Our data show that UC P2
 gene may play a role for ethiopathogenesis of con- genital sensorineural hearing loss. Further studies are needed to elucidate  P03
.35 f Su.n Pcteiholniv oafn U: NCPon2e i.n E s. eBnasyosrainl:e Nuoranle .h Oea. rTiunngc l:o Nsso.ne. M. Nacak: None. F. Sensorineural hearing loss in OPA1-linked disorders Çelenk: None. M. Deniz: None. C. Durucu: None. S. Mumbuc: None. M. D. Bonneau1, S. Leruez2, D. Milea3, S. Defoort-Dhellemmes4, E. Colin5, M. Crochet4, Kanlıkama: None. S. Oguzkan Balcı: None. V. Procaccio1, M. Ferré1, J. Lamblin6, V. Drouin7, C. Vincent-Delorme8, G. Lenaers9, C. Blanchet10, P. Reynier1, P. Amati-Bonneau1; 1INSERM U1083, Angers, France, 2Département d’Ophtalmologie, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 3Département d’Ophtalmologie, CHU Angers,, Angers, France, 4Département  P03
.33 d’Ophtalmologie, CHU Lille, Lille, France, 5Département de génétique, CHU Angers, Genetic aetiology of Hearing Loss in Cyprus Angers, France, 6Département d’Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie, CHU Lille, Lille, France, V. Anastasiadou1, G. Tanteles2, C. Costi2, C. Shammas2, E. Spanou2, V. Neocleous2, L. A. 77. Département de Biochimie et Génétique, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 8Service de Phylactou2; Génétique Médicale, CH Arras, Arras, France, 9INSERM U-1051, Montpellier, France, 1010. 1Makarios III Hospital & The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, Département d’Oto-Rhino-Laryngologie, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. GJB2 Mutations in OPA1, encoding a mitochondrial dynamin-related GTPase, are Mutations in the (Connexin 26) gene are responsibGlJeB 2for moGrJeB 6than reponsible for dominant optic atrophy (DOA). About 20% of OPA1 mutation half of all cases of pre-lingual recessive inherited non-syndromic deafness carriers have complicated forms of DOA associating extra-ocular features in Europe. This study presents a mutation analysis of the and ge- such as deafness or neuromuscular disorders. Reviewing the files of 327 nes in 146 Cypriot patients with non-syndromic sensorineuGrJaBl 2h earing loss patients with an OPA1 mutation, we found 21 patients with hearing loss (SNHL) compatible with r(eGcJeBs6s-iDve1 3in S1
h8e3ri0ta) nce. Pat(iGeJnBt6s -wD1er3eS 1s8cr5e4e)ned for (6.4%). In 10 patients deafness was detected under age 20 (~48%), in 3 pa- the c.-23+1G>A splice mutation and thGe JcBo2d ing exon 2 of the gene inclu- tients over age 20 (~14%) and in 8 patients the age of onset was unknown ding also the deletions del and del . Thirty (38%). The severity of deafness ranged from mild and moderate in 14 cases patients were verified with bi-allelic mutations and with c.35delG as (66%) to profound in 5 cases (24%). Audiological tests supported the dia- the most dominating one, accounting for 81.7%, followed by p.Arg184Pro gnosis of auditory neuropathy in 8 cases. (6.7%), p.Leu90Pro (5.0%), p.Glu47stop (1.7%), delGlu120 (1.7%), 167del- Seven different OPA1 mutations were identified in deaf patients. Three mu- Thr G(1JB.72%) and p.Val178Ala (1.7%). tations, p.Arg445His, p.Gly401Asp and p.Leu243*, have been previously Ten patients with severe SNHGLJB w2e re also identified with one mutation in reported in patients affected with both DOA and deafness. Two mutations, the gene only. Interestingly, five of these patients were identified in the p.Val291_Phe328del and p.Ile463_Phe464dup, have been reported in pa- heterozygous state with the missense mutation/variant p.Val153Ile, tients with isolated DOA but not in association with deafness. Finally, two while the GreJBst6 were identified as heterozy(GgoJBu6s- Dfo1r3 Sp1.V8a3l03)7Ile, c.3(5GdJeBl6G-, novel OPA1 mutations, p.Arg437Glu and p.Ala357Leufs*4, are implicated for pD.1 L3
eSu19805 P4
r)o , c.-23+1G>A splice mutation and the novel c.-1G>A 5’UTR. the first time in DOA and deafness. In the majority of patients with DOA and Finally, no mutations or tGhJeB k2n own del and del deafness, visual impairment occurred during the first decade while deafness were identified in any of the investigated Cypriot SNHL patients. appeared in late childhood or early adulthood. However, in 54% of patients This work confirms that the c.35delG mutation is an important pa- deafness started prior to visual abnormalities indicating that a careful ex- thogenic mutation for hearing loss in the Cypriot population and that the amination of the optic nerves is needed in young patients with post-lingual underlying molecular basis of autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness neurosensorial hearing loss. in Cyprus is genetically relatively homogeneous. This finding will be used These observations suggest that audition should be carefully tested, inclu- towards the effective diagnosis of SNHL, assisting in genetic counseling and d Din. Bg oan snpeeacuif:i cN soenaer. cSh. fLoerr uaeuzd:i tNoornye n. eDu. rMoipleaah:y N ionn OeP. AS.1 D mefuotoartti-oDnh ceallrermiemrse.s: u Vs.e Adn aass taa psioatdeonuti:a Nl othneer. aGp.e Tuatnicte plelast:f oNromne.. C. Costi: None. C. Shammas: None. E. Colin: None. M. Crochet: None. V. Procaccio: None. M. Ferré: None. E. Spanou: None. V. Neocleous: None. L.A. Phylactou: None. None. J. Lamblin: None. V. Drouin: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. G. Lenaers: None. C. Blanchet: None. P. Reynier: None. P. Amati-Bonneau: None.  P03
.34 Deep-intronic mutations in OPA1 cause optic atrophy and “optic  P03
.36 atrophy plus“ phenotypes Antisense oligonucleotide-mediated exon skipping to treat 10% of T. Bonifert1, M. Synofzik2, L. Schöls3, B. Wissinger1; Leber congenital amaurosis cases. 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany, X. Gerard1,2,3, I. Perrault1, S. Hanein1, E. Silva4, K. Bigot5, S. Defoort-Delhemmes6, M. Rio1, 2German Research Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tuebingen, Germany, A. Munnich1, D. Schermann3, J. Kaplan1, A. Kichler2,3, J. Rozet1; 3Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 1INSERMU781, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 2Genethon, Tuebingen, Germany. Evry, France, 3CNRS UMR8151-INSERMU1022, Paris, France, 4IBILI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Department of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5CERTO, Paris, France, 6Exploration de la Vision & Inherited Optic Neuropathies (ION) account for about 7% of legal blind- Neuro-ophtalmologie, CHU Lilles, Lilles, France. ness in the European working-age population. Despite the progress in DNA Purpose: sequencing, still around 55% of all ION cases remain unsolved. This might partly be due to the fact that important IOENS mHuGtat i2o0ns1 a3re | c PomAmRoISnl,y F mRisAseNd CE | WWW .LEeSbeHr Gco.OngRenGital amaurosis (LCA) is a congenital or neo1n2at7alABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.38 CE P290
 Broadening the phenotype of LR P2
 mutations: association of a new blindnes s. The most common disease-causing mutation (>10%) is located LR P2
 mutation with predominantly ocular phenotype suggestive of deep in intron 26 of the gene where it creates a strong splice donor Stickler syndrome. site thatleads to the insertion of a cryptic exon encoding a premature stop G. Van Camp1, I. Schrauwen1, M. Sommen1, C. Claes1, M. Flaherty2, F. Collins3; cMoadtoenr.i aOlu arn adim M wetahso tdos :assess antisense oligonucleotide (AON)-mediated 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department exon skipping to correct the aberrant splicing. of Ophthalmology, The Childrens’ Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 3Department Patient fibroblasts harbouring the c.2991+1655 of Clinical Genetics, The Childrens’ Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia. A>G mutation and controls were transfected using antisense and sense 2’O- methyl phosphorothioate oligonucleotides designed to target ESE around tRhees umlutst aatniodn .d Tishceu esfsfiiocine:n CcEy Po2f 9s0k ipping was assessed using qRT-PCR, We- We studied two siblings from a consanguineous Iraqi family presenting with stern blot and primary cilia counting. a syndrome with high myopia, esotropia, vitreous changes, cataract, , and Expression levels were unchanged when distinct facial features (epicantic folds, a high nasal bridge and a degree of control cells were transfected using the sense or antisens ONs (p>0.05). maxillary hypoplasia). Likewise, no chaCnEgPe2 9w0as noted when patient cells were treated with the No mutation was identified in CO L9
A1/2. To identify the causative mutation, sense ONs (p>0.05). Conversely, a highly significant increase in expression we performed exome sequencing of one of the probands, which revealed a of the wildtype allele was obtained when cells were treated with new non-synonymous variant in LR P2
 that segregated in the family. The va- AONs (0.029<p<0.002) with expression levels reaching that of controls. riant (c.11483A>G; p.Asp3828Gly), is predicted damaging according to SIFT Western blot analysis evidenced increased levels of CE P290
 in patients’ and Polyphen prediction programs and is conserved among species. Muta- cell lines treated with the AOvNss but not the sense ONs. )F.inally, primary cilia tions in LR P2
 have been shown to cause the Donnai-Barrow syndrome or expression was significantly reduced in patient’s fibroblasts compared to Facio-oculo-acoustico-renal (FOAR) syndrome, a syndrome presented with controls lines (48.6%±6.5% 83.6%±3.2%; p=0.0097 Upon transfection facial abnormalities, ocular anomalies, sensorineural hearing loss, protein- with the antisevnsse ONs but not the sense versions, the proportion of ciliated uria, and diaphragmatic hernia and absent corpus callosum, although there cells increased significantly in patients, reaching levels similar to controls is variability in the expression of some features (eg absent corpus callosum (75.3%±3.5% 78.3%±3.4%; p=0.624). These results show therapeutic po- and proteinuria). This family shows a milder phenotype with some features tential of exon skipping for the treatment of the most common LCA-causing and similarities to the Donnai-Barrow syndrome, including demonstrated mX.u Gtaetriaornd.: None. I. Perrault: None. S. Hanein: None. E. Silva: None. K. Bigot: microglobulinuria. The type of mutation (non-synonymous) might explain None. S. Defoort-Delhemmes: None. M. Rio: None. A. Munnich: None. D. the milder phenotype. In conclusion, we have identified a new mutation in Schermann: None. J. Kaplan: None. A. Kichler: None. J. Rozet: None. LR P2
 that broadens the phenotypical spectrum associated with LR P2
 mu- t Gat.i Voanns. Camp: None. I. Schrauwen: None. M. Sommen: None. C. Claes: None. M. Flaherty: None. F. Collins: None.  P03
.37 Regulatory Mutations in the 5’UTR of NMNAT1, encoding the Nuclear Isoform of Nicotinamide Nucleotide Adenylyltransferase 1, cause  P03
.39 Leber Congenital Amaurosis Mainzer-Saldino syndrome is a ciliopathy caused by mutations in the F. Coppieters1, A. Baert1, A. L. Todeschini2,3, C. Van Cauwenbergh1, M. Bauwens1, S. De IFT140 gene. Jaegere1, T. de Ravel4, F. Meire5, N. Abdelmoula Bouayed6, L. Florentin-Arar7, R. A. Veitia2,3, I. Perrault1, S. Saunier2, S. Hanein1, E. Filhol2, A. Bizet2, F. Collins3, M. A. M. Salih4, S. B. P. Leroy1,8, E. De Baere1; Gerber1, N. Delphin1, E. Silva5, V. Baudouin6, M. M. Oud7, N. Shannon8, M. LeMerrer1, O. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2CNRS UMR 7592, Roche9, C. Pietrement10, C. Bole-Feyssot11, P. Nitschke12, M. Zahrate11, P. Beales13, H. H. Institut Jacques Monod, Equipe Génétique et Génomique du Développement Gonadique, Arts7, A. Munnich1, J. Kaplan1, C. Antignac2, V. Cormier-Daire1, J. Rozet1; Paris, France, 3Université Paris Diderot-Paris VII, Paris, France, 4Center for Human 1INSERMU781, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, Genetics, Leuven University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 5Hôpital Des Enfants Reine 2INSERMU983, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 3Clinical Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 6Department of Histology, Medical University of Sfax, Sfax, Genetics, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 4Pediatric Neurology, King Khalid Tunisia, 7Molecular biology and cytogenetics, Lito Maternity Hospital, Athens, Greece, University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5IBILI, Faculty of Medicine, University of 8Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Coimbra, Department of Ophthalmology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Nephrology, CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, 7Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Clinical Genetics, NMNAT1 Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 9Ophthalmology, IHU Necker, Leber Congenitaelt A amlaurosis (LCA) is the earliest inherited retinal dystrophy Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 10Pediatrics, American Memorial Hospital, (RD). Recently, coding mutations in resolved the last remaining lo- CHU Reims, Reims, France, 11Genomics Plateform, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris Descartes cus, LCA9 (Falk . 201N2)M. HNeArTe1, we aimed to identify the genetic defect in University, Paris, France, 12BioInformatics, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, an LCA9-linked consanguineous Sub-Saharan African family (F1) and deter- 13Molecular Medecin, UCL, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. mine the contribution of mutations in LCA. Introduction: MNMasNsAivTe1ly parallel sequencing of all exons and promotor regions in N4M idNeAnTti1- ty-by-descent regions of F1 identified a novel homozygous 5’UTR variant in Ciliopathies is an emerging class of genetic disorders due (c.-70A>T), which segregated with disease. Subsequent to altered cilia assembly, maintenance or function. Syndromic ciliopathies Sanger sequencing in 76 probands with LCA/early-onset RD revealed co- affecting bone development have been classified as skeletal ciliopathies. ding mutations in 5 additional probands, and identified a second homozy- Mutations in genes encoding components of the intraflagellar transport gous 5’UTR variant (c.-69C>T) in a Moroccan consanguineous LCA family (IFT) complex A, that drives retrograde ciliary transport, are a major cause (F2). In bothN FM1N aAnTd1 F2, cDNA sequencing detected no other potential patho- of skeletal ciliopathies. Mainzer-Saldino syndrome (MSS) is a rare disorder genic variants but revealed loss of heterozygosity in heterozygous carriers, cMheatrhaoctdesr iaznedd rbeys puhltasl:angeal cone-shaped epiphyses, chronic renal failure suggesting mRNA degradation. Subsequently, significantly lower and early-onset severe retinal dystrophy. mRNA expression in leukocytes was shown for the homozygous mutants IFT1 W40e collected 16 families presenting three diagnostic in comparison with healthy controls. Luciferase assays for both adjacent criteria of MSS. Through ciliome re-sequencing combined to Sanger sequen- 5’UTR variants in COS-7, KGN and COV434 cell lines revealed significant- cing, we identified mutations in seven MSS families. The effect of the ly loNwMeNr AaTc1tivity for c.-69C>T in comparison with the wild-type 5’UTR. Of mutations on the IFT140 localization was assessed using flagged-IFT140 note, both families show LCA with evolutive macular iNnvMoNlvAeTm1ent, typical mutant proteins which showed a partial to nearly complete loss of basal for -related disease. body localization associated with an increase I FoTf 1c4y0toplasm staining while INnM cNoAnTcl1usion, this study sustained the role of coding mutations the wild-type Flagged-IFT140 protein predominantly localized to the basal in LCA. Moreover, the identification of two neighboring 5’UTR variants in bodies in RP E1
 cells. To assess the impact of mutations on cilioge- makes this the first study to link 5’UTR regulatory mutations to nesis, abundance and morphology of primary cilia were studied in cultured congenital blindness, and may impact upon the role of 5’UTR mutations in fibroblasts of patients and detected absent cilia in a high proportion of pati- h Fe. rCeodpitpaireyte brsli:n Ndonnees.s Ain. Bgaeenretr: aNl.one. A.L. Todeschini: None. C. Van ent cells compared to controls. Ciliary localization of anterograde IFTs were Cauwenbergh: None. M. Bauwens: None. S. De Jaegere: None. T. de Ravel: aClotenrceldu siino MnSS patient fibroblasts supporting the pivotal role of IFT140 in None. F. Meire: None. N. Abdelmoula Bouayed: None. L. Florentin-Arar: None. R.A. Veitia: None. B.P. Leroy: None. E. De Baere: None. proIpFeTr1 d4e0v elopment and function of ciliated cells. : Here we report on compound heterozygosity or homozygosity for mutations in seven MSS families. After Sensenbrenner and Jeune syndromes, MSS is the ultimate skeletal ciliopathy ascribed to IFT disorga- nI.i zPaetriroanu.lt: None. S. Saunier: None. S. Hanein: None. E. Filhol: None. A. Bizet: 128 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index None. F. Collins: None. M.A.M. Salih: None. S. Gerber: None. N. Delphin:  P03
.42 None. E. Silva: None. V. Baudouin: None. M.M. Oud: None. N. Shannon: Genes and mutations for olfactory phenotypes None. M. LeMerrer: None. O. Roche: None. C. Pietrement: None. C. Bole- T. Olender, I. Keydar, A. Alkelai, E. Ben-Asher, D. Lancet; Feyssot: None. P. Nitschke: None. M. Zahrate: None. P. Beales: None. H.H. The Weizmann Instiute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Arts: None. A. Munnich: None. J. Kaplan: None. C. Antignac: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. J. Rozet: None. Genetic variations in the Olfactory Receptor (OR) genes are likely responsib- le for odorant-specific sensitivity differences (anosmias),while variations in  P03
.40 auxiliary genes, mediating neuronal transduction, development and mainte- A missense mutation in the ALDH1A3 gene cause autosomal recessive nance, are candidates underlying general olfactory sensitivity (GOS) pheno- microphthalmia in a large consaguisnuos family. types, including congenital general anosmia (CGA). We recently generated a R. Gershoni-Baruch1,2, E. Dagan3, A. Mory2; comprehensive account of genomic missenese variations in human ORs. We 11Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2The Ruth find that each individual harbors, 500-600 allelic variants with different co- and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 3Faculty of Social ding sequence, a considerably higher number than locus count (413). With Welfare and Health Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel. the reported allele-specific sensory neuronal expression, the brain receives distinct neuronal readouts of all such alleles. Further, we identified 239 se- gregating pseudogenes (SPGs), ORs with both intact and pseudo forms in the Here we report on large Muslim inbred kindred from Northern Israel with population. A “barcode” of missense and nonsense variants thus underlies a isolated microphthamia/anophthalmia in nine affected individuals. Assu- highly personalized smell receptor repertoire. One borderline signal, requi- ming autosomal recessive mode of inheritance we ring validation, shows lower sensitivity to a specific odorant associated with performed whole genome linkage analysis, on four DNA samples of affected an OR pseudogene allele. In parallel, we performed a systematic exploration individuals. Homozygosity mapping techniques were employed and a 1.5MB for auxiliary olfactory genes and their variations. This was done using 11 region, homozygous in all affected individuals, was delineated, further lin- data sources, including RNA-Seq of olfactory epithelium, and literature sur- kage analysis resulted a two point LOD score of 7.9. The region contained 9 vey of olfactory-related diseases and mouse phenotypes. genes, one of which; ALDH1A3, was a clear candidate gene. This gene seems One auxiliary gene variation appears to affect sensitivity to a specific odo- to be the key enzyme in the formation of a retinoic acid gradient along the rant, suggesting a novel odorant processing mechanism. These efforts now dorso-ventral axis during the early eye development and also in the deve- also assist in an on-going whole exome sequencing study of 66 Jewish fami- lopment of the olfactory system. Sanger sequence analysis revealed a mis- lies with CGA, showing various modes of inheritance. The identification of sense mutation, causing a substitution of Valine to Methionine at position specific pathogenic functional CGA variants will help elucidate the molecu- 71. Analyzing the Val71Met mutation using Mutation Taster online predicts l Ta.r O blaesnids eorf: gNeonneer.a Il. oKlefaycdtaorr:y N soennes. iAti.v Aitlyk.elai: None. E. Ben-Asher: None. D. this variant to be diseasecasing (probability score:0.92). The effect of the Lancet: None. missense mutation on the enzymatic activity was studied in vitro but results showed no changes between mutated and wiled type ALDH1A3. Recently, Lucas et al (2013), have reported on three families with anophthalmia/mi-  P03
.43 crophthalmia caused by mutations in ALDH1A3 gene. In summary, we re- Association of TGFB1 with otosclerosis in a population of clinically port on nine affected individuals from consanguineous kindred, bearing a and histologically confirmed Hungarian patients missense mutation in M. Sommen1, G. Van Camp1, B. Liktor2, P. Csomor3, E. Fransen1, I. Sziklai3, I. Schrauwen1, ALDH1A3, a key enzyme in the formation of a retinoic acid gradient during T. Karosi3; t Rh.e G eearrslyh oenyei- Bdaervueclohp: mNoennet.. E. Dagan: None. A. Mory: None. 1University of Antwerp, Department of Medical Genetics, Edegem, Belgium, 2Bajcsy- Zsilinszky Hospital, ENT Department, Budapest, Hungary, 3University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Center, Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Debrecen, Hungary.  P03
.41 Genetic analysis of insensitivity to pain in hunting dogs: a model for human sensory neuropathies J. Plassais1, M. Paradis2, B. Hedan1, A. Pommier1, E. Guaguère3, l. Lagoutte1, C. Hitte1, C. Otosclerosis is a frequent cause of hearing impairment in the Caucasian po- Andre1; pulation characterized by abnormal resorption and deposition of the bone 1CNRS - UMR6290 - Université Rennes1 - IGDR, rennes, France, 2University of Montreal, of the otic capsule. It is a complex disease caused by both environmental St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada, 3Clinique Vétérinaire Saint Bernard, Lomme, France. and genetic factors. Case-control association studies have implicated several genes. In order to confirm these susceptibility genes for otosclerosis, we stu- died a unique Hungarian otosclerosis population in which the presence of Among different human Hereditary Sensory Autonomic Neuropathies otosclerotic foci was confirmed by histological investigation. This inCcOlLu1siAo1n (HSAN) and some forms of Charcot-Marie Tooth diseases (CMT), several cTrGitFeBr1iu mBM hPa2s nBeMvePr4 b AeGenT used R iEnL pNr)e vious association studies. We exami- are characterized by insensitivity to pain sometimes combined with self- ned thirteen single nucleotide polymorphismTsG (FSNB1Ps) in six genes ( , mutilation. Strikingly, several purebred dogs also present similar clinical , , , and in 153 otosclerosis patients and 300 characteristics reported in the literature for fifty years. In the dog, clinical unrelated controls. An association between (rs1800472) and clini- signs appear in 4 months old puppies and consist of acral analgesia, with or cally and histologically confirmed otosclerosis was detected, with a similar without sudden intense licking, biting and severe self-mutilation of the feet, effect size across histologically confirBmMePd2 and nBoMnP-c4onfirmed otosclerosis whereas proprioception, motor abilities and spinal reflexes remain intact. populations. The CfaOcLt1 tAh1at othAeGr Tg)enes did not reRpEliLcNat, e could be due to dif- Despite its rare occurrence in the whole dog species, several hunting dog ferent reasons such as lack of power ( and ) and false positive in- breeds are clearly predisposed with a higher risk, i.e. estimated to 1 % in the itial association ( and . However, for with very reasonable French spaniels. Since only a few genes responsible for human homologous powReErL aNnd for which association was robustly replicated in previous studies neuropathies have been identified, we took advantage of the dog model to with several independent populations, this seems very unlikely. The results search for the genetic causes of this disease in hunting dogs. To this aim, we for may reflect the possibility that otosclerosis is clinically heteroge- collected blood samples from hunting breeds of which 30 are affected. Pedi- nMe.o Suos mwmitehn s:e Nvoenrael. eGn. dVoapnh Ceanmotpy:p Neosn, eea. cBh. Lwikittho ra: dNioffneer.e Pn. tC msoomleocur:l aNro bnaes. iEs.. gree analyses allowed us to confirm a recessive inherited disease. A Genome Fransen: None. I. Sziklai: None. I. Schrauwen: None. T. Karosi: None. Wide Association Study (GWAS) using the Illumina Canine HD SNP array with 24 affected and 40 healthy dogs, allowed us to identify a single 1.5Mb locus not yet described for human HSAN and CMT, with a Bonferroni correc-  P03
.44 ted p-value of 2.5x10-6. We are thoroughly investigating this locus through a Study of allelic variants related to Quantitaive Sensory Testing capture sequencing strategy since, interestingly, it contains candidate genes parameters in patients with CRPS not yet associated to human neuropathies and thus constitutes an opportu- M. López Bartolomé1, J. Fernández Mateos1, M. Sánchez Barba2, M. García Mellado3, C. n Ji.t yP ltaos isdaeisn:t iNfyo nnee.w M n. Peuarraodpiast:h Nyo gneen. eBs. iHne hduamn:a Nnosn.e. A. Pommier: None. E. Muriel Villoria3, R. González Sarmiento1; Guaguère: None. L. Lagoutte: None. C. Hitte: None. C. Andre: None. 1Unit of Molecular Medicine. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Statistic Department. University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Unidad del Dolor. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. Background: Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic pain con- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEd |i tWionW, rWesu.Elt SoHf dGys.fOunRctGion in the central or peripheral nervous system1s2.9ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.46 DNA Diagnostics of Retinal Stargardt Dystrophy Type 1 in Russia Due to the level of difficulty in the evaluation and diagnosis of neuropathic M. T. Bondarenko, A. L. Chukhrova, A. N. Loginova, A. V. Poliakov; pain, a new technique, called QST (Quantitative Sensory Testing) is being Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. used to measure changes in somatosensory function. The aim of our study was to investigate the genetic variation of 16 genes involved in nervous system pathways, in patients from Salamanca (Spain), Stargardt disease is the most common hereditary early-onset macular dege- diagnosed CRPS, comparing these results with different parameters of the neration. Autosomal-recessive Stargardt desease type 1 (STGD1) is caused QST. by mutations in the ATP-binding cassette transporter gene (ABCA4). ABCA4 Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by standard gene mapped to 1p22, encodes 2273 amino-acid, includes 50 exons. There techniques. We selected 16 non-synonymous SNPs. Studies were performed are about 500 mutations in the ABCA4 gene have been reported. using TaqMan probes for the analysis of the polymorphisms in the following The two groups of unrelated control individuals and the two groups of unre- genes:. OPRM1, OPRD1, OPRK, CNR1, DRD2, GABRA, EDN1, TRPV1, NO S3
 lated STGD1 patients from Russia were analysed for the prevalent European and BDNF. ABCA4 gene mutations: G863A, G1961E, A1038V,  L541
P,  P1380
L, T1526M, Pain evaluation using VAS and QST. Statistical analysis performed with  P2027
F, R2107H by MLPA. SPSS. In the first control group (882 individuals) the allele frequency of G863A, Results and conclusion: Preliminary analysis showed differences (p<0,05) A1038V and G1961E were 0.17%, 0.51% and 0.62%, respectively. In the se- when we compare patients and controls in OPRD1, CNR1, GABRA6 and cond control group (201 individuals) was found  L541
P only, the allele fre- BDNF genes. Analysis of VAS values showed significant differences in GA- quency - 0.25. BRA1 and EDN1 genes. In the first patients group (124 individuals) the allele frequency of G863A We also compared SNPs genotypic distribution with different parameters were 1.2% and G1961E - 7.7%; in the second patients group (110 indivi- of the QST, and we found significant differences in OPRK, OPRM1 and CNR1 duals) allele frequency of A1038V,  L541
P,  P1380
L were 17.7%, 18.2% and genes. 1.8%, respectively (p<0.05). Other mutations were not found. That support the hypothesis that polymorphism in genes involved in diffe- Heterozygous carrier frequency of G863A is high in Europe (1:18 in Nort- rent pathways could be associated with increased susceptibility to develop hern Europe), but it is significantly lower in Russia (1:294). CRPS and suffer pain. SNPs in these genes are also associated with QST pa-  L541
P is detected in linking with A1038V in the compound heterozygous rameters, reinforcing that QST could be an useful tool for the diagnose of in 31 patients, and without A1038V in two patients only. One patient had a n Me.u Lróoppeazth Bica rptaoilno.mé: None. J. Fernández Mateos: None. M. Sánchez A1038V alone. Barba: None. M. García Mellado: None. C. Muriel Villoria: None. R. González For the first stage STGD1 diagnosis seems comfortable to use MLPA-system Sarmiento: None. to detect the five mutations, that we have found, as a full ABCA4 gene se- q Mu.eTn. Bcionngd ias reexnpkeon: sNivoen.e. A.L. Chukhrova: None. A.N. Loginova: None. A.V. Poliakov: None.  P03
.45 A dual approach for comprehensive genetic testing of ABCA4 in Stargardt disease  P03
.47 M. Bauwens1, C. Van Cauwenbergh1, S. De Jaegere1, S. Lefever1, B. D‘haene2, F. Pattyn1, B. Whole genome analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms and Leroy3, E. De Baere1, F. Coppieters1; copy number variants in fibromyalgia suggest a role for the central 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Biogazelle, Ghent, nervous system Belgium, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. E. Docampo1,2, G. Escaramís1,2, M. Gratacós1,2, S. Villatoro1,2, A. Puig1,2, M. Kogevinas3, J. Purpose: Vidal4,5, J. Carbonell6,5, J. Rivera7,5, J. Alegre8,5, A. Collado9,5, R. Rabionet1,2, X. Estivill1,2; 1Center Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Genetic testing of Stargardt disease, a frequent retinal dystrophy, Barcelona, Spain, 3The Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), is mostly limited to Asper chip analysis or Sanger sequencing of the coding Barcelona, Spain, 4Rheumatology Unit, Hospital General de Guadalajara,, Guadalajara, region. To overcome its cost and limitations, we designed a comprehensive Spain, 5FSGCDB Group (Fibromyalgia and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Spanish Genetic molecular test based on massively parallel sequencing (MPS) and quantita- and Clinical Data Bank), Foundation FF, Barcelona, Spain, 6Fibromyalgia Unit, Rheumatology Service, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 7CenRheumatology Unit, tMiveet hPoCdRs (: qPCR) to identify single nucleotide and copy number variations Instituto Provincial de Rehabilitación, Hospital Universitario Gregorio Marañón, ter (CNV) respectively. ABCA4 Genomic Regulation (CRG), Madrid, Spain, 8Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Unit, Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 9Fibromyalgia Unit, Rheumatology Service, Hospital Following enrichment of the coding region, pools of 12 patients were Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. sequenced (Miseq, IllumAinBaC)A.4 CNV screening comprised 50 qPCR assays, performed in 48 patients with oRnees uhlettse: rozygo us or no mutation following chip and/or sequencing, Fibromyalgia (FM) is a highly disabling syndrome defined by a low pain and 27 controls (L C480
, Roche). threshold and a permanent state of pain. The mechanisms explaining this UsingMPS, a 20x minimal coverage was reached for 98% of the complex disorder remain unclear and its genetic factors have not been iden- amplicons. A variant allele frequency threshold of 25% allowed detection tified. The aim of this study was to elucidate genetic susceptibility factors of 99% of previously identified variants. In addition, a previously undetec- for FM. ted indel mutation was identified in a patient with one known heterozygous We used the Illumina 1 million duo array to perform a genomewide asso- mutation. ciation study (GWAS), and Agilent’s 2X400K platform for array comparative CNV analysis revealed a novel heterozygous deletion in a patient carrier of a genomic hybridization (aCGH) to identify regions varying in copy number kCnoonwclnu shieotnerso: zygous sApBlicCeA 4site mutation. The deletion covers 3-4 kb, span- that could be involved in FM susceptibility. ning exons 20-22. Breakpoint delineation is ongoing. GWAS was performed in 300 FM cases and 203 controls. No SNP reached ABCA4 MPS for proves to be a cost-efficient alternative to San- GWAS significance, but 21 of the most associated SNPs were chosen for re- ger sequencing and chip analysis. In addition, qPCR screening identified a plication in over 900 cases and 900 pain free-controls. Four of the strongest novel deletion, being the second one reported. CNV analysis might be associated SNPs selected for replication showed a nominal association in useful in this fraction of patients (30%) in whom only one or no coding mu- the joint analysis, and one, rs11127292 (MYT1L) was found to be associated tation can be detected by standard approaches. Finally, the low prevalence to FM with low comorbidities (p=4.28X10-5, OR (95%CI)=0.58 (0.44-0.75). of CNVs in unsolved Stargardt cases might point to other mechanisms such By aCGH, an intronic deletion in NRXN3 showed to be associated to female aMs .v Baariuawtieonnss: iNno nnoen. -Cc.o Vdainng C raeugwioennsb.ergh: None. S. De Jaegere: None. S. cases of FM with low levels of comorbidities (p=0.021, OR (95%CI)= 1.46 Lefever: None. B. D‘haene: None. F. Pattyn: None. B. Leroy: None. E. De (1.05-2.04)). Baere: None. F. Coppieters: None. Both GWAS and aCGH results point at a role for the central nervous system in FM genetic susceptibility. If the proposed FM candidate genes are further validated in replication studies, this would highlight a neurocognitive invol- vement in this disorder, currently considered musculoskeletal and affective. T Eh. iDs owcoarmkp woa: sN ponaert. iGal.l yE sscuaprpaomrítse:d N boyn eE.N MG.A GGrEa.tacós: None. S. Villatoro: None. A. Puig: None. M. Kogevinas: None. J. Vidal: None. J. Carbonell: None. J. Rivera: None. J. Alegre: None. A. Collado: None. R. Rabionet: None. X. Estivill: None. 130 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P03
.48 Analysis of aniridia patients by CGH-array A. Franzoni1, P. Dello Russo1, A. Mariutti2, G. Damante3; Numerous SCN5A mutations affect the cardiac sodium channel Nav1.5 1Istituto Genetica medica-A.O.U. SMM, Udine, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze mediche e α-subunit and cause several types of arrhythmias. By expressing N- and biologiche-Università degli Studi di Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Istituto Genetica medica-A.O.U. C-terminal SCN5A mutations (R104W and R1860GfsX12) with wild-type SMM; Dipartimento di Scienze mediche e biologiche-Università degli Studi di Udine, (WT) channels in HEK cells to mimic the heterozygous state of the patients, Udine, Italy. we showed that interactions between α-subunits could modulate the chan- PAX6 nel function, location and potentially the disease phenotypes. When expressed alone, the N- and C-terminal mutants were mostly degra- Aniridia is a rare genetic disorder due to mutation of the P AgXen6e . ded and showed either reduced or no INa density. When co-expressed with Among these mutations there are deletions, which are often not detectable WT channels, the N-terminal mutant exerted a dominant-negative effect on through direct sequencing. Identification of deletions of the genomic WT channels by retaining them in the endoplasmic reticulum. In contrast, can be performed by MLPA. However, the MLPA system does nPoAtX 6al low a co-transfection of WT channels with C-terminal mutants almost restored precision identification of the deletion borders. In order to set up a system the INa density to the level of WT and increased total and cell surface prote- for a precise identification of deletions and their borders in the geno- in expression of mutant channels, suggesting that WT allow mutant proteins mic region, we used the CGH-arraPyA Xa6pproach. A chip was designed in which to escape proteasomal degradation. Co-immunoprecipitation studies sho- oligonucleotides spanning a region of 20 Mb, 10 Mb in position 5’ and 10 wed that the WT α-subunits interacted with each other, as well as with the Mb inP ApXo6si tion 3‘, respectively to gene, with a probe average frequency N- and C-terminal mutants. In addition, altered biophysical properties of INa about 500 bp. This chip was used to analyse aniridia pPaAtiXe6nts with deletion current were found at the heterozygous state for both mutants. of a genomic region previously identified by MLPA. Five individuals In conclusion, interaction between Nav1.5 α-subunits could explain the va- show deletions in a position 3P‘A tXo6 the last exon of the gene. The com- riable phenotypes observed in SCN5A-mutation carriers. The N-terminal va- mon region of these deletions has a size of 154 Kb, and inPclAuXd6es elements of riant associated with a loss-of-function due to its dominant-negative effect transcriptional control of the gene. Our data confirm that aniridia can on WT channels lead to a Brugada type-I ECG pattern. In contrast, the partial be due to deletioPnA Xo6f transcriptional control elements of gene and de- rescue of the INa current of the C-terminal variant and its altered biophysi- monstrate that the CGH-array approach can be successfully used to identify cal properties could explain the complex clinical picture of sick sinus syn- dAe.l eFtriaonnzso inni :t Nheo ne. P. Dgeenlloo mRuics rseog:i Nono.ne. A. Mariutti: None. G. Damante: d Ar.o Zmiyea adnedh -aIstrleiaelm fi:b Nroilnlaet.i Jo.n C wlaittohto: uNto Bnreu. gSa. dDau EchCaGt eplaettt:e Nronn.e. E. None. Gandjbakhch: None. I. Denjoy: None. F. Hidden-Lucet: None. I. Deschênes: None. S. Hatem: None. A. Coulombe: None. N. Neyroud: None. P. Guicheney: None.  P04
.01 Microdeletion of 6q25.1 and congenital heart defect: a case report E. Moschella1, I. Loddo1, M. I. S. Crapanzano1, V. Salpietro1, F. De Luca2, M. P. Calabrò2, S.  P04
.03 Briuglia1; Regulation of Expression of CY P19
A1, MIF, ABCA1 by the Retinoic Acid 1Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, Messina, Italy, 2UOS Cardiologia Pediatrica, Receptor-Related Orphan Receptor α (RORα) Messina, Italy. N. Coban, C. Gulec, B. Ozsait-Selcuk, N. Erginel-Unaltuna; Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. We describe the case of a girl that was born to nonconsanguineous parents at 39 weeks of gestation by Cesarean section performed for perinatal suffe- The RORα is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of transcription ring and intrauterine growth arrest. Birth weight was 2.240 kg. At birth was factors that plays an important role in the regulation of many physiologi- diagnosed subaortic Perimembranous Ventricular Septal Defect, so therapy cal processes. Melatonin and cholesterol are two known ligands of RORα with Furosemide e ACE-Inh was immediately started. She had also left renal and both were shown to be important for cardiovascular diseases like athe- pielectasy. rosclerosis. Therefore, it was suggested that RORα might play a role in the Phenotypic examination was remarkable for: flat nasal bridge, epicanthic pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. In this study, we identified RORα response folds, folded right helix, short neck, small hands and feet, eyelid ptosis, joint elements (ROREs) within the promoter regions of the CY P19
A1, MIF and laxity, cutis laxa, generalized hypotonia, auxological parameters <3rd centi- ABCA1 genes. ChIP analysis demonstrated RORα occupancy of the CY P19
A1, le. Karyotype was normal. MIF and ABCA1 promoters in THP-1 and HUVEC cells. Briefly, THP-1 and HU- At the age of 18 months she was hospitalized for failure to thrive, recurrent VEC cells were treated with RORα specific ligands (CPG52608 and SR1001) vomiting, food refusal and episodes of arrhythmia. Holter-ECG showed “par- and after the activation of RORα, the expression of the target genes were oxysmal supraventricular tachycardia“ and then beta-blocker therapy was analyzed. In the result of the analyses, we found that expression of some of started. target genes were differentiated in THP-1 and HUVEC cells. Furthermore, At the age of 32 months brain MRI showed „Expansion of the cisterna magna we investigated whether RORα activity in THP-1 macrophages, which play with a wide communication with the fourth ventricle, hypoplasia of cerebel- an important role in the development of atherosclerosis and express tar- lar hemispheres and vermis (Dandy Walker variant).“ get genes of RORα, is affected by the presence of simvastatin. We observed Array-CGH showed a de novo microdeletion in the 6q25.1 region, extended that simvastatin repressed the expression of the studied target genes, and approximately 630 kb. that this repression was partially prevented by RORα ligands (especially by In the critical region 6q25.1 was identified TAB2 gene (TAK1-binding pro- SR1001). These data suggest that CY P19
A1, MIF and ABCA1 are direct tar- tein 2), responsible for numerous non-syndromic congenital heart anoma- get genes of RORα. With the demonstration of the genes that involve in the lies such as ASD, VSD, aortic stenosis and congenital hypoplasia of the aortic pathogenesis of atherosclerosis might be controlled by an inducible tran- arch. In a family abnormalities in heart rhythm (paroxysmal supraventricu- scription factor, this study offers a potential therapeutic treatment for the lar tachycardia) was also described in literature. d Nis. eCaosbea.n: None. C. Gulec: None. B. Ozsait-Selcuk: None. N. Erginel- Extensive studies carried out in patients with congenital cardiac defects Unaltuna: None. demonstrated the involvement of this gene in the development of cardiac s Etr. uMcotuscrehse.lla: None. I. Loddo: None. M.I.S. Crapanzano: None. V. Salpietro: None. F. De Luca: None. M.P. Calabrò: None. S. Briuglia: None.  P04
.04 Genetic risk factors for atrial fibrillation in the Japanese population K. Ozaki, T. Morizono, T. Tsunoda, M. Kubo, Y. Nakamura, T. Tanaka;  P04
.02 RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. New mechanisms underlying the variable phenotypes caused by N- and C-terminal SCN5A mutations in silico A. Ziyadeh-Isleem1,2, J. Clatot1,2,3, S. Duchatelet1,2, E. Gandjbakhch1,2,4, I. Denjoy1,2,5, F. The etiology of atrial fibrillation (AF) associates on complex interactions of Hidden-Lucet1,2,4, I. Deschênes3, S. Hatem1,2, A. Coulombe1,2, N. Neyroud1,2, P. Guicheney1,2; multiple environmental and genetic factors. We recently reported 1Inserm U956, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Université Pierre et Marie replication study for AF susceptible chromosomal loci identified Caucasian Curie, Paris, France, 3Heart and Vascular Research Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 4AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département descent by 1a) genome wide association study (GWAS) results in a Japanese de Cardiologie. Centre de Référence pour les Maladies Cardiaques Héréditaires, Paris, population . Here, to further validate the results of the Japanese GWAS and France, 5Centre de Référence pour les Maladies Cardiaques Héréditaires. Service de to identify novel AF susceptible loci, we genotyped the high-ranking single cardiologie, Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France. nucleotide polymorphisms in the GWAS with additional samples of approxi- mately 1,600 cases and 17,100 controls in the Japanese. Through combina- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE t | io W n oW f thW e . GE WS AH S G re. sO ulR tsG , the known AF locus on chromosome 4q25, clo1s3e 1toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PITX2 CAV1 ZFHX3 -15 P0
RRX1 Methods and results , showed extremely strong association (P <  P1
 0 ). Other three known and associated cardiovascular abnormalities in fetal TS are scarce. loci, locus on 7q31, locus on 16q22 and -l8ocus on 1q24P, were also validated with statistical signifPicIaTnXc2e P(RR<X 11.0Z xF H10X3). Furthermo- We studied post-mortem heart specimens of 36 TS fetuses and one TS ne- re, we id-8entified two novel association signal on chromosome 10 and 12 ( wborn. Abnormal aortic valve morphology was observed in 32 (86%): BAV < 5 x 10 ). Interestingly, the four genes ( , , and the gene in 28 (76%), unicommissural valve in 2 (5%) and atresia in 2 (5%). In BAV, on chromosome 12) encode transcription related factors with homeobox the leaflets showed AP-orientation in 61% and left-right (LR) orientation in domain found in proteins related to cardiopulmonary development and/or 39%a. lTlhere were no significant differences in occurrence of additional car- differPeInTtXia2tiCoAnV. 1St r2atification by age at diagnosis revealed that the greater diovascular abnormalities between hearts with AP-BAV and LR-BAV. Howe- odds ratios observed in the younger age than the older one on the three ver, hearts with LR-BAV showed ascending aorta hypoplasia and tubular loci, , , and chromosome 12. By combination of the six genetic hCyopnocplulassiioan of the B-segment, as opposed to only 55% and 64% of hearts factors, the odds rNataiotu hraes Griesneent tiocs 4.5. These results indicate that the genetic with AP-BAV, respectively. 1fa)ctors significantly contribute to the etiology of AF in the Japanese. KE.l Olinzaokr iP: TN oente a. lT.,. Morizono: None. T4.4 T, s6u7n0o-d6a7:5 N (o2n0e1. 2M).. Kubo: None. Y. The large majority of TS fetuses shows abnormal aortic valve morphology. Nakamura: None. T. Tanaka: None. BAVs with different leaflet orientations are present, implying that haplo-in- sufficiency of sex-chromosomal genes can lead to different BAV morphology types, and that additional factors have a role in determination of BAV mor-  P04
.05 phology. As the proportion of LR-BAV is higher in TS fetuses than reported in A homozygous mutation in Smoothened, a member of the Sonic aKd.u vlatsn, LERn-gBeAleVn m: Naoyn hea. vMe. Ma .w Boarrsteel ipnrgosg:n Noosnise .t hAa.Cn .A GPi-tBteAnVb einrg TeSr-.de Groot: None. M.J.H. Baars: None. A.V. Postma: None. B.J.M. Mulder: None. M.R.M. Hedgehog (SHH)-GLI pathway is involved in human syndromic Jongbloed: None. atrioventricular septal defect M. E. Baardman1, Y. Sribudiani2, F. Verheijen2, L. M. A. van Unen2, R. Brouwer2, M. van den Hout2, C. Kockx2, W. van Ijcken2, T. van Essen1, P. van der Zwaag1, G. J. de Marchie Sarvaas1, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, R. M. W. Hofstra2;  P04
.07 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Center Phenotypic variability in generalized arterial calcification of infancy. Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. P. Marin Reina, L. Marín Marzal, T. Guixeres Esteve, B. Fernandez Tudela, A. Alberola Introduction Pérez, A. Pérez Aytés; Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain. Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) is a common congenital heart disease with a high impact on morbidity. It is often accompanied by other congenital INTRODUCTION: The generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is anomalies and previous studies have shown that in these syndromic AVSDs a rare disease, with autosomal recessive inheritance. Eventhough 85% die defects in the SHH-GLI signaling pathway are major etiological factors. One during the first six months due to heart failure, there are wide phenotypical crucial member of the SHH-GLI signaling pathway is the receptor protein variability with patients with long term survival. An early treatment with sMmeothotohdesned. Here we present the first reported homozygous smoothened diphosphonates has been used with good results. We present here two un- mutation in two syndromic AVSD patients. related patients with different outcomes. CASE 1: 5 weeks old newborn, premature of 33 weeks, transferred to our Two probands, a twin boy and girl, presented with an AVSD, postaxial poly- hospital due to heart failure and cardiorrespiratory arrest. The suspected dactyly and skin syndactyly of the second and third toes of both feet. The boy diagnoses were viral myocharditis versus metabolopathy. The boy died four also had hypospadias. The parents were consanguineous and they had one days later. The diagnosis of GACI was done by the anatomophatological stu- healthy older child. Karyotyping was normal and Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndro- dy. mRees wulatss excluded. Exome sequencing was performed and candidate variants CASE 2: Patient born at 32 weeks of gestation with hidrops faetalis. 30 were validated. weeks of gestation had detected a pericardial effusion and hyperechogenic SMO arterial in ultrasound. Echocardiography revealed calcifications in aorta and A novel homozygous missense mutation p.R575W (c.1725C>T) in exon 10 coronary arteries. Computed tomography and ultrasound showed extensi- of the gene (7q32.3) was detected. Functional studies in fibroblasts of ve calcifications until the iliac arteries with low flow in renal arteries. The the patients showed normal expression of the SMO protein but an abnormal diagnosis of GACI was made and therapy with etidronate was started when localization of SMO protein, outside the cilia. Moreover we show severely the child was 22 days old. All calcifications disappeared when the child was reduced downstream GLI1 mRNA expression after stimulation with the SHH 15 months and the etidronate was stopped in the second year old. Actually, agonist purmorphamine, These results, together with the previously descri- patient is 6 and asymptomatic. bed association of SHH signalling defects with AVSD and SLOS, suggest that DISCUSSION: A high index of suspicion of these disease is needed in order to t Mhi.sE .S BMaOa rmdmutaanti:o Nno inse i.n Yv.o Slvriebdu dinia snyin: dNroonme.i cF .A VVeSrhDe iinje hnu: mNoannes.. L.M.A. van use an early treatment with biphosphonates. Also, the genetic counseling is Unen: None. R. Brouwer: None. M. van den Hout: None. C. Kockx: None. W. very important for those families. There are some questions not solved like van Ijcken: None. T. van Essen: None. P. van der Zwaag: None. G.J. de Marchie Sarvaas: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: t Ph.e M daurrina tRioenin oaf: tNhoen ter.e La.t mMaernínt aMnadr zthale: fNaocntoer. sT .c Gonudixietiroensi nEgs ttehvee e: vNoolnuet.i oBn. . Fernandez Tudela: None. A. Alberola Pérez: None. A. Pérez Aytés: None. None.  P04
.08  P04
.06 Whole-exome sequencing in familial calcific aortic valve stenosis Bicuspid aortic valve morphology in fetal Turner syndrome S. Le Scouarnec1, C. Dina2, C. Scott1, M. Hurles1, N. Carter1, H. Le Marec2, V. Probst2, T. Le K. van Engelen1,2, M. M. Bartelings3, A. C. Gittenberger-de Groot3, M. J. H. Baars1, A. V. Tourneau2, J. Schott2; Postma4, B. J. M. Mulder2, M. R. M. Jongbloed5,6; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2INSERM 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, UMR1087, l‘institut du thorax, Nantes, France. 2Dept. of Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 33 Dept. of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Heart Failure Research Center, Dept. of Anatomy and Embryology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands., Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Dept. of Anatomy and Calcific aortic valve stenosis (CAVS) is a complex disease under the influence Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 6Dept. of Cardiology, of risk factors (e.g. dyslipidemia) as well as genetic polymorphisms (e.g. in Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. APOA). The identification of rare genetic variants with a strong effect would Background give major insights into the mechanisms leading the bone-like phenotype. Mutations in the NOTCH1 gene have been linked to aortic valve calcification but they only explain a handful of cases and also lead to congenital anoma- Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is a common congenital heart defect. Animal lies. Our aim is to uncover the first genes involved in ‘degenerative’ CAVS, studies demonstrated that BAVs with different leaflet orientations have di- using families that appear to be monogenic autosomal dominant forms of stinct etiologies. BAV is particularly common in Turner syndrome (TS). As CAVS, including a very large pedigree of >50 cases. TS patients share a common genetic abnormality (monosomy X), one would First, we sequenced the exome of 20 patients affected by severe CAVS, from expect a common morphogenetic background for BAV and thus the same 9 families with ≥3 cases (mean depth: ~82X per patient). The hundreds of BAV leaflet orientation. Indeed, 95% of BAVs in TS adults were shown to rare variants were prioritised according to their functional consequence h1a3ve2 anterior-posterior (AP) leaflet orientation. EDaStHa oGn 2B0AV1 3m o| rPpAhoRloIgSy, FRaAndN tCheEir |s WegrWegWati.oEnS wHitGh .tOheR CGAVS phenotype in the families. As a vali-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index dation study, we sequenced a target of 500 kb (Agilent SureSelect capture, were identified in 87% of the alleles. The most common point mutation in Illumina HiSeq sequencing) in 475 CAVS cases. The 500-kb target contained our population was the pseudogene specific variant p.Q318X (26%). Three exonic regions of candidate genes from our exome sequencing project (69 novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci were identified in the genes) or the literature (31 genes), and regulatory regions. After applying CY P21
A2 gene which seems to be specific for the Tunisian population. The standard frequency and quality filters, we performed burden tests to iden- overall concordance between genotype and phenotype was 98%. tify CAVS disease genes. With this study the molecular basis of CAH has been characterized, provi- The identification of rare genetic variants within this project could lead to ding useful results for clinicians in terms of prediction of disease severity, the possibility of alternative patient management for a disease that repre- gMe.n Getriicb aaan:d N porneen. aI.t aBle cno uCnhsaerlfiendgd.ine: None. F. G. Riepe: None. E. Clauserc: s Se.n Ltse aS cmoaujaorrn peucb: lNico nhee.a Clt.h D pinroa:b Nleomne i.n C t.h Se caogtet:i nNgo pneo.p Mul. aHtiuornle.s: None. N. None. A. Ayedi: None. S. Makni: None. M. Sfar: None. H. Sboui: None. N. Carter: None. H. Le Marec: None. V. Probst: None. T. Le Tourneau: None. J. Kahloul: None. H. Ben Hamouda: None. S. Chouchane: None. S. Trimech: Schott: None. None. N. Zouari: None. S. M’Rabet: None. F. Amri: None. P. Holterhus: None. A. Saad: None.  P04
.09 Homozygous mutation in the Myosin-Binding Protein C gene  P04
.11 leading to an early onset of HCM with mild hypertrophy and severe Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms with arrhythmias. microalbuminuria in essential hypertension S. J. R. Joosten1, Z. E. Fejzic2, A. G. Reimer2, P. B. J. Beerbaum2, M. P. Lombardi3, N. A. I. Galán Chilet1, P. Rentero Garrido1, G. O. De Marco Solar1, P. Marín García1, R. Cortés1, F. Blom4, C. L. M. Marcelis1; Martínez2,3, V. González Albert1, J. C. Martínez Escudero4, J. Redón1,2,3, F. J. Chaves1,5; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 1Research Foundation of the University Clinic Hospital-INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Radboud University 2University Clinic Hospital of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3CIBER 03/06 Physiopathology Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Institute of Health Carlos III, Minister of Health, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Madrid, Spain, 4Rio Hortega University Hospital of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 5CIBER 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain. Netherlands. Objectives: Introduction ~ Microalbuminuria (Malb) is an early marker for cardiovascular Heterozygous mutations in the myosin-binding protein diseases and renal risk in hypertension. Several studies have identified dif- (MYBP C3
) genes are the most frequent genetic causes of hypertrophic car- ferent loci and genetic markers for the risk of developing hypertension in diomyopathy (HCM). Patients with MYBP C3
 mutations generally have late Malb, but the genetic basis of Malb is little known. Therefore, the objectives onset disease and a relative good prognosis. Homozygous or compound he- wMeerteh othdeo liodgeyn:tification of genetic variations involved in the development of terozygous MYBP C3
 mutations have been associated with early onset disea- Malb in essential hypertension. se with severe hypertrophy and heart failure. we have designed an experiment which studies 1536 SNPs, WCaes ew ill describe here the clinical features of a family with a homozygous selected in based results of prior GWAS, in 960 samples of hypertension Spa- mutation (p.Cys566Arg) in MYBP C3
. nish population with a Custom Golden Gate Genotyping Assay of Illumina. ~ The index patient (an 8 year old girl) presented with a cardiac arrest Linear regression analysis of quantitative variables and logistic regression due to ventricular fibrillation at the age of 8 years. After resuscitation she aRneasluylstiss: of qualitative ones were performed using PLINK v1.07. We adjusted underwent cardiac evaluation. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed signi- by age, sex, body mass index and systolic blood pressure for all analysis. ficant left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) but echocardiogram and Magnetic we obtained an association between rs12322500(ER C1
 gene) and Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed only mild LVH. She fully recovered and log_UAE, 0.3253(0.1413-0.5093) and OR for Malb presence of 2.657(1.373- underwent ICD implantation. During one year follow-up she had two appro- 5.144); the AA genotype had higher value for UAE than AG/GG genotypes. priate ICD shocks for ventricular arrhythmias. The asymptomatic brother Other SNP with a significant association was rs1746048(CXC L12
 gene) of the index patient (age 11 years) showed a similar typical ECG with only that had for log_UAE 0.7362(0.2441-1.228), an OR for Malb presence of mild LVH on echo and MRI. Genetic testing of both the index patient and her 28.53(3.237-251.4); the AA genotype has higher value for UAE than AG/ brother showed a homozygous mutation (p.Cys566Arg) in the MYBP C3
-ge- GG genotypes. Finally, SNP rs12260555(WDFY4 gene) had log_UAE of nCeo.n Bcoluths iaosny mptomatic parents were heterozygous carriers of this mutation 0Co.1n3c6lu7(s0io.0n3s54-0.2381) and OR for Malb presence of 1.798(1.2-2.694); with and their cardiac assessments revealed no abnormalities. the highest levels of UAE in the AC genotype. ~ Homozygous mutations in the Myosin-Binding Protein C gene : this study shows three SNPs strongly associated with UAE and could lead to an early onset of HCM with mild hypertrophy and severe ven- presence of Malb in hypertensive patients. These SNPs are located in genes t Sri.cJu.Rla. rJ oarorshteynth: mNoianse.. Z.E. Fejzic: None. A.G. Reimer: None. P.B.J. Beerbaum: involved in renal damaged in hypertension. Further functional studies will None. M.P. Lombardi: None. N.A. Blom: None. C.L.M. Marcelis: None. b I.e G naelcáens Csahriyle tto: Ncoonnefi.r Pm. R theensteer roe Gsualrtrsid.o: None. G.O. De Marco Solar: None. P. Marín García: None. R. Cortés: None. F. Martínez: None. V. González Albert: None. J.C. Martínez Escudero: None. J. Redón: None. F.J. Chaves: None.  P04
.10 Steroid 21-hydroxylase genetic analysis of 50 Tunisian patients M. Gribaa1, I. Ben Charfeddine1, F. G. Riepe2, E. Clauserc3, A. Ayedi4, S. Makni5, M. Sfar4, H. Sboui6, N. Kahloul7, H. Ben Hamouda8, S. Chouchane9, S. Trimech10, N. Zouari11, S.  P04
.12 M’Rabet12, F. Amri7, P. Holterhus2, A. Saad1; Introducing a multiplex panel of markers for genetic testing of 1Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology. familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy based on linkage analysis Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatrics, Division M. Keramatipour1, H. Saghafi1, M. Haghjoo2, S. Sabbagh1, N. Samiee2, A. Amin2, F. of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Vakilian2; Germany, 3Oncogenetic Unit, Cochin University Hospital, Paris, France, 4Department of 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Pediatrics, Tahar Sfar University Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia, 5Department of Pediatrics, Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical Children University Hospital of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 6Department of Neonatology, and Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 7Department of Pediatrics, Ibn El Aims: Jazzar University Hospital, Kairouan, Tunisia, 8Neonatology Unit, Tahar Sfar University Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia, 9Department of Pediatrics, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 10Department of Endocrinology, Farhat Hached University Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused by mutations Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 11Department of Pediatrics, Sahloul University Hospital, in genes encoding cardiac sarcomere proteins. Nowadays genetic testing Sousse, Tunisia, 12Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Gabès, Gabès, Tunisia. of HCM plays an important role in clinical practice by contributing to the diagnosis, prognosis, and screening of high risk individuals. The aim of this sMtuedthyo wdass a dnedv eRloepsuinlgts a: reliable testing strategy for HCM based on linkage Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is an autosomal recessive disease of analysis and appropriate for Iranian population. steroid biosynthesis in humans. More than 90% of all CAH cases are caused six panels of four microsatellite markers surroun- by mutations of the 21-hydroxylase gene (CY P21
A2), and approximately ding MYH7, MYBP C3
, TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, and MY L2
 genes (24 markers 75% of the defective CY P21
A2 genes are generated through an intergenic in total) were selected for multiplex PCR and fragment length analysis. Cha- recombination with the neighboring CY P21
A1P pseudogene. racteristics of markers and informativeness of the panels were evaluated in In this study, the CY P21
A2 gene was genotyped in 50 patients in Tunisia 50 unrelated Iranians. The efficacy of the strategy was verified in a family with the clinical diagnosis of 21-hydroxylaEsSe HdeGfic 2ie0nc1y3. C Y| P P2
A1RA2IS m, uFtaRtiAonNs CEw | iWth WHCWM. .aEllS mHaGrk.eOrsR wGere highly polymorphic. The panels were infor1m3at3i-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ve in 96-100% of samples. Multipoint linkage analysis excluded the linkage database. The c.16189T>C mutation in the D-loop region that is associated bCeotnwceluensi othne: disease and all six genes by obtaining maximum LOD score ≤ with susceptibility to DCM could be detected in 19% of patients as well as in -2. 0% of controls. Five different deletions were found in 29 patients. Eighteen This study suggests a reliable genetic testing method based on patients had 8.5 kb , Twelve 9 kb ,Seven 7.3 kb, Eight 4977 bp common dele- linkage analysis between 6 sarcomere genes and familial HCM. It could be tion between nt8161-nt13640, and 11 patients had 7.4 kb deletion. Multiple a Mp.p Klieerda mfoar tdipiaogunr:o Nstoinc,e p. rHe.d Sicatgihvea,fi o: rN socnree.e Mni. nHga tgehsjtoinog: Nino nceli.n Sic. aSl asbebttaignhg:. deletions have been found in 21 patients. None. N. Samiee: None. A. Amin: None. F. Vakilian: None. Also 43 polymorphisms were found ,10 unpublished polymorphisms were found. A homologous amino acid A5480G, non-homologous substitutions, such as G5466A , an apparently homoplasmic substitution within tRNA ge-  P04
.13 nes T4384C, which affects the T_C loop of tRNA glutamine, 3 remarkable Running for Genotyping in a Heartbeat? Hypertrophic mutations (A8860G, A2706G and N3107C) most of these polymorphisms Cardiomyopathy, Molecular Findings wMe. rMe oonbtsaezrevrei:d N .one. P. Baghdadi: None. A. mohamadian: None. M. I. M. Carreira1,2,3, A. Mascarenhas1, A. Santos2, N. Lavoura1, S. Santos4,5, A. Fernandes4,5, C. Houshmand: None. Monteiro6, F. Corte-Real7,8, M. Venâncio8,9; 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Laboratório de Genética Molecular de Cardiopatias,  P04
.15 Centro de Neurociências e Biologia Molecular, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CIMAGO – Centro Identification of 22q11.2 deletion in patients from adult congenital de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal, 5CQE, heart disease clinic - a missed burden in the transition care Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal, 6Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade de B. Chung1, P. Chow1, A. Liu1, P. Lee1, V. Wong1, K. Chan2, M. Tang3, K. Lun1, E. Lau4, Y. F. Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 7CENCIFOR – Centro de Ciências Forenses, Instituto Nacional Cheung1, K. T. Chau1, Y. L. Lau1; de Medicina Legal, Coimbra, Portugal, 8Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 1Paediatrics, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 9Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico Carmona 2Prenatal diagnosis unit, Dept of O&G, Tsan Yuk Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, da Mota, CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal. Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 3Prenatal diagnosis service, Dept of O&G, Tsan Yuk Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 4Prenatal diagnosis service, Dept of OG, Tsan Yuk Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common cause of sudden death among youngsters and athletes, affecting 1:500 individuals. More 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is a common genetic diagnosis in than 1000 mutations are associated with this condition, especially in genes patients with congenital heart disease (CHD). It is multi-systemic with both encoding sarcomere proteins. congenital and later-onset features with lifelong consequences. Variable cli- Sudden cardiac death (SDC) is a devastating complication of several cardio- nical expression and limited awareness contribute to its under-diagnosis. vascular diseases, commonly including genetic disorders. The number of With low childhood mortality, there is an increasing number of diagnosed/ SCD in which no specific cause can be confirmed, even thorough a rigorous undiagnosed adults, posing a hidden challenge in the transition care for pa- post-mortem examination, is still highly significant. tients with CHD. Our objective is to determine the prevalence of 22q11DS in Recent guidelines recommend the genetic screening for family members of adult patients with conotruncal defects and to delineate their extra-cardiac patients with HCM or victims of SCD. manifestations. We enrolled patients through an adult CHD clinic by active The identification of alterations in the genes can be extremely important screening, using fluorescence-PCR and FISH. We have recruited 102 with in the management of families, especially because it allows clarification of conotruncal defects in 2012. Twelve patients are diagnosed with 22q11DS. risk situation of asymptomatic family members and, in cases of SCD, it can Importantly 11 are not known to have 22q11Ds previously, which translates provide a diagnostic. into a missed diagnosis of 1 in every 10 adults with conotruncal defects. New approaches with panels of genes, such as Sequenom MassArray System Nine had the cardiac diagnosis of tetralogy, 2 had pulmonary atresia and and Exome Sequencing Technology, are being developed, allowing an increa- ventricular septal defect, 1 had interrupted aortic arch; for extra-cardiac se of the number of genes to be studied simultaneously and detection of a manifestations, 2 patients had learning difficulties, 2 had schizophrenia, 2 greater variety of mutations. had history of hypocalcemia, 1 had thyroid nodule, and 1 had brain abscess. During the last 4 years 89 index cases were analysed in the laboratory by Among these 12 patients, only 1 was assessed by the cardiologists to have direct sequeMnYcBinPgC a3nd SeMquYeHn7om MassArray System. the typical facial dysmorphism. By cascade family testing, the deletion in 1 The results of this study demonstrated that the most frequent mutated ge- patient was found to be inherited from her mother with schizophrenia. The nes are the and , being detected in more than 50% of the ana- recruitment is ongoing. This study will provide important information on lysed cases, as found in the literature. the disease burden of 22q11DS and may highlight an important and actio- New generation technologies promise to revolutionize the current know- n Ba.b Cleh uganpg :i nN othnee. t Pra. Cnshiotiwo:n Nalo cnaer. eA o. fL piua:t iNeonntes .w P.i tLhe CeH: NDo.ne. V. Wong: ledge about genetic bases of HCM and SCD and can contribute to clarify ge- None. K. Chan: None. M. Tang: None. K. Lun: None. E. Lau: None. Y.F. notype-phenotype co-relation or to establish the cause of death in negative Cheung: None. K.T. Chau: None. Y.L. Lau: None. a I.uMto. pCsairerse.ira: None. A. Mascarenhas: None. A. Santos: None. N. Lavoura: None. S. Santos: None. A. Fernandes: None. C. Monteiro: None. F. Corte-Real: None. M. Venâncio: None.  P04
.16 Identifying genetic determinants of congenital heart defect in Down syndrome  P04
.14 R. Sailani1, P. Makrythanasis1, A. Valsesia2,3,4, S. Deutsch1, F. Santoni1, C. Borel1, K. Mutations and Deletions mitochondrial DNA in Iranian Hypertrophic Popadin1, E. Migliavacca1, A. J. Sharp1, G. Duriaux Sail1, E. Falconnet1, K. Rabionet5,6,7, Cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients C. Serra-Juhé8,6, S. Vicari9, D. Laux10, Y. Grattau11, G. Dembour12, A. Megarbane11,13, M. Montazeri1, P. Baghdadi2, a. mohamadian2, M. Houshmand3; R. Touraine14, S. Stora11, S. Kitsiou15, H. Fryssira15, C. Chatzisevastou-loukidou15, E. 1Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Advanced Medical Science, Tabriz Kanavakis15, G. Merla16, D. Bonnet10, L. A. Pérez-Jurado8, X. Estivill5,6,7, J. M. Delabar17, S. E. University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Antonarakis1,18; Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iranmani, Tehran, Islamic 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Republic of Iran, 3National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Switzerland, 3Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Centre for Genomic Regulation, Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain, 6Hospital del Mar Research Institute (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 7CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health Because of the linkage between energy metabolism in the mitochondria and (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain, 8Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 9Children‘s cardiac muscle contraction, it is reasonable to assume that mitochondrial Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 10University Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 11Institut Jerome Lejeune, Paris, France, 12UCL, Bruxelles, Belgium, 13Unité de Génétique Médicale abnormalities may be responsible for some forms of HCM. We analysed et Laboratoire Associé INSERM, Beirut, Lebanon, 14CHU de Saint-Etienne, Cedex 2, the whole mitochondrial genome in a series of 52 patients with HCM for France, 15University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 16Medical Genetics Service, Hospital, alterations and compared the findings with those of 60 control subjects. An IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 17Université Paris Diderot,Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, increased number of novel missense mutation st RcoNuAld g bluet admeteincted nearly in France, 18iG E3
 institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. allA gTePnaesse e6ncoding for protein subunits in patients. Four mutations were found that are unpublished. The c.4384T>C in , c.9063A>G in , c.2071 T>C, c.3170C>A, in noncoding MTRNA2 16S Also 33 po- Congenital heart defect (CHD) occurs in 40% of Down syndrome cases. l 1ym 3o 4rphisms were identified which had not been EpuSbHlisGh e2d0 in1 t3he | MPiAtoRMIaSp, FRWAhNileC cEar |r yWinWg thWre.eE cSoHpiGes. oOf RgeGnes or other functional elements on chr21ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index increases the risk for CHD, trisomy 21 is not sufficient to cause CHD. Thus Methods. Paired-end, WGS data was generated on the Illumina Genome Ana- additional genetic variation and/or environmental factors could contribute lyzer II and Hi-Seq platforms for germline DNA from a proband with HLHS to CHD risk. Here we use association studies to identify genomic variations (~36X average depth of genome coverage); her affected half-sisters with that with trisomy 21, determine the risk for CHD in DS. This GWAS includes tetralogy of Fallot (~38X) and truncus arteriosus (~10X), respectively; her 187 DS with CHD (AVSD=69, ASD=53, VSD=65) as cases, and 151 DS without unaffected full brother (~30X); and their shared unaffected father (~33X). CHD as controls. Chr21 specific association study revealed rs2832616 and Reads were aligned to the human genome reference sequence, followed by rs1943950 (both cis-eQTLs for KRTA P7
-1) as CHD risk alleles (adjusted p- realignment and recalibration. Single nucleotide variant and short indel calls values < 0.05). These signals were confirmed in a replication cohort of 92 were made using the Genome Analysis Toolkit’s UnifiedGenotyper. Variants DS CHD cases and 75 DS controls (nominal p-value = 0.0005). Furthermore with <1% minor allele frequency and all variants located in previously-pu- rs2183593 and rs7282991 were identified as risk factors for ASD. Since DS blished CHD-associated gene regions were identified. These variants were is likely to be a disorder of gene expression, 2-locus interaction was applied analyzed for co-segregation according to one of three genetic models: 1) for whole genome eQTLs. A pair of interacting eQTL on chr2 and chr11 was autosomal dominant (AD) with incomplete penetrance, 2) AD with gonadal identified. Furthermore, a search for chr21 risk CNVs for CHD was perfor- mosaicism, and 3) autosomal recessive. Variants co-segregating according med using a customized chr21 array of 135K probes across 55 DS-AVSD to one of these models and defined as high impact and/or potentially dama- and 53 DS controls. It revealed two CNV regions (FDR=0.04) in previously ging were considered causal candidates. defined CHD minimal region, and another CNV (FDR=0.03) upstream of PO- Results. Variant calling and co-segregation analysis identified a list of likely- FUT2. We propose that the CHD risk of DS is complex and determined by damaging variants. Candidate causal variants for complex congenital heart specific SNPs and CNVs variations on chr21 and interaction of non-chr21 dSi.s eSatesen zweli:l lN boen per. eKs.e Sntteevde.ns: None. R. Lyons: None. S.B. Gruber: None. P.J. g Re.n Soamiliacn vi:a Nrioannet.s P.. Makrythanasis: None. A. Valsesia: None. S. Deutsch: Gruber: None. None. F. Santoni: None. C. Borel: None. K. Popadin: None. E. Migliavacca: None. A.J. Sharp: None. G. Duriaux Sail: None. E. Falconnet: None. K. Rabionet: None. C. Serra-Juhé: None. S. Vicari: None. D. Laux: None. Y. Grattau: None. G. Dembour: None. A. Megarbane: None. R. Touraine: None. S.  P04
.19 Stora: None. S. Kitsiou: None. H. Fryssira: None. C. Chatzisevastou-loukidou: Human valve disease is caused by copy number changes in ADAMT S19
 None. E. Kanavakis: None. G. Merla: None. D. Bonnet: None. L.A. Pérez- M. Hitz1, J. Bigras2, M. Thibeault2, D. Stemple1, M. Hurles1, G. Andelfinger2; Jurado: None. X. Estivill: None. J.M. Delabar: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Sainte Justine Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.  P04
.17 Valve defects are one of the predominant causes of cardiovascular morbidity Congenital heart defects are rarely caused by mutations in ACTС1/ and mortality. A third of all patients with congenital heart defects exhibit ACTA2 genes valve defects. Several structural variations have been identified in human T. Khodyuchenko, A. Zlotina, D. Zverev, A. Malashicheva, A. Kostareva; disease including valvular heart defects. In a search for causal Copy Num- Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics Almazov Federal Heart, Blood and Endocrinology Centre, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. ber Variation (CNV) we identified a family with a homozygous deletions in ADAMT S19
. We have studied a large patient discovery cohort sampled at the Sainte Ju- Background: It has been shown that some congenital heart defects (CHD) stine Hospital, Montreal for disease associated CNVs and searched for small can have genetic background due to missens mutation in cardiomyocyte- genomic imbalances resulting in homozygous deletions. After independent specific genes. Thus, cardiac actin was shown to be involved in pathogene- validation we have screened additional public cohorts for recurrent CNVs. sis of CHD and smooth muscle actin in pathogenesis of aortic aneurysm in Downstream in vivo modeling was done using antisense gene knockdown in combination with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In present study we inve- Xenopus tropicalis oocytes. stigated whether mutations in human α-cardiac actin (ACT C1
) and smooth We identified a homozygous deletion overlapping ADAMT S19
 in an inbred muscle α-actin (ACTA2) genes can cause ASD or PDA. family with two affected. The observed phenotype is a pulmonary stenosis, Matherial and Methods: Total genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral pulmonary artery dilatation and an aortic valve anomaly. This 475kb CNV blood of 86 patients with ASDs and 100 patients with PDA. Coding exons and spans the first seven exons of ADAMT S19
 including part of the peptidase flanking intron regions of ACT C1
 (NM_005159.4) and ACTA2 (NM_001613) domain. Two additional duplications in patients with hypoplastic left heart were amplified by PCR with specific primers designed according to the cor- syndrome have been observed in another cohort. Gene knockdown in Xeno- responding gene reference sequences. PCR fragments were directly sequen- pus tropicalis supports a role during heart development. ced using a BigDye Terminator v3.1 sequencing kit and a 3130 Genetic Ana- This CNV is the first homozygous microdeletion observed in a family with lyzer (Applied Biosystems). Sequencing results were analyzed with BioEdit valve disease. The importance of extracellular matrix genes in valve patho- 7.1 software and Sequencing Analysis 5.3.1 software (Applied Biosystems). genesis has been demonstrated in human and mouse. These findings of loss Results: Sequence analysis of ACTA2 and ACT C1
 did not identify any nucleoti- and gain of function spanning the same gene will enable a better genotype- de changes that altered the coding sense of the genes. In the case of ACT C1
 phenotype understanding and will improve our understanding of normal we have found the earlier described nucleotide polymorphism rs2307493 a Mn.d H aibtzn: oNromnael. vJa. lBvieg rdaesv:e Nloopnme. eMn.t .Thibeault: None. D. Stemple: None. M. Hurles: None. G. Andelfinger: None. (NCBI SNP database) resulting in a synonymous substitution. Conclusion: our results confirmed that the mutations in ACT C1
 gene are rare (at least <1%) cause of ASD. In patients with PDA the mutations of ACTC 2 gene are not detected, thus, being excluded from the list of frequent PDA-  P04
.20 a Ts.s Kohcioadtyeudc gheennektoic: dNeofneec.t sA.. Zlotina: None. D. Zverev: None. A. Malashicheva: Involvement of BAG3 and HSPB7 loci in various etiologies of systolic None. A. Kostareva: None. heart failure: results of a European collaboration assembling more than 2,000 patients S. Garnier1, E. Villard2, C. Hengstenberg3, N. Lamblin4, E. Arbustini5, M. Komajda2, R. Isnard2, S. Cook6, F. Cambien1, P. Charron2;  P04
.18 1Inserm UMR937 & UPMC Univ Paris 6, Paris, France, 2UPMC Univ Paris 6, Inserm The genetic basis of complex congenital heart disease: identification UMR956, AP-HP Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital, Paris, France, 3University of Regensburg, of potentially causal variants through whole-genome sequencing Department of Internal Medicine II, Regensburg, Germany, 4Hospital Regional University S. Stenzel1, K. Stevens2, R. Lyons1, S. B. Gruber3, P. J. Gruber4; of Lille - Cardiological Hospital, Lille, France, 5Foundation IRCCS Polyclinic San Matteo, 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 2Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, Center for Genetic Cardiovascular Diseases, Pavia, Italy, 6Imperial College London, Heart United States, 3University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, Science Centre, London, United Kingdom. 4University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Background and purpose. Genetic background of multifactorial systolic Background. Genetic risk factors contributing to the multi-factorial etiolo- heart failure (systHF) is poorly understood. However, through a recent gy of congenital heart disease (CHD) remain poorly understood. The goal GWAS we identified two loci associated with sporadic Dilated Cardiomyo- of this study is to explore genetic variants underlying the development of pathy (DCM): BAG3 and HSPB7 loci. We hypothesized that the two loci (1) complex CHD through whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of a family affected could also be involved in systHF due to coronary artery disease (ischemic- by hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) and conotruncal defects. We hy- HF) and (2) could be involved in the severity of systHF and not only in the pothesize that the clustering of these anat Eo Sm Hica Gll y 2 d 0is 1ti 3nc |t l Pe Asio Rn Is S is , a Ft Rtr Aib Nu- CEs |u WsceWptiWbil.iEtyS tHo dGe.vOeloRpG HF. 135 table to a more proximal defect in cardiogenesis.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index United Kingdom, 3Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Methods. We genotyped SNPs previously associated with DCM (rs2234962: Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, BAG3 locus, rs10927875 and rs945417: HSPB7 locus) in 1160 European Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5INSERM UMR1087, CNRS UMR6291, Université de Nantes, CHU Nantes, l‘institut du patients with ischemic-HF and 1322 controls. The severity of systHF (inclu- thorax, Nantes, France, 6School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen‘s ding left ventricle ejection fraction and LV end-diastolic diameter or LVEDD) University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom. was also analysed in ischemic-HF patients as well as in a European cohort of 1141 DCM patients. Results. SNPs related to HSPB7 locus were significantly associated with Brugada Syndrome (BrS) is a disorder associated with an increased risk of ischemic-HF (MAF of rs10927875 and rs945417 were less frequent in pa- sudden cardiac death and specific ECG features. Loss-of-function mutations tients than controls, p value 0.0017 and 0.0016 respectively) whereas SNP in SCN5A underlie the disorder in ~25% of patients, while other genes have related to BAG3 locus was not. In patients, the two loci were not associated been implicated but account for <1%. We here set out to identify the genetic with severity of HF, except LVEDD that was associated with rs2234962 both defect underlying BrS in a 3 generation family with a case who died sudden- in DCM patients and ischemic-HF patients (p=0.0086 and 0.012 respective- ly at 24 years old. ly). Individuals from the pedigree were genotyped using the Illumina-Huma- Conclusions. Out of the two loci previously associated with DCM we obser- nOmniExpress SNP-array. Exome-sequencing was carried out in 3 indivi- ved that HSPB7 locus was also associated with ischemic-HF whereas BAG3 duals from the pedigree using Agilent SureSelect-Target-Enrichment 50Mb locus was not, suggesting differential involvement according to the under- capture followed by sequencing on an Illumina-HiSeq2000. These 3 indivi- lying cause of HF. Severity of HF was not related to the two loci, except BAG3 l Soc. uGsa arnsiseorc: iNatoende .w Ei.t hV iLllVa rddi:a Nmoentee.r C in. Hbeonthg sptoenpbuelargti:o Nnos.ne. N. Lamblin: duals were selected based on their genetic distance and the presentation of None. E. Arbustini: None. M. Komajda: None. R. Isnard: None. S. Cook: a BrS-ECG at baseline. None. F. Cambien: None. P. Charron: None. Linkage analysis identified a region on chromosome 8 (8p11.21-8q11.23) shared among affected family members. In parallel, comparison of 3 exomes from affected individuals and after filtering out of variants occurring at a MAF of >1% in public and in-house exome/genome databases results in 10  P04
.21 rare variants shared, 2 locate to chromosome 8 locus and reside in 2 diffe- Lack of relationship between CY P3
A5 expression and blood pressure rent genes, namely HOOK3 and PXDNL. These 2 variants have been found at in healthy adults in Ashanti, Ghana a MAF of 0.02% and 0.008%, respectively, in the NHLBI-EVP (n=6500 indi- D. L. Fisher1, J. Plange-Rhule2, M. Moreton3, J. Eastwood4, S. M. Kerry5, F. Micah6, A. Johnston7, I. A. M. MacPhee8; viduals). The function of PXDNL, which appears to be specifically expressed 1Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of in heart, is yet unknown. London, London, United Kingdom, 2School of Medical Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah Combining linkage analysis and exome sequencing, we identified a chromo- University of Science and Technology & Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, somal interval and a possible novel gene for BrS. Ongoing studies are aimed Ghana, 3Analytical Services International Ltd., St. George‘s, University of London, at investigating further the involvement of this gene in a large set of patients London, United Kingdom, 4, Division of Clinical Sciences: Renal Medicine, St. George‘s - w J.i tBha Brcr:S .None. R.F. Marsman: None. S. Le Scouarnec: None. Y. Mizusawa: University of London, London, United Kingdom, 5Blizard Institute, Barts and the London None. A.V. Postma: None. M.W. Tanck: None. P. Lindenbaum: None. N. Carter: School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United None. R. Redon: None. A.A. Wilde: None. P. McKeown: None. C.R. Bezzina: Kingdom, 6Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, Ghana, 7Analytical Services, St. None. George‘s - University of London, London, United Kingdom, 8Division of Clinical Sciences: Renal Medicine, St. George‘s - University of London, London, United Kingdom.  P04
.23 Introduction: CY P3
A5 protein substantially increases 6β-hydroxylase ac- Spectrum of KLH L3
 and CU L3
 mutations in Familial Hyperkalemic tivity which stimulates the sodium-retaining actions of the mineralocor- Hypertension ticoid receptor, potentially causing high blood pressure. Most Africans are H. Louis dit Picard1, N. Thurairajasingam2, S. Latreche1, S. Miserey-Lenkei3, O. Pylypenko3, R. Vargas-Poussou2, E. Clauser1, X. Jeunemaitre1,4,5; functional CY P3
A5 expressers so one would expect to find a relationship 1INSERM U970 - Paris-Cardiovascular Research Center, PARIS, France, 2AP-HP Hôpital between CY P3
A5 and blood pressure. Our study investigates this possible Européen Georges Pompidou, PARIS, France, 3CNRS, UMR 144 - Institut Curie, PARIS, explanation for the high incidence of hypertension in Africans, in a Ghanaian France, 4AP-HP Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 5Université Paris population. Descartes, Paris, France. Materials and Methods: DNA samples were obtained from 957 of a cohort of 1,013 apparently healthy individuals, who in 2001/02 had been recruited to an epidemiological study of hypertension and salt intake. They wCYePre3 Are5s*i3- Familial Hyperkalemic Hypertension (FHHt) is a rare inherited form of ar- dentCsY oPf 31A25 v*6illages in the Ashanti region of Ghana. The extracted DNA was, terial hypertension. In 2001, two genes - WNK1 and WNK4 - were identi- in 898 individuals, of sufficient quality to allow genotyping at the fied and subsequently found to regulate renal ion transport. In 2012, we and SNPs by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Blood pressure and others identified mutations in two other genes, KLH L3
 and CU L3
, as was measured using an OMRON HEM705CP sphygmomanometer. The parti- responsible for the majority of cases. Kelch-like 3, is an actin-binding pro- cipants had sat for at least 5 min before three pressures were obtained one tein that recruit substrates for the Cullin3-based ubiquitin-ligase complex. minute apart; the first reading was discarded and the mean of the second The objective of this study was to compare inheritance and phenotype in and third calculated for analysis. Hypertension was defined as systolic BP one or the other gene. ≥140 mmHg. We identified 20 different missense mutations in the KLH L3
 gene in 24 Results: 244 (27.2%) of the 898 individuals were hypertensive. Although FHHt index cases. The majority of them were located within conserved there was a possible relationship between bCloYoPd3 Ap5re*3ssureC YaPn3dA d5*e6gree of Kelch motifs at the surface of the molecule. There were 16 dominant, 4 de CY P3
A5 expression, there was no statistically significant relationship bet- novo and 4 recessive cases and a large variability of the phenotype. Homo- ween either systolic or diastolic pressure and or geno- zygous subjects had an earlier age at diagnosis (8.4 vs 35.9 years) but com- types and their haplotypes. parable blood pressure and biological phenotype. Analysis of the CU L3
 gene Conclusion: We conclude that there is either no association between CY P3
A5 revealed six de novo and 2 dominant heterozygous splice-site mutations expression and blood pressure or, if there is a relationship, an association clustered around exon 9 that lead to a loss of 57 residues corresponding to a t Dh.aLt. iFs ivsehreyr :w Neoanke.. J. Plange-Rhule: None. M. Moreton: None. J. Eastwood: segment linking BTB and RING-binding domains of the protein. Patients had None. S.M. Kerry: None. F. Micah: None. A. Johnston: None. I.A.M. MacPhee: a young age of diagnosis (10 years) and a severe clinical and biological phe- None. notype. KLH L3
 is highly expressed in the distal nephron and its inhibition by RNA interference leads to an increase of Na+-Cl- cotransporter expression at the cell membrane. All mutations should decrease the ubiquitination of this  P04
.22 t Hra. nLsopuoisr tdeirt aPnicda trhdu: sN aouneg.m Ne. nTth iutsr aaicratijvaistiyn gina mth:e N doinseta. lS n. eLpahtrreocnh.e: None. S. Exome sequencing of multiple affected individuals from an Irish Miserey-Lenkei: None. O. Pylypenko: None. R. Vargas-Poussou: None. E. family with Brugada Syndrome uncovers a novel locus for the Clauser: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. disorder J. Barc1, R. F. Marsman1, S. Le Scouarnec2, Y. Mizusawa1, A. V. Postma3, M. W. Tanck4, P. Lindenbaum5, N. Carter2, R. Redon5, A. A. Wilde1, P. McKeown6, C. R. Bezzina1; 1Department of Experimental Cardiology, Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 136 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.24 Genotype-Phenotype correlations in Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia. Data of the French Rendu-Osler-Weber Syndrome Myocardial infarction (MI) due to coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most cohort. common cause of death in developed countries. Genetic and non-genetic C. Paez1, S. Giraud2, G. Lesca3, E. Decullier4, E. Babin5, M. Carette6, R. Corre7, P. Duffau8, factors affect risk for MI with roughly equal relative contributions. The heri- B. Gilbert-Dussardier9, P. Hatron10, J. Harle11, P. Kaminski12, P. Lacombe13, C. Lavigne14, B. tability of MI has been estimated to be 0.35 and 0.38 for males and females, Lorcerie15, P. Magro16, S. Riviere17, P. Edery18, S. Dupuis-Girod18; respectively. Known genetic risk variants explain 10 % of the additive gene- 1Service de Genetique et Centre de reference sur la maladie de Rendu-Osler, Lyon tic variance in susceptibility to CAD. University Hospital, Lyon, France, 2Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire, Lyon Despite advances in understanding the pathophysiology of MI, relatively University Hospital, Lyon, France, 3Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire, Lyon little attention has been paid to the distinction between ST-segment eleva- University Hospital, Unviersite Lyon 1, F-69008, Lyon, France, 4Pole IMER, Lyon University Hospital, Faculte de medecine, Universite Lyon 1, F-69008, Lyon, France, tion MI (STEMI) and non-ST-segment elevation MI (NSTEMI). This divisi- 5Hopital Cote de Nacre, Service d’ORL, Caen, France, 6Hopital Tenon, Service de on is made based on characteristic ECG changes and the two are known to Radiologie, 75970 Paris Cedex 20, Assistance Publique – Hopitaux de Paris, Universite present with different baseline characteristics. It is commonly thought that Curie (Paris VI), Paris, France, 7Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Hopital Pontchaillou, STEMI results from complete occlusion of a coronary artery whereas NSTE- Service de Pneumologie, Rennes, France, 8Hopital Haut-Leveque – Centre François MI is caused by partial or transient blockage. The possible differences in Magendie, Service de Médecine Interne, Pessac, France, 9Centre Hospitalier Universitaire genetic risk factors for STEMI and NSTEMI are virtually unknown. La Miletrie, Service de Genetique Medicale, Poitiers, France, 10Universite Lille 2, CHRU We performed a genome-wide association study of MI (1579 cases, 1576 de Lille, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, Service de medecine interne, Lille, France, 11Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Marseille, Hopital de la Conception, Service de Medecine controls) with stratification into NSTEMI/STDERMAMI a2ndC ErePpTl1icated DthEeN rNeDsu2lDts Interne, Marseille, France, 12Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Brabois Service de in two independen-8t study samples. We identify a novel risk locus for MI Medecine Interne, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France, 13Hopital Ambroise Pare, Service de (OR=1.28, p=7*10 ) at 1p13.3 containing , and . Radiologie, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Universite Paris Ile-de-France Ouest, We show-10 that the association is markedly stronger for NSTEMI (ORD=R1A.M562, Paris, France, 14Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d’Angers, Service de Medecine Interne, p=4*10 ) than for STEMI (OR=1.11, p=0.20). We further show that the SNPs Angers, France, 15Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Service de Medecine Interne, conferring risk to NSTEMI are also associated with the expression of Dijon, France, 16Centre Hospitalier Regional et Universitaire Bretonneau, Service de and provide evidence suggesting that this locus contains two distinct but Pneumologie, Tours, France, 17Centre Hospitalier Regional et Universitaire Bretonneau, pPa. rStaialoll:y N oovneer.l aJp. pSiinngis aasloso: cNioantieo. nJ .s iKgentatulsn.en: None. A. Havulinna: None. A. Service de Pneumologie, Montpellier, France, 18Service de Genetique et centre de Sarin: None. T. Hiekkalinna: None. S. Ripatti: None. P.J. Karhunen: None. H. reference sur la maladie de Rendu-Osler, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France. Huikuri: None. M. Lokki: None. V. Salomaa: None. M. Nieminen: None. M. Perola: None. INTRODUCTION: Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is a domi- nantly inherited genetic vascular disorder characterized by recurrent epi-  P04
.26 staxis, cutaneous telangiectasia and visceral arteriovenous malformations Compound heterozygous or homozygous truncating MYBP C3
 (AVM) that affect many organs, including the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, mutations causes severe cardiomyopathy with left ventricular liver and brain. noncompaction and septal defects resulting in neonatal death AIMS: To study the relationship between the phenotype and genotype in J. C. Herkert1, Y. M. Hoedemaekers1,2, I. M. Frohn-Mulder2, M. Dalinghaus2, A. van den patients with a proven mutation in either ENG, ACVR L1
, or less frequently Wijngaard3, R. R. de Krijger2, M. Michels2, I. F. M. de Coo2, M. W. Wessels2, D. Dooijes2,4; MADH4. 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical METHOD: We used the French HHT database (CIROCO) developed for the Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, network, which contains detailed clinical features registered from 2005 to Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. 2013. Background RESULTS: A total of 1534 HHT patients with a proved mutation were ana- lysed. Among them, the mutated gene was ACVR L1
 in 58.4%, ENG in 39.9% Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a heart mus- and MADH4 in 1.7% of patients. cle disease generally caused by autosommyaol sdino mbiinndainntg s parrocotemine rCic MgeYnBeP m C3
u- The nose-bleeding event appears to be a predominant characteristic for tations leading to a phenotype in adult age. The most commonly mutated each of the HHT populations studied: this symptom was present in 92.4, 93.4 gene (20-40%) in adult-onset HCM is ( ). and 88.5% of the cases of patients carrying the ENG, ACVR L1
 and MADH4 Idiopathic HMCYMB PinC 3y oung children is rare. Our goal was to describe four neo- mutations, respectively. Telangiectasia were present in all groups: ACVR L1
 nates with severe HCM caused by compound heterozygous or homozygous (92.7%), ENG (90.6%) or MADH4 (76%). Mtruenthcoatdisn g mutations and compare these to those described in li- Patients with ENG mutations showed a higher prevalence of pulmonary ar- terature. teriovenous malformations (PAVM) (72.4%) as well as a marked prevalence FourM uYnBrPelCa3ted neonates with severe unexplained cardiomyopathy of cerebral arteriovenous malformations (CAVM) (24.5%). In contrast, the wReesruel ststu died. A literature review was performed to identify other patients hepatic malformations (HAVM) manifested to be more often related to the with biallelic mutations. presence of the ACVR L1
 mutation (66.2%). Structurally, ENG mutations sho- All children presented with feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, wed to be widely distributed through the gene. In contrast, ACVR L1
 mutati- dyspnea and died from cardiac failure before age 13 weeks. Left ventricular ons occur preferentially in exons 3 and 7. non-compaction was diagnosed in three patients. In the fourth, noncompac- CONCLUSIONS: This study on a large cohort showed major differences lin- tion was not a clear feature, but could not be excluded. All patients had sep- kCin. gP atheze: sNyonnder.o Sm. eG airnadu dth: Ne omnue.t aGte. dLe gsecnae: .None. E. Decullier: None. E. tal defects. Two patients were compound heterozygotes for the c.2373dupG Babin: None. M. Carette: None. R. Corre: None. P. Duffau: None. B. Gilbert- (p.Trp792fsX17) and c.2827C>T (p.Arg943X) mutation. T wMoY BwPeCr3e homozy- Dussardier: None. P. Hatron: None. J. Harle: None. P. Kaminski: None. P. Lacombe: None. C. Lavigne: None. B. Lorcerie: None. P. Magro: None. S. gous for the c.2373dupG and the c.2827C>T mutation respectively. Riviere: None. P. Edery: None. S. Dupuis-Girod: None. All reported patients with double truncating mutations in reported so far (n=21), are diagnosed with severe cardiomyopathy and/or die within Cthoen cfilrussti omnosn ths of life. In 52% (11/21) septal defects or a patent ductus arteriosus accompanied cardiomMyoYpBaPthCy3.  P04
.25 In contrast to heterozygous mutations, homozygous or com- Genetic variants affecting the expression of DRAM2 at 1p13.3 are pound heterozygous truncating mutations cause severe neonatal associated with acute myocardial infarction with different effects for cardiomyopathyM wYiPthB Cfe3atures of left ventricular noncompaction including STEMI and NSTEMI septal defects in 60% of patients. Neonates with cardiomyopathy should be P. Salo1, J. Sinisalo2, J. Kettunen3,1, A. Havulinna4, A. Sarin3,1, T. Hiekkalinna1,3, S. Ripatti3,1, iJn.vCe.s Htiegrakteerdt: f Noro ne. Y.M. H aonedd eomthaeerk searrsc: oNmoneeri.c I .gMe.n Fer omhunt-aMtuioldnesr.: None. M. P. J. Karhunen5,6, H. Huikuri7, M. Lokki8, V. Salomaa4, M. Nieminen2, M. Perola9,3,10; Dalinghaus: None. A. van den Wijngaard: None. R.R. de Krijger: None. M. 1Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Michels: None. I.F.M. de Coo: None. M.W. Wessels: None. D. Dooijes: None. Finland, 2Division of Cardiology, Heart and Lung Center HUCH, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 4Chronic Disease Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 5School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 6Fimlab Laboratories Ltd, Tampere University Hospital Region, Tampere, Finland, 7Department of Internal Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 8Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 9National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 10Estonian Genome Center of the University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 137ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.27  P04
.29 Analysis of single and combined genotypes of MTHFR, MTR and MTRR Whole exome sequencing as a tool to identify novel causal variants polymorphisms regard to content of sulfur amino acids in plasma of and genes for Brugada syndrome patients with preeclampsia and coronary heart disease D. Daneels1, M. Bonduelle1, U. Peeters1, P. Brugada2, G. Pappaert2, S. Van Dooren1; H. Akopyan, I. Nazarko, O. Efimenko, L. Czorna; 1Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel & REGE, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Institute of Hereditary Pathology of National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Belgium, Brussels, Belgium, 2Heart Rhythm Management Centre, UZ Brussel - Vrije Lviv, Ukraine. Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, Brussels, Belgium. Hyperhomocysteinemia is generally established etiological factor for Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a cardiac channelopathy inherited as an autoso- thrombosis. We have analyzed common polymorphic variants MTHFR mal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance and variable expression. All С677Т/А1298С, MTR A2756G, MTRR A66G regard to the plasma homocy- published BrS-associated genes have been identified by a classical candidate steine and cysteine level among 115 Ukrainian patients with preeclampsia gene approach, leading to a total genetic diagnostic yield of 30% (with 20% and coronary artery disease (55 and 71 respectively) and 186 controls (33 of mutations in the SCN5A gene). Currently available genomics and bioinfor- pregnant and 83 non-pregnant women, and 70 men). Significant increase of matics technologies allow us to identify novel and potentially major genes homocysteine level was proved in patients with preeclampsia, whereas mo- involved in BrS. Hence we can better address the urgent question to what derate hyperhomocysteinemia (within 15-30 mmol/L) was noted just only extent BrS can be regarded as a pure Mendelian, monogenic disorder or as in 10.91% of patients with ischemic heart disease. Unexpectedly, 41.8% of an oligo- to polygenic syndrome modulating disease expression. such patients and less than 4% of controls showed decrease in cysteine con- We report the results of a first panel of exome sequence data of 8 stringent- centrations with significant difference in mean values (239.35+47.38 and ly selected, large BrS families. Multiple candidate causal variants in genes 270.93+38.28 mmol/L, P<0.05). Hypercysteinemia (>350 mmol/L) was already linked with cardiac arrhythmias and in novel cardiac genes were noted in 7.27% cases in the absence of control. No significant differences identified and validated with Sanger sequencing. In three families we obser- in prevalence either of С677T or А1298С genotypes of MTHFR gene was ved that novel, in silico disease-causing variants in known cardiac arrhyth- established. At the same time, significantly increased proportion of MTR mia genes did not show complete correlation with the clinical diagnosis by AA and MTRR GG genotypes were recognized as a prominent trait of pati- segregation analysis in all available family members. This phenomenon is ents with preeclampsia and coronary artery disease. We found 6 among 81 also seen in our diagnostics lab for SCN5A mutation analysis. On one hand possible combined genotypes of MTHFR С677T and A1298C, MTR A2756G, these results question the major causality of the analyzed variants but on MTRR A66G, which more than 5 times increases the risk of preeclampsia the other hand they might point in the direction of a polygenic inheritance and coronary heart disease. Our data suggest a link between hyperhomo- of this disorder. To further investigate this hypothesis, we currently compa- cysteinemia and hypocysteinemia with carrier status of defined genotypes re exomic SNP profiles, including the type, relative burden and pattern of of methionine synthase, methionine synthase reductase and cystathionine variants, within a cardiac arrhythmias candidate gene set between control synthase. Reducing the concentration of L-cysteine can lead to disruption of a Dn.d D BarnSe-eplas:t iNenont es.a Mm.p Bleosn.duelle: None. U. Peeters: None. P. Brugada: None. G. Pappaert: None. S. Van Dooren: None. the biosynthesis of endogenous hydrogen sulphide with the loss inherent to h His. Asikgonpiyfiacna:n Nt voanseo. dI. iNlaatzoarr ekfofe: cNto.ne. O. Efimenko: None. L. Czorna: None.  P04
.30  P04
.28 Genetic diversity of plakophilin-2 (PK P2
) and desmoglein-2 (DSG2) Genotype-phenotype discrepancies in Brugada syndrome genes in Russian patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular S. J. Van Dooren1, P. Brugada2, D. Daneels1, U. Peeters1, L. Peirsman1, I. Timmermans1, K. dysplasia Kindermans1, M. Biervliet1, G. Pappaert2, M. Bonduelle1; A. Shestak1, O. Blagova2, V. Rumiantseva1, Y. Frolova1, S. Dzemeshkevich1, E. 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel - UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, Zaklyazminskaya1; 2Heart Rhythm Management Center, Cardiovascular Division, Vrije Universiteit Brussel - 1Russian Research Center of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Moscow Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. Brugada syndrome is one of common inheritable arrhythmogenic disorders Background: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) is an inhe- in apparently structurally normal hearts, inherited as an autosomal do- rited cardiomyopathy characterized by progressive fibro-fatty replacement minant trait with incomplete penetrance and variable expression. Clinical of the myocardium and high risk of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias. diagnosis is based on documented ventricular arrhythmias and/or related Mutations in the genes encoding desmosomal proteins cause ARVD. Mutati- symptoms, family history AND a type 1 spontaneous or sodium-blocker in- on rate in those genes in Russian cohort had not been studied yet. duced ST-SsCeNgm5Aent ECG elevation. Genetic diagnosis is currently still based Methods: Fifteen unrelated Russian ARVD patients were examined with coll- on the mutation analysis of the pore-forming α-subunit of the sodium chan- ecting of personal and family history, physical examination, ECG, Echo-CG, nel gene( ), resulting in a genetic diagnostic yield of approximately myocardial biopsy and cardiac MRI. Analysis of PK P2
 and DSG2 genes was 20%. performed by direct sequencing. We performed SCN5A mutation analysis in 135 Brugada syndrome proin- Results: Screening of mutations in PK P2
 and DSG2 genes in 15 DNA samp- bsialincdos of our outclinic patient population. We identified 20 variants of which les was performed. In PK P2
 gene we found three rare genetic variants: two 17 described mutations and 3 novel potential disease causing variants by truncating mutations (р.W538X and с.1523_1538del) and one missense prediction tools, resulting in a diagnostic yield of respectively 12,6% VUCS p. S140
F. All patients carrying 3 genetic variants had an oblivious ma- to 14,8% (3 variants included). Subsequent segregation analysis was per- nifestation at the 46 y.o. with high grade ventricular arrhythmia; ICD was formed in 8 large families of the identified SCN5A positive BrS probands to implanted. determine genotype-phenotype correlation. A sensitivity of 76% and spe- In DSG2 gene we did find three missense VUCSes p. S194
L, p.V533I and cificity of 79% was assessed and could be increased up to 85% and 92% p.N245H. Variants p. S194
L and p.N245H were analysed with PolyPhen2 and respectively with exclusion of the undescribed SCN5A variants. Revision of considered as «probably damaging» and «possibly damaging» respectively. all ECG data revealed that some ajmaline or baseline ECG negative BrS pa- All patients carrying 3 genetic variants had an oblivious manifestation at tients with SCN5A mutations did not meet the stringent diagnostic criteria the 26 y.o. with ventricular tachycardia, RV hiperthrophy; ICD implanted or but demonstrated conduction disease. strongly recommended. These results urge for the need to revise the clinical diagnostic criteria for Conclusion: We identified six mutations in 2 most common ARVD genes in Brugada syndrome, especially since the ajmaline ECG data are of important Russian unrelated ARVD patients. Always truncated mutations and probab- added value for this low penetrant disorder in the discovery of novel major ly damaging variants account for 40% mutations. This prevalence matches mS.oJl.e Vcuanla Dr ogeonreenti:c N poanteh.w P.a yBsr uing aBdrau:g Naodnae s. yDn.d Draonmeee.ls: None. U. Peeters: with the prevalence of ARVD9 and ARVD10 (HRS/EHRA Expert Consensus None. L. Peirsman: None. I. Timmermans: None. K. Kindermans: None. M. Statement). Observation in healthy ethnically-matched volunteers is in pro- Biervliet: None. G. Pappaert: None. M. Bonduelle: None. g Ar.e Sssh nesotwak. F: uNnocntei.o Ona. lB elaffgeocvt ah:a Ns otone b. eV .e Rluucmidiaatnetds.eva: None. Y. Frolova: None. S. Dzemeshkevich: None. E. Zaklyazminskaya: None. 138 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.31  P04
.33 Ebstein anomaly: report of two siblinigs born to unaffected parents. Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis: identification of two S. Jougheh Doust1, A. Redington2, D. Chitayat1,3; candidate loci by genome-wide homozygosity mapping in a familial 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University case. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Cardiology, The Hospital for Sick J. Plaisancié1, E. Justrabo2, H. Hamel3, P. Calvas1, N. Chassaing1, E. Bieth1; Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and 1Medical Genetics, Purpan Hospital, Toulouse, France, 2Pathology, University Hospital, Medical Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Dijon, France, 3Pneumology, Bocage Hospital, Dijon, France. Canada. Idiopathic Pleuroparenchymal Fibroelastosis (IPF) is a rare clinicopatholo- Ebstein anomaly is a rare cardiac malformation associated with displace- gic entity, characterized by a fibrotic thickening of the pleura and subpleural ment of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve towards the apex at the right parenchyma with upper lobe predominance. The pathologic findings inclu- ventricle of the heart with variable severity extending from a severely af- de the following: 1) intense fibrosis of the visceral pleura, 2) prominent sub- fected fetus to an asymptomatic adult. Ebstein anomaly can be familial or pleural fibroelastosis, 3) sparing of the parenchyma distant from the pleura, sporadic as well as syndromic and non-syndromic. The majority of cases 4) patchy lymphoplasmatic infiltrates, 5) fibroblastic foci present at the lea- are sporadic and non-syndromic and the suggested mode of inheritance in ding edge of the fibrosis. Etiology and physiopathology of this entity are still familial cases is autosomal dominant (AD) (Sinokovec et al., 2005, DigMiliYoH e7t unknown but genetic origin is suggested by reported affected sib pairs. al., 2011) although caGseAsT Asu4g agneds tNivKeX o2f- 5a utosomal recessive mode of inheri- Here we described three sibs, a brother and two sisters, affected by a drama- tance have been reported (Chitayat et al.,1992). A few genes including tic restrictive syndrome, secondary to bilateral pleural fibrosis and leading (Postma et al., 2010), (Digilio et al., 2011) have been sug- to premature death during the fourth decade. For these three sibs, clinical gested to be candidate genes in isolated, non-syndromic cases. We report presentation, radiographic and pathologic findings are consistent with IPF. two siblings (a boy and a girl) diagnosed prenatally with Ebstein anomaly Their unaffected parents were first cousins and the siblings had identical and other right sided heart lesions. The parents were non-consanguineous symptoms with similar severe progression which is strongly indicative of a of Swiss descents. The couple had 4 miscarriages, the 2 affected children simple autosomal recessive inheritance. We identified by Genome-Wide Ho- and a healthy child. The father carries an apparently balanced chromosomal mozygosity Mapping two candidate loci, spanning 9,60 Mb on chromosome rearrangement between chromosomes 17 and 19 and array CGH done on 5 and 8,97 Mb on chromosome 9. Unfortunately, Whole Exome sequencing the affected girl was negative. The Ebstein anomaly in this pregnancy seems strategy failed to identify the causal mutations of this rare fatal disease in to have autosomal recessive mode of inheritance although autosomal domi- o Ju. rP plaeidsaignrceieé.: None. E. Justrabo: None. H. Hamel: None. P. Calvas: None. N. nant mode of inheritance with incomplete penetrance in one of the parents Chassaing: None. E. Bieth: None. cannot be ruled out. Further investigation is being done to identify the cau- s Sa.t iJvoeu ggehneeh i Dn othuisst :f aNmoniley.. A. Redington: None. D. Chitayat: None.  P04
.34 Mutation analysis of the AGXT gene in combined liver-kidney and  P04
.32 isolated liver transplanted six children for primary hyperoxaluria A Dutch founder mutation in the cardiac regulatory light chain type 1: a single center experience (MY L2
). M. Turkmen1, S. Agılkaya2, D. Alaygut1, M. Torun Bayram1, B. Kasap1, A. Soylu1, S. A. Van den Wijngaard1, G. R. F. Claes1, I. P. C. Krapels1, M. B. Hoos1, A. T. J. M. Helderman- Kavukcu1, S. Cingoz2; van den Enden1, Y. E. G. Barrois1, R. J. Jongbloed1, F. H. J. van Tienen1, J. W. Sels2, S. H. H. 1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, Kuijpers3, P. Garcia-Pavia4, A. Perrot5, I. Christiaans6, P. G. A. Volders7, H. J. M. Smeets1; 2Department of Medical Biology and Genetic, School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Cardiology, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, Netherlands, 3Cardiology, Máxima Medisch Centrum, Eindhoven, Netherlands, 4Cardiomyopathy Unit, Heart Transplant Program, Primary hyperoxaluria type I (PH1)A iGs XaTn autosomal recessive rare disorder, Department of Cardiology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain, 5Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Experimental & Clinical Research Center, Berlin, characterized by progressive kidney failure, caused by mutations in the ala- Germany, 6Academisch Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Cardiology, MUMC, nine: glyoxylate aminotransferase ( ) gAeGnXeT which leads to the failure of Maastricht, Netherlands. the alanine: glyoxylate aminotransferase activity in the liver. Although targe- ted sequence analysis of exo nAsG 1X,T 4 and 7 of has been proposed for first line genetic testing, the sequence of the entire coding region is recommen- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common disease with an estima- ded. We aimed to detect the gene mutations causing PH1 in combined ted prevalence of 0.2% in the general population. In 30%-60% of patients liver-kidney, isolated liver, sequential kidney and liver-kidney transplanted an autosomal dominant gene mutation is identified. Most of the reported six Turkish children (Five male) with phenotypic characAteGrXisTtics of PH1. Me- mutations are distinct and unique for each family. In addition, clinical hete- dian age at diagnosis was 119 months (Range 42-178 months). The entire rogeneity and incomplete penetrance are observed in families with a mu- coding region including exon intron boundaries of the gene were se- tation. Occasionally, sudden cardiac death is the first manifestation of the quenced in patients. disease. We detected six mutations PH1causing and two minor allele polymorphism In this report, we describe the mutation p.Glu22Lys (p. E22
K, c.64G>A) in in six patients. The entire patients had at least one PH1 related mutation. MY L2
, a gene that is rarely mutated in HCM as it accounts for less than 1% Patient 1 had homozygous minor allele polymorphisms Pro11Leu in exon 1 of identified HCM mutations. We identified the p. E22
K mutation in 11 HCM and Ile340Met in exon 10, and mutation Met195Arg in exon 5. families and show that it is a Dutch founder mutation that probably origina- Patient 2 had homozygous mutation c. 33_34insC in exon 1. Patient 3 was ted about 425 years ago in the region around Eindhoven in the south of The compound heterozygous for mutations Gly170Arg in exon 4 and c.846+1G>A Netherlands. The availability of multiple families carrying the same founder in intron 8 and heterozygous minor allele polymorphisms Ile340Met in exon mutation provides the opportunity to investigate phenotypic differences 10. PatienAtG 4X hTad homozygous mutation c.823-824dupAG in exon 8. Patient influenced by external or genetic factors other than the primary mutation, 5 and 6 had homozygous mutation c.976delG in exon 10. Mutational analy- which can improve mechanistic insights and aid in the discovery of progno- sis of the gene in PH1 patients can be a useful tool for establishing the stic factors. We demonstrate that mutation carriers generally have a benign d Mia. gTnuorksmis eann:d N cohnoeo. sSi.n Agg aınlk aaypap:r Noporniea.t De .t hAelaryagpuetu: tNico snter.a Mte.g Tyo.run Bayram: disease manifestation with variable phenotype expression, reduced pene- None. B. Kasap: None. A. Soylu: None. S. Kavukcu: None. S. Cingoz: None. trance and late onset. However, when a comorbidity factor is present like hypertension, hypothyroidism, coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation or a second gene mutation, disease penetrance appears to be higher with an  P04
.35 earlier onset and sometimes cardiac arrest requiring an implantable cardio- Both genetic and allelic heterogeneity greatly influence the outcome v Ae.r Vtearn d deefnib Wrililjantgoara irnd :s uNrovniev.o Grs.R..F. Claes: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. M.B. of renal function in polycystic kidney disease patients. Hoos: None. A.T.J.M. Helderman-van den Enden: None. Y.E.G. Barrois: E. Cornec-Le Gall, M. P. Audrezet, J. M. Chen, Y. Le Meur, C. Ferec, T. Genkyst Working None. R.J. Jongbloed: None. F.H.J. van Tienen: None. J.W. Sels: None. S.H.H. Group; Kuijpers: None. P. Garcia-Pavia: None. A. Perrot: None. I. Christiaans: Chru Brest, Brest, France. None. P.G.A. Volders: None. H.J.M. Smeets: None. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most PcKoDm1- mon inherited disorderP KaDffe2c ting 1/400 to 1/1000 individuals worldwide. The disease is genetically heterogeneous with two causative genes, ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE(  |8
 W5%W ofW pa.EtieSnHtsG) a.OndR G (15% of patients). To improve our under1st3an9-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index TCF2 PAX2 ding of the genotype/phenotype correlation in ADPKD, we have collected tested for the presence of and mutations using direct sequencing a large population of more than 1000 patients (including The Genkyst co- of all coding regions and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification hort) from the western part of France. We have scanned the whole coding (MLPA). In case genetic defect was identified in the index patient we chek- sequences of these two genes and searched for large rearrangements. We ked the carrier status of the parents in order to determine its origin and have identified a mutated allele in 90% of our patients and reported 351 inheritance within the family. new mutatPioKnDs2 (Audrezet et al., Human Mutation, 2012). These molecular Genetic defects such as missense mutations and deletions of multiple exons data as well as the correlation with the paPtKieDn1ts’ phenotype allowed us to were found in only small proportion of the cases (less than 10%). This could show that mutations are associated with renal survival approximately be explained either with the presence of as yet unknown defects in other ge- 20 years longer than that associated with mutations (79.7 years ver- nes involved in urinary tract development or with the different ethnic back- sus  P5
K8.D41 years). In terms of allelic effect on phenotype, in sharp contrast to ground of the patients. Including more genes in the panel for CAKUT genetic previous studies, we demonstrated that it is the type but not the position of testing as well as expanding the groups of Roma and Turkish patients would the mutation correlates strongly with renal survival. The median age aVl.l oPwen ucsh teov :c lNaorinfey. tOh.a Bt.eltcheva: None. A. Boueva: None. H. Rendakova: of end stage renal disease (ESRD) onset is 55.6 years in patients with trun- None. G. Zlatanova: None. R. Kaneva: None. V. Mitev: None. cating mutation versus 67.9 years in the non-truncating mutation carriers (E Cornec-Le Gall, JASN, in Press).The identification of such genetic factors is c Er.u Ccioarln aesc t-aler ggeatlel:d N tohneer.a Mpi.ePs. Aaured rceuzrerte: nNtolyn eu.n Jd.Mer. dCehveenl:o Npmoneen. tY.. Le meur:  P04
.38 None. C. Ferec: None. T. Genkyst working group: None. Genome-wide association analyses identified a locus influencing the ratio urinary calcium/ urinary sodium. T. Corre1,2, C. Hayward3, G. Pistis4, N. Pirastu5, S. Ulivi5, Z. Kutalik1,2, M. Bochud6, O.  P04
.36 Polasek7, I. Rudan8, N. D. Hastie3, M. Traglia4,5, M. Cocca4,5, P. Gasparini5, D. Toniolo4,9, S. Bergmann1,2, P. Vollenweider10, O. Devuyst11; Array CGH analysis of Bulgarian patients with multiple congenital 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss pathologies including anomalies of kidney and urinary tract Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM O. Beltcheva1, V. Penchev1, A. Boueva2, G. Zlatanova2, G. Stancheva1, T. Goranova1, V. Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Division Mitev1, R. Kaneva1; of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 5Institute for 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo” – University of Trieste, Trieste, University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Pediatrics Hospital, Pediatric Nephrology Italy, 6Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, and Hemodialysis Clinics, Sofia, Bulgaria. Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Split, Croatia, 8University of Edinburgh Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 9Institute of Molecular Genetics, Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) represent Pavia, Italy, 10Department of Internal Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, approximately 25% of all pathologies identified in the prenatal period. Switzerland, 11Institute of Physiology, Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, These conditions constitute a broad range of disorders resulting from the University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. abnormal renal development in embryogenesis. They are one of the most common causes of chronic renal failure in both children and adults. In the present study an array Comparative Genome Hybridization (aCGH) for 10 Concentrations of calcium and sodium in the urine (UCa, UNa) are important Bulgarian patients was performed. The children were diagnosed with diffe- biomarkers for various cardiovascular and renal disorders. These traits vary rent manifestations of CAKUT - unilateral agenesis, multiple cysts, VUR, hy- across individuals and part of this variance is genetically determined. Hence, dronephrosis, etc. Many had accompanying malformations in other organs we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for UCa, UNa and like heart, skeleton, neuronal tube, etc. All patients were initially screened UCa/UNa ratio in over 8,000 subjects of European descent.The discovery for mutations in the two most commonly affected genes, TCF2 and PAX2, but phase was conducted on 5,150 samples from a Swiss population based co- no defects were identified. hort (Colaus), with replication in four additional genetic isolates (CROATIA- Using aCGH we identified a variety of genomic rearrangements. Common Korcula, CROATIA-Split, INGI-Val Borbera and INGI-Carlantino) for a total of copy number variations (CNV) were present in all samples. In addition, 3,122 samples. Calcium and sodium were measured in a spot urine sample we found microdeletions and microduplications affecting multiple genes and both traits, unadjusted and adjusted for urinary creatinine excretion as known to be expressed in kidney, which potentially have important role well as the UCa/UNa ratio were analyzed as outcome variables. for urinary tract development and function - SUMF1, CROCC, TN S1
, NALCN, A GWAS was conducted on 2.5M single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) ANXA6, ELF3, BCAR3 and SKA P2
. Their protein products are implicated in applying a linear regression with additive model on normalized traits ad- cell signaling, cytoskeleton formation, transcription regulation and extracel- justed for age, sex and population structure. 143 SNPs with p-value below lular matrix rearrangements. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 1E-5 in 34 loci were selected for replication, and subsequently meta-ana- study to identify a possible link between mutations affecting these genes lyzed. Among loci subjected to replication attempt, one locus reached the and CAKUT. Further studies need to be carried out in order to confirm their recognized genome-wide significant threshold of 1E-8 (five phenotypes), i Onv. oBlevletmcheenvta i:n N tohnee p. Va.t hPoegnecnheesvi:s Noof nteh.e Ase. Bdoisuoervdae:r Ns.one. G. Zlatanova: for UCa/UNa ratio. The significant signal (top SNP p-value = 1.5E-10, effect None. G. Stancheva: None. T. Goranova: None. V. Mitev: None. R. Kaneva: size in original scale in discovery cohort = 3.8E-3) lies within the long arm None. of chromosome 21 (21q22.3), in a gene-rich region. Studies are ongoing in order to determine which gene of the locus is causative for the trait variati- o Tn. ,C aonrdre t:h Neo bnieo.l oCg. iHcaaly rwealerdv:a nNcoen eo.f Gth. eP iasstsiso:c Niaotnioen. .N. Pirastu: None. S. Ulivi: None. Z. Kutalik: None. M. Bochud: None. O. Polasek: None. I. Rudan:  P04
.37 None. N.D. Hastie: None. M. Traglia: None. M. Cocca: None. P. Gasparini: Mutations in TCF2 and PAX2 genes are a rare cause for Congenital None. D. Toniolo: None. S. Bergmann: None. P. Vollenweider: None. O. Anomalies of Kidney and Urinary Tract (CAKUT) in Bulgarian patients Devuyst: None. V. Penchev1, O. Beltcheva1, A. Boueva2, H. Rendakova1, G. Zlatanova2, R. Kaneva1, V. Mitev1; 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Pediatrics Hospital, Pediatric Nephrology  P04
.39 and Hemodialysis Clinics, Sofia, Bulgaria. Characterization of NEK8/NPH P9
 mutations in patients with severe renal cystic hypodysplasia and associated ciliopathy defects V. Grampa1,2,3, E. Filhol1,2,3, N. Elkhartoufi4,5, P. Krug1,2,3, F. Silbermann1,2,3, A. Benmerah1,2,3, Congenital Abnormalities of Kidney and Urianry Tract (CAKUT) are common J. L. Alessandri6, S. Sigaudy7, R. Bouvier8, M. T. Zabot8, C. Antignac1,2,5, M. C. Gubler1, C. pathological conditions diagnosed in 1 out of 500 newborns worldwide. Jeanpierre1,2,3, T. Attié-Bitach4,2,3, S. Saunier1,2,3; 1Inserm U983, Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Knowledge of the fundamental causes of CAKUT is essential for understan- Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Inserm U781, Paris, France, 5Department ding the mechanisms of their pathology as well as for reliable consultation, of Genetics, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 6Réanimation néonatale et Infantile prognosis and treatment. Centre Hopitalier Felix Guyon, St Denis, Réunion, 7Département de génétique médicale, HNF1B (TCF2) and PAX2 are two of the important transcription factors re- Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 8Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Est, Bron, sponsible for correct kidney development. Mutations in the genes for the- France. se proteins are the most commonly identified causes for CAKUT. They are found in up to 15 % of the cases. In the present study 40 patients from 32 families were included - 24 families NEK8/NPH P9
 encodes a protein that belongs to the NIMA (Never In Mitosis o 1f 4B 0ulgarian, 5 of Turkish and 3 of Roma origin. EaEchS aHffGec t2ed0 i1nd3i v|i dPuAalR wIaSs, FRgAenNe CA)E k |i nWasWe fWam.iElyS, HwhGic.hO iRs Gessential for control of cell cycle progres-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index sion. NEK8 is composed of a N-terminal serine/threonine kinase domain Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis and a C-terminal RC C1
 domain involved in localization of the protein at the (FHHNC) is an autosomal recessive tubular disorder characterized by ex- centrosome and the base of the cilium. To date only one homozygous NEK8 cessive renal magnesium and calcium excretion and chronic kidney failure. mutation, located in the RC C1
 domain, has been reported in a patient with This disease is caused by mutations in CLDN16 or CLDN19, encoding tight early onset nephronophthisis, a frequent renal ciliopathy. junction proteins claudin-16 and claudin-19, respectively. The identifica- Using ciliary gene-enriched exome sequencing, we identified novel recessi- tion of several FHHNC patients from Spain carrying missense mutation ve NEK8 mutations in 3 cases with very severe overlapping phenotypes in- p.(Gly20Asp) in CLDN19 has raised the question of the origin of this muta- cluding renal cystic dysplasia or hypodysplasia, situs inversus, cardiopathy tion from a common ancestor. The aim of this study was to identify disease with hypertrophic septum and paucity of the bile ducts. causing mutations among a Spanish cohort of 30 unrelated FHHNC families Two patients, who died early after birth, carried either compound or homo- and to determine whether the p.(Gly20Asp) mutation is a founder muta- zygous missense mutations. A homozygous splice mutation in intron 1, like- tion. The mutational analysis was carried out by sequencing the CLDN16 ly resulting in protein loss, was identified in a fetus who presented agenesis and CLDN19 exons and their exon-intron boundaries. Determination of the of the vermis, pancreatic cysts/fibrosis and abnormal genitalia in addition haplotypes was performed by genotyping three short tandem repeats flan- to multicystic kidney dysplasia and situs inversus. king the CLDN19 locus and four single nucleotide polymorphisms located We demonstrated that the NEK8 mutations affect localization of the protein in introns 3 and 4. Our results revealed CLDN19 mutations in all the pa- at the base of the cilium. Moreover, fibroblasts of the patient carrying the tients; no CLDN16 mutations were detected. Six different mutations were two compound mutations showed defect in ciliogenesis compared to fibro- identified, four of them novel, p.(Ile41Thr), p.(Gly75Cys), p.(Gly75Ser) and blasts from control individuals. p.(Gly122Arg). The p.(Gly20Asp) mutation was found in 28 unrelated pa- This study extends the spectrum of ciliopathy defects associated with NEK8 tients (93.3%), and was present in homozygous state in 83.3% of the pro- mutations, from nephronophthisis to lethal developmental multisystemic bands. Results of the haplotype analysis indicated that all alleles carrying disorders. Further characterization of the functional effect of the mutations the p.(Gly20Asp) mutation shared a common haplotype cosegregating with and downstream affected pathways will allow to understand the pathophy- this mutation. These findings are consistent with the existence of a founder s Vio. Glorgaimcapl ab:a Nsiosn ief. tEh.i sF pilhhoeln: oNtoynpeic. Nva. rEilakbhialirttyo.ufi: None. P. Krug: None. F. effect responsible for FHHNC in our cohort. Testing for the presence of this Silbermann: None. A. Benmerah: None. J.L. Alessandri: None. S. Sigaudy: m F.u Ctalatvioenri esh-Moaurltdin b: eN tohnee f. iErs. tC goerndeotbica -sLcarneuens:i nNgo inne .S Ep.a Mniasrht ipna-Ntiueñnetsz.: None. H. None. R. Bouvier: None. M.T. Zabot: None. C. Antignac: None. M.C. Gubler: Gonzalez-Acosta: None. None. C. Jeanpierre: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None. S. Saunier: None.  P04
.42  P04
.40 A rare penetrant mutation in NEPH3 gene confers high risk of Molecular investigation of distal renal tubular acidosis in Tunisia, renal failure in primary hematuric glomerulopathies and of evidence for founders mutations microalbuminuria in the general population M. Nagara1, K. Voskarides2, S. Nouira1, N. Ben Halim1, R. Kefi1, L. Romdhane1, F. Ben K. Voskarides1, M. Pieri1, P. Demosthenous1, K. Felekkis2, C. Stefanou1, M. Arsali3, Y. Rhouma1, H. Aloulou3, R. Ben Abdallah4, L. Ben Mansour4, T. Kammoun4, M. Hchicha4, A. Athanasiou4, D. Xydakis5, &. Stylianou5, G. Goulielmos5, P. Loizou6, J. Savige7, M. Höhne8, Ayadi5, J. Chemli6, C. Deltas2, S. Abdelhak1; L. A. Völker8, T. Benzing8, P. H. Maxwell9, D. P. Gale9, E. Daphnis5, M. Zavros4, A. Pierides10, 1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Laboratoire de Génomique Biomédicale et Oncogénétique, C. Deltas1; Tunis, Tunisia, 2Molecular Medicine Research Center and Laboratory of Molecular 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2University of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Limassol and Medical Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Pediatric Department, Farhat Hachad General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus, 4Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Pediatric Department, Hédi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 5University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 6Private Clinical Laboratory, Ammochostos, 5Department of Pediatrics, Tahar Sfar Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia, 6Service de pediatrie, Cyprus, 7University of Melburne, Melburne, Australia, 8University of Cologne, Cologne, Hôpital Sahloul, Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia. Germany, 9University College London, London, United Kingdom, 10Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. Background: Primary distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) is a rare genetic disease caused by mutations in different genes involved in the secretion of The wide spectrum of phenotypic heterogeneity, ranging from benign isola- H+ ions in the intercalated cells of the collecting duct required for final excre- ted hematuria to severe proteinuria and renal failure, is a critical issue in pri- tion of fixed acids. Both autosomal dominant and recessive forms have been mary hematuric diseases, such as Thin Basement Membrane Nephropathy described; the latter is also associated with sensorineural hearing loss. (TBMN) and IgA nephropathy. Phenotypic heterogeneity could be explained Methods: Twenty five Tunisian families were analyzed for mutations in the by the existence of modifier genes. We genotyped a cohort of well-studied AT P6
V1B1 and AT P6
V0A4 genes by direct sequencing. Mutation dating for adult TBMN patients (sample group 1) from 19 families, with a homoge- the founder mutations was performed by 2 methods (Kosambi formula and neous genetic background, for potential functional modifier SNPs expressed DMLE+2.2 program). in slit diaphragm (SD: pivotal to the structure of the glomerular filtration Results: Two founder mutations in AT P6
V1B1 gene were found in 16/25 barrier). We identified sixN liEkPeHly3 variants. When we categorized the patients dRTA patients, one of them was estimated to be older than 2400 years. For in “Severe” and “Mild”, based on the existence or not of proteinuria and renal the remaining patients, two mutations in the AT P6
V0A4 gene, one of them failure, variant V353M in (filtrin) gave suggestive association (geno- being novel, were found in three Tunisian cases. The presence of a hetero- typic association: p=0.036), where 353V is highly conserved. A pooled he- zygous missense mutation p.T30I, of the AT P6
V1B1 gene, was identified in maturic cohort of 524 patients (sample group 2) confirmed th-3e association, six patients; while no mutations of the second gene were detected. Any de- under the dominant model (genotypic association: p-3=5.0x10 , OR=5.95 ad- leterious mutations of either AT P6
V1B1 or AT P6
V0A were found for two justing for gender/age; allelic association: p=5.1x10 adjusting for patients’ probands. kinships). Genotyping 6531 subjects of the Framingham Heart Study (samp- Conclusion: Our study gives evidence of phenotypic and genotypic hetero- le group 3) revealed an association of the homozygou-3s 353M/M genotype geneity of dRTA in Tunisian population. Five different mutations were found, with microalbuminuria in this population (p=1.0x10 , OR=12.8 adjusting two of them were due to a founder effect. Direct screening of these mutati- for gender/age). Co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that 353M causes ons could be a rapid and valuable tool for diagnosis of dRTA in Tunisian and reduced Neph3 homodimerization and increased Neph3-Nephrin binding, N Mo.r Ntha gAafrraic: aNno pneo.p Ku.l aVtoiosnkas.rides: None. S. Nouira: None. N. Ben Halim: possibly this affecting the long-term SD integrity. In concluNsEiPonH,3 genetic as- None. R. Kefi: None. L. Romdhane: None. F. Ben Rhouma: None. H. Aloulou: sociation results from three independent sample groups and functional stu- None. R. Ben Abdallah: None. L. Ben Mansour: None. T. Kammoun: None. M. Hchicha: None. A. Ayadi: None. J. Chemli: None. C. Deltas: None. S. dies support a “rare variant-large effect” phenomenon for -V353M in Abdelhak: None. renal disease, giving also clues for common pathophysiology in hematuric d Kis. eVaosseksa orifd gelso:m Neornuel.a Mr .o Priigeirni:. None. P. Demosthenous: None. K. Felekkis: None. C. Stefanou: None. M. Arsali: None. Y. Athanasiou: None. D. Xydakis: None. &. Stylianou: None. G. Goulielmos: None. P. Loizou: None. J. Savige:  P04
.41 None. M. Höhne: None. L.A. Völker: None. T. Benzing: None. P.H. Maxwell: Founder effect of Claudin-19 p.(Gly20Asp) mutation in Spanish None. D.P. Gale: None. E. Daphnis: None. M. Zavros: None. A. Pierides: None. C. Deltas: None. families with familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis F. Claverie-Martin, E. Cordoba-Lanus, E. Martin-Nuñez, H. Gonzalez-Acosta; Hospital N. S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 141ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.43  P04
.45 Molecular diagnosis of hereditary kidney diseases: nephronophthisis, NPH S2
 mutations in steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome: a medullary cystic kidney disease, hyperuricemic nephropathies and mutation update and the associated phenotypic spectrum renal cysts-diabetes syndrome K. Bouchireb1,2,3, O. Boyer1,2,3, O. Gribouval2, F. Névo2, E. Huynh-Cong2, V. Morinière4,2, R. A. Aquilano1,2, C. Graziano3, O. Baraldi2, G. Comai2, E. Sestigiani4, E. Marasco1, A. Campait4,2, G. Mollet2, C. Antignac4,2,3; Prossomariti1, P. Fici2, M. Seri3, A. Santoro4, S. Stefoni2, G. La Manna2, V. Mantovani1; 1Néphrologie pédiatrique - Hôpital Necker - Enfants malades - MARHEA, Paris, France, 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, 2Inserm U983 - Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Bologna, Italy, 2Dept. of Diagnostic Experimental and Specialty Medicine, Bologna Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Génétique médicale - Hôpital Necker - Enfants malades - University, Bologna, Italy, 3Unit of Medical Genetics, S.Orsola-Malpighi University MARHEA, Paris, France. Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 4Unit of Nephrology, Dialysis and Hypertension, S.Orsola- Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy. Mutations in the human NPH S2
 gene encoding podocin are implicated in an autosomal recessive form of non syndromic steroid-resistant nephrotic Hereditary kidney diseases (HKD) represent a heterogeneous spectrum of syndrome (SRNS) in both pediatric and adult patients. Patients with homo- disorders and a leading cause of chronic renal failure. Once ultrasound and zygous or compound heterozygous mutations commonly present with SRNS urinalysis have excluded polycystic kidney and glomerulonephritis, the fa- before the age of 6 years and rapidly progress to end-stage kidney disease mily history and clinical features can help to distinguish recessive nephro- with a low prevalence of recurrence after renal transplantation. Here we nophthisis from dominant nephropathies, but the differential diagnosis is reviewed all the NPH S2
 mutations published between 2000 and January still difficult due to phenotypic overlap. 2013, and we also reviewed all mutations described in our personal cohort Aim of this study is to develop and validate a clinicNalP aHnPd5 mUoMlecOuDlarR dEiNagno- in Necker hospital. In summary we identified 5 new pathogenic mutations in HstNicF a1lBgorithm, useful to drive the genetic screening. DNAs from 30 aNffPecHtPed1 addition to the 106 already described. The mutations are distributed along patients were HsNubF1mBitted to direct sequencing of , , and the entire coding region and lead to all kinds of alterations including 44 mis- genes. Furthermore, deletion analysis by multiplex PCR for sense, 13 nonsense, 10 small insertions, 22 small deletions, 9 splicing, 2 in- and MLPAR fEoNr were performed. del mutations and 1 mutation in the stop-codon. In addition to the 101 likely Six causative mutations were identified. A novel heterozygous p. E48
K mu- pathogenic mutations, 36 variants were classified as variants of unknown tNaPtiHoPn5 in was found in a familial case of cystic nephropathy, hyperu- significance, as these missense changes were not predicted to be deleterious ricemia, hyperkalemia and anemia. The homozygous p.R489X mutation in by the Polyphen 2 software and/or variants that were exclusively described gHeNneF 1wBas detected in a patient with retinitis pigmentosa and recur- in the heterozygous state. Genotype-phenotype analyses established corre- rent cholangitis (Senior-Locken Syndrome). The heterozygous p.R295C va- lations between some variants and age at onset, ethnicity and clinical evolu- riant in was identifiedN iPnH aP p1atient with renal failure and diabetes; tion. Based on this review, we are creating a web database using the Leiden this mutation is known to alter the DNA binding domain. The HhoNmF1oBzygous Open Variation Database (LOVD) software that lists all identified variants deletion of multiple exons in gene was identified in a patient with a Kn.d B wouilcl hailrloebw: tNhoen ien. cOlu. sBioonye orf: fNuotnuer.e O re. pGorirbtos.uval: None. F. Névo: None. E. renal medullary cysts. Heterozygous whole gene deletions of were Huynh-Cong: None. V. Morinière: None. R. Campait: None. G. Mollet: None. C. detected in a patient with medullary cysts and renal hypoplasia and in a pa- Antignac: None. tient with diabetes and cholestasis. Our data confirm the high genetic hete- rogeneity of HKD and indicate the need to broaden the genes to be screened, aA g. oAaql utihlaant oc:o Nulodn eb.e C a.c Ghireavzeiadn toh: aNnoknse t.o O N. GBSa rtaelcdhi:n Noolongey. .G. Comai: None. E.  P04
.46 Sestigiani: None. E. Marasco: None. A. Prossomariti: None. P. Fici: None. M. Bladder exstrophy and other urological defects associated with Seri: None. A. Santoro: None. S. Stefoni: None. G. La Manna: None. V. deletions in 2p14p15 involving OTX1 Mantovani: None. C. J. Jorgez1, J. A. Rosenfeld2, V. Vangapandu1, A. Sahin1, S. Bian1, D. Pham1, C. Carvalho1, J. Lupski1, A. Miller3, D. Weaver4, B. Burton5, D. Babu6, J. Bamforth7, D. Lamb1; 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Signature Genomic  P04
.44 Laboratories, Spokane, WA, United States, 3Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States, 4indiana University School of Medicine, indianapolis, IN, Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus due to a novel AVPR2 mutation. A United States, 5Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United case report. States, 6University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 7university of Alberta, edmonton, C. Pidone, V. Ferraù, E. Moschella, M. I. S. Crapanzano, A. Costa, R. Gallizzi, T. Arrigo, S. AB, Canada. Briuglia, C. D. Salpietro; Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, Messina, Italy. Development of the genito-urinary (GU) tract is intricate and defects in- clude cryptorchidism (1:150), hypospadias (1:200), micropenis (1:300), Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is characterized by poliuria, poly- vesicoureteral-reflux (VUR) (1%) and bladder-exstrophy-epispadias (BEE) dipsia, recurrent bouts of fever and acute hypernatremic dehydration af- (1:45000). Using array-comparative-genomic-hybridization (aCGH) we ter birth that may cause neurological sequelae. Prevalence is estimated at identified fivOeT Xin1dividuals with deletions in the 2p14p15 region (66.0kb- 1-2/1000000. The disease results from the failure of the renal tubules to 5.6Mb) that include OthTeX 1homeodomain transcription factor orthodenticle- respond to antidiuretic hormone. In most cases, the disease is X-linked re- homolog-1 ( ). Case #1 (BEE and VUR) has the smallest deletion (66kb) cessive (90%) and caused by mutations in the gene located on Xq28, coding encompassing only and was identified from 30 BEE patients using for the V2 receptor of antidiuretic hormone. AVPR2 is the only gene in which Nimblegen-3x720-aCGH and validated by Agilent-aCGH and CNV-Taqman- mutations are known to cause X-linked NDI. NDI can also be inherited in an assays. Cases #2-5 werdee indoevnot ified among 30,183 subjects submitted to Si- autosomal recessive (9%) or autosomal dominant manner (1%). gnature Genomics for clinical aCGH testing and had deletions validated by We describe the case of a 12 months-old boy came to our observation for FISH. Cases #2-5 had large CNVs (2.39-5.70Mb) and exhibited va- persistent fever, hypernatriemia (sodium 159 mmol/L), hyperchloremia, riable features similar to the 2p15p16.1 microdeletion syndrome including hyperazotemia and a family history of polyuria and polydipsia (mother, developmental delay, short stature, facial abnormalities, and GU defects. maternal aunt and maternal grandmother). At the physical examination the Different GU abnormalities in patients wOitthx 1the same gene defect are not child showed discrete clinical conditions and febrile temperature, marked rare. GU defects in our patients include testicular (3/5), penile (3/5), kid- hypotonia and poor responsiveness to external stimuli, delayed motor deve- ney (2/5), bladder (1/5), and VUR (1/5). null mice have prepubescent lopment and failure to thrive. transient growth retardation and gonadal defects attributed to low levels of After liberalization of water intake, we have seen the disappearance of fever pituitary hormones. Two patients have short stature and three have gonadal and hypotonia, restarting of normal caloric intakes and spontaneous norma- defects. The presence of GU defects in four of our cohort and in seven of lization of sodium and other electrolytes. At this point, after having achieved 2p15–p16.1 syndrome cases (one of them has OTX1 deleted) suggest this a normal hydration we observed polydipsia (1330 cc/die), polyuria (138 region encodes genes important for GU development. As conclusion, impair- ml/Kg/die) and dilute urine (specific gravity <1.010). ment of OTX1 function may lead to GU tract abnormalities as common as Sequencing analysis of AVPR2 gene showed: c.738dupG, p.Arg247Alafs*12. cCry.Jp. tJoorrcgheirzd: iNsomn eto. Ja.sA r. aRroes aesn BfeBldE:. A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; The condition of heterozygous carriers of this duplication was found also in Signature Genomics. V. Vangapandu: None. A. Sahin: None. S. Bian: None. D. mother, aunt and grandmother: c.[738dupG];[=], p.[Arg247Alafs*12];[(=)]. Pham: None. C. Carvalho: None. J. Lupski: None. A. Miller: None. D. Weaver: TCh. eP miduotnaet:i oNno nthea. tV .w Fee frorauùn:d N hoanse .n Ee.v Mero bsecehne ldlae:s Ncroinbee.d M b.Ie.Sfo. rCer.apanzano: None. B. Burton: None. D. Babu: None. J. Bamforth: None. D. Lamb: None. None. A. Costa: None. R. Gallizzi: None. T. Arrigo: None. S. Briuglia: None. C.D. Salpietro: None. 142 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.47  P04
.49 On the origins of renal cell carcinoma, vesicoureteric reflux and C The MEFV mutation profiles and SAA1 gene BcII polymorphism in (Opitz trigonocephaly) syndrome: A complex puzzle revealed by the chronic renal failure patients that requiring long-term haemodialysis sequencing of an inherited t(2;3) translocation. in Turkish population J. M. Darlow1,2, L. McKay3, M. G. Dobson1,2, D. E. Barton1, I. Winship3; O. OZDEMIR1,2, S. CETINKAYA3, M. KAYATA S4
, F. SILAN1, M. E. YILDIRIM2, H. KUCUK 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin 12, Ireland, 2National Children’s KURTULGAN2, B. KOKSA L2
, S. ATIK YALCINTEP E1
, E. AKAR1, F. CANDAN4; Research Centre, both at Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Crumlin, Ireland, 3University of 1Canakkale On Sekiz Mart University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Genetics, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 4Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey. The co-incidence of an inherited balanced translocation through 2q37.3 in patients who developed renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with the finding of gene- tic linkage in the same chromosomal band in a study of vesicoureteric reflux Background and Aim: There is an increased mortality risk in chronic renal (VUR), an inherited developmental disorder, suggested the possibility that failure(CRF) patients taht requiring long-term haemodialysis due to the there might bCeD a9 6gene involved in urinary tract development in that band chronic inflammation. The relationship between chronic kidney failure and that could account for both findings. WCXeC hRa7veC iXdCeRn7tified the breakpoints. On role of familial genetic markers remains incompletely understood. In the 3q, the gene is bisected in an intron, while on 2q the break-point is current study it was aimed to find out the prevalence of MEFV mutation pro- in an intergenic region 103 kb from . expression has been re- files and serum amiloid A1 (SAA1) genes BcII polymorphism in CRF patients ported to be elevated in > 50% of renal cell carcinomas and tChXeC gRe7ne is also that requiring long-term haemodialysis. Method: Current cohort includes involved in kidney development. This raises the possibilCitDy 9t6hat the t(2;3) 242 CRF patients and 245 healthy individuals from the same population. translocation brought an enhancer of CD96 into proximity to , causing Total genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood- EDTA and MEFV it to be misregulated, leading to a risk of RCC. MCuDta9t6ion of was thought mutation analysis was carried out by reverse hybridization StripAssay and to be the cause of some cases of C Syndrome because a t(3;18) translocation real-time techniques. The SAA1 gene was genotyped by BclI/RFLP method. was found in a case. The translocation bisected and no gene was found Results: Various common MEFV mutations were detected in high portion of at the breakpoint on chromosome 18. However, this is now shown not to be (38%) CRF patients. The most frequent mutations were  E148
Q and M694V true, because none of the patients with t(2;3) have any features of C Syndro- respectivelly. The increased T allele frequency was detected in CRF patients me. The other breakpoint in the C Syndrome case was in 18q12.1, which is when compared to the health individuals from the same population. Conclu- now known to contain the desmocollin and desmoglein gene clusters, re- sions: The current results indicate that germ-line mutations in both genetic sponsible for tight junction formation in epithelia, and it seems likely the mL.i sM-rceKgauyla: tNioonne o. fM th.Ge.s De ogbesnoens :i sN tohnee .t rDu.eE .c Bauasrteo onf: tNhoen sey. nI.d Wroinmseh.ip: None. biomarkers (MEFV and SAA1 genes) play crucial role in CRF pathogenesis d Ou.e O tzod tehme ilro: nNgo-nteer. mS. cChertoinnkica yinaf: lNamonme.a Mtio. Kn ainya tthaes :c Nurorneen. tF C. SRiFla cno: hNoornte.. M.E. Yildirim: None. H. Kucuk kurtulgan: None. B. Koksal: None. S. Atik yalcintepe: None. E. Akar: None. F. Candan: None.  P04
.48 Identification of Homozygous Mutations in two Alpha Integrin Encoding Genes in Fetuses with Severe Kidney Development Defects  P04
.50 C. Jeanpierre1,2,3, F. Silbermann1,2,3, C. Humbert1,2,3, C. Bole-Feysot2, P. Nitschke3,2, L. Autosomal Recessive Steroid Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome (SRNS) Heidet4, P. Blanchet5, V. Bodiguel6, M. C. Gubler1, C. Antignac1,2,7, S. Saunier1,2,3, &. Société Française de Foetopathologie8; in a three generation family: Expanding the genotype:phenotype 1Inserm U983, Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 3Université Paris correlation Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4reference center MARHEA, AP-HP, G. E. Jones1, V. Jain1, P. Vasudevan1, L. Robertson1, M. Pollak2, J. Feehally3; Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 5Department of Genetics and Fetopathology, Arnaud de 1Leicester Clinical Genetics Department, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France, 6Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3The John Walls Renal , Intercommunal, Le Raincy-Montfermeil, France, 7Department of Genetics, AP-HP, Necker University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. Hospital, Paris, France, 8SOFFOET, Paris and other cities, France. SNRS type 2 (OMIM: 600995), is an autosomal recessive condition charac- Renal hypodysplasia (RHD) is a heterogeneous condition encompassing a terized by proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia, and oedema. It is spectrum of kidney development defects responsible for pediatric end-stage resistant to steroid treatment and usually progresses to end-stage renal di- renal disease and mortality. The occurrence of familial and syndromic cases sease before the second decade. Approximately 20-30% of cases are caused indicates the existence of a genetic component. by recessive mutations in the NPH S2
 gene1. In order to identify genes involved in recessive RHD, we analysed fetuses We describe a family with three generations of individuals with compound belonging to consanguineous families by whole exome sequencing. In two heterozygous mutations in NPH S2
. Two individuals developed SNRS in families, we identified homozygous mutations in integrin encoding genes childhood, while one is clinically well. that play a crucial role during kidney development: a missense variation in The proband was diagnosed with SRNS aged 1yr. She was referred to Gene- ITGA3, predicted as damaging by Polyphen2 and Sift, in a family with two tics as her father had the same presentation, requiring kidney transplant at fetuses with multicystic renal dysplasia and a splicing mutation in ITGA8 10yrs. Genetic testing confirmed that both were compound heterozygotes in two fetuses from a family with bilateral renal agenesis. These mutations for mutations R138Q and Q215X in the NPH S2
 gene. The mother was found were absent from SNP and in-house databases. Screening of fetuses with to be heterozygous for R138Q mutation. Cascade screening revealed that similar phenotypes did not allow us to identify any other ITGA3 or ITGA8 the paternal grandmother carried the Q215X, and the unaffected paternal mutation. grandfather was a compound heterozygote for R138Q and R229Q. By reexpressing the mutated ITGA3 protein in MDCK cells, we demonstrated The R138Q mutation has been found in approximately 1/3 of familial ca- that the  L518
P mutation alters epithelial morphogenesis (3D culture) and ses, and is thought to be a founder mutation in Europe 1,2. It is associated cell adhesion on laminin 5. We also showed that the ITGA8 mutation led with early onset of disease3. Q215X results in premature termination of the to skipping of exon 28, resulting in a protein with in frame deletion of 33 protein4. The R229Q is a common polymorphism with allele frequency of aminoacids. 3.6%, although it can lead to a late onset form in patients who are compound This is the first report of human mutations in ITGA3 and ITGA8 associated heterozygotes for R229Q and another mutation4. with RHD. However, ITGA3 mutations have been reported in association This case is a striking example of how genetic testing is invaluable to accura- with another renal pathology, congenital nephrotic syndrome. Experiments tely counsel a family with an autosomal recessive condition, which initially are in progress to formally demonstrate the causative effect of these mutati- a Gp.pEe. aJrosn teos b: eN oanne a. uVt.o Jsaoinm: aNl odnoem. Pin. aVnast updeedvigarne:e N.one. L. Robertson: None. M. ons in RHD and to understand the pathophysiological basis of the phenoty- Pollak: None. J. Feehally: None. pCic. Jveaarniapbieilrirtey: aNsosoneci. aFt.e Sdi lwbeitrhm IaTnGnA: 3N omnuet. aCt.i oHnusm. bert: None. C. Bole-Feysot: None. P. Nitschke: None. L. Heidet: None. P. Blanchet: None. V. Bodiguel: None. M.C. Gubler: None. C. Antignac: None. S. Saunier: None. &. Société Française de Foetopathologie: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 143ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P04
.51 Urofacial syndrome is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous condition caused by recessive mutations in HPS E2
 and LRIG2. tution was found neither in healthy controls nor in patients with IgAN and H. M. Stuart1, N. A. Roberts2, B. Burgu3, S. B. Daly1, J. E. Urquhart1, S. Bhaskar1, M. patients with MGN. Exon 19 seems to be a variable region due to amount Mermerkaya3, M. S. Silay4, M. A. Lewis2, M. B. O. Olandriz5, B. Gener6, E. Sites7, C. M. A. of found polymorphisms. In this exon we also found unpublished substitu- Calder8, T. Lourenco9, M. Rodriques9, A. Calado10, M. Amado10, C. Beetz11, R. E. Varga11, W. tions c.2351C>T (p.Ala784Val), c.2378G>A (p.Cys793Tyr) and c.2393G>A W. Yue12, E. A. McKenzie13, E. N. Hilton1, A. S. Woolf2, W. G. Newman1; (p.Gly798Asp). These changes were neither in healthy controls nor in pati- 1Genetic Medicine and Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of ents with FSGS/MCD and patients with MGN. Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Paediatric and Child Health, SMu.p Spaofratreikdo bvya :t hNeo ngera. nJ.t Rperoitjeercotv PaR: VNOonUeK. -J P. 2 S5
te/kLrFo1va/:2 N. one. L. Obeidova: University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Department of Urology, Ankara None. M. Kohoutova: None. V. Tesar: None. University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Urology, Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Unidad de Nefrologia Infantil, Hospital Universitario Araba, Vitoria- Gasteiz, Spain, 6Servicio de Genetica, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 7Division of Genetics, Children‘s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 8Genética  P04
.53 Médica e Diagnóstico Pré Natal Professor Doutor Sérgio Castedo, Porto, Portugal, Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2) and 9Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital de Dona Estefania, Lisbon, Portugal, hypertension due to novel compound heterozygous mutations within 10Department of Pediatrics, Centro Hospitalar do Barlavento Algravio, Portimao, Portugal, 11Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Jena University the ENP P1
 gene Hospital, Jena, Germany, 12Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Oxford, K. Kapelari1, B. Lorenz-Depiereux2, T. Strom3, E. Steichen-Gersdorf1; United Kingdom, 13Protein Expression Facility, University of Manchester, Manchester, 1Department of Pediatrics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Helmholz Zentrum München, München, United Kingdom. Germany, 3Helmholz Zentrum München, Technische Universität, München, Germany. Urofacial syndrome (UFS) or Ochoa syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive Hypophosphatemic rickets is a heterogeneous group of renal phosphate wa- condition characterised by voiding dysfunction of the urinary bladder with sting disorders caused by elevated circulating fibroblast growth factor 23 a significant risk of childhood renal failure. Most affected individuals have (FGF23)P wHEhXic h inhibits phosphate reFaGbFs2o3rption and 1,25-dihydroxySvLiCt3am4Ain3 an abnormality of facial movement on expression which distinguishes the D synthesis in the proximDaMl Pre1nal tubules. Mutations in any ofE tNhPeP fi1ve known condition from other forms of urinaHrPyS vEo2i,d ing dysfunction. genes - (XLH [MIM 307800]), (ADHR [MIM 193100]), Previously, we reporteHdP tShEa2t the majority of cases of UFS are caused by bial- (HHRH [MIM 241530], (ARHR1[MIM 241520]), and (ARHR2 lelic, loss-of-function mutations in which encodes heparanase 2. We [MIM 613312]) causes hypophosphatemia. We report a 13 years old boy present an expanded mutation spectrum for previousLlRyI uGn2reported with a late onset of rickets, who presented with progressive bone deformity, cases of UFS. Furth. eLrR, tIhGr2ough exome sequencing and autozygosity mapping, genu valgus and bone pain since the age of ten years. In addition the patient we report that UFS is also caused b.y biallelic mHutPaStEio2ns inLR IG2 in three had bilateral conductive hearing deficit and hypertension. Hypertension was unrelated families encodes the leucine-rich repeats and immunoglo- related to hyperreninemia following stenosis of the right renal artery due to bulin-like domain 2 protein (LRIG2) The lack of or mutations myointimal proliferation. Biochemical investigations showed an elevated al- in some cases of classical UFS provides evidence of further genetic hetero- kaline phosphatase activitFyG, dFe2c3reased serum phosphate levels and an eleva- geneity. ted FGF23 level. Autosomal dominant hypophosEpNhPaPte1m ia was excluded by ThLeR uIrGi2n ary tract features of UFS are indistinguishable from non-syndromic sequence analysis of the gene. Due to the more complex pEhNePnPo1type forms of voiding dysfunction. We demonstrate that novel missense variants of the patient we suggested sequencing of the (ectonucleotide py- in may be associated with non-syndromic bladder dysfunction. rophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1) gene. Sequence analysis of re- Little is known about the functional roles of heparanase 2 and LRIG2. Howe- vealed one heterozygous non-synonymous single nucleotide variation (SNV) ver, both LRIG2 and heparanase-2 were immunodetected in nerve fascicles in exonE N2P (PN1M_006208.2:c.275G>A, NP_006199.2:p.Gly92Asp) and one he- growing between muscle bundles within the human fetal bladder, direct- terozygous splice site mutation in intron 21(NM_006208.2:c.2230+1G>A) ly implicating both molecules in neural development in the lower urinary of the gene. Both SNVs were not found in databases of sequence va- t Hra.Mct.. Stuart: None. N.A. Roberts: None. B. Burgu: None. S.B. Daly: None. J.E. riatiEoNnPs P(1dbSN P137
) and of mutations (HGMD), and within 1846 in house Urquhart: None. S. Bhaskar: None. M. Mermerkaya: None. M.S. Silay: exomes. We identified two novel compound heterozygous mutations within None. M.A. Lewis: None. M.B.O. Olandriz: None. B. Gener: None. E. Sites: the gene in a boy with autosomal recessive hypophospatemia and a None. C.M.A. Calder: None. T. Lourenco: None. M. Rodriques: None. A. c Ko.n Kcoapmeiltaarni:t Nmoinlde. pBh. eLnoorteynpze-D oefp gieenreeurxa:l iNzeodn ea.r Tte. rSitarlo cma:l cNifoicnaet. iEo.n S otfe iicnhfaennc-y. Calado: None. M. Amado: None. C. Beetz: None. R.E. Varga: None. W.W. Gersdorf: None. Yue: None. E.A. McKenzie: None. E.N. Hilton: None. A.S. Woolf: None. W.G. Newman: None.  P04
.54 Mutations in a large VNTR of MU C1
 are frequent in autosomal  P04
.52 dominant medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) The mutational analysis of the ACTN4 gene in patients with focal V. Moriniere1,2, A. Mégarbané3, S. Lebbah1, A. Gnirke4, B. Blumenstiel4, A. Bleyer5, A. segmental glomerulosclerosis using HRM method Kirby4,6, B. Knebelmann7, C. Antignac8,9,2; M. Safarikova1, J. Reiterova2, J. Stekrova1, L. Obeidova1, M. Kohoutova1, V. Tesar2; 1Reference Center MARHEA, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2Department of 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Genetics, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 3Faculté de Médecine. Université Saint in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech States, 5Section on Nephrology, Wake Forest School of Medecine, Winston-Salem, NC, Republic. United States, 6Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 7Department of Adult Nephrology, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 8Inserm U983, Paris, France, 9Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is characterized by proteinuria, hypalbuminemia Paris, France. and edemas. There are four most important genes that condition the for- mation of hereditary nephrotic syndrome in adult patients (ACTN4, CD2AP, NPH S2
 and TRP C6
). The gene ACTN4, which encodes protein α-actinin 4, is MCKD is a rare disorder characterized by autosomal dominant tubulo-in- responsible for the autosomal dominant form of focal segmental glomeru- terstitial kidney disease (TIKD), sometimes associated with renal cysts and losclerosis (FSGS). gout/hyperuricemia. UMOD mutations have been described in patients with The mutational analysis of the gene ACTN4 was performed on the set of 48 hyperuricemia (MCKD2). Mutations in the MU C1
 gene encoding mucin 1 patients with FSGS/MCD. To investigate the prevalence and possible effect were very recently identified in MCKD1 patients (Kirby et al, Nature Genet, of some substitutions found in FSGS/MCD patients we were also looking for 2013) using a sophisticated approach associating cloning of the genomic these changes in 154 patients with IgA nephropathy (IgAN) and 55 patients region, capillary sequencing and de novo assembly since next generation se- with membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN). 200 unrelated healthy males quencing failed to identify them. All patients harbor a single cytosine inser- and females without history of renal disease or abnormal urinary findings tion in one copy of the 60-base repeat unit of the long CG-rich coding VNTR were studied as controls. High resolution melting (HRM) analysis and se- of MU C1
. The frameshift is predicted to result in a mutant protein which is quencing selected samples were used during this mutation detection. expressed in the distal tubule and collecting duct of affected individuals. It was found 20 exonic and intronic substitutions in the set of patients with Using an approach coupling PCR amplification of MwoI digestion (which FSGS/MCD. We found unpublished substitution 2242A>G (p.Asn748Asp) selectively cleaves the reference sequence) products and primer-extension that could have causal associations with FSGS. This change was identified assay (SNaPshot Multiplex Kit), we tested 21 new families with clinical in- i 1n 45 49 years old woman with FSGS and positive faEmSiHly Ghi s2to0r1y. 3T h|i sP AsuRbsItSi-, FRfo Arm Na Cti Eon | f Wor W67 W pa .t Eie Sn Hts Gbu .Ot li Rnk Gage data in only 2 families. 50 pts reached ESRD at a mean age of 46 +/-4 yrs (20-82 yrs) with highABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index intrafamilial variability. Early gout occurred in only 2 patients and hyperu- age of patients, genotypes, stage of fibrosis, grade of inflammation, serum ricemia was generally absent or related to CRF. Renal cysts were present in level of liver enzymes, serum viral load, and presence of smteiaRt-o1s2i2s amndiR m-1o2d6e 10/28 pts. omfi tRr-a1n3s6missiomni.R-181a We detected the presence of the cytosine insertion in 11/21 families. Fu- Statistical analyses revealed differential expression of , , thermore, we detected an additional mutation made of a 5C deletion, which and in HCV infected patients relative to non-infected in- is predicted to result in the same mutant protein as the cytosine deletion. dividuals, between genotypes, and gender. Their expression was associated These results show that MU C1
 mutations represent a frequent cause of with the degree of fibrosis and with the grade of inflammatory activity, and M V.C MKoDr.iniere: None. A. Mégarbané: None. S. Lebbah: None. A. Gnirke: E. correlated to the presence of steatosis of the liver, to the mode of transmis- Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); sion, and to the serum HCV load. miR-122 Modest; inventors on the C-insertion genotyping assay under patent review, Recent advances in the remlatiRio-n12sh6ipm bieRt-w18e1ean HCV minifRec-1ti3o6n and miRNAs sho- filed by the Broad Institute. B. Blumenstiel: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; inventors on the wed that other miRNAs may be as important as in the fight against C-insertion genotyping assay under patent review, filed by the Broad Institute. A. HCV. Here we show, that , , and , might also play a Bleyer: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual r Eo.l eB ions HtjaCnVc iicn:f eNcotnioen. .E. Bandelj: None. B. Luzar: None. M. Poljak: None. D. property); Modest; inventors on the C-insertion genotyping assay under patent Glavač: None. review, filed by the Broad Institute. A. Kirby: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; inventors on the C-insertion genotyping assay under patent review, filed by the Broad Institute. B.  P04
.57 Knebelmann: None. C. Antignac: None. Relationship between response to colchicine treatment and MDR1 polymorphism in FMF patients A. Uludag1, C. Silan2, S. Atik Yalcintepe1, C. Akurut1, A. Uludag3, F. Silan1, O. Ozdemir1;  P04
.55 1Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Thin basement membrane nephropathy due to heterozygous CO L4
A3/ Canakkale, Turkey, 2Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of Medicine Department CO L4
A4 mutations is a more frequent cause of end-stage kidney of Pharmacology, Canakkale, Turkey, 3Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of Medicine Department of Family Medicine, Canakkale, Turkey. disease compared to Alport syndrome L. Papazachariou1, P. Demosthenous1, M. Arsali2, M. Zavros3, A. Lazarou2, M. Hadjigavriel4, C. Stavrou5, L. Yioukkas6, K. Voskarides1, A. Pierides7, C. Deltas1; 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Limassol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus, Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a disease, which is encountered with 3Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Larnaka General Hospital, Larnaka, Cyprus, recurrent acute inflammatory episodes. Colchicine, which is used in FMF 5Evangelismos Hospital, Paphos, Cyprus, 6Paphos General Hospital, Paphos, Cyprus, treatment, prevents leukocyte chemotaxis and collagen migration into the 7Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. extracellular space. Multi Drug Resistance 1 (MDR1) gene codes for a signi- ficant membrane protein, and this controls xenobiotic passage-transport. We investigated the relationship between MDR1  C3435
T polymorphism Alport syndrome (AS) is a severe hereditary hematuric neCpOhLr4itAis5, associated and colchicine response in FMF patients. with deafness, eye defects and early progression toC eOnLd4-Ast3a/gCeO kLi4dAn4e y disea- Patients were divided into three groups according their responses. Patients, se (ESKD). About 85% of all AS cases are X-linked due to mutations who recovered from episodes with standard colchicine treatment, and had (XLAS) and the rest are autosomal recessive due to mutati- no attack in the last 1 year, were accepted as Complete Responders. Patients, ons (ARAS). Thin basemenCtO m L4
eAm3b/rCaOnLe4 nAe4phropathy (TBMN) is the leading whose episode number and intensity were decreased, but ongoing with the cause of familial microscopic hematuria (FMH) worldwide and is mostly ex- standard treatment, were accepted as “Partial Responders”. Patients, whose plained by heterozygous mutations. We recently showed episodes were not decreased despite the standard treatment, were accep- that TBMN should not be considered as a benign condition, since about half ted as “Non-responders”. MDR1  C3435
T genotype was defined by RT-PCR of these patients progress to chronic renal failure after the age of 50 years. method. We have studied, genetically and clinically, nine Greek-CyCpOriLo4t AA5S families re- MDR1 C and T allele frequencies of our FMF patients with colchicine respon- ferred to public hospitals: four XLAS families with nine living patients (71%) ses of complete, partial and unresponders were C= 0.75 and T= 0.25 in com- and five ARAS families with four living patients (29%). - P628
L was plete responders; C= 0.56 and T=0.44 in partial responders; and C= 0.50 and found in two of CthOeL 4XA L3
A S faCmOLil4ieAs4. Only six of these living patients reached T= 0.50 in non-responders. While T allele frequency was the lowest in com- ESKD. We have alCsoO Ls4tuAd3ied a large number of FMH families. We have found plete responders to colchicine, it was the highest in the non-responders. a heterozygous or mutation in 213 living patients in 27 fa- According to our results, Multi Drug Resistance 1 gene  C3435
T polymor- milies. Mutation -G1334E was found in 16 families and it accounts phism acts an important role on colchicine response in FMF patients good for 155 patients. Of these 213 patients, 21 have reached ESKD. Interestingly, response to colchicine treatment was related to C allele, whereas poor re- we observe that Greek-Cypriots patients with ESKD due to TBMN (21 pati- s Ap.o Unlsued waga:s N roenlaet.e Cd. tSoi lTa na:l lNeloen ien. SFM. AFt ipk aYtaielcnitnst.epe: None. C. Akurut: None. A. ents) outnumber by 3.5 times those who reach ESKD due to AS (6 patients). Uludag: None. F. Silan: None. O. Ozdemir: None. This observation demonstrated again that TBMN is not a benign condition, as usually mentioned in the previous literature. Further investigations are n Le. ePdaepda izna cohthareiro up:o Npuonlaet.i oP.n Ds etom coosnthfiernmo uthsi:s N eopnied.e Mm. iAolrosgailic:a Nl ofinned. iMng. .Zavros: None. A. Lazarou: None. M. Hadjigavriel: None. C. Stavrou: None. L. Yioukkas:  P04
.58 None. K. Voskarides: None. A. Pierides: None. C. Deltas: None. Mechanism of MDR3 dysfunction in PFI C3
 patients T. Kim, J. Kim, J. Choi; Ewha wamans univ., Seoul, Korea, Republic of.  P04
.56 Heapatitis C infected patients and liver expression of miR-122, miR- BACKGROUND: Progressive faAmBilCiaBl4 intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFI C3
) 126, miR-136 and miR-181a isM aD rRa3re liver disease which caused by mutation of the ATP-binding cassette, E. Bostjancic1, E. Bandelj1, B. Luzar1, M. Poljak2, D. Glavač1; subfamily B, member 4 gene ( ) also known as multidrug resistance 3 1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathology, Department of Molecular Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, ( ). MDR3 is hepatocellular canalicular transporter associated with not Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. only biliary secretion of phosphMaDtiRd3ylcholine but also efflux of drugs and xenobiotics. This study was conductedM tDoR in3vestigate the functional charac- For hepatitis C virus (HCV) it was shown that host cellular microRNA terization of several variants of found in PFI C3
 patients. (miRNA), miR-122, facilitates replication of viral RNA genome by bin- METHODs: Thirteen nonsynonymous variants found in PFIC patients ding to its 5‘-UTR. With respect to the findings in vitro, the clinical im- were selected. Transport activity of each variant wMasD Rm3easured through pact of hepatic miR-122 on HCV in humans is still largely unclear and ATP-dependent uptake of paclitaxel using plasma inside-out membrane ve- little is known about the role of other host/cellular miRNAs in viral sicles. To determine the mechanism through which variants change infection. We therefore analysed expression of miR-122, miR-126, miR- transport activity, cell surface biotinylation, immunoblottinMgD aRn3d immu- 181a and miR-136 in HCV infected patients. nofluorescence were performed. RpESULTs: Six variants (M1, M5, M7, M8, M11 M12, M13) of showed Study included liver bimopiRs-i1e2s 2ofm 6i5R -p1a2t6iemntisR -i1n3fe6cted wmiitRh- 1H8 C1
Va of different a significant reduction in the transport activity, compared to the reference genotypes (gt: gt1, gt1a, gt1b, gt3 and gt4) and 9 non-infected individuals. ( <0.05). Througph cell surface biotinylation, we found that M1 and M11 sho- Expression analysis of , , and was perfor- wed altered protein size and the others showed decreased cell surface ex- med by qPCR and statistically analysed foE rS dH iffG er e2 n0 ce1 s 3 b e| t wPA eeR n I gS e, n dF eR r A anN d CEp |r WessWionW le.vEeSlsH (G<.0O.0R5)G. In particular, three of them (M5, M7, M8) res1ul4te5dABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index p HJV. in decreased total protein levels in immunoblMotDtiRn3g ( <0.05) and this result introduce premature stop codon (p.G66*), was found in The mutation was confirmed by immunofluorescence. wasH pJrVe sent only in the patient´s father who turned out to be a heterozy- CONCLUSION: Our studies revealed several variants result in chan- gote. Neither MLPA nor real-time PCR revealed copy number variations in ges in the transport activity of MDR3. Decreased transport activity of each the gene region. Fragment analysis of six STS markers indicated loss of variant can be explained by protein truncation (M1, M11), decreased total heterozygocity (LOH) in the middle third of chromosome 1. LOH spanning protein levels (M5, M7, M8), or impairment of membrane trafficking (M12, the region chr1:86,020,000-162,505,000 was confirmed by genomic hybri- M T.1 K3i)m.: None. J. Kim: None. J. Choi: None. disation on the Affymetrix Genome-wide human SNP 6.0 array. The patient´s genotypes at the overwhelming majority of the examined SNP loci outside oCof nthcelu LsiOoHn: region were identical with those on both paternal chromosoHmJVe  P04
.59 1 alleles. Impact of ABCB4 mutations on 90 Italian adult patients with JH in our patient is caused by duplication of the mutated cholestatic syndromes allele due to paternal disomy combined with 1/3 segmental isodisomy. This D. A. Coviello1, A. Crosignani1, D. Degiorgio2, C. Colombo3, M. Zuin4, M. Vassallo5, M. highlights the importance of testing clinically unrelated parents of homozy- Syrén6, P. Battezzati4; gMo.t eNse sroulfdfeorvina:g N froonme. aSu. tForsaonmkoavl ar:e Nceosnseiv. eV .d Sistreaanseecsk syu: cNho anse .J HE.. Honsova: 1E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genoa, Italy, 22Department of Diagnostic Services, Laboratory None. O. Luksan: None. M. Benes: None. K. Michalova: None. S. Kmoch: of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Ospedale Policlinico, University None. M. Jirsa: None. of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Clinical and Community Sciences, Division of Pediatrics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Ospedale Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Health Sciences, Division of Internal Medicine and Liver Unit, School of Medicine Ospedale San Paolo, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 5IRCCS  P04
.61 Policlinico San Donato, Division of Internal Medicine 2, San Donato Milanese, Milan, Viral hepatitis C infection influencing host genetic factors Italy, 6Department of Diagnostic Services, Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1, A. Zarina1, V. Sondore2, J. Keiss2, A. Krumina3; IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Ospedale Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. 1Riga Stradins University, Scientific laboratory of molecular genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga East University Hospital, Infectology Center of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 3Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia. ABCB4 gene encodes for MDR3 protein; its mutations may impair biliary phosphatidylcholine secretion and are well-known as causes of Progressive- Objectives: susceptibility to viral hepatitis C and it clinical outcome could be familial intrahepatic-cholestasis-type-3 (PFI C3
) in children, but their clini- influenced by patients mutations in detoxification enzyme coding genes and cal impact in adults with cholangiopathies remains ill-defined. most common monogenic liver diseases. We consecutively evaluated 2602 subjects with hepatobiliary-disease and Material and methods: 74 males and 40 females with chronic viral hepatitis 90 underwent sequencing analysis of each of the 27 ABCB4 coding exons C infection, age 41±13 years, 81 of them underwent antiviral treatment, 16 including the adjacent intronic regions; 37 had clinical diagnosis of Primary- of them had SVR. From biochemical analysis available were level of iron, fer- Sclerosing-Cholangitis (PSC) of which 14 with a concomitant hepatobiliary ritin, ALT before and in time of treatment, viral load, and treatment outcome. disease (e.g, Juvenile Cholelithiasis -JC-, Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnan- 300 healthy inGdSiTvPid1uals represGenSTteAd1 control pMopTuHlaFtRion (195 maHlFeEs and 105 cy -ICP-), 17 had Primary-Biliary-Cirrhosis (PBC), 24 had Idiopathic-Chole- femalesU) GatT a1gAe1 21±3 yeaArsT.P F7oBr included individuals were tested mutations stasis (IC), 1 had Autoimmune-Hepatitis and 1 had Overlap-Syndrome. Mo- in the genes: (A333G), ( C69
T), ( C677
T), ( C282
Y, reover, 4 subjects had experienced ICP and 6 had medical history of JC. We H63D), ((TA)7), (H1069Q) by standard molecular methods. identified 15 different nucleotide changes that have an effect on the primary Results: mutation frequencies in patient group (control group) were as protein structure, 7 not described previously (p. E616
K, p.G634E, p.G811R, follows: A333G= 0.238 (0.327, p>0.05),  C69
T=0.318 (0.349, p>0.05), p. S849
YfsX24, p. L859
W, p.M948I and p.Q1181X) and 8 already identified  C667
T=0.297 (0.359, p>0.05),  C282
Y=0.053 (0.035, p>0.05), H63D=0.118 in children and adults with different cholangiopathies; the new nucleoti- (0.121, p>0.05), (TA)7=0.384 (0.35, p>0.05), H1069Q=0.048 (0.013,OR=3.77, de changes were not detected in 112 ethnically matched healthy subjects p=0.05). With biochemical mark2ers association was found for ferritin with or reported as polymorphisms in dbSNP database. A single heterozygous a2lleles (TA)7 (DOMDEV model, r=-289.1, p=0.005) and  C282
Y (ADD model, mutation was identified in 15 and two mutations were identified in 3 sub- r2=499.3, p=0.02), for ALT before treatment with allele A333G (ADD model, jects; among them, 6 had PSC of which 4 (4/14, ≈29%) with concomitant r2=-36.33, p=0.027), for ALT in treatment wi2th alleles  C677
T (ADD model, hepatobiliary disease, 3 (≈18%) had PBC, 4 had IC (≈17%), 2 (50%) had ICP r=-23.62, p=0.05) and  C282
Y (ADD model,2 r=67.21, p=0.03), viral load be- and 3 (50%) JC. In summary, single heterozygous mutations in ABCB4 are fore treatment with -  C677
T (ADD model, r=0.9, p=0.036). associated to different cholangiopathies in a relevant percentage of adults, Conclusions: (TA)7,  C282
Y, A333G and  C677
T alleles has impact on inflam- including the phenotype PSC when, in particular, JC and/or ICP are descri- b De.dA .w Citohviine ltloh:e N colinneic. aAl. hCisrotosrigy.nani: None. D. Degiorgio: None. C. Colombo: mation severity in liver during hepatitis C viral infection.  C282
Y and H1069Q None. M. Zuin: None. M. Vassallo: None. M. Syrén: None. P. Battezzati: None. aLll. ePleiesk cuosuel:d N boen ein. fMlu. eKnrceiinleg: sNuosncee.p Ati.b Zilairtiyn tao: Nheopnea.t iVt.i sS Co nvdirourse.: None. J. Keiss: None. A. Krumina: None.  P04
.60  P04
.62 Segmental paternal isodisomy as a cause of juvenile hemochromatosis Identification of rare variants in patients with isolated biliary atresia type 2a M. Neroldova1, S. Frankova1,2, V. Stranecky3, E. Honsova4, O. Luksan1, M. Benes2, K. by exome sequencing. Michalova5, S. Kmoch3, M. Jirsa1; E. A. Tsai1, C. M. Growchowski2, L. D. Leonard2, K. M. Loomes2, B. A. Haber3, N. B. Spinner2, 1Laboratory of Experimental Hepatology, Institute for Clinical and Experimental M. Devoto2; Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Hepatogastroenterology, Institute 1University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2The Children‘s Hospital for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Applied of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Merck Research Laboratories, North Genomics and Institute of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Charles University of Prague, Wales, PA, United States. First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Clinical and Transplant Pathology, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Centre of cytogenetics, Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Biliary atresia (BA) is a severe pediatric liver disease resulting in necro- Diagnostics, Charles University of Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech inflammatory obliteration of the extrahepatic biliary tree and presenting Republic. within the first few months of life. The etiology of BA is unknoXwPnN,P wEiPt1h evi- dAeDnDc3e for infectious, environmental,J AanGd1 genetic factors described. Possible genetic risk factors include a BA associated locus flanked by and Juvenile hemochromatosis (JH) represents a group of disorders characte- revealed by GWAS, a report of missense mutations in a small per- rised by iron overload causHinJgV liver injury, cardiomyopathy and endocrine centage of patients, and a BA-associated deletion on 2q37.3 revealed by CNV abnormalities. Here we describe the genetic basis of JHH caFuEs. ed by a homozy- analysis. Animal models have suggested candidate genes, but mutations gous nonsense mutation in in a nonH-cAoMnPs,a HnJgVuineouTsF Rfa2mily. have not been found in humans until now. We performed exome-sequencing Hemochromatosis is generally caused by mutHaFtiEons in Recessive forms on 30 Caucasian, non-syndromic BA patients to further investigate the ge- of JH are associated with mutations in and . Testing for the netic basis of BA. Exomes were captured using Agilent All Exon V5 71MB prevalent HmFuEtations  C282
Y, H63D,  S65
C in revealed onHlAyM thPe HhJeVtero- kit and sequenced with the Illumina HiSeq platform. The 100bp paired-end zTyFgRo2u s state for H63D. No other predictably pathogenic variation was de- reads were aligned to GrCH37 using BWA and processed using Picard and tected by sequencing. With regard to the patient‘s age, , and 146 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRSAAMNtCooEls .| VWarWianWts .wEeSrHe cGal.lOedR uGsing GenomeAnalysis ToolKit. There were were analyzed. A known homozygous mutation c.196G>T, predicted toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index a total of 4,938 loss-of-function or non-synonymous variants in these samp- found in the 1000 Genomes Project, NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project or in les. We filtered across the 1000 Genomes Phase I data and NHBLI ExZoEmB2e aBn.y Y oefr u2s0h0a clmoni:t Nrooln ceh. rMo.m Foesinosmteeisn :o Nf Boneed.o Ou.iSn. c Boinrktr: oNlso.ne. SequZeInCc3ing Project datasets to investigate variants that occur in less than 1% of these populations. We found one likely damaging variant in both aAnDdD 3 , genes previously reported in patients with BA findings. We also  P04
.65 found five likely damaging variants across several candidate genes such as Two deletions on chromosome 16p13.3 cause autosomal recessive and those implicated by animal models of BA. Our results suggest that intractable diarrhea of infancy syndrome g Ee.nAe. tTics asiu: sNcoenpet.i bCi.lMity. Gtoro BwAc ihso lwikseklyi: tNoo bnee .h Lig.Dh.l yL ehoentearrodg: eNnoenoeu. sK..M. I. Bar joseph1, D. Oz-Levi2, D. Yagel1, T. Olender2, E. Ruzzo3, A. Alkelai2, E. Ben-Asher2, Loomes: None. B.A. Haber: None. N.B. Spinner: None. M. Devoto: None. H. Reznik-Wolf1, B. Pode-Shakked1, K. Hartman4, R. Shapiro4, R. Shamir4, R. Kleta5, L. Pennacchio6, J. Wells7, D. Goldstein3, E. Pras1, D. Lancet2, Y. Anikster1; 1Tel hashomer, Ramat gan, Israel, 2Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Rehovot, Israel, 3Duke Universiy, Durham,United States, Durham, NC, United States, 4Schneider  P04
.63 Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel,, Petach Tikva, Israel, 5University College London, Potential role of ISV-8 poly-T variants of CFTR gene in recurrent London, United Kingdom, London, United Kingdom, 6Lawrence Berkeley National idiopathic pancreatitis: A case series of four children Laboratory, Berkeley, United States, Berkeley, CA, United States, 7Cincinnati Children’s I. Loddo1, C. Liuzzo1, V. Procopio1, M. Priolo2, C. Mammì2, S. Cardile1, S. Briuglia1, C. HospitalMedical Center, Cincinnati, United States, Cincinnati, OH, United States. Romano1, C. Laganà2, C. Salpietro1; 1UOC Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 2UOC Medical Genetics, AO „Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli“, Reggio Calabria, Italy. Intractable diarrhea of infancy syndrome (IDIS) is a non-infectious diarrhea lasting more than 2 weeks. Onset is observed within the first few weeks of life leading to malabsorption and failure to thrive, and is associated with Background: The 5T variant is a stretch of five contiguous thymidines at the great suffering and high mortality. We have encountered 6 IDIS patients from 3’ of the intron 8 of CFTR gene that exacerbates skipping of exon 9, resulting different families of Iraqi jewish origin. SNP analysis together with Exome in reduced levels of functional CFTR protein. This process seems to be influ- sequencing detected two different deletion alleles, ΔS and ΔL. Performing enced by the number of TG repeats immediately adjacent to 5T. Individuals long range PCR we established the exact boundaries for the two deletions, carring 5T adjacent to either 12 or 13TG repeats are more likely to exhibit which share 1476bp, on the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p13.3). an abnormal phenotype (non-classic cystic fibrosis, recurrent pancreatitis) Using multiplex PCR assays, we determined the form in which these dele- than those with 5T adjacent to <12TG. tions appear in all 6 patients . Full segregation was found among the Iraqi Materials and methods:We describe the cases of 4 children (aged 12, 10, patients with autosomal recessive patterns of inheritance, while the deleti- 6 and 3 years) affected by recurrent idiopathic pancreatitis. The diagnosis ons were not found in 200 controls. The shared 1476bp deletion does not of pancreatitis was made by the presence of typical abdominal pain, serum encompass any known genes; however, it does include a predicted enhancer. amylase and/or lipase 3 times greater than the upper limit of normal and It is possible that the enhancer’s target is a transcription factor controlling characte ristic imaging findings. Sequence analysis of PRS S1
, SPINK1 and a developmental event crucial for normal gastrointestinal function. To test CFTR genes was performed. this hypothesis, we assessed for the expression of the 1476bp region in a Results:Sequence analysis showed the absence of mutations in PRS S1
 and transgenic mouse model and observed reproducible enhancer activity in the SPINK1 genes. stomach, duodenum and pancreas of mouse embryos at days 11.5, 12.5, and CFTR gene sequencing in three boys showed the presence of following poly- 13 not later and neither in grown mice. To further study these deletions we morphisms: 5T/5T-12TG/12TG; 5T/5T-11TcGis/12TG; 5T/9T-13TG/11TG. amplified candidate genes around the deletion, but so far we have not obser- Ttrhaen s3-years old girl with the most severe form of idiopathic pancreatitis v Ie. dB aarn jyo sdeifpfehr: eNnocnees. bDe.t Owze-eLne vpia: tNieonnet .a Dn.d Y caognetlr:o Nl ocnDeN. AT.s O. lender: None. E. showed 5T/7 T-13TG/9TG. The 5T allele, in with 13TG, was associated in Ruzzo: None. A. Alkelai: None. E. Ben-Asher: None. H. Reznik-Wolf: None. B. with F508del, a severe CFTR mutation. Pode-Shakked: None. K. Hartman: None. R. Shapiro: None. R. Shamir: Conclusions:The high prevalence of 5T carriers makes the assessment of None. R. Kleta: None. L. Pennacchio: None. J. Wells: None. D. Goldstein: the TG repeat number of great interest as a reliable predictor of the 5T pene- None. E. Pras: None. D. Lancet: None. Y. Anikster: None. trance. Further studies comparing the prevalence of the 5T-poly(TG) haplo- types to the general population are needed to define their role in pancreatic dI.i sLeoadsdeo.: None. C. Liuzzo: None. V. Procopio: None. M. Priolo: None. C.  P04
.66 Mammì: None. S. Cardile: None. S. Briuglia: None. C. Romano: None. C. Toward the genetic basis of oesophageal atresia: clinical and Laganà: None. C. Salpietro: None. molecular study by next generation sequencing E. Andreucci1, S. Romano1, A. Provenzano2, B. Mazzinghi1, M. Pantaleo1, L. Giunti1, E. Lapi1, S. Bargiacchi2, O. Zuffardi3, S. Giglio1,2;  P04
.64 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, Novel IL-10RA splice-site mutation causes autosomal recessive Italy, 2Medical Genetics Section, Department of Biomedical Experimental and Clinical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, inflammatory bowel disease Pavia, Italy. B. Yerushalmi1, M. Feinstein2, O. S. Birk3,2; 1Division of pediatrics Soroka university medical center, Beer-sheva, Israel, 2Morris Kahn laboratory of human genetics at the National Institute of Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 3Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute Oesophageal Atresia (OA) consists in the interruption of the continuity of of Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel. the oesophagus sometimes associated with a persistent communication with the trachea (tracheo-oesophageal fistula). Its incidence is 1 in 3500 births, with associated anomalies - cardiac malformations being the most Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are chronic inflammatory bowel di- common - present in around half of the cases (syndromic OA). It’s aetiology seases (IBDs), rarely expressed in an early onset form (EO-IBDs). These ear- is still unknown: twin and family studies have suggested that genetic factors ly onset forms are characterized by a particularly severe and predominantly don’t play a major role; however, at least 3 genes are involved in the etiolo- pancolitic inflammation, and have been shown to be caused by mutations gy of syndromic OA: NMYC in Feingold syndrome, SOX2 in anophthalmia- in I L10
RB (IBD25 , MIM123889) and IL-10RA (IBD28 , MIM146933). Eight esophageal-genital syndrome and CHD7 in CHARGE association. Moreover, individuals of a large Bedouin kindred in southern Israel presented with an microdeletions of the FOX gene cluster (FOXF1, MTHFSD, FOX C2
, FOX L1
) autosomal recessive phenotype of EO-IBD. Homozygosity of affected indi- were reported to cause a phenotype resembling VACTERL association. viduals and heterozygosity of obligatory carriers was assayed at the IBD25 We studied a cohort of 10 subjects with OA, firstly excluding genomic imba- and IBD28 loci: while there was no association with IBD25, polymorphic lances by array-CGH analysis and later analysing 9 genes, potentially invol- markers at the IBD28 locus demonstrated full segregation with the disease ved in the disorder, by next generation sequencing. Selected genes were tho- phenotype. Sequencing of I L10
RA revealed a novel homozygous point mu- se reported as associated with syndromic forms of OA, and those described tation. IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine secreted by a variety of cell in literature as potentially causative. We found 50% of cases with predicted types and is critical for maintaining immune homeostasis in the gastroin- damaging variants, among which two in DST, encoding a protein compo- testinal tract. The mutation is synonymous, but as it is located at the first nent of desmosomes that anchors intermediate filaments to desmosomal nucleotide of a conserved splice donor site, it is essential for splice-site plaques; and two in DSP, encoding a protein member of the plakin protein recognition. Sequencing of an affected individual’s cDNA revealed that de- family of adhesion junction plaque proteins. These mutations were not pre- struction of the natural splice site led to the absence of 18 nucleotides of the sent in dbSNPs135 nor in the Exome Sequencing Project. Our initial results coding region of IL-10RA, eliminating 6 aEmSinHoG ac 2id0s.1 T3he | mPuAtaRtIioSn, wFaRsA nNot CEs |u WggeWst Wtha.Et, SevHenG i.nO a RmGultifactorial condition, high-throughput seque1nc4in7gABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index can identify genes that could allow to better understand the pathogenesis is composed of the catalytic subunit of human telomerase reverse transcrip- o Ef. t Ahne ddriesuecacsie:. None. S. Romano: None. A. Provenzano: None. B. Mazzinghi: tase (hTERT) and the telomerase RNA component (TERC) encoded by TERC None. M. Pantaleo: None. L. Giunti: None. E. Lapi: None. S. Bargiacchi: gene. Gene amplifications involving the TERC gene (3q26) are frequent in None. O. Zuffardi: None. S. Giglio: None. human tumors. Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and Inflammatory bo- wel disease (IBD) are two pre-malignant conditions. The aim of this study was to evaluate the TERC gene copy number and senescence status in pe-  P04
.67 rMipehtheroadl sly:mphocytes of patients with PSC and IBD, as a possible surrogate Recurrence of Hirschsprung disease due to maternal mosaicism of a marker for increased tendency for malignancy. novel RET gene mutation By applying fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to leuko- C. Amiñoso1,2, S. Garcia-Minaur1,2, J. Tenorio1,2, L. Martinez3, J. Tovar3, P. Lapunzina1,2, J. cytes of 14 PSC patients, 13 IBD patients (8 with Crohn‘s disease, 5 with Solera1,2; Ulcerative colitis) and 12 healthy controls, we estimated gene dosage of the 1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, TREeRsuCl gtsene at 3q26.3. The cells in senescence were evaluated from the nuclei Spain, 2Unit 753, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras fragmentation on the DAPI staining. (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Pediatric Surgery Department, INGEMM and IdiPAZ Research Laboratory. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad : The percentage of cells with more than two copies of TERC gene Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. was significantly higher in PSC patients [mean (3 x red signals) 44.7] than in IBD patients [mean 29.6] and controls [mean 3.86] (p value < 0.0001). The TERC gene copy number was also higher in PSC patients with concomitant Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, MIM 142623) or aganglionic megacolon is cCoolnitcislu (s6i4o%n:) despite significantly lower disease activity indices. Significant- tRhEeT most frequent genetic cause of congenital intestinal obstruction. Seve- ly more cells in senescence status were also observed in the PSC group. ral genes have been implicated in isolated HSCR. Inactivating mutations of TERC gene copy number and senescence status are increased , transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion with incomplete and in IBD and even more in PSC. These findings may be related to their different sex-dependent peRnEetTrance, are identified in about 50% of familial cases.We LtAe ibn. eAd rem mni ace nile: s N ao onn ned e. p Y Fr. e S Kdu oils napy io ke osvi f:t i :No Non on t neo e. .dH Ie. vK Le aal iot szp h: :Nm Noa onl neig e. n .Aa.n Sctye.in: None. M. : N . . f . report a family with recurrence of long-segment HSCR in two siblings. Mu- tation analysis of performed by PCR and direct sequencing identified a heterozygous truncating mutation in both siblings. The same mutation was identified in the unaffected mother but the  P04
.70 electropherographic signal intensity of the mutant allele was low, suggesting Latrophilins a new family of genes contributing to increased airway a mosaic mutation. The same reRsuETlt was obtained when the analysis was smooth muscle mass and contraction in asthmatic airways carried out in genomic DNA from buccal cells.We are not aware of any other A. Faiz1,2, C. Donovan3, B. G. G. Oliver1,2, A. J. Halayko4, K. A. Detillieux4, J. P. T. Ward5, T. cases of somatic mosaicism for mutations reported in isolated HSCR Lee5, S. D. Wilton6, J. L. Black1,2, J. E. Bourke3, B. E. McParland2, J. K. Burgess1,2; 1Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 2The University of Sydney, familial cases. As the somatic mosaic mutation in the mother was detected Sydney, Australia, 3University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4University of by a widely used standard method (direct sequencing), we wonder whether Manitoba/Manitoba Inst of Child Health, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 5Kings College this is a truly unique family or whether the true frequency of somatic and London, London, United Kingdom, 6Australian Neuromuscular Research Institute, Perth, germ-line mosaicism is underestimated in HSCR. Based on these findings Australia. we would recommend that germ-line or somatic mosaicism should be spe- cifically looked for in families with recurrence of HSCR in the offspring of u Cn.a Affmeciñteods op:a Nreonntes. .S. Garcia-Minaur: None. J. Tenorio: None. L. Martinez: Asthma is associated with hyper-contractile airways and structural changes None. J. Tovar: None. P. Lapunzina: None. J. Solera: None. in the airway wall, including increased airway smooth muscle (ASM) mass. The aim of this study was to identify genes which may contribute to these processes in asthmatic airways. To compare the gene expression profiles of  P04
.68 human primary ASM cells from asthmatic (n=3) and healthy donors (n=3), Dense genotyping of immune-related disease regions identifies nine Affymetrix GeneChip HuGene_1.0_ST Arrays were used. Partek® analysis new risk loci for primary sclerosing cholangitis revealed 11 differentially expressed genes, which were not previously as- J. Z. Liu1, J. Roksund Hov2,3, T. Folseraas2,3, E. Ellinghaus4, A. Franke4, C. A. Anderson1, T. H. sociated with asthma, including latrophilin 3 (LPHN3), a gene thought to be Karlsen2,3; brain specific, which was up-regulated in asthmatic ASM cells compared to 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Oslo University Hospital, healthy donors (3.4 fold p<0.001, n=3). Using qPCR LPHN3 and the family Oslo, Norway, 3University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 4Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, member LPHN1 were both found to be up-regulated in asthmatics (n=16) Kiel, Germany. compared with healthy donors (n=6, p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively). The microarray predicted a single splice variant of LPHN3 increased in asthma- tics which was confirmed by RT-PCR and sequencing. The LPHN1 ligand, Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a severe liver disease of unknown α-LTX (toxin produced by black widow spider), increased proliferation of etiology leading to fibrotic destruction of the bile ducts and ultimately the immortalised ASM cells (n=3, 1.21 & 1.20 fold, 0.3nM & 1nM, p<0.01 respec- need for liver transplantation. We compared 3,789 European ancestry PSC tively) and induced the phosphorylation of AKT at 1 min (1nM). Addition of cases to 25,079 population controls across 130,422 single-nucleotide poly- α-LTX (10nM) caused contraction of human airways, while FLRT3 (LPHN3 morphisms (SNPs) genotyped using Immunochip. We identified 12 genome- ligand) had no direct effect. The enhanced expression of LPHN1 in asthmatic wide significant associations outside the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) aSiurpwpaoyrs tmeda:y contribute to increased proliferation and contractility of ASM. complex, nine of which were novel, thereby increasing the number of known The functional role of LPHN3 in the airways requires further investigation. PSC risk loci to 16. Despite comorbidity with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in 72% of the patients, six of the 12 loci showed significantly stronger Conflict of i nNtaetrioensta:l Health and Medical Research Council, Australian Post- graduate Awards and Cooperative Research Centre for Asthma and Airways association with PSC than IBD, suggesting an overlapping yet distinct gene- A. Faiz: None. C. Don Novoan: None. B.G.G. Oliver: None. A.J. Halayko: tic architecture. We incorporated pleiotropy with seven diseases clinically None. K.A. Detillieux: None. J.P.T. Ward: None. T. Lee: None. S.D. Wilton: co-occurring with PSC and found suggestive evidence for 33 additional PSC None. J.L. Black: None. J.E. Bourke: None. B.E. McParland: None. J.K. risk loci. These findings further complete the genetic risk map of PSC and Burgess: None. considerably expand on the relationship between PSC and other immune- m J.eZd. iLaitue:d N doinsee.a Jse. sR.oksund Hov: None. T. Folseraas: None. E. Ellinghaus: None. A. Franke: None. C.A. Anderson: None. T.H. Karlsen: None.  P04
.71 Association of the genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism and antioxidant pathways polymorphic markers with development of  P04
.69 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Telomerase gene copy number is increased in IBD and PSC G. Korytina, L. Akhmadishina, T. Viktorova; A. Amiel1,2, Y. Sulayev2, H. Katz2, A. Stein3, M. Liberman4, F. Konikoff3, I. Laish3; Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, Russian Federation. 1Genetic Institute, Kfar Saba, Israel, 2Faculty of Life Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3Gastroenterology and Liver Institute, Meir medical center, Kfar Saba, Israel, 4Genetic Institute, Meir medical center, Kfar Saba, Israel. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a multifactorial inflamm- Background atory disease primarily affecting distal respiratory pathways and lung par- 148 : Telomerase is an enzyme complex thEaSt lHenGgt h2e0n1s t3e l|o mPAerResI.S It, FReAncNhyCmEa .| A Wn WoxiWda.nEt-SanHtiGox.iOdaRnGt imbalance in the lung contributes to theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Genetics, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuvem, Belgium. Objectives: development of COPD that is caused by a complex interaction of genetic and BMPR2 environmental risk factors. The purpose of this paper is to determine the mutations in the The contribution of the 28 polymorphic markers of xenobiotic metabo- Methodgse:n e in members of one family with a diagnosis of Familial Pulmona- lism and antioxidant pathways genes (CY P1
A1, CY P1
A2, CY P1
B1, CY P2
A6, ry Arterial Hypertension. CY P2
E1 , CY
P2 F1, CY
P2 J2, CY
P2 S1
, GSTM1, GSTT1, GST P1
, NQO1, EPHX1, Clinical Evaluation: Written informed consent was obtained from UGT2B7, SOD1, SOD3, CAT, GPX1) to COPD has been assessed. For this pur- all family members, who underwent pedigree analysis and clinical assess- pose, PCR-RFLP analysis of the xenobiotic metabolism and antioxidant pa- ment in accordance with the requirements of the Ethics Committee of the thways genes polymorphisms in COPD (N=391) and control (N=514) groups Genetic Medical Institute of Zulia University. Familial pulmonary arterial hy- has been performed. pertension was diagnosed with the use of current international consensus The NQO1 rs1131341 was associated with COPD in additive model (OR=2.55 criteria, and was determined through clinical evaluation, chest radiography, 95%CI 1.74-3.75), P=1.012 x 10-6 adjusted for age, sex, pack-years, ethnos). electrocardiography, Doppler echocardiography and right-heart catheteri- Analysis showed an association of the C-T haplotype of rs1131341 and zation. Other known causes of elevated pulmonary arterial pressure were rs1800566 NQO1 gene polymorphisms eBxMclPuRd2e d. The diagnosis was established without knowledge of the genotype (OR=2.77 95%CI 1.75 - 4.40, P=0.0001) with COPD. The relationship bet- status. The molecular analysis of the ween the CY P2
A6 rs71790353 (OR=3.16 95%CI 1.89-5.33, P=0.00001 Resultsg: ene was perBfoMrPmRe2d with collaboration with the Centre for Human with normal genotype) and CY P2
S1  rs338583 (OR=0.21 95%CI 0.10-0.44, Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium. P=0.00001 in recessive model) and COPD risk was found. Significant asso- Analysis of BMsePqRu2e nce was performed in three family mem- ciation with increased rick of COPD was observed for the CAT rs1001179 bCeornsc wluitshio pnu:l monary hypertension. All were heterozygous for the c.1471C>T in recessive model (OR=0.40 95%CI 0.21-0.76, P=0.0035), the EPHX1 mutation in exon 11 of the gene (at protein level p.Arg491Trp). rs1051740 in additive model (OR=1.46 95%CI 1.13-1.89, P=0.0034), and the The FPAH is less rare than initially believed, in part because of GST
P1  rs1695 in dominant model (OR=1.51 95%CI 1.12-2.04, P=0.00439). patient and physician awareness of the familial occurrence of the disorder. We found a significant interaction of the smoking status and CY
P1 A1 It is an autosomal dominant disorder that affects females disproportiona- rs1048943 (P=0.047), GPX1 rs1050450 (P=0.041), CY
P2 F1 rs11399890 tely, may occur at any age, and is characterized by reduced penetrance and ( GP.= K0o.0r4y9ti)n aa:n Ndo UnGe.T 
L2 .B A7k rhsm7a4d3i9s3h6in6a :( PN=o0n.e0.1 T3. )V.iktorova: None. variable expressivity as is s een in this first Venezuelan family report. These results suggest that other endogenous or exogenous factors modify its ex- pRr.eAs.s Cioend, eanso i:s Nwoenlel .k Gn.o Vwenrg.ara: None. T. deRavel: None. 
P04 .72 Dyrk1A (Dual-specificity thyrosine (Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A) overexpression is linked to Congenital Hypothyroidism in 
P04 .74 Down Syndrome Contribution of LHX4 mutations to pituitary hormone deficits in 350 D. Kariyawasam1, L. Rachdi1, A. Carré2, M. Martin Pena3, M. Houlier1, C. Dupuy2, N. patients presenting with ectopic posterior pituitary and/or sella Janel4, J. Delabar4, R. Scharfmann1,5, M. Polak1,6,5; turcica anomalies 1INSERM U845, „Growth and Signaling“ Research Center, Paris, France, 2Institut Gustave M. Legendre1,2, E. Cohen1, N. Collot2, S. Rose2, F. Dastot2, P. Duquesnoy1, B. Copin1,2, M. Roussy, « Espèces Réactives de l’Oxygène et Radiocarcinogenèse » Team, UMR 8200, Vie-Luton1,2, A. Bertrand3, L. Hilal4, J. Leger5, M. Maghnie6, I. Oliver-Petit7, M. Polak8, M. Villejuif, France, 3Centre Esther Koplowitz (CEK), IDIBAPS - Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Tauber7, P. Touraine9, M. Sobrier1, S. Amselem1,2; Spain, 4CNRS, BFA-
E5  - EAC CNRS 4413 - Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 1Inserm UMR_
S933  and UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 2U.F. de Génétique clinique 5Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 6Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Hôpital Necker et moléculaire, Hôpital Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie et Enfants Malades, Paris, France. d‘Endocrinologie, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France, 4Laboratoire de Biologie Background générale, Faculté des Sciences, Rabat, Morocco, 5Service d‘Endocrinologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, 6Pediatrics, IRCCS G. Gaslini, University of Objective: : Down Syndrome patients are predisposed to Congenital Hy- Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 7Service d‘Endocrinologie et Génétique, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU pothyroidism which may aggravate their mental status. de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 8Service d‘Endocrinologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker, Methods To understand the thyroidal dysgenesis mechanisms in a Down AP-HP, Paris, France, 9Service d‘Endocrinologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France. Syndrome murine model. : The transgenic Dyrk1a (TgDyrk1a) mouse has three copies of Dyr- LHX4 k1a. We compared T4 and TSH plasmatic levels of 8-12 weeks old TgDyrk1a and wild type (wt) mice, their thyroid structure and their development from To date, only 9 unambiguous mutations have been reported in pitui- embryonic day (E) 13.5 to 
E17 .5 by immunofluorescence with anti-Nkx2.1 tary hormone deficits. These mutations, always found in the heterozygous antibody, a marker of early thyroid development and anti-T4 antibody for state, are resspelolan stiubrlcei cfoar a dominant hypopituitarism with variable expres- final differentiation. The transcription factors Nkx2-1 and Fox
E1  involved sivity. Several patients displayed an ectopic posterior pituitarLyH (X
E4 PP) or a iRne tshuylrtsoidogenesis and the thyroglobulin necessary for T4 synthesis were hypoplastic . studied by qPCR at these stages. The objective of this study was i) to assseelslas ttuhrec picraevalence of mutati- : TgDyrk1a mice have a lower plasmatic T4 (2.4 ng/mL versus wt: ons in a large group of patients presLeHnXt4ing with various pituitary hormone 3.7 ng/mL; p = 0.019) and an increased plasmatic TSH (114mUI/L versus deficits associated with an EPP and/or anomalies, ii) to provide wt: 73mUI/L). Their thyroidal follicles surface is larger (6955µm² versus a most complete dLeHsXcr4iption of the associated-phenotypes, and iii) to wt: 5755µm²). At 
E15 .5 the primary thyroids are larger (5700000 pix² vs assess the functional consequences of thLeH iXd4e ntified variants. wt: 2900000 pix²; p= 0.01) but their follicular differentiation surface is de- PWOeU s1cFr1eened the gene in a group of 350 independent probands and creased at 
E17 .5 (1070000 pix² vs 2800000 pix² in wt, p= 0.01). RNA levels assessed the ability of the identified variants to transactivate the oCfo Nnkclxu2s-i1o(nps=0.009), Fox
E1  (p=0.025) at 
E13 .5, and Thyroglobulin (p=0.04) proximal promoter. at 
E17 .5 are increased. In addition to one previously described mudtea tnioovno (c.538-1G>C), we identi- : TgDyrk1a mice have abnormal thyroid development with ul- fied 6 novel heterozygous mutations: 1 nonsense (p.Tyr131X), 1 frameshift timately mild hypothyroidism. An increase of the transcription factors ex- (p.Arg48ThrfsX151), 1 splice (c.606+1G>T, ) and 3 missense variati- pression and their target genes involved in thyroid development and func- ons (p.Ala65Val, ps.Aelrlga2 t2u1rcGilcna and p.Arg235Gln). Posterior hypophysis was tion was documented. The young adult thyroids phenotype is probably due eutopic in one patient; EPP was noted in four probands. Three patients sho- to a compensation mechanism. We are studying candidate genes as Dyrk1a wed an abnormal . Short stature at diagnosis ranged from -2SD t Dar. gKeatrsi yuaswinags athmy:r Noiodnael. cLe.l lR laincehsd.i: None. A. Carré: None. M. Martin Pena: to -5SD. Incomplete penetrance was observed in one family (p.Tyr131X). None. M. Houlier: None. C. Dupuy: None. N. Janel: None. J. Delabar: None. R. FLuHnXc4tional assessment of the identified variants is underway. Scharfmann: None. M. Polak: None. This study, performed in the largest cohort of patients so far screened for mutations, showsesl ltah atut rtchiicsa gene is responsible for at most 2% (7/350 independent probands) of hypopituitarisms associated with ectopic poste- 
P04 .73 r Mio. rL peigteunitdarrey: aNnodn/eo. rE . Cohen: Non dee. fNe.c Ctso.llot: None. S. Rose: None. F. Dastot: None. P. Duquesnoy: None. B. Copin: None. M. Vie-Luton: None. A. Familial pulmonary arterial hypertension: BMPR2 gene mutation Bertrand: None. L. Hilal: None. J. Leger: None. M. Maghnie: None. I. Oliver- findings in a Venezuelan family Petit: None. M. Polak: None. M. Tauber: None. P. Touraine: None. M. Sobrier: R. A. Cedeno1, G. Vergara2, T. deRavel3; None. S. Amselem: None. 1Genetic Medical Institute, Zulia University, Maracaibo, Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of, 2Cardiology, Hospital Clinic, Maracaibo, Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of, 3Medical ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 149ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .75 CY
P3 A4 TS
C1  and TS
C2  genotypes and clinical efficacy of everolimus *22 in subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA) and renal phisms were related with Tac dose requirements. A new variant angiomyolipoma (AML) associated with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex varCiaYnPt3 (A4*2;2 rs35599367) was recently associated with a significant lower (TSC) Tac dose requirement. The main aim of thiCsY sPt3uAdy5 was tCoY aPn3aAl4yze the impact D. J. Kwiatkowski1, J. J. Bissler2, D. N. Franz2, M. Palmer3, C. Kalfoglou4, S. Segal5, D. Chen5, of on blood Tac levels and dose requirements among Spanish J. Sampson6; kidney transplanted, and to identify new and variants that 1Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Cincinnati Children‘s could be related wCiYthP 3TAa4c *b2i2oavailability. A total of 206 kidneyT paqatmieannts who Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 3Novartis Pharmaceuticals received CaY cPa3dAa5v*e3ric kidCnYePy3 aAn4d* 1received Tac as primary immunosuppres- Corporation, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, sor were studied. was genotyped by real time PCR assay, East Hanover, NJ, United States, 5Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Florham Park, NJ, United States, 6Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United and tChYeP 3A5 CY Pa3nAd4 *1 polymorphisms through PCR-RFLP. The Kingdom. coding exons (plus intronic fClaYnPk3inAg4 *b2a2ses) of the two genes were sequen- ced. *3, polymorphisms were associated with Tac dose requirements (p<0.05). The CY
P3 A4 variant did not influence Tac dose and blood levels, nominally and after correcting by the CY
P3 A5 genotypes. TSC is characterized by growth of nonmalignant but often progressive le- sTiSoCn1s in sTeSvCe2ral organs throughout the body such as the brain (SEGA) and We identified a new misseCnYsPe3 A5 exon 8 variant, p.
P227 T, in one pa- tiCeYnPt.3 TAh5i*s1 /w*a3s a conserved residue predicted to affect protein function. In kidneys (AML). Most TSC patients have inactivating mutations in either conclusion, the absence of CcYoPd3inAg4 variants suggested that rs776746 or , and TSC lesions show constitutive activation of mTOR. The ( alleles) was the mainC dYePt3eArm4*i1n/a*n1tB of Tac pharmacogenetics efficacy and safety of everolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, was assessed in two in our population. Although rare variants were found among our double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trials: EXIST-1 (SEGA associated patients, the promoter rs2740574 ( ) was the main modifier with TSC; NCT00789828) and EXIST-2 (AML associated with TSC or spora- o Bf .T Taacv biriao aIgvlaeislaiabsi:l iNtyo naet .t hF.i sO gretengea.: None. C. Diaz-Corte: None. V. Álvarez: dic lymphangioleiomyomatosis; 2NCT00790400). In EXIST-1, patients were None. E. Coto: None. randomized to receive 4.5 mg/m/day everolimus (n=78) or placebo (n=39) and in EXIST-2, patients were randomized to receive 10 mg/day everolimus (n=7
P9 ) or placebo (n=39). In each triPal, everolimus was superior to placebo for the primary endpoints of SEGA and AML response rates (SEGA: 35.0% vs 
P04 .77 0%; <0.00T0
S1 C;1 AML: T4
S2 C.02% vs 0%; <0.0001) and was associated with an A novel homozygous insertion in the NNT gene in a Dutch patient with acceptable safety profile. Blood DNA was collected from all patients in both familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD) trials and and gene alterations were identified by sequencing O. Jazayeri1, X. Liu2, C. C. van Diemen1, B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, R. J. Sinke1, J. Zhang2, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1; of the coding regions for mutations and by Multiplex Ligation-dependent 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Probe Amplification analysis for genomic deletions. Preliminary results de- Groningen, Netherlands, 2BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. monstrated no apparent correlation between response rate and mutation categories in either trial (Table). These results suggest that everolimus has a similar clinical benefit in patients, regardless of TSC genotype; further in- TS
C1  2 Familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD; MIM 202200) is a rare autosomal depth analysis of genotype-clinical response correlation will be performed. recessive disorder characterized by undetectable or low levels of plasma / Mutation Frequency and Corresponding SEGA and AML Response Rate EXIST-1 cortisol despite high plasma adreno¬corticotropin (ACTH) levels. Affected Mutation Mutation individuals are resistant to ACTH, i.e. the adrenal cortex is not able to pro- Gene frequency, % SEGA response frequency, % SEGA response duce cortisol in response to stimulation by ACTH. TS
C1  (n/N) rate, % (n/N) rate, % FGD is a heterogeneous disorder with known mutations in M
C2 R, MRAP, TS
C2  Everolimus Placebo STAR, CY
P11 A1 and MCM4. It has recently been indicated that mutations in 13 (10/77) 50 8 (3/39) 0 71 (55/77) 30 74 (29/39) 0 NNT (nicotinamide nucleotide transhydro¬genase) are also responsible for No mutation 13 (10/77) 45 18 (7/39) 0 FGD. NNT is a highly conserved protein integrated in the inner mitochon- identified drial membrane; it appears to be essential for free radical detoxification in EXIST-2 Mutation Mutation adrenocortical cells. Our study provides support for NNT being involved. frequency, % AML response frequency, % AML response We studied a consanguineous Dutch family with one affected boy with FGD, Gene TS
C1  (n/N) rate, % (n/N) rate, % presenting with convulsions and hypoglycaemia at the age of 12 months. TS
C2  Everolimus Placebo In retrospect, he had had a brownish tan due to increased ACTH level since 4 (3/79) 50 5 (2/39) 0 76 (60/79) 48 69 (27/39) 0 the age of 4 months. His adrenal ultrasound was normal and no mutations No mutation could be detected in M
C2 R and MRAP. SNP haplotyping (300k array) iden- D.J. Kwiatkowski:1 N8 o(1n4e/. 7J9.J). Bissler: 3B6. Research 2G6r (a1n0t /(3p9ri)ncipal inves0tigator, cid oe lln at bi ofi re ad tor or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); tified a 6.67 Mb homozygous region harboring the NNT gene. Exome-se- Modest; Novartis. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, quencing revealed a novel homozygous frameshift mutation (NM_012343.3: and expert witness); Modest; Novartis. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; c.1259dupG). This mutation was validated by Sanger sequencing and both Novartis. D.N. Franz: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator his parents were shown to be heterozygous carriers. The mutation is located or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; in exon 9 and creates a frameshift starting at codon His421 and leading to Novartis. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert a premature stop-codon (p.His421Serfs*4). It also lies in the mitochondrial witness); Modest; Novartis. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis. m Oa. tJraixza dyoemri:a Nino, nweh. Xic.h L iisu :k An.o Ewmnp tlooy rmeesuntl t( fiunl l FoGr Dpa wrt-htiemne t)r; uSnigcnaitfiecda.nt; BGI- Other; Modest; Novartis. M. Palmer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BGI Research, Shenzen, China. C.C. van Diemen: None. B. Sikkema-Raddatz: Novartis. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual None. R.J. Sinke: None. J. Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; property); Modest; Novartis. C. Kalfoglou: A. Employment (full or part-time); BGI-BGI Research, Shenzen, China. C.M.A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. Significant; Novartis. S. Segal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novartis. D. Chen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Novartis. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Novartis. J. Sampson: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, 
P04 .78 collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Contribution of GH and GHRHR mutations to isolated growth hormone Significant; Novartis. C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of deficiency - Identification and functional characterization of new drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Novartis. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria variants (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novartis. F. Consultant/ Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis. M. Legendre1,2, M. Sobrier1, F. Dastot1,2, N. Collot2, S. Rose2, A. Soleyan2, L. Hilal1, M. Vie- Luton1,2, P. Duquesnoy1, B. Copin1,2, S. Amselem1,2; 1Inserm UMR_
S933  and UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 2U.F. de Génétique clinique et moléculaire, Hôpital Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France. 
P04 .76 A search for new CY
P3 A5 and CY
P3 A4 variants as determinants of tacrolimus dose requirements in transplanted patients Although growth hormone (GH) and the GH releasing hormone receptor B. Tavira Iglesias, F. Ortega, C. Diaz-Corte, V. Álvarez, E. Coto; (GHRHR) have been recognized as key etiologic factors in non-syndromic HOSPITAL UNIVERSITARIO CENTRAL DE ASTURIAS, OVIEDO, Spain. forms of isolated growth hormone deficiency (IGHD), few mutations have been identified in this rare conGdHition (aGcHcoRuHnRting for 6-12.5% and 0-6.7% of CY
P3 A5*3 CY
P3 A4*1 IGHD cases). So far, very few functional studies have been performed. Tacrolimus (Tac) is an immunosuppressive drug used to avoid the rejection To assess the contribution of and in the pathogenesis of IGHD, o 1f 5so 0lid organs. (rs776746) and ES(HrsG27 240051734) | p PoAlymRoISr-, FRwAe NfirCstE a |n WalyWzedW th.EeSseH twGo.O geRnGes in a large cohort of patients with non-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index GH GHRHR syndromic forms of IGHD. GH linkage to a single region, all family members were tested with both known was studied in 191 independent patients and was subsequently polymorphic microsatellite markers and with additional markers developed analyzeidn ivnit trhoe remaining 144 independent patients (with no identified for this purpose. Linkage was identified to a chromosomal locus on chromo- dGeHf ect and available DNA). The GHRH response of GHRHR variants was as- some 18p11.1-q13.3. The multipoint Lod score calculated was 2.99, using sessed through a CRE-dependent luciferase assay. the Pedtool server assuming recessive inheritance with 99% penetrance mutations were identified in 28 patienGtHs R(H1R5%), 10 of them (10/191, and an incidence of 0.01 or 0.001 for the disease allele in the population. 5%) representing familial forms of IGHD. These include 7 noveGl HmRuHtaRtions The region contains 10 genes encoding ciliary proteins, a putative mutation (2 frameshifts, 5 missense). We identified mutations in 22 patients cRa.u Psianrgv aPrCi:D N wonaes. nMo. tM idaezonrt:i fNieodn ein. Sa.n Ay lokfr itnhaewsie:. None. V.C. Sheffield: None. M. (15%), 7 of them (7/144, 5%) representing familialG cHasReHsR. The mu- Aviram: None. tation spectrum (6 truncating, 1 splice, 10 missense) comprises 13 novel mutations. As shown by functional studies, 5 of the missense varia- tions represent loss-oGf-HfunctGioHnR mHRutations. 
P04 .81 Overall, this study performed in a large patient cohort, which identifies Surprising genetic heterogeneity for primary ciliary dyskinesia in the molecular defects in or in 50 out of 191 independent paGtiHents Irish Traveller population G(2H7R%H)R, reveals the importance of those genes in the pathogenesis of non- D. Slattery1, P. McGettigan2, A. Reynolds3, B. N. Kennedy3, S. Ennis4,5, S. Lynch6,5, J. P. Casey7, syndromic IGHD. Noteworthy, 62% (31/50) of the patients with a or D. Lambert1; M. Lege dnedfreec:t Nreopnere. sMe.n St osbproierar:d Nico cnaes. eFs. .Dastot: None. N. Collot: None. S. 1National Centre for Respiratory Disorders, Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin 1, Rose: None. A. Soleyan: None. L. Hilal: None. M. Vie-Luton: None. P. Ireland, 2UCD School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, University Duquesnoy: None. B. Copin: None. S. Amselem: None. College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 3Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 4School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 5National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Dublin 12, Ireland, 6Genetics Department, Children’s University Hospital, Temple Street, Dublin 
P04 .79 1, Ireland, 7National Children‘s Research Centre, Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, Dublin Short stature caused by a pseudo-isodicentric Xq21.1 chromosome, 12, Ireland. despite three SHOX genes S. G. Kant1, H. J. van der Kamp2, D. A. J. P. Haring3, A. C. Gijsbers1, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, W. Oostdijk2; Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a life-limiting multi-organ condition 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. characterised by impairment of muco-ciliary clearance. Identification of the of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, PCD disease mutations in the Irish population would facilitate the develop- Diaconessen Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. ment of genetic-based diagnostic tests to allow for earlier definitive diagno- sis, earlier treatment and improved long-term outcomes. Currently patients have to travel to the UK for confirmation of diagnosis. We aimed to identify Pseudo-isodicentric X chromosomes of the short arm of chromosome X the genetic mutation responsible for PCD in the Irish Traveller population (i(Xp) chromosomes) are rare. Most i(Xp)chromosomes occur as a mosaic (~26,000), an endogamous nomadic group distinct from the Roma gypsies. with a 45,X cell line. Patients with this mosaic genotype have ovarian failure Our study involves five affected children from three different families. As and variable height. We report two patients who presented with proportio- each recessive disorder in the Irish Traveller population is caused by a com- nate short stature without stigmata of Turner syndrome. Both patients also mon homozygous mutation, we hypothesised that the three families shared had hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. the same PCD disease mutation. Exome sequencing was performed for one Conventional cytogeXnISeTtic analysis in lymphocy tes revealed the presence of affected child from each family. Analysis of the exome data did not identify a 46,X,pseudo-isodicentric Xq21.1. FISH analysis showed that the X inactive a recessive deleterious mutation common to the affected children from all specific transcript ( ) gene is present twiceon the i(Xp)chromosome. In three families. Analysis of electron microscopy results supported the genetic patient 1 the i(Xp)chromosome was demonstrated in all cells next to a nor- findings; each family has a different type of ciliary defect suggesting a diffe- mal X-chromosome, while in patient 2 a mosaic was seen in which 10% of rent disease gene. The findings have led to a change in study design and the the cells harboured aX 4I
S5 T,X karyotype, and in 90% of the cells a karyotype exome data from each family is now being analysed independently. We iden- with the i(Xp)chromosome was shown. tified a known PCD disease gene in one family, a novel disease gene in the The presence of two genes on the i(Xp) chromosome indicates inacti- second family and analysis is on-going in the third family. The results to date vation of the i(Xp), caused by alteration of the chromatin structure, a pro- suggest that there is more than one PCD disease gene in the Irish Traveller cess described as inactivation enhancement. The degree of inactivation is p Do.p Sulalattteioryn:, wNohniceh. Pi.s MsucrGpertitsiginagn :g iNvoenne t. hAe. lRimeyitneodld pso: pNuolnaeti.o Bn. Nsi.z Kee.nnedy: correlated with the size of the Xq deletion, wSHitOhX l arger deletions being more None. S. Ennis: None. S. Lynch: None. J.P. Casey: None. D. Lambert: None. critical. The inactivation might also concern the PAR regions. This would effectively cause haploinsufficiency of the gene, explaining the short stature in these patients. 
P04 .82 Both patients were treated with growth hormone, while patient 1 also re- First reported spontaneous pregnancy in autosomal recessive ceived low dose estrogens. This resulted in growth acceleration without in- c Sr.eGa.s Ke ainn tb: oNnoen em. aHt.uJr. avtaionn d.er Kamp: None. D.A.J.P. Haring: None. A.C. pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1B) complicated by placental Gijsbers: None. C.A.L. Ruivenkamp: None. W. Oostdijk: None. insufficiency V. Jain1, L. Robertson1, M. Levy2, A. Baldwin2, A. Hanukoglu3; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Endocrinology, University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, 
P04 .80 United Kingdom, 3E.Wolfson Medical Center, Dept. of Pediatrics and Tel-Aviv University, A novel chromosomal locus for primary ciliary dyskinesia Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv, Israel. R. Parvari1,2, M. Mazor1, S. Alkrinawi3,1, V. C. Sheffield4, M. Aviram3,1; 1Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2National Institue Biotechnology Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel, 4University of Iowa, Introduction Iowa City, IA, United States. Pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA) is characterized by hyperkalaemia, meta- bolic acidosis and elevated aldosterone levels (Chang 1996). The autosomal recessive form (PHA1B) is due to mutations in three genes, each encoding Cilia are essential for fertilization, respiratory clearance, cerebrospinal fluid a sub-unit of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) (Chang 1996). This circulation and establishing laterality. Cilia motility defects cause primary channel is widely expressed on the surface of motile cilia (Enuka 2011) and ciliary dyskinesia (PCD, MIM244400), a disorder affecting 1:15,000-30,000 therefore PHA1B is associated with respiratory infection and infertility. births. In a consguineous Bedouin family with 2 affected and 6 healthy Case history SCNN1A siblingDs NwAeH h5ave seDaNrcAhI1ed for t he mutation causing the disease. Assuming We report the case of a 28-year old female with PHA1B, due to homozygous disease by homozygosity of a mutation from a common ancestor, linkage mutations in the gene, who became spontaneously pregnant after to the and geneswas excluded by the finding of heterozygo- one year of trying to conceive. A 20-week antenatal scan showed severe sity of alleles at known polymorphic markers adjacent to these genes. We intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR). Continued placental insufficiency further searched for homozygous regions consistent with linkage by geno- and oligohydramnios led to an emergency delivery at 28 weeks. Post-ope- typing the patients and both parents with the Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) ratively, the mother required treatment for hyperkalaemia with metabolic GeneChip® Human Mapping 250K Sty arrays. Five homozygous regions acidosis as well as a DVT. The baby developed meconium ileus necessitating larger than 18cM were identified using tEheS KHinGS N2
P0  p1r3og |r aPmA. RToI Sd,e tFeRrmAinNe CEa | bWowWel Wres.EecStiHonG a.nOd Ra Gprolonged neonatal intensive care admission.151ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Discussion not described in the Database of Genomic Variants or an in-house reference) PHA1B causes widespread ciliary dysfunction and infertility (Enuka 2011). were assessed with Ensembl and DECIPHER for gene content and similar To our knowledge, this is the first case of a successful spontaneous pregnan- cases, respectively. Segregation analysis was performed if possible. Genes cy in a female with PHA1B. SWCeN Nhy1pAo thesize that the placental insufficiency in CNVs were compared with information from GWAS, gene expression in in this pregnancy was linked to the maternal PHA1B resulting from the ho- rodents’ growth SpHlaOtXes, aInGdF 1pRublished information. Known or potentially mozygous mutation in the gene encoding the α-subunit of ENaC. pathogenic CNVs were detected in 39 families; in 6 families a known cause Therefore, this case illustrates that spontaneous pregnancy is possible in of SS was found ( or ), in two combined with a second, potential- PHA1B. If achieved there should be careful monitoring for the possible com- ly pathogenic CNV. In 33 families one or more potentially pathogenic CNVs plications of maternal metabolic instability and fetal IUGR/prematurity as (n=40) were detected, several of the deleteAdD oArM dTuSp1l7icaPtReKdG g2enBeMs Pm3aPyA bPe- wV.e Jlla ains :c Nouonnes.e Lll.i nRgo gbievretsno tno: tNhoen ceo. uMp.l eL etovy h: iNgholnieg.h At .t hBeasled wisisnu: eNso.ne. A. cPoAnsTiUdLePre4d as potential candidate genes ford eg nroowvoth disorders, including Hanukoglu: None. four genes associated with height by GWAS ( , / , , ). In 9 families, the CNVs occurred or segregated with SS. In conclusion, besides 6 CNVs in 6 families (4%) known to be causative for 
P04 .83 short stature, 40 CNVs in 33 families (22.1%) with possible pathogenicity Loss of function of DMX
L2  causes a complex neuroendocrine disorder were identified. Segregation studies and bioinformatic analysis suggested with ataxia and mental disability. v aHr.Aio.u vsa pno Dteunytvieanl vcoanodrdide:a tBe. gReenseesa.rch Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; L. Huijbregts1,2, B. Tata1,2, M. Amouyal1, S. Jacquier1, S. Leka1, A. Durr3, E. Genin4, J. Carel5,6, J. Leger1,6, N. de Roux1,2; Novo Nordisk (The Netherlands). J.C. Lui: None. S.G. Kant: None. W. 1INSERM U676, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 2Paris Diderot University, Paris, Oostdijk: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Novo Nordisk France, 3INSERM U
S975 , Paris, France, 4INSERM U1078, Brest, France, 5INSERM CIE-5, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 6Pediatric Unit, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, (The Netherlands). A.C.J. Gijsbers: None. M.J.V. Hoffer: None. M. Karperien: France. None. M.J.E. Walenkamp: None. C. Noordam: None. P.G. Voorhoeve: None. V. Mericq: None. A.M. Pereira: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Pfizer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis. H.L. Claahsen-van de Grinten: None. S.A. van Gool: Here, we studied a new phenotype in three brothers born from first cousins None. M.H. Breuning: None. M. Losekoot: None. J. Baron: None. C.A.L. of Senegalese origin. Disease onset began in early childhood with growth re- Ruivenkamp: None. J.M. Wit: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers tardation and asymptomatic hypoglycemia with incomplete suppression of bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Pfizer, Lilly, Ipsen and Ferring. insulin levels. Between 14 and 20 yrs, the three patients developed a slow- F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Tercica, Ipsen, Pfizer, Prolor, Teva and Biopartners. ly progressing non-autoimmune insulin deficient diabetes mellitus, central hypothyroidism and partial hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. In addition, they exhibited an ataxia and dystonia due to a progressive peripheral sen- sitive-motor demyelinating polyneuropathy, along with pyramidal manife- 
P04 .85 stations. Brain MRI exposed moderate sub-cortical temporal white matter A large novel deletion in the NBD2 domain of the ABCA3 gene causes disease. All three subjects presented a moderately low intelligence quotient, neonatal respiratory distress, SMD
P3 . dysarthria, difficulties swallowing and frontal alopecia to different degrees. A. Singer1, C. Vinkler2, E. Leshinsky-Silver2, S. Zangen3; A genome mapping followed by high throughput sequencing of two candi- 1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Genetic Institute, Holon, Israel, 3Intensive Care Unit, date regions found an un-described homozygous in-frame deletion of 15 Ashkelon, Israel. nucleotides in exon 24 of DMX
L2  (c.5827_5841del) leading to the deletion of 5 residues (p.1942_1946del) in the three brothers. The c.5827_5841del homozygous deletion was associated with a significant decrease of DMX
L2  The hereditary surfactant metabolism dysfunction disorders ( SMDP) are mRNA levels in blood lymphocytes. The screening of DMX
L2  in 10 additional genetically heterogeneous resulting in severe respiratory insufficiency in cases with a similar phenotype did not reveal any new mutation. full-term infants. Surfactant, mixture of lipids (90%) and specific proteins, DMX
L2  encodes for rabconnectin-3α (rbcn3-α) which is a synaptic prote- prevents lung collapse by lowering surface tension in the alveoli, at the end in interacting with regulators of the Rab3a “on-off” activity, a vesicle as- of expiration. sociated protein involved in the regulatory secretion. The production of a SMDP are AasBsCoAc3ia ted with mutations in genes encoding the surfactant pro- Dmxl2-knock-out mouse line confirmed the role of rabconnectin-3α in the teins like SP-C and SP-B and lamellar body biogenesis like ABCA3. SMDP central activation of the gonadotropic axis. In-vitro investigation showed its caused by mutations is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder. role in regulatory secretion. These data open a new door to understand the with the majority of affected children dying within 3 months of age. Some pLo. sHtnuaijtbarle ngetsu:r Noeonned.o Bcr. iTnaet ap:l Nasotnicei.t My .l eAamdionugy taol: pNuobneer.t Sy.. Jacquier: None. S. infants though, will develop pediatricA BinCtAe3rstitial lung disease (ILD). Some Leka: None. A. Durr: None. E. Genin: None. J. Carel: None. J. Leger: None. N. will improve spontaneously. Genotype-phenotype relationship is not clear. de Roux: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and We present a novel mutation in the gene associated with neonatal pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Servier. death. She was born at term atnhd developed progressive respiratory distress within a few hours. On day 9 she was mechanically ventilated. On day 59 despite extensive treatment the patient died. Sequencing the entire enco- 
P04 .84 ding regions of the ABCA3 revealed a novel homozygous nonframeshift de- Copy number variants in patients with short stature letion of 24bp in exon 26 in a highly conserved region. The deletion results H. A. van Duyvenvoorde1,2,3, J. C. Lui4, S. G. Kant3, W. Oostdijk1, A. C. J. Gijsbers3, M. J. V. in a protein shorter by eight amino acids in the NBD2 domain. The parents Hoffer3, M. Karperien5, M. J. E. Walenkamp6, C. Noordam7, P. G. Voorhoeve8, V. Mericq9, A. were found to be heterozygous for this deletion. M. Pereira2, H. L. Claahsen-van de Grinten7, S. A. van Gool1, M. H. Breuning3, M. Losekoot3, Functional data and genotype-phenotype relationship studies are needed J. Baron4, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp3, J. M. Wit1; in order to allow proper counseling and clinical decisions. Until now, no 1Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), department of Pediatrics, Leiden, therapies have been shown to be effective. Lung transplantation has been Netherlands, 2LUMC, department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden, Netherlands, 3LUMC, department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Section on suggested in patients with milder mutations. Prenatal genetic diagnosis has Growth and Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, bAe.e Sni nogffeerr:e Ndo tnoe t. hCe. pVainrkelnetrs: iNno onue.r Ec.a Lsee.shinsky-Silver: None. S. Zangen: None. 5University of Twente, MIRA institute for biomedical technology and technical medicine, department of Developmental BioEngineering, Enschede, Netherlands, 6VU University Medical Center, department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Canisius- 
P04 .86 Wilhelmina Hospital, department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9University of Chile, institute of Maternal and Child Research, Santiago, Chile. Mutations in CY
P24 A1 as a major cause of Idiopathic Infantile Hypercalcemia (IIH). A. Molin1, N. Coudray1, G. Abéguilé1, N. Richard1, S. Melaabi1, M. Decamp1, C. Colson1, M. Gérard1, N. Gruchy1, H. Mittre1, M. Castanet2, M. Kottler1; Height is a highly heritable and classic polygenic trait. Recent GWAS have 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Caen, France, 2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Rouen, revealed that at least 180 genetic variants influence adult height. However, France. these variants explain only about 10% of the phenotypic variation in height. In an effort to identify novel genetic variants associated with short stature (SS), we studied 162 patients from 149 unrelated families with SS. To detect Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (IIH), also called Lightwood syndrome, copy number variants (CNVs), whole genome SNP array analysis was perfor- is characterized by transient hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria responsib- m1e5d2. All potentially pathogenic CNVs (containing E prS oH teG in -2 co0 d1 in3 g g| eP nA esR aI nS d, FR leA fN orC nE e p| h W rocW alcW in. oE sS isH , wG it. hO iR ncG reased levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin DABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Background: CY
P24 A1 (1,25-(OH)2-D), and low levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH). Recently mu- Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a dominant- tations in the gene encoding for vitamin D-24-hydroxylase, the en- ly inherited non-autoimmune early-onset diabetes, that is characterized by zyme responsible for inactivation of the 1,25-(OH)2-D, have been rCeYpPo2r4teAd1, clinical and genetic heterogeneity. At least thirteen genetic subtypes have giving a new insight into IIH. bOebejne cdtievsec:ribed worldwide with important impacts on diagnosis strategy, Objectives: To confirm and extend earlier findings, we screened for individual and familial prognosis and pharmacogenomics. mutations a cohort of 34 patients (index cases) diagnosed with hypercalce- Methods: To identify the genetic aetiologies of early-onset diabetes or mia and low PTH leCvYePl 2(<42A0 pg/mL). MODY in Tunisian families. Methods: Biochemical and endocrine analyses were performed using stan- Thirteen diabetic probandsH N(mF1eAa,n H aNgFe4 Aa,t IdNiSa,b IePtFe1s , dNiEaUgnRoOsDis1: dard methods and mutations were identified using the routine pro- 26.6G±
C4 K.9 years) from families with diabetes segregating in 2-to-3 genera- cedures involved in the laboratory. CY
P24 A1 tions were screened for mutations in Results: We found 9 (5 children and 4 adults) unrelated patients (26.5%) and genes by Sanger sequencing and MLPA technique. Two informative with homozygous (4/9) or compound heterozygous (5/9) mutati- negative families were investigated by linkage analysis using SNP microar- ons. We identified seven new mutations and a large deletion encompassing ray genotyping (Illumina Cardio-Metabo BeadChip consisting of ~200,000 exons 9 to 11. In children, IHH was diagnosed before 2 years (range: birth - 8 SRNesPus)lt. sT:he MAZEL software was used for SNP selection, and 11,993 SNPs months; mean: 4,5 months) with high calcemia level (>3 mmol/l) and low were analyzed by parametric aHnNdF n4oAn -parametric methods in each family. PTH. All presented with nephrocalcinosis. Out of the 4 adults with CY
P24  Direct MODY genes sequencing showed only one probably non-da- mutations (1 female and 3 males) 2 presented with nephrocalcinosis, and maging missense mutation in (p.I453V) in one family. Two indepen- 1 had kidney stones assocCiYaPte2d4 Aw1ith hypercalciuria. All received vitamin D dent linkage signals were found, each one in a single family: on chromosome supplementation. 11 (F1:Zmax-bipoint = 1.986; Zmultipoint= 2.230) and chromosome 17 (F2: Zmax-bipoint Conclusion: Mutations in currently could give a pathogenic expla- =C o1n.7c3lu5s)i. oInn :family F1, a non-parametric analysis confirmed the linkage si- nation for some IIH, and thus constitute caution regarding vitamin D sup- gnal on chromosome 11 (p-val<0.005). p Ale. mMoelninta: tNioonn ein. N in. fCaonucdy.ray: None. G. Abéguilé: None. N. Richard: None. S. A causal mutation in known MODY genes has been excluded Melaabi: None. M. Decamp: None. C. Colson: None. M. Gérard: None. N. in the studied MODY patients. A thorough exploration of genomic intervals Gruchy: None. H. Mittre: None. M. Castanet: None. M. Kottler: None. identified by our study in two families, through gene targeted sequencing or whole exome sequencing, will be promising to identify the responsible g Ae.n Aem(sa) raan: dN ocaneu.s Cal. mLeeccoheaunri:s mNo onfe .t hJe. Pdhisileipapsee.: None. S. Lobbens: None. S. 
P04 .87 Sassi-Houij: None. L. Chaieb: None. A. Saad: None. M. Gribaa: None. P. Froguel: None. M. Chadli-Chaieb: None. M. Vaxillaire: None. Genetic testing for MODY: retrospective study of utilisation in the Netherlands S. S. Weinreich1, A. Bosma1, L. Henneman1, T. Rigter1, M. Breuning2, E. de Koning3, M. Losekoot2, M. Cornel1; 
P04 .89 1EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Monogenic diabetes: molecular screening of MODY genes Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of E. Marasco1, A. Aquilano1, P. Fici1, A. Di Rocco1, G. Storci2, A. Prossomariti1, C. Fazio1, M. Endocrinology and Department of Nephrology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Bonafè2, M. Seri3, V. Mantovani1,3; Netherlands. 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Diagnostic Experimental and Specialty Medicine, Bologna, Italy, 3Unit of Medical Genetics, S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Genetic testing for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) may be re- Italy. levant for treatment of patients and for monitoring of their healthy family members. This study describes the current state of genetic testing for MODY in the Netherlands in terms of volume and test positive rate, medical setting, Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is characterized by early- purpose of the test, and age of patients tested. Some analyses focus on the onset non insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and autosomal dominant most prevalent subtype, HNF1A MODY. inheritance. Although 12 MODY genes are described, only the most frequent In total, 1473 mutation scans for HNF4A, GCK, HNF1A and HNF1B were MODY2 and 3 subtypes are usually investigated. performed in 2001-2010. Cascade testing for a known mutation in family We report a mutation screening of GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A, HNF1B and PDX1 members occurred 290 times, and did not show an increasing time trend. In genes (MODY1-5) in 283 patients fitting MODY criteria. Gene mutations are total about 400 individuals were identified with a MODY mutation. Testing investigated by dHPLC and sequencing; large gene deletions are detected by for HNF1A MODY was mostly requested by internists and paediatricians, of- MLPA. 108 different mutations, 44 of which novel, were detected in 143 pro- ten from regional hospitals. A substantial proportion (20-28%) of HNF1A bands (50.5%). Among the mutated patients, 79% were GCK/MODY2, 14% MODY probands was over 40 years old at the time of testing. HNF1A/MODY3, 3% HNF4A/MODY1, 2% PDX1/MODY4 and 2% HNF1B/ The number of individuals genetically tested for MODY so far in the Nether- MODY5. Among GCK mutations, 59 were missense and 7 were non-sense lands is low compared to previously predicted numbers of patients. Prima- mutations, 5 were splicing and 4 were small indel, 16 mutations were detec- ry care physicians and clinical geneticists rarely request genetic testing for ted in more than one family. Among HNF1A mutations, 13 were missense, 3 HNF1A MODY. In 2009-2010 25% of clinical geneticists’ requests concerned were indel and 2 non-sense, 2 variants affected the HNF-4α binding site of cascade testing. Doctors’ valuation of the test on the one hand and patients’ the gene promoter. Also in HNF4A gene a mutation disrupting the HNF-1α and family members’ response to (an offer of) genetic testing on the other binding site in the 
P2  promoter was detected. A patient showed double he- hand need to be investigated. There could be a lack of perceived utility of terozygous mutations involving both HNF1A and HNF4A genes. Compound genetic testing for symptomatic patients and/or presymptomatic family heterozygosis for 2 variants of PDX1 gene was detected in a proband. Hete- members. Efforts may be needed to develop and implement translational rozygous deletion of whole HNF1B gene was found in 2 patients. Our data g Su.iSd.e Wlineiensr.eich: None. A. Bosma: None. L. Henneman: None. T. Rigter: broaden the knowledge of the mutations repertoire in these genes and as- None. M. Breuning: None. E. de Koning: None. M. Losekoot: None. M. Cornel: sess the relative prevalence of MODY subtypes in our population. However, None. about half of patients remains without characterization of the gene defect, i En.d Micaartainsgc oth: aNto anded. Ait.i oAnqaul iglaennoe:s N sohnoeu. lPd. bFeic iin: vNeosnteig. aAt.e Dd.i Rocco: None. G. Storci: None. A. Prossomariti: None. C. Fazio: None. M. Bonafè: None. M. Seri: None. V. Mantovani: None. 
P04 .88 Molecular and genetic analysis of autosomal dominant early-onset diabetes in Tunisian families A. Amara1,2,3, C. Lecoeur4,5,6, J. Philippe4,5,6, S. Lobbens4,5,6, S. Sassi-Houij2, L. Chaieb7, A. 
P04 .90 Saad2, M. Gribaa2, P. Froguel4,5,6, M. Chadli-Chaieb1,7, M. Vaxillaire4,5,6; Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus in a prospective cohort of 174 1Unit of Molecular Endocrinology, Sousse Faculty of Medicine, Sousse University, Sousse, patients: frequent association with developmental defects and Tunisia, 2Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive neuropsychological dysfunction. Biology. Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Higher Institute of K. Busiah1, S. Drunat2, A. Bonnefond3, L. Vaivre-Douret4, A. Simon5, I. Flechner5, N. Biotechnology of Monastir, Monastir University, Monastir, Tunisia, 4European Genomic Pouvreau2, B. Gérard2, C. Elie5, A. Dechaume3, R. Nimri6, L. de Vries7, N. Toubiana2, C. Institute for Diabetes (EGID) FR 3508, F-59000, Lille, France, 5CNRS UMR8199, Metz8, A. Bertrand9, S. Nivot-Adamiak10, M. de Kerdanet11, C. Stuckens12, F. Jennane13, V. Pasteur Institute of Lille, Lille, France, 6Lille 2 University, Lille, France, 7Department of Sulmont14, C. Letallec15, N. Ser15, C. Désirée16, S. Pereira16, M. Philip6, R. Scharfmann17, P. Endocrinology and Diabetology.Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. Froguel3, P. Czernichow5, M. Vaxillaire3, M. Polak18, H. Cavé16; ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 153ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1INSERM U845, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2CHU Robert Debré, Paris, D. Erkoc Kaya: None. H. Arikoglu: None. H. Ozdemir: None. M. Gonen: France, 3CNRS-UMR-8199, Lille, France, 4Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, None. S. Kayis: None. 5Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 6Schneider Children‘s Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 7Schneider medical center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 8Brest Hospital, Brest, France, 9CHU Besançon, Besançon, France, 10CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 11CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 12CHU Lille, Lille, France, 13University children‘s hospital A.Harouchi, 
P04 .92 Casablanca, Morocco, 14CHU Reims, Reims, France, 15CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, Whole-exome sequencing in Czech MODYX families: first results and 16CHU Robert Debré-Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 17INSERM U 845, Paris, implications France, 18CHU Necker-Paris 5 university, Paris, France. P. Dusatkova1, M. Fang2, S. Pruhova1, A. P. Gjesing3, O. Cinek1, T. Hansen3,4, O. Pedersen3,5,6, J. Zhang2,7, J. Lebl1; 12nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, Neonataldiabetes mellitus (NDM) is a rare form of pancreatic beta-cell dys- Prague, Czech Republic, 2BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 3Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of function leading to hyperglycaemia early in life. It belongs to monogenic Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern diabetes with genetic alterations impairing either pancreas development or Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 5Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and insulin secretion. Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Faculty of Health We evaluated phenotype-genotype correlations and clinical outcome in 174 Sciences, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 7T-Life Research Center, Fudan University, probands with NDM diagnosed before one year of age, referred to the French Shanghai, China, Shanghai, China. NDM Study Group from 1995 to 2010. No patient had beta-cell autoimmu- nity and all had normal pancreas morphology. They were prospectively in- v(AeBstCigCa8t,eKdC fNoJr1 a1l)terations in chromosIoNmS)e. 6q24 (uniparental isodisomy, du- Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is a heterogeneous group of plication, methylation deffect) and mutations in genes encoding KATP channel autosomal dominant diabetes clinically characterised by positive family hi- and preproinsulin ( KCNJ11 ABC
C8  story of diabetes, age at diagnosis before 25 years and negative beta-cell The geneticIN cSause of NDM was identified in 128/174 (74%) probands and autoantibodies. Although 13 MODY genes are known, approximately 30% of consisted in 6q24 abnormalities (n=40), mutation in (n=43), all cases remain genetically unclarified (MODYX). We aimed to identify the (n=31) or (n=14). Refined neuropsychological and psychomotor inve- genetic cause of diabetes in 6 MODYX families (22 persons) by whole-exome stigations evidenced disorders ranging from developmental coordination sequencing (WES). disorder (particularly visual-spatial dyspraxia) and/or attention deficits On average, 99.2% of all exons from each individual were sequenced on an to developmental delay and epilepsy (DEND syndrome) in all patients with Illumina HiSeq 2000. The detected variants in each sample (average 65,816) KATP channel mutations. On the other hand, intra-uterine growth retardation underwent co-segregation analyses within the family and filtering against (92%), early age at diagnosis (median 5 days [1-120]), and developmental databases dbSNP, Exome Variant Server, 1000 Genome Project, HapMap, defects involving heart, kidneys or urinary tract (22%) were core feature of LuCamp. the 6q24 phenotype. Remission of diabetes occurred in 89 (51%) probands, While 154 variants identified in 4 MODYX families are further evaluated and but recurrence probability was high, without difference between 6q24 and compared with data from other MODYX families, causal mutations in pre- KATP channel probands (82% vs 86%, p=0·36). viously known MODY genes were found in two families: First, p.Arg235Trp In conclusion, age at onset, birth weight or associated features can guide in the HNF1B gene was detected. Although HNF1B disruption is mostly as- NDM genetic testing. Neuropsychological and developmental defects are sociated with diabetes and cystic kidney disease (Renal Cysts and Diabetes frequent, differ according to the genetic aetiology, and deserve multidisci- syndrome), the proband did not display any renal anomaly. A second family p Kli.n Baursyi aahss: eNsosnmee. nSt.. Drunat: None. A. Bonnefond: None. L. Vaivre-Douret: carried p.Trp113Leu in the HNF1A gene causing HNF1A-MODY. This mutati- None. A. Simon: None. I. Flechner: None. N. Pouvreau: None. B. Gérard: on escaped the previous testing by direct sequencing due to the presence of None. C. Elie: None. A. Dechaume: None. R. Nimri: None. L. de Vries: None. N. 2 formerly unknown polymorphisms under the reverse primer suggesting Toubiana: None. C. Metz: None. A. Bertrand: None. S. Nivot-Adamiak: None. M. de Kerdanet: None. C. Stuckens: None. F. Jennane: None. V. that only one allele was amplified. Sulmont: None. C. Letallec: None. N. Ser: None. C. Désirée: None. S. Pereira: First results from WES in MODYX families pointed out that there is a need None. M. Philip: None. R. Scharfmann: None. P. Froguel: None. P. Czernichow: for constant awareness and regular re-evaluation of both clinical criteria None. M. Vaxillaire: None. M. Polak: None. H. Cavé: None. and primer sequences in routine testing of MODY. S Pu. pDpuosrattekdo vbay: ENFoSnDe .a Mn.d F NaTng1:1 A4.0 
E2 m. ployment (full or part-time); Significant; BGI Shenzhen. S. Pruhova: None. A.P. Gjesing: None. O. Cinek: None. T. Hansen: None. O. Pedersen: None. J. Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time); 
P04 .91 Significant; BGI Shenzhen. J. Lebl: None. Does TCF7
L2  gene predicts type 2 diabetes also in Turkish? D. Erkoc Kaya1, H. Arikoglu1, H. Ozdemir1, M. Gonen2, S. Kayis3; 1Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Konya, Turkey, 2Necmeddin Erbakan University, Meram Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
P04 .93 Endocrinology, Konya, Turkey, 3Selcuk University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Metabolic and genetic cardiovascular risk factors in diabetes mellitus Animal Science, Biometry-Genetics Unit, Konya, Turkey. type 2 patients A. A. Bystrova1, A. A. Voitovich2, M. A. Bogdanova3, B. I. Smirnov4, T. S. Razorenova3, E. I. Krasilnikova1, O. A. Berkovich1, E. V. Shliakhto1, V. I. Larionova1,3; Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) is one of the most challenging health 1St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, problems of the 21st century and growing anxiously in time. The Turkish 3North-Western State Medical University n.a. I.I. Mechnikov, Saint-Petersburg, Russian population is no exception to this trend. To date, TCF7
L2  gene has been Federation, 4St. Petersburg State Electrotechnical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian shown to be the strongest association with an increased risk of T2DM with Federation. well-replicated results in several different populations. TCF7
L2  encodes a transcription factor, involved in Wnt-signalling pathway, a major regulator of cell growth and development. Wnt signaling influences endocrine pan- Diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2) is closely associated with the development creas development and modulates mature β-cell functions including insulin of various cardiovascular complications including coronary artery disease secretion, survival and proliferation. This study provides valuable informa- (CAD). The aim of this study was to investigate CAD risk factors specific to tion about the Turkish population because it is the only association study DM2 patients. STUDY POPULATION: DM2 patients with CAD, among them between TCF7
L2  variants and T2DM in a Turkish population to the best of 41 male and 134 femAaPleOsA (1average age 52±10), AaPnOd CD3M2 patAiePnOtEs without our knowledge. Genotyping was carried out by PCR-RFLP and PCR-SSCP ACAPODA, 5among them 57 malesA DanRdB 3127 females (AaCvEerage age 50±10). Poly- techniques and six common variants (rs7903146 C>T, rs12255372 G>T, morphisms of genes G-75A and C+83T, Sst1, epsilon, rs7901695 T>C, rs11196205 G>C, rs11196213 C>T and rs3814573 C>T T-1131C and 
S19 W, W64R, and I/D together with me- substitutions) were genotyped in 1p69 non-obese diabetic and 119 healthy dical history, family history of CAD and DM2, the body mass index, and the ipndividuals. rs7903146 and rs12255372 were significantly associated with serum lipid levels, among them total cholesterol, high density lipoprotein T2DM (OR:1.9 [95% CI: 1.15-3.19] =0.005 and OR:2.1 [95% CI: 1.25-3.55] cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, very low density lipopro- =0.002 respectively). Calculated odds ratios were higher compared with tein cholesterol, triglycerides, and the atherogenic index were studied with current literature. Remarkably, for all studied SNPs, heterozygote and ho- the factor analysis and the logistic regression method. RESULTS: The DM2 mozygote rare allel frequencies were observed higher than common allels patients with CAD were older than the DM2 patients without CAD. Also, according to other populations. We consider it is because of our genetic he- their body mass index and the levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol terogeneity resulting from historical importance of our geographical positi- were higher than the same in the DM2 patients without CAD. It is interesting on which in the center of migration roads. Our results indicate that TCF7
L2  that the elevated levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol were typical m 1i 5gh 4t be a strong effector on T2DM development EinS THurGki s2h0, t1oo3. | PARIS, FRtoA tNheC fEem | aWle WDMW2 .pEaStieHnGts .wOitRhG CAD and not to the males, when analyzedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .96 Does summation of alleles account for genetic risk and genotype- separately. No one gene polymorphism was associated with higher risk of phenotype association in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus? C AA.AD. iBny tshtero DvMa:2 N poantei.e Ant.As.. Voitovich: None. M.A. Bogdanova: None. B.I. N. P. Pace1, A. Al Ashtar1, J. Vassallo2, A. E. Felice1; Smirnov: None. T.S. Razorenova: None. E.I. Krasilnikova: None. O.A. 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Department of Berkovich: None. E.V. Shliakhto: None. V.I. Larionova: None. Medicine, University of Malta, Msida, Malta. Introduction 
P04 .94 : Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and metabolic syndrome are com- The adiponectin variants contribute to the genetic architecture of mon complex disorders with a high prevalence in the Maltese population. type 2 diabetes in Turkish The aim of this study is to further define the genetic interplay between co- H. -. Arikoglu1, D. Erkoc Kaya1, H. Ozdemir1, S. Ipekci2, A. Arslan3, S. Kayis4, M. Gonen5; gnate genes from metabolic and inflammatory pathways on the likelihood 1Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Konya, Turkey, oMf edtehvoedloping T2DM in adulthood and to relate the association of certain 2Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology, Konya, Turkey, genetic profiles with defined biological and clinical endpoints. 3Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Gaziantep, : Eight hundred carefully characterised T2DM cases were recruited. Turkey, 4Selcuk University, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Animal Science, Biometry-Genetics Unit, Konya, Turkey, 5Necmeddin Erbakan University, Meram Faculty Anthropometric and biochemical parameters, including serum high-sensiti- of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology, Konya, Turkey. vity C-Reactive protein (hsCRP) levels were determined, and genotyping of 4R3e scuolgtnsate genes carried out. Neonatal cord blood samples were used as the control reference population in this study. Adiponectin is a strong candidate gene for type 2 diabetes, since adiponec- : Ten polymorphisms in metabolic/inflammatory pathways showed tin modulates insulin sensitivity and plays an important role in regulating significant association with T2DM. Three loci showed significant association energy homeostasis. We aimed to evaluate the contribution of the adiponec- with lipid profile, body weight and hsCRP levels. hsCRP levels demonstrated tin gene polymorphisms in genetic background of type 2 diabetes in a Tur- a strong positive correlation with body mass index. Genetic score analysis kish population. The study included unrelated, non-obese 169 patients and showed that combining multiple genetic markers results in higher relative age-BMI-matched 119 non-diabetic individuals with no family history. PCR- rCiosknsc.l uTshieo nfunctional significance of these polymorphisms is being further RFLP technique was used for ten SNPs genotyping. We detected significant evaluated using targeted siRNA-mediated silencing in cultured monocytes. aPssociation with type 2 diabetes and SNPs -11391G>A and -11043C>T in : A panel of ten candidate genes has consistently demonstra- proximal promoter region and SNP +276GP>T in intron 
P2  of adiponectin gene ted significant association with type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome ( <0.05). The silence SNP +45T>G in exon 1 and SNP +349A>G in intron 2 in the Maltese population. These gene variants serve functional roles in showed weak association with disease ( =0.06 and =0.07, respectively). inflammation and adipose tissue function. A recruited cohort of untreated We consider that SNPs in proximal promoter might be important in disease newly-diagnosed T2DM serves to identify and explore genotype-phenotype development by changing adiponectin expression. The effect of other as- association. The strong effect sizes of these alleles could be used to develop sociated SNPs is unclear, possibPly that it may be in interaction with other personal genetic susceptibility profiles for T2DM leading to personalization known or unknown SNPs and/or genes. Also, oneP of rare SNPs, Y111H was o Nf .cPa. rPea acne:d N porneev.e An.t iAoln A osfh ctharr:o Nniocn ceo. mJ. pVlaicsastaiollon:s .None. A.E. Felice: None. associated with fasting insulin ( <0.05) while other SNP R112C was effecti- ve on fasting glucose, fasting insulin and HbA1C ( <0.05). We observed that Y111H and R112C polymorphisms may be severely effective on glucose and 
P04 .97 insulin levels even in heterozygote form in an individual. Especially R112C, Analysis of the WF
S1  gene promoter polymorphisms as putative risk was associated with impaired multimerization and possibly with impaired factors of diabetes mellitus secretion and/or action of adiponectin since its localization. Consequently, N. Németh, Z. Elek, S. Prokop, A. Somogyi, M. Sasvári-Székely, Z. Rónai; adiponectin gene polymorphisms in Turkish population might contribute to Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. gHe.n-.e Atircik boagclkug: rNoounned. Dof. Etyrpkoe c2 K daiayba:e tNeosn.e. H. Ozdemir: None. S. Ipekci: None. A. Arslan: None. S. Kayis: None. M. Gonen: None. WWoFlSf1ra min is a transmembrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) playing a role in maintaining ER homeostasis. The protein is coded by the 
P04 .95 gene, loss-of-function mutations are responsible for the monogenic Association between TCF7
L2  gene polymorphisms and haplotypes DIDMOAD syndrome (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy with risk of type 2 diabetes in the Iranian population and deafness), whereas polymorphisms of the gene were suggested to be P. Keshavarz; risk factors of diabetes mellitus. Center for Cellular and Molecular biology, Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Our aim was to investigate the association of two promoter polymorphisms, Islamic Republic of Iran. the rs4273545 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and the rs148797429 insertion/deletion variant (ins/del) with diabetes mellitus. 452 patients and 484 healthy controls took part in the study, genotypes were analyzed by TCF7
L2  is a transcription factor influencing the transcription of several PCR-RFLP and allele-specific amplification. Statistical analysis was carried genTeCsF t7hLe2reby exerting a large variety of functions within the cell. There is out using khi-square statistics, linkage analysis was done by the Haploview strong evidence from several previous studies that two common variants software. of (rs7903146 and rs12255372) are associated with type 2 diabe- The rs4273545 G/T SNP showed a significant association with type 2 diabe- tes. We examined the impact of rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs11196205 tes (T2DM), even after correcting for Bonferroni (p = 0.00034, OR = 1.343), variants of TCF7
L2  gene and the haplotypes involving these variants on but not with type 1 form of the disease (T1DM). No significant association type 2 diabetes in an Iranian genetic association study. We genotyped the was found howeveRr between the ins/del and either T1DM or T2DM. Lin- three polymorphisms in 537 type 2 diabetic case and 441 control subjects kage analysis reveal2ed linkage disequilibrium between the SNP and the by TaqMan assay. In logistic regression analysis adjusted for age, sex and ins/del (D’ = 0.97; = 0.78), moreover a combined analysis of the two loci BMI, the allele frequency of rs7903146 and rs12255372 were significantly- dIne msiloicnostrated that the rs4273545T-rs148797429ins haplotype showed an 1d0ifferent between- 1t1ype 2 diabetes patients and control subject (p=6.8 ×10 increased risk for T2DM (p = 0.0004, OR = 2.410). and p=9.3 ×10 respectively). In genotype frequency comparison, the analysis suggested that these two polymorphismIsn a vrietr ion a GC-rich most significant association was obtained under a do-1m0inant genetic m-1o0del region possibly altering the methylation status of the promoter region and for rs7903146 and rs12255372 variants (p=9.6 ×10 and p=3.8 ×10 re- influencing the binding of transcription factors (e.g. Sp1). functional spectively). In haplotype analysis the CGG haplotype of TCF7
L2  rs7903146- aNn.a Nlyésmise uths:i nNgo lnuec.i Zfe. rEalseek :r eNpoonret.e Sr .c Pornosktorupc: tNs oisn ein. Ap.r Sogormeossg.yi: None. M. rs11196205-rs12255372 variants showed sig-5nificant association with type Sasvári-Székely: None. Z. Rónai: None. 2 diabetes in our study subjects (p=1.1 ×10 ). In conclusion, we found a strong association of TCF7
L2  variants and a three-marker haplotype with dPe. vKeeloshpamveanrzt: o Nf otynpe.e 2 diabetes in the Iranian population ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 155ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .001 A combination of inherited CNVs of unknown significance: Could it be th responsible for severe phenotype? We present a 9 year old boy with post-natal growth delay (2,5 centile) and M. Hančárová1, T. Maříková1, M. Trková2, K. Männik3, A. Kurg3, Z. Sedláček1; delayed skeletal age, mild-moderate intellectual impairment, problems with 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles limb coordination and hypotonia of the limbs. He manifests dysmorphic fea- University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2GENNET, Prague, tures: broad forehead, strabismus, low-set ears, broad mouth, small hands Czech Republic, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, and feet, pectus excavatum, widely spaced nipples. Estonia. The karyotyPpOeM o1f2 t1hLe1 p2atient was concluded to be 46,XY,t(7;8)(p12.1;p12), not disrupting any known genes on chr8. The breakpoint on chr7 may be disrupting , (mapping in progress) which has as yet unknown Microarrays can identify CNVs associated with intellectual disability (ID). functioNnE. LaL
C2 G, HD B(2X424 k) pAeNrfOor6med on the patient detectedP LaE KdHelAe9tion of The assessment of causality of inherited aberrations is difficult. We report 12q12 (1,1 Mb chr12:44,830,147-45,964,945, hg19), encompassing the an affected boy in whom a combination of inherited CNVs was likely patho- genes and as well as the pseudogene . Four genic. previously described patients with overlapping deletions share most of the The patient showed severe ID, speech delay, ADHD, seizures, microcephaly, dysmorphic features and thNe EgLrLo2wth- and mental retardation seen in our craniostenosis, strabismus, hypotonia, lower limb deformities, atypical fat patient. distribution, facial dysmorphism (hypertelorism, high nasal bridge, broad We suggest that the loss of may contribute to the growth delay, be- nose, small mouth, thin lips, long philtrum, small chin, low-set ears), asthma cause it is upregulated in the epiphyseal plates of broilers with excessive and allergies. His karyotype was normal. SNP array analysis revealed 4 lar- growth and is likely a part of the CNS also controlling skeletal development ge CNVs: 0.8 Mb dup5p13.2, 1.4 Mb del13q12.12, 0.9 Mb dup19p13.3, and in addition to neuronal differentiation and mitogenesis. It is also coupled to 2.9 Mb del14q32.2. The large del14q32.2 was maternal and the remaining 3 protection and proliferatNioEnL Lo2f neurons in the hippocampus and cerebral aberrations were paternal. The parents were mildly affected, both attended cortex, and Nell2-defiDciBeXn2t mice have been shown to have impaired spatial a special school. The mother had a similar phenotype with dysmorphism, lDeBaXrn2ing memory. Thus, may contribute to the intellectual impair- speech disorder, craniostenosis, asthma and allergy. ment in the patient. might contribute to the psychomotor delay, as The maternal deletion involved zinc finger protein gene BC
L11 B highly si- is involved in determining the fate of interneurons in the ventral spinal milar to BC
L11 A, the candidate for the 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndro- c Eo.rOd. cCoanrtlsroenll:i nNgo mneo. tDo.r nMeisucreoon:s N, aosn we.e Mll. aFsa innn eeamrelyl: n Neounrea.l Ep.l aFtree npgaettne:r Nnionnge.. me. The paternal dup19p33.3 affected 33 genes including ID candidates MA
P2 K2, EEF2 and HDGFR
P2 . The presence of 2 CNVs of unknown significance larger than 500 kb is 8x 
P05 .004 more likely in ID patients than in controls. CNVs tolerated in mothers can Dysregulation of FOXG1 pathway in a 14q12 microdeletion case. cause ID in sons. This and the milder parental affection, large CNV size and O. Perche1, G. Haddad2, A. Menuet3, P. Callier4, M. Marcos1, S. Briault1, B. Laudier1; involvement of candidate genes suggest that the combination of CNVs could 1Centre Hospitalier Régional d‘Orléans - CNRS - UMR7355 - University of Orleans, cause the severe phenotype in our patient. The combination might exceed Orleans, France, 2Genetic Department, Hospital of Blois, Blois, France, 3CNRS - UMR7355 the tolerable load of genetic hits and/or transfer them to a sensitive genetic - University of Orleans, Orleans, France, 4Cytogenetics Department, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, background. France. S Mu.p Hpaonrtčeádro bvyá :C NHoEnReI.S TH. ,M NaTří/k1o4v2á0: N0,o 0n0e.0 M64. 2Tr0k3o vaán:d N SoFn0e1. 8K0. 0M2ä7nsn1i0k:. FOXG1 None. A. Kurg: None. Z. Sedláček: None. „ syndrome” includes postnatal microcephaly, severe mental retarda- tion with absence of language and agenesis of the corpus callosum. When 
P05 .002 the syndrome is associated withF OlXaGrg1e 14q12q13 deletions, the patients Further delineation of 12p13.33 micro deletions: Two families with present characteristic facial dysmorphism. Although all reports wereF bOaXsGed1 small overlapping deletions. on genomic analysis, recently a regulatory elements deletion asso- J. E. Liebelt1, K. Stallard1, J. Nicholl2, W. Waters2; ciated with a doFwOnX Gex1pression of mRNA suggedset endo vaon implication of 1South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, Adelaide, Australia, 2SA Pathology, pathway. Herein, we report the case of a young boy with a phenotype con- Cytogenetics, Adelaide, Australia. sistent wFiOthXG a1 „ syndrome“. He had a translocation t(6;14) (q22.1;q12) associated with a heterozygous 14q12.2q13 deletiFoOnX eGn1com- passing . Subsequently, we investigated his tranFsOcXrGip1t omic profile on 12p13.33 microdeletion, associated with intellectual disability (ID), speci- lymphoblastoïd cell lines and/or fibroblasts and showed that was fic language impairment and psychiatric manifestations has only been de- commonly doFwOnX-Gre1g ulated. Moreover, several otheFrO XG1 pathway genes scribed in a handful of case reports. We report 2 families with overlapping, were also disturbed. Our data and review of previous reports highlight dys- but not identical small microdeletions on chromosome 12p13.33, who pre- regulation of pathway as the cause of the „ syndrome“ deve- sented with features consistent with the previously published cases. Array l Oop. mPeerncthael: d Nisoonred. eGr.. Haddad: None. A. Menuet: None. P. Callier: None. M. CGH was performed using BlueGnome Cytochip oligo ISCA (4080-5) 8x60K Marcos: None. S. Briault: None. B. Laudier: None. array. Family one consists of an affected mother in whom the deletion has occurred de novo and her 2 affected daughters. They have a 896kb deletion at 12p13.33 [chr12:1,972,757-2,868,481 (hg18)]. involving the CACNA1C, 
P05 .005 DC
P1 B, FKB
P4 , ITFG2, NRI
P2 , FOXM1 and 
C12 orf32 genes. The mother 15q11.2 microdeletion (B
P1 -B
P2 ) and developmental delay, has mild ID with prominent psychiatric issues whilst her 2 daughters have behaviour issues, epilepsy and congenital heart disease: a series of 49 mild ID and significant speech issues. Family two consists of an affected patients mother (parents unavailable for testing) and her affected son and daugh- C. Vanlerberghe1, F. Petit2, V. Malan3, C. Vincent-Delorme2, S. Bouquillon1, O. Boute2, ter. They have a 1.35Mb deletion at 12p13.32-p13.33 [chr12: 2,117,194-3- M. Holder-Espinasse2,4, B. Delobel5, B. Duban5, L. Vallee6, J. M. Cuisset6, M. P. Lemaitre6, ,469,086 (hg18)]. Involving the CACNA1C, DC
P1 B, FKB
P4 , ITFG2, NRI
P2 , M. C. Vantyghem7, M. Pigeyre7, S. Lanco-Dosen8, G. Plessis9, M. Gérard9, G. Jedraszak10, FOXM,
C12 orf32, TUL
P3 , TEAD4 and TSPAN9 genes. All have mild ID with M. Mathieu10, G. Morin10, F. Bilan11, B. Gilbert-Dussardier12, D. Fauvert13, J. Roume13, V. prominent speech issues. To date these are the smallest deletions identified Cormier-Daire14, R. Caumes14, J. Puechberty15, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2, J. Andrieux1; 1Institut de génétique médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 2Service in the 12p13.33 region and may assist in localizing the genes responsible for de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, the neurodevelopmental aspects of the phenotype. Despite partial or total 3Service de cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, deletion of CACNA1C, none of the affected individuals have symptomatic or 4Department of clinical genetics, Guy‘s hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Centre de ECG findings consistent with Brugada syndrome, suggesting that haploin- cytogénétique, hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Lille, France, 6Service de neuropédiatrie, s Ju.Eff.i cLiieenbceylt o: fN tohnies .g Ke.n Set iasl lnaordt :e Nnoonueg.h J t. oN cicahuoslel: t Nhiosn ceo. nWd. iWtioante.rs: None. Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 7Service d‘endocrinologie, Hôpital Claude Huriez, CHRU, Lille, France, 8Service de neuropédiatrie, Hôpital de Sambre Avesnois, Maubeuge, France, 9Service de génétique clinique, CHU, Caen, France, 10Service de génétique clinique, CHU, Amiens, France, 11Laboratoire de génétique cellulaire et 
P05 .003 Moléculaire, Pôle Biologie Santé, CHU, Poitiers, France, 12Service de génétique clinique, 12q12 deletion syndrome: new perspective on the genetic cause of La Milétrie, CHU, Poitiers, France, 13Unité de génétique médicale, CHI Poissy-Saint the phenotype Germain, Poissy, France, 14Département de génétique médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants E. O. Carlsen, D. Misceo, M. Fannemel, E. Frengen; Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 15Service de génétique médicale, CHRU, Montpellier, Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, France. Norway. 156 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRCAhrNomCoEs o|m We W15W’s p.EroSxHimGal. lOonRgG arm is a region rich in duplicons, definingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .007 Systematic phenotyping of the 16p11.2 600 kb deletion and five breakpoints for 15q rearrangements. 15q11.2 microdeletion between duplication carriers B
P1  and B
P2  hasN IbPeAe1n, NpIrPeAvi2o, uCsYlyF IPas1s, oTcUiaBtGedC Pw5ith developmental delay S. Lebon1, A. Maillard2, K. Mannik3, Q. Chen4, F. Zufferey2, N. D. Beckmann2, V. Siffredi2, L. and behaviour issues. This region contains four highly-conserved and non- Hippolyte2, A. Macé5, E. Hanson6, C. Ferrari7, E. Migliavacca3, Z. Kutalic5, T. the Simons VIP imprinted genes: . Our goal is to refine the Consortium8, t. 16p11.2 European Consortium2, E. H. Sherr9, J. E. Spiro8, J. S. Beckmann2, phenotype associated with this microdeletion in a large cohort of patients. W. K. Chung10, A. Reymond3, S. Jacquemont2; 1Unité de neuropédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Prevalence of this CNV is 0.8% in patients presenting with developmental Switzerland, 2Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, delay, behaviour issues and/or multiple congenital malformations, analysed Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, by array-CGH in 4 different French Genetic laboratories. After exclusion of Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New patients presenting an associated genetic alteration (known CNV, aneuplo- York, NY, United States, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne, idy or point mutation in a known gene), we collected data from 49 unrelated Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Department of Psychiatry, Boston Children‘s Hospital, Harvard patients. Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 7Department of Psychiatry, Centre Hospitalier 67.5% of the patients presented with mild or moderate developmental de- Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Simons Foundation, New York, NY, United States, 9Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United lay, 82% had speech impairment and 60% had behaviour issues (Attention States, 10Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder, Autistic Spectrum Disorder or Obsessi- United States. ve-Compulsive Disorder). Seizures were described in 19% of the patients and 16% had an associated non specific congenital heart disease. Parents were analysed in 55 % of the families. In those families, 29 % of The ~600kb 16p11.2 deletions and duplications are among the most fre- the microdeletions were inherited from one of both parents, who did not quent genetic etiologies of neurodevelopmental disorders. These recurrent present any of the features associated with the deletion. rearrangements are associated with mirror phenotypes such as obesity and Our results support the hypothesis that 15q11.2 (B
P1 -B
P2 ) microdeletion underweight, macro- and microcephaly, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with developmental delay, abnormal behaviour, generalised and schizophrenia (SCZ). In 16p11.2, as well as in other genomic disorders, epilepsy and congenital heart disease, although this latter finding had not reports of variable expressivity and “incomplete penetrance” have ham- been previously reported. pered genetic counseling and patient management. However, incomplete penetrance and variability of expression amongst pati- To better understand this variability, we compared the effects of deleti- e Cn.t Vs aanrlee frrbeeqrguhene:t Nanonde w. Fo.u Pldet rite:q Nuoinree .f uV.r tMhaelra nst:u Ndoiense .t oC .b Vei nacsseensts-Dedel.orme: None. S. Bouquillon: None. O. Boute: None. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. B. ons and duplications through a systematic assessment of large cohorts of Delobel: None. B. Duban: None. L. Vallee: None. J.M. Cuisset: None. M.P. 16p11.2 rearrangements’ carriers (Simons VIP and Europe consortia: n= Lemaitre: None. M.C. Vantyghem: None. M. Pigeyre: None. S. Lanco-Dosen: 287 del, 301 dup). The deletion consistently impacts neurodevelopment, None. G. Plessis: None. M. Gérard: None. G. Jedraszak: None. M. Mathieu: regardless of ascertainment. It is associated with a decrease in full scale IQ None. G. Morin: None. F. Bilan: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. D. (FSIQ) of two standard deviations and frequently causes specific language Fauvert: None. J. Roume: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. R. Caumes: None. J. difficulties. Psychiatric co morbidities are present in the majority of carri- Puechberty: None. S. Manouvrier-Hanu: None. J. Andrieux: None. ers, and seizures are observed in 24% of deletion carriers. We identified an increased velocity of head circumference growth during infancy, which reca- pitulates the well-documented pattern seen in ASD. In contrast, duplication 
P05 .006 carriers have a broader range of IQ when compared with deletion carriers Copy-number variations at 16p11.2 in Estonian patients (increased rates of FSIQ below 50 and above 100: OR=3.5, p=0.002): this P. Tammur1, T. Reimand1,2,3, O. Žilina4,1, I. Talvik2,5, P. Ilisson1, T. Ilus1, P. Toit1, K. Kuuse1, K. heterogeneity is associated in part with ascertainment method. The asso- Õunap1,2; ciation of the duplication with decreased head circumference is similarly 1Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 2University of Tartu, Department of Pediatrics, influenced by ascertainment, suggesting that the phenotypic heterogeneity Tartu, Estonia, 3University of Tartu, Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biotechnology, Institute of might be caused by an interaction between the duplication and other ge- Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Children’s Clinic of netic and/or environmental factors. Additional genetic variants that could Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. u Sn. dLeerblioen t:h Neosnee o. bAs.e Mrvaailtliaornds: Naroen ec.u Krr. eMnatlnyn uikn:d Be.r R inevseeastrcigha Gtiroann.t (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Swiss Scientific Exchange NMS Programme. Q. Chen: None. F. Zufferey: None. N.D. Beckmann: None. V. Siffredi: None. L. There are many copy-number variations (CNVs) associated with genomic Hippolyte: None. A. Macé: None. E. Hanson: None. C. Ferrari: None. E. disorders with extreme phenotypic heterogenity. One of such CNVs is dupli- Migliavacca: None. Z. Kutalic: None. T. the Simons VIP Consortium: B. cation-deletion at 16p11.2. This syndrome seems to be as frequent as micro- Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending deletion/duplication 22q11.2. grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Simons Foundation Both deletions and duplications at 16p11.2 have been associated with in- Autism Research Initiative. T. 16p11.2 European Consortium: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants tellectual disability and language impairment. In case of duplication, under- as well as grants already received); Significant; grant SF0180142Cs08 from weight and intellectual disability is observed contrary to deletion, where Estonian Government, Centre of Translational Genomics grant S
P1 GVARENG, obesity and autistic features are main symptoms. It is shown previously that the European Union through the European Regional Developemtn Fund. E.H. clinical symptoms in carriers of the deletion/duplication represent opposite Sherr: None. J.E. Spiro: None. J.S. Beckmann: B. Research Grant (principal manifestation mediated by gene dosage. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants From January 2012 until January 2013 we performed 667 CNV analyses already received); Significant; Swiss National Science Foundation. W.K. Chung: (HumanCytoSNP-12 v2-1 BeadChips; Illumina Inc.) and found microdeleti- None. A. Reymond: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; on/duplication at 16p11.2 in 10 (1.4%). At the same time we diagnosed in 5 the Leenards Foundation Prize, the Swiss National Science Foundation, SNSF (0,75%) patient with microdeletion/duplication 22q11.2. Sinergia grant. S. Jacquemont: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Here we describe 11 Estonian patients with CNV at 16p11.2. Three cases collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); were with duplication and 8 with deletion in that region. The length of chan- Significant; the Leenards Foundation Prize, „bourse de la relève académique de la ges varies between 0.2Mb-0.8Mb. Faculté de Biologie et Médecine de l‘Université de Lausanne“. All patients show developmental delay and language impairment in diffe- rent severity. As expected, dysmorphic features are presented in very minor scale. In one family two brothers had inherited the deletion from father. In 
P05 .008 one case the duplication was inherited from mother. All parents are not cli- Chromosome 16q12.1 deletion: a case report adding evidence for a nically investigated yet. new microdeletion syndrome 16p11.2 microdeletion/duplication syndrome is surprisingly frequent in J. Ferrão1, S. I. Ferreira1, E. Matoso1,2, A. Jardim1, F. Ramos3,4, J. Saraiva3, J. B. Melo1,5, I. M. Estonian population. It seems to be even more frequent CNVs than 22q11.2 Carreira1,5,6; microdeletion/duplication. Such finding can be explaned by the fact that 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade since 2012 chromosomal microarray is a first-tier clinical diagnostic test for de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Laboratório de Citogenética, Hospital Pediátrico iPn.d Tivaimdmuaulrs: wNiotnhe d. eT.v Releoipmmanedn:t aNl odniesa. bOi.l iŽtiielisn aa:n Ndo/noer. cI.o Tnaglevniki:t aNl oanneo. mP.a lies. Carmona da Mota, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Ilisson: None. T. Ilus: None. P. Toit: None. K. Kuuse: None. K. Õunap: None. 3Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico Carmona da Mota, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5CIMAGO - Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 6CENCIFOR - Centro Ciências Forenses, Instituto Nacional de Medicina Legal, Coimbra, Portugal. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 157ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index de novo Interstitial deletions of the proximal long arm of chromosome 16, involving malities in males (hypospadias). Using SNP array we det Mecetethdo ad s1 9aqn1d3 R.1e1- bands 16q11 to 16q13, are rarely reported. With the global implementati- msuilctrso: deletion in a patient with apparently balanced cytogenetic re- on of the array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) technique, arrangement between chromosomes 2p35 and 19q13.11. the reported cases can now be well characterized at a molecular level, with We sdteu dnyo vao male patient of 6 years 7 months old age with all principal exact breakpoint establishment. Despite some phenotypic variability, the featur es of 19q13.11 microdeletion synddero nmoveo. By cytogenetic-FISH analysis few reported cases with 16q deletion present some common features, like identify to apparently balanced non-reciprocal t(2;19) (p35;q13.11). developmental delay, abnormally shaped eadres n, ohvyopotonia, limb anomalies Using250 k Nsp SNP array we detect a interstitial 19q13.11 pat de- and dysmorphisms. letion of ~2.54 Mb. To the further characterized the extent of deletion was We report a 9 year old female patient with a 3.9Mb deletion at chro- analyzed by high-density 6.0 SNP array, and found a 2,489,839 pb deletion, mosome 16q12.1, detected by array-CGH using an Agilent 180K oligonu- the proximal and distal breakpoints at (33,565,628-36,055,467). We reali- cleotide. She presented with short stature, renal bilateral SaAnLoLm1aly, develop- zed genotype-phenotype correlations of our patient with eight previously ment delay, hypotonia, facial dysmorphisms and precocious puberty. published caseUs,B aAn2d, WtwToP I,a SnCnGo2taBt2e,d Z NinF 3D0
E2 C, IZPNHF
E1 R8 1d, aZtNabFa5s9e9, , rLeOfiCn4i0n0g6 t8h5e, The reported deletion contains 18 genes, one of which is , whose mu- cLrOiCti1ca0l0 6r5eg2i9o0n9 ,t o ~5 Z1N7 Fk3b0 (chr19:34,919,268-35,436,076), containing 9 tations cause Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS), a rare dominant develop- RefSeq genes ( UBA2 meSnAtLaLl 1disorder characterized by anal, renal, limb and ear malformations. and ). This genomic region was further analyzed The few reported patients with 16q12.1 deletions have in common the loss tChoen pclruosbiaobnilsi:ty of gene haploinsufficiency; resulting as the most si- of gene, but they do not meet the clinical criteria for being diagnosed gnificant gene for the phenotype; including the male genital abnormalities. as having TBS. In the literature, it has been suggested that TBS is caused by a To our knowledge, this is thUeB fAir2st case report of 19q13.11 dominant negative mutation of the gene, whereas haploinsufficiency results deletion syndrome due to an apparently balanced de novo chromosome re- in a milder phenotype, like the ones observed in patients with the deletion arrangement. In addition, we propose that may be responsible for the including our patient. The deletion of adjacent genes might contribute to the c Co.rAe. pVheenneogtaysp: eN oofn teh. iKs .n Noiveetol :m Niocrnoed. eF.l eFteiornna snydnedzr: oNmonee.. J. Berumen: phenotypic variability that is observed among these patients. None. S. Kofman: None. Report of further patients is necessary in order to define the critical region and the candidate genes responsible for this new 16q12.1 microdeletion s Jy.n Fderrorãmoe: .None. S.I. Ferreira: None. E. Matoso: None. A. Jardim: None. F. 
P05 .011 Ramos: None. J. Saraiva: None. J.B. Melo: None. I.M. Carreira: None. Inherited 1q21.1q21.2 duplication and 16p11.2 deletion : a two-hits case with severe clinical manifestations S. Brisset1, A. Briand-Suleau2,3, L. Tosca1,4, Y. Capri5, D. Gras6, C. Baumann5, D. Pineau1, J. 
P05 .009 Saada7, V. Ortonne2, A. Verloes5, G. Tachdjian1,4, M. Goossens2,3, C. Metay2,3; Duplication-Deletion-Duplication 17p13.3 with the smallest reported 1Service d’Histologie, Embryologie et Cytogénétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France, 2Service de Biochimie-Génétique, Plateforme de Génétique deletion of YWHAE Constitutionnelle, AP-HP, Hôpital H. Mondor, Creteil, France, 3INSERM U955, Hôpital B. L. V. L. Dupont JM, I. A. G. N. JM Dupont; H. Mondor, Creteil, France, 4INSERM U935, Villejuif, France, 5Department of genetics, : Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, APHP, Hôpitaux universitaires Paris Centre, France., APHP, Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 6Department of neuropediatrics, Paris, France. AP-HP, Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 7Gynécologie Obstétrique, AP-HP, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France. Microdeletion of 17p13.3 involving YWHAE (14-3-3-epsilon), but distal to PAFAH1B1, is a newly recognized syndrome associated with variable disor- In a fetus exhibiting absent nasal bone, a proximal duplication of chromoso- ders of cortical development and facial dysmorphism. More recently, both me 1 long arm was first identified on karyotype, associated with a 16p11.2 microdeletions and microduplications mapping to this region have been deletion secondary characterized by array-CGH. Duplication was shown to identified. Clinical characterization has been reported according to the be paternally inherited. Whole chromosome 1 painting probe in both exclu- length and the genes involved in such rearrangements. ded a translocation or an insertion elsewhere. Oligoarray-CGH on amniotic we report on a boy presenting with seizure, learning difficulties and foot fluid characterized the 1q21.1q21.2 duplication of 5,8Mb with father’s iden- abnormalities.Array comparative genomic hybridization (oligonucleotide tical breakpoints. Furthermore a 16p11.2 deletion of 545Kb was revealed array-CGH Nimblegen) showed a complex rearrangement with six break- that was unexpectedly maternally inherited and identical. points on 17p13.3: Duplication-Deletion-Duplication. Deletion of 30 Kb in- Paternal history was noteworthy for placement since 6 months-old in host cluded only the last exon of YWHAE. First duplication of 380 Kb involved families because of his parents inability to take care of him. Language delay NXN, TIMM2, ABR genes and the second of 164 Kb involved CRK, MYO1C, was noted at 3 years. Proband’s mother was adopted at 1 month-old. Lan- INP
P5 K, PITPNA genes. Quantitative PCR was performed to confirm the re- guage delay and learning difficulties were observed associated with over- arrangement and to show that was absent in both parents and therefore weight. occurred de novo. In early development, proband presented epilepsy and axial hypotonia fol- We are able to review and refine the molecular and clinical features of re- lowed by psychomotor retardation. Absence of nasal bone was confirmed. cently described novel microdeletion and microduplication on 17p13.3. We The boy exhibited macrocephaly, dysmorphy and congenital anomalies. report the smallest deletion of YWHAE described. This gene is encoding a Thus, we report a case with two inherited chromosomal rearrangements highly conserved protein that has been shown to play a crucial role in neu- resulting in exacerbation of neurodevelopmental phenHoYtDyIpNe compared to ronal development and synaptogenesis. We compare critical regions deli- his parents. Descerti baeld 1q21.1 duplication is associated with developmental neated and candidate genes proposed in cohorts with the aim of refining the anomalies and macrocephaly notably because of the paralog gene phenotype-genotype correlation. (Brunetti-Pierri , 20et0 8al). The 16p11.2 deletion, a novel emt aiclrodeletion Breakpoints of this non recurrent complex genomic rearrangement were syndrome is associated with abnormal behaviour, mental retardation and not associated with low-copy repeats and are therefore probably due to re- macrocephaly (Walters , 2010, Nature, and Jacquemont 2011, Na- plicative mechanism such as Fork Stalling and Template Switching (FoSTeS) ture). We will discuss the fact that occurrence of additional chromosomal o Br. LM.Vic.Lro. hDoumpoonlot gJyM M: Neodniaet.e Id.A B.Gre.Na.k J IMn dDuucpeodn Rt:e Nploincea.tion (MMBIR). events, as described in the proband, may be involved in variable expressivity a Sn.d B crlisinsiecta: lN hoentee.r oAg. eBnreiaitnyd a-Ss uolbeaseur: vNeodn ien. Lth. eT ofasmcai:ly N.one. Y. Capri: None. D. Gras: None. C. Baumann: None. D. Pineau: None. J. Saada: None. V. Ortonne: None. A. Verloes: None. G. Tachdjian: None. M. Goossens: None. C. Metay: 
P05 .010 None. 19q13.11 Microdeletion Syndrome due to an apparently balanced de novo chromosome rearrangement: Characterized by high-density SNP array analysis C. A. Venegas1, K. Nieto2, F. Fernandez1, J. Berumen1, S. Kofman1; 
P05 .012 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico. D.F, Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina. UNAM, Mexico. 1q21.1 microduplication syndrome in a boy and his father D.F, Mexico. M. Havlovicova1, M. Simandlová1, Z. Slámová1, J. Drábová1, M. Hrdlička2, Z. Sedláček1; Background: 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics , University Hospital Motol and 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of 19q13.11 Microdeletion Syndrome [OMIM#613026] is an Paediatric Psychiatry , University Hospital Motol and 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. emerging disorder characterized by pre-postnatal growth retardation, de- velopmental delay, microcephaly, minor facial dysmorphic features, and 158 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG signs of ectodermal dysplasia, extremity malformations, and genital abnor-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Chromosomal band 1q21.1 can be divided into two distinct regions, pro- scribed only 2 patients with this condition so far. In these cases PIM3 gene ximal and distal, based on segmental duplications that mediate recurrent (localized in 22q13.33) was considered to be responsible. rearrangements. Microdeletions and microduplications of the distal region We present 7 patients (2 males and 5 females) with Phelan McDermid syn- within 1q21.1 are susceptibility factors for a variety of neurodevelopmental drome. Age at diagnosis ranges from 10 month to 55 years and deletion ex- phenotypes and distinct dysmorphic features. tent varies from 0.4 Mb to 7.6 Mb. All patients present common features We present a 6 years old boy with severe intellectual disability, ASD, signi- of the syndrome, but they differ in inconstant sypmtoms. Any correlations ficant speech delay, hyperactivity and macrocephaly. He comes from 3rd between phenotype and deletion range haven′t been observed. pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia , diabetes and excessive obesity of Patients have been diagnosed using FISH and MLPA, deletion extents were the mother ( there were 2 sponatenous abortions from another partnership proven by oligonucleotide arrayCGH. of the mother). His early development was delayed- walking unattended at There are 6 patients with deleted PIM3 gene in our group, including two 18 months of age. He exhibits significant facial dysmorphism: macrocephaly adult patients, but only one of these patients (10-year-old boy with 1.9 Mb with prominent forehead, long face, arched eyebrows, periorbital fullness, long deletion) has developed hepatic failure recently. Therefore simple PIM3 epicanthal folds, broad nasal bridge, upturned nose, deep philtrum . His deletion doesn′t seem to be the cause of hepatic failure. extremities are relatively short with short fingers, he also has hypoplastic The possible mechanism is an alteration of the gene on the other allele, epi- genitalia. genetic factors or mutation in some modifier genes. We discuss potential The extent of the duplication of our patient is 2.3 Mb , affecting 32 HGNC benefit of whole exome sequencing to further elucidate mechanism in these genes, chr1:144.510.930 - chr1:146.812.122.(hg18) patients. His father is a carrier of microduplication confirmed by FISH analysis, the SRu.p Ppoourrto: vCáz:e Ncho nMei. nPi.s Htreyd ovfič Háekaolvtáh: pNroonjeec. tJ 0. D00rá6b4o2v0á3: .None. M. Simandlová: exact extend will be confirmed by array CGH method. He has borderline in- None. Š. Vejvalková: None. M. Malíková: None. D. Novotná: None. telectual capacity, his facial features are almost normal. Consistent phenotypic differences haven’t yet been described between people with different-sized microduplications - and people in the same fa- 
P05 .015 mily with the same size microduplication can have very different features. 2q24.3 deletion involving SCN1A in a patient with profound multiple S Mu.p Hpaovrltoevdi cboyv 0a0: 0N6o4ne2.0 M3. Simandlová: None. Z. Slámová: None. J. Drábová: disabilities and severe epilepsy None. M. Hrdlička: None. Z. Sedláček: None. S. Grotto1, C. Vanhulle2, F. Chevallier-Hélas1, L. Guyant-Maréchal1,3, P. Saugier-Veber1,4, C. Blondeau3, T. Frebourg1,4, P. Chambon1, A. Goldenberg1; 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Department of Neonatology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Department of Neurology, 
P05 .013 Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 4Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute 1q44 microdeletion in a Czech boy for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, Rouen, France. M. Simandlova1, M. Havlovicová1, M. Hančárová1, J. Drábová1, Z. Slámová1, M. Kynčl2, Z. Peřinová3, Z. Sedláček1; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of SCN1A haploinsufficiency is associated with Dravet syndrome. We report a Radiology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, microdeletion involving SCN1A in a patient with profound handicap. After Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles uneventfully first months of life, the proband presented at 4 months febrile University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. seizures after a vaccination. Examination showed hypotonia and poor eye contact. In the following weeks, he presented recurrent febrile or afebrile seizures and his neurological status deteriorated with loss of eye contact, The 1q44 microdeletion syndrome is a newly described syndrome first re- worsening hypotonia, stagnation of development. EEG, initially normal, ported by De Vries et al (2001). It is associated with facial dysmorphism, were severely modified after several months. Epilepsy was refractory to developmental delay (in particular delay of expressive speech), seizures drugs. Different types of seizures were reported : generalized, partial, myo- and hypotonia. The most common facial features include microcephaly, clonic, absences, status epilepticus. Seizures were mostly provoked by slight hypertelorism and thin upper lip. Abnormal corpus callosum (agenesis, hyperthermia. At 20 years, he was unable to sit without support, had no eye hypogenesis or slightly reduced thickness) is observed in some affected contact, expressed no words, had dysmorphic facial features, microcephaly. patients. Our patient is a 6-year-old boy with a de novo deletion of 1q44 He underwent vertebral arthrodesis and gastrostomy. Array-CGH analysis of about 800 kb (242,951,908-243,763,883, hg18). He was born from the identified a 3.2Mb de novo deletion at 2q24.3 involving SCN1A and 11 adja- 3rd pregnancy (two previous pregnancies ended by spontaneous abortion). cent genes. The proband presented several criteria of Dravet syndrome : The psychomotor development of the boy is delayed (sitting at 12 months, onset in the first year of life, frequent and intractable seizures of different walking attended by both hands from 18 months, unattended at 3 years, he types, febrile seizures, but his cognitive impairment was more severe than understands simple sentences but does not speak understandable words). that commonly associated with this disease. 2q24.3 deletions are rare and He suffers from seizures developed at the age of 2 years (first two seizures mostly much larger and are associated with profound disability. The severi- were during fever, since 3 years of age the seizures are short, with wrapping ty of the clinical presentation in this patient shows that haploinsufficiency up and turning blue in the face). MRI showed normal corpus callosum, but of other genes on 2q24.3 contributes to the profound disability associated small changes in white matter. The deletion of our patient is one of the shor- to 2q24.3 deletions. This observation shows that 2q24.3 deletions should be test published so far, affecting only 5 genes (FAM36A/COX20, NCRNA00201, considered in patients presenting severe handicap associated with febrile HNRNPU, EFCAB2 and a part of KIF26B), and his clinical picture helps to s Se.i zGurroetsto, a: Nkoeyne f.e Cat.u Vraen ohfu Dllera: vNeotn sey.n Fd. rCohmevea.llier-Hélas: None. L. Guyant- define the phenotypic spectrum of the syndrome. Supported by CHERISH, Maréchal: None. P. Saugier-Veber: None. C. Blondeau: None. T. Frebourg: N MT. /
S1 im42a0n0d laonvda :0 N0o0n6e4. 2M0.3 H.avlovicová: None. M. Hančárová: None. J. None. P. Chambon: None. A. Goldenberg: None. Drábová: None. Z. Slámová: None. M. Kynčl: None. Z. Peřinová: None. Z. Sedláček: None. 
P05 .016 2.5 Mb Deletion of 3p25.3 
P05 .014 K. Najafi1,2, K. Najafi1,2, G. Abassi1, B. Bozorgmehr1, A. Moshtagh1, A. Kariminejad1, M. Fulminant Hepatic Failure associated with Phelan McDermid Kariminejad1, R. Kariminejad1; syndrome 1Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Shahrak Gharb, Tehran, Islamic R. Pourová, P. Hedvičáková, J. Drábová, M. Simandlová, Š. Vejvalková, M. Malíková, D. Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Novotná; University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. A 6 years old girl with severe mental retardation was referred to our gene- tics lab. The first and only child of non- consanguineous healthy parents, Phelan McDermid syndrome is caused by 22q13.3 deletion and its typical she was delivered at age of 9 months by C-section. Her birth weight was 255 features are severe intellectual disability, absent or poor speech develop- grams. At examination she does not walk or crawl. She had seizures when ment, decreased pain-sensitivity, hypotonia and mild facial dysmorphism. she was 2 months. Her facial features include epicanthal folds, puffiness of The syndrome could also comprise autistic features, seizures or thermore- eyelids, strabismus, arched eyebrows, synophris, short upturned nose and gulation problems. Rare symtoms are hearing loss, genitourinary anomalies long philtrum . She had notable hirsutism on her chin, forehead and legs. and congenital heart defect. Extremely rare is association of Phelan McDer- Her karyotype was normal. Whole genome BAC Array Comparative Genomic mid syndrome and hepatic failure in earElyS cHhiGldh 2o0od1. 3Th |e PreA hRavISe ,b FeeRnA dNe-CEH | yWbrWidizWat.iEonS wHaGs .pOerRfoGrmed using CYTOCHIP genomic BAC array ve 1rs 5io 9nABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 3.0 and AGILENT 4x44 whole genome array. Data were analysed using Blue- the 17p12-11.2 region was detected. This chromosomal region contains se- Fuse Multi software. A 2.5 Mb deletion of 3p25.3p25.3 was detected. veral important genes, including the dosage-sensitive RAI1 gene, suggesting The deletion spans nucleotides 8.85 Mb to 11.3 Mb covering 23 OMIM ge- the recently described Potocki-Lupski syndrome. nes and 7 OMIM diseases. We compare phenotypic and genotypic findings Our ongoing study demonstrates that aCGH is very useful in precisely iden- of other overlapping cases. The deleted region in our patient includes the tifying and characterizing chromosome anomalies (previously detected or SRGA
P3 /MEGAP gene that has been formerly implicated in cognitive im- not by conventional cytogenetics), being a valuable tool for providing an ac- p Ka.i rNmajeanfit: iNno 3npe .m Ki.c Nroadjaefile: tNioonne s.y Gn.d Arobmases ib: uNto dnoee. sB n. Boto iznocrlgumdee hCrA: V3 gene. cGu.r aCtaer ddoiasg: nNoosnise .a Vn.d P hlaeilapsfuu:l Ngeonnee.t iVc. cCoeulnmsaerlein: gN oton eth. De .f aOmchiliya.na: None. G. None. A. Moshtagh: None. A. Kariminejad: None. M. Kariminejad: None. R. Motei: None. M. Stoian: None. Kariminejad: None. 
P05 .019 
P05 .017 Submicroscopic abnormalities in a girl with mental retardation and A pure de novo duplication of 9p in a woman with intellectual dysmorphic findings revealed by aCGH analysis disability and dysmorphic features Y. K. Terzi1, F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz Celik1, I. Erol2; A. Cieślikowska1, M. Kucharczyk1, M. Kugaudo2, M. Pelc1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, K. 1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Chrzanowska1; Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatric Neurology, 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Ankara, Turkey. Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Specific copy number variations (CNVs) have been found to be associated with susceptibility to various intellectual and developmental disorders. One Duplication of 9p is a fairly well-described syndrome. In spite of the varia- of those is mental retardation (MR) with developmental delay with an esti- tions in the size of the duplicated segment, its phenotype is clinically reco- mated prevalence of 2-3% in the general population. Application of array gnizable. comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) techniques to clinical practice, However, there are some reported cases with relatively mild phenotype, wi- unraveled genetic aberration in MR patients with normal constitutional ka- thout intellectual disability. Due to phenotypic heterogeneity it is essential ryotype. Here we report a five-year-old girl with mental and motor retarda- to present detailed phenotype description to delineate a critical region for tion, epilepsy, and dysmorphic findings with normal constitutional karyo- the 9p duplication syndrome. type. To determine the genetic contribution in the development of clinical We report on a 20-year-old woman with pure de novo 9p duplication. She findings, aCGH analysis was performed. Roche NimbleGen Human CGH ISCA was referred to the genetic counseling unit because of intellectual disabili- Plus 3x1.4M Array was used for aCGH analysis. The data were analyzed by ty and dysmorphic facial features. Moreover hypotonia in early childhood, using Nexus6 software (BioDiscovery). As a result of aCGH analysis, 5 chro- short stature, scoliosis and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism were noted. mosomal regions were marked as important regions. AmoPnTg CtHheDs1e regions, The diagnosis of duplication was established by MLPA and delineated by one of them has been found to be related with autism spectrum disorder arrayCGH as 46,XX.arr cgh 9p13.1-pter(199,254-38,751,949)x3 dn with the and intellectual disability, previously. Microdeletion in the locus on size of 38.55 Mb. Our report is one of the few ones giving the molecular Xp22.11 has been has been found iPnT aCuHtiDs1m spectrum patients but not in he- and clinical characteristics of pure 9p duplication. In the literature there are alty controls. However, we found a 24.3kb copy gain in the same locus in our some suggestions concerning the critical regions and phenotype-genotype patient. This finding showed that locus may not be disrupted with correlation. However, the genes influencing the individual clinical manife- deletion only, copy gain in that region might also have effect on the gene, and stations of the 9p duplication have not yet been identified. its function. Also, other identified copy gains and loss may have contributed There is the need for further studies of 9p duplication patients to establish to the accompanying dysmorphic findings. As we experienced in the current precise genotype-phenotype correlations in this chromosomal region. patient, array CGH analysis is a valuable tool in uncovering submicroscopic The study was supported by MNiSW Grant No. 0605/B/
P01 /2009/37. Ac- c Yh.Kro. mTeorszoi:m Naoln ree. aFr.rI.a Snagheimn:e Nnotsn.e. Z. Yilmaz Celik: None. I. Erol: None. quiring of the Roche NimbleGen microarray platform was co-financed by E AR. DCFie pśrliokjoewcts (kEaU: N Sotnruec. tMu.r Kalu Fcuhnadrcsz)y PkO: INGo.n0e2.. 0M1. .0K0u-g1a4u-d0o5:9 N/o0n9e.. M. Pelc: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. 
P05 .020 Novel changes in the SL
C16 A2 gene identified by X-exome sequencing in two Finnish families with Allan-Herndon Dudley syndrome. 
P05 .018 A. K. Philips1, M. Arvio2, H. Kääriäinen3, H. Van Esch4, S. Haas5, V. Kalscheuer5, G. Froyen6, Implementation of array comparative hybridization technology in I. Järvelä1; detection of chromosomal abnormalities in patients with intellectual 1Department Of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Child Neurology, disability Päijät-Häme Central Hospital, Lahti, Finland, 3National Institute for Health and Welfare, G. Cardos1, V. Plaiasu2, V. Celmare1, D. Ochiana2, G. Motei2, M. Stoian1; Helsinki, Finland, 4Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department 1Personal Genetics-Medical Genetics Center, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetics Department - of Human Molecular Genetics,Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania. Germany, 6Human Genome Laboratory, Dept Of Human Genetics,VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) technology is a power- ful tool for simultaneous detection of multiple chromosomal abnormalities Background: Allan-Herndon-Dudley Syndrome (AHDS) is typically characte- with much higher resolution than conventional cytogenetics. rized by severe psychomotor impairment. Mutations in the TH transporter The aim of our study has been to implement the aCGH technology in detec- gene, SL
C16 A2 (also known as MCT8) have been associated with the AHDS tion of postnatal chromosomal abnormalities in patients with developmen- in more than 45 families. SL
C16 A2 is an essential TH transporter involved tal delay/intellectual disabilities, with/without congenital anomalies (DD/ in the transport of TH across the blood-brain barrier and the blood-cerebro- ID/CA). spinal fluid barrier. Seven patients with DD/ID/CA and dysmorphic features, aged between 1 Methods: We performed Agilent SureSelect enrichment of all X chromosome to 14 years, previously assessed by conventional cytogenetic analysis, were specific exons from the index patients, followed by massively parallel se- included in aCGH analysis with NimbleGen ISCA Plus 3x1.4M Platform (Ro- quencing. All variants were filtered against the publicly available database. che). Results: We identified a 5bp insertion in exon 3 of SL
C16 A2 gene in family The aCGH analysis detected clinically relevant chromosomal abnormalities D299, which likely caused a frameshift mutation (p.G334PfsX11). In family in three of the patients analyzed, with relevant abnormal phenotype. 
L107  we identified a C>A missense change (p.R445C) in exon 4. Both chan- For the first patient, the aCGH analysis precisely characterized the marker ges completely segregated with clinical phenotype in the families they were chromosome found by conventional cytogenetic analysis (karyotype: 46,XX found and were not present in 100 anonymous Finnish controls. Affected der (8)), a duplication of 30 Mb being involved (8q13.3-q22.3 regions). patients in both families suffered from severe intellectual disability, impai- In the second patient case, a boy of 3 year old with DD/ID, obesity (karyoty- red speech, poor head control & movement disorders. pe: 46,XY,t(6;12)dn), the aCGH analysis identified a 6 Mb deletion on chro- Conclusions: The novel mutations in SL
C16 A2 confirm the diagnosis of Al- mosome 6 (6q16.1-q16.2-q16.3 regions), with pathogenic significance. lan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome and represent, to the best of our knowledge, In the third case patient, a boy aged 14 with DD/ID, facial dysmorphism and t Ah.eK f.i rPshti mliposl:e Ncuolnaer.l yM c. oAnrfviirom: Nedo ncea.s Hes. Kinä äthrieä iFniennn:i sNho npeo.p Hu.l aVtaionn E.sch: s1k6el0etal abnormalities (normal karyotype) a micrEoSduHpGlic a2ti0on1 3of 
|1  P.9A MRbI Sin, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index None. S. Haas: None. V. Kalscheuer: None. G. Froyen: None. I. Järvelä: None. oPfa Mtieenditcsa al nGden Meteitchs ohdass been transformative, allowing genome-wide studies in patients with ID. de novo 
P05 .021 Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome: increased serum triiodothyronine In this work we report a deletion at 6q25.3 citoband in a patient (T3) is a key diagnostic marker with hirsutism, sparse and coarse hair, coarse face, bushy eyebrows, squint, A. Riess1, J. Kohlhase2, U. Grasshoff1, M. Schöning3, O. H. Riess1, A. Tzschach1; bulbous nose, large mouth, thin upper lip, short stature, brachydactyly, um- 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Center for Human Genetics, Freiburg,, Germany, 3Childrens Hospital, University of Tuebingen, bilical hernia, borderline hepatosplenomegaly (on US). Tuebingen, Germany. The alteration was determined by aCGH analysis (Agilent 180K custom ar- rRaeys)u alntsd a tnhde ccoonnfcirlumsaiotinon studies and inheritance analysis was carried out by qPCR using a fdrea gnmoveont designed inside the altered region. Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS) is an X-linked intellectual disabili- ty syndrome caused by mutations in SL
C16 A2 which encodes the monocarb- aCGH revealed a 2.7 Mb deletion at chromosome region 6q25.3 con- oxylate thyroid hormone transporter 8 (MCT8). Clinically, the affected male taining 14 genes. This region was found to be deleted in patients with deve- patients are characterized by severe intellectual disability, initial hypotonia lopment delay, microcephaly, dysmorphic features and heaAriRnIgD l1oBs s together with subsequent spastic paraplegia, dystonic posturing and superimposed with sacral/anorectal malformations (Nagamani S. et al, 2009; Titomanlio paroxysmal dyskinesia. The patients typically have elongated faces, but L. et al, 2006). Among the genes affected in the patient, (AT-RICH other dysmorphic features are less consistent. Leukodystrophy and white INTERACTION DOMAIN-CONTAINIANRGI D
P1 RBO TEIN 1B) was recently found to matter changes are present in early childhood and improve with age. The be mutated in Coffin-Siris syndrome patients. The authors also described most specific laboratory finding in AHDS patients is an increase of serum copy number variations affecting gene to be associated with the triiodothyronine (T3), while serum thyroxine (T4) is decreased and thyroid- syndrome (Santem GW, et al, 2012). Siris syndrome and the intellectAuRaIl Da1nBd stimulating hormone (TSH) is either normal or mildly increased. speech impairment also featured in the syndrome. Our patient brings new We report on a 17-year old patient with severe intellectual disability and insight to the delineation of the 6q25 microdeletion syndrome and neurological problems in whom increased serum T3 led us to suspect AHDS h Fa. pLloopinessu: fNfiocnieen. Mcy. iBna Crbooffsina:- SNiroinse s. yGn.d Srooamrees.: None. S. Sousa: None. T. Temudo: None. C. Gomes: None. P. Maciel: None. which was confirmed by the detection of a SL
C16 A2 mutation (c.812G>A, p A.R. R27ie1sHs:) .None. J. Kohlhase: None. U. Grasshoff: None. M. Schöning: None. O.H. Riess: None. A. Tzschach: None. 
P05 .024 Chromosome Xq11.23 deletion of 846 kb in a 2,5-years old 
P05 .022 developmentally delayed boy with agammaglobulinemia Alstrom syndrome: two brothers with two heterozygous ALM
S1  D. Ilencikova1, M. Hikkelova2, A. Soltysova3, Z. Kukova1, A. Hlavata1, L. Kovacs1; 1II. Pediatric Department of Children University Hospital, Comenius University, mutations (Y1571X AND 
L1423 X) Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Gendiagnostica, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Laboratory of G. Pi1, J. Marshall2, M. Ortiz1, A. Zuñiga1; Genetics, Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia. 1Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain, 2The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States. We present a 2,5 years old male from orphanage, examined at the age of 11 months for developmental delay and frequent bronchitis. The boy is the first Alstrom syndrome (AS, #203800) is a rare autosomal recessive disease cha- child of a healthy, consanguineous couple. His cousin died at the age of 3 racterized by multiorgan dysfunction. The key features are childhood obesi- years and was mentally retarded with immunodeficiency. He was delivered ty, blindness due to congenital retinal dystrophy, and sensorineural hearing at 37 weeks of gestation, birth weight of 2700 g (pc=25th), length of 48 cm loss. Associated endocrinologic features include hyperinsulinemia, early- (pc=50th) with normocephaly. Clinical evaluation revealed: short stature ( - onset type 2 diabetes, and hypertriglyceridemia. ThAuLsM, SA1S shares several 4,2 SDS), hypotonia, hypotrophy, pectus excavatum, alopecia areata occipital, features with the common metabolic syndrome, namely obesity, hyperinsu- ventricular septal defect, congenital glaucoma, hypacusis mixta, CD19 nega- linemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. Mutations in the gene have been tive agammaglobulinemia. Development milestones were delayed, he was found to be cau sative for AS. ALM
S1  protein localizes to the basal bodies of lying in bed. For epilepsy and feeding problems we performed screening for cilia and plays an unknown role in intracellular trafficking. metabolic disorders, but results were negative. Cerebral MRI was normal. CASE REPORT:We describe the case of two brothers of 13-year-old (male) The aCGH-chip 44 Oligo Microarray Agilent detected a deletion on chr X: and 11-year-old (female) born to unrelated healthy spanish parents. Both 48.635.654-49.481.774 bp 846kb, Xp11.23. Fourty four genes are located in patients were attended in the Paediatric Service with a diagnosis of Alstrom the deleted region including PQB
P1  and SYP, which may be good candidates syndrome. Boy had hypothyroidism, acanthosis nigricans and hepatosple- in generating the phenotype. The PQB
P1 caused Renpenning syndrome, an nomegaly. He had normoacusia in the limit. The child also gave a history of X-linked mental retardation syndrome with clinically recognizable features photophobia with nystagmus along with 100% visual disability. The patient in our patient. The SYP is involved in regulation of gene for Wiskott-Aldrich also had secondary metabolic myopathy which involved the proximal mus- s Dy.n Idlernocmikeo.va: None. M. Hikkelova: None. A. Soltysova: None. Z. Kukova: cles and kyphosis. Girl had hypothyroidism, dyslipemia, hypoacusia and di- None. A. Hlavata: None. L. Kovacs: None. lated caridomiopathy. As her brother, she was blind (100%) and had a histo- ry of photophobia with nistaAgLmMuSs1. B oth brothers had a progressive cronic nephropathy and central obesity. Genetic analysis showed that both were carriers of two heterozygous mutations: c.5145T>G; p.Tyr1715X and 
P05 .025 c.4268T>A; p.Leu1423X. Both mutations cause a truncated protein and had Array-CGH study of chromosomal rearrangements in patients with been described previously in literature. Diagnosis of Alstrom Syndrome can intellectual disability from Russia and Ukraine be difficult because some features begin at birth and others emerge as the N. V. Hryshchenko1, N. A. Skryabin2, A. A. Kashevarova2, L. A. Livshits1, I. N. Lebedev2; cGh.i lPdi :d Nevoenleo. pJs. Manadrs phhaelln: oNtoynpee. iMs .f aOmrtiizly: -Ndoenpee.n Ad.e Znut.ñiga: None. 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. 
P05 .023 This research is an extension of the chromosomal rearrangements study in 6q25.3 deletion encompassing ARID1B in a patient with intellectual patients with intellectual disability (ID), which was supported by EC FP-7 disability and aggressive behavior CHERISH project (no. 223692). The previously obtained results based on F. Lopes1, M. Barbosa2, G. Soares2, S. Sousa1, T. Temudo3, C. Gomes1, P. Maciel1; array-CGH screening revealed pathogenic causative CNVs in 15.8% of pati- 1Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, University ents with ID (9 of 57). Thereby the high information content of array-CGH of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 2Center for Medical Genetics Dr. Jacinto Magalhães, National Health Institute Dr Ricardo Jorge, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Pediatria, Hospital Geral for identification of genomic rearrangements associated with ID has been de St. António, Porto, Portugal. proved. As far as the majority of identified chromosomal deletions and du- plications were benign (non-pathogenic) CNVs, it is important to distinguish Introduction common CNVs in the observed groups. Therefore we initiated a molecular cytogenetic study in ID-patients of two similar ethnic groups (Slavic Russian Intellectual disability (ID) is one of the most frequent and disabling neu- and Ukrainian populations). rological impairments in school-age children, accounting for 1-3% of the The first data of array CGH analysis showed that the most frequent CNVs population in the developed countries. TE hS e H imG pa 2 ct0 o1 f 3 aC | G P HA inR tI hS e, pF rR acA ticN e CEi n| WouWr gWrou.EpsS wHeGre. OduRpG8p11.23-p11.22, dup/del15q11.2 and dup6p2116.312.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .029 ATRX duplication syndrome: two overlapping duplications at Xq13.3- The high frequency of these rearrangements suggests that they are benign, q21.1 but this hypothesis needs to be verified. In contrast, rare probably pathoge- F. Martinez, M. Rosello, S. Mayo, S. Monfort, S. J. Oltra, C. Orellana; nic chromosomal rearrangements have been also detected in both groups of Fundacion para la Investigacion, Valencia, Spain. patients, some of which are identical in patients from Russia and Ukraine. Further research will allow us to define the role of novel CNVs in the ID-phe- notype manifestation, and determine the frequency of common pathogenic In two unrelated male patients with syndromic intellectual disability (ID) as well as non-pathogenic rearrangements in both populations. we detected two duplications of 12 and 18 Mb, respectively, by array-CGH. The results of this study will significantly improve information content of The common overlapping interval spans 6Mb at Xq13.3-q21.1, where only molecular cytogenetic screening based on array-CGH in ID-patients from 25 genes are annotated. Interestingly, both patients also share many clini- o Nu.rV .c Hourynsthricehse.nko: None. N.A. Skryabin: None. A.A. Kashevarova: None. L.A. cal features, suggesting a major role for any of the genes contained in the Livshits: None. I.N. Lebedev: None. common interval. Among these, the most outstanding is ATRX, the causative gene of X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome, one of the growing list of genes implied in chromatin remodeling causing ID: MEC
P2 , 
P05 .026 CBP, RSK2, NSD1, etc. Many of these genes, especially MEC
P2 , which closely A small de novo 16q24.1 duplication in a woman with severe clinical interacts with ATRX, are dose-sensitive so that not only haploinsufficiency features mutations, but also duplications are related with syndromic ID. S. Redon1,2, C. Bénech3,1, S. Audebert-Bellanger2, G. Friocourt1, M. Planes2, P. Parent2, C. Among the clinical features, both patients share severe ID, absent expressi- Férec1,2,3; ve speech, early hypotonia, behavioral problems (hyperactivity, repetitive 1INSERM U1078, Brest, France, 2CHRU, Brest, France, 3EFS, Brest, France. self-stimulatory behavior), postnatal growth deficiency,microcephaly,micr ognathia, cryptorchidism and several dysmorphic features such as low-set posteriorly rotated ears or downslanting palpebral fissures. These features We report here a de novo 16q24.1 interstitial duplication in a woman with strikingly resemble the usual findings among patients with loss-of-function a severe phenotype consistent with mental retardation, spastic paraplegia, mutations of this gene. Furthermore, only one of the carrier mothers of our severe epilepsy, a narrow and arched palate, malar hypoplasia, little sub- patients was informative in the analysis of X-chromosome inactivation, and cutaneous fat and arachnodactyly. Although conventional karyotyping was she showed a completely skewed X-chromosome inactivation. This is a con- found to be normal, array-CGH detected a small duplication on chromosome stant finding among female carriers of inactivating point mutations of this 16. Using QFM-PCR, we characterised its proximal and distal breakpoints. gene. Taken all together, although the implication of further genes cannot be The duplication, which is approximately 250 kb, encompasses seven genes excluded, we propose that the increased dosage of ATRX is the major patho- (KIAA0182, GIN
S2 , c16orf74, COX4NB, COX4I1, MIR1910 and IRF8). Several genic mechanism of this X-linked phenotype, a duplication syndrome that reports have previously described large 16q duplications, and some of these e Fv. oMkaerst itnheazt: oNfo MneE.C MP.2 R.osello: None. S. Mayo: None. S. Monfort: None. S.J. overlap with our region in 16q24.1. Oltra: None. C. Orellana: None. Due to the variability of the described phenotypes, the characterisation of small 16q duplications may help to determine critical regions and the genes they contain that are associated with the components of complex pheno- 
P05 .030 t Sy.p Rese.don: None. C. Bénech: None. S. Audebert-Bellanger: None. G. Custom designed CGH array in autism spectrum disorders Friocourt: None. M. Planes: None. P. Parent: None. C. Férec: None. C. Orellana, M. Roselló, S. Monfort, S. Mayo, S. Oltra, F. Martinez; Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. 
P05 .028 New insights on cognitive and structural brain imaging phenotype in Introduction: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have a complex multifac- primary microcephaly due to ASPM mutations torial etilogy. Recently, copy number variants (CNV’s) have been shown S. Passemard1,2,3, M. Schaer4, M. Laurent5, K. Hernandez1, O. Boespflug Tanguy6, T. to contribute to over 10% of ASD cases. Many of the known genes whose Billette de Villemeur7, B. Isidor8, B. Gérard1,9, M. Elmaleh10, P. Gressens2,3, S. Eliez4, A. mutations cause ASD, have functions related to epigenetic regulation. We Verloes1,2,3; have applied a custom-designed oligo array CGH with an exonic overlapping 1Département de Génétique, hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Inserm U676, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Diderot Paris7, Paris, France, coverage of 450 genes known to cause autism or intellectual disability and 4Office Médico Pédagogique, Université de Genève, Genève, Switzerland, 5Service de autism candidate genes related to epigenetic machinery. Psychopathologie, hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Service de neuropédiatrie, Material and methods: Custom oligonucleotide arrays (formats 4x44 and hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 7Service de neuropédiatrie, hopital Trousseau, 8x60) were designed with e-Array Agilent technology. The final array design Paris, France, 8Département de Génétique, hopital Mère Enfant, chu Nantes, Nantes, contains: 36,000 exonic probes for 450 genes considered of high priority France, 9Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique. CHU de Strasbourg - Nouvel Hôpital Civil, (mean distance between probes 25bp), 2,000 probes for regulatory ele- Strasbourg, France, 10Service de radiopédiatrie, hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France. ments and microRNA’s and 22,000 whole genome probes (backbone). Results: We have studied a series of 139 patients including syndromic au- tism and/or familial cases of idiopathic autism. We have found 24 cases with Primary recessive microcephaly (MCPH) caused by ASPM mutations is a pathological CNV’s. Most are non-recurrent CNV, what allow us to propose model of abnormal brain development linked to neural progenitors prolife- new candidate genes involved in autism. ration defects. MCPH is defined as a homogenous reduction of cerebral volu- Discussion: Our results confirm the importance of three regions in autism: me principally affecting the cortex. The reduction of brain volume has been Xq28 (MEC
P2 ), 22q13 (SHANK3) and 16q13, while all others regions are correlated to cognitive disabilities. However, correlation between cognitive extremely heterogeneous. Most pathological CNV were found in cases with functions and structural brain phenotype has not yet been well established s Cy.n Odrreolmlainca a: uNtoisnme.. M. Roselló: None. S. Monfort: None. S. Mayo: None. S. in genetic microcephalies. Oltra: None. F. Martinez: None. Here, we provide evidence that specific cognitive functions are preserved in ASPM-related patients and this is correlated with their structural brain changes. General intelligence, memory scales and structural brain magnetic 
P05 .031 resonance imaging scans were acquired from 6 ASPM-related patients. The 15q11.2 deletion and autism spectrum disorders Using cranial MRI, we measured the volume of the different brain structures V. De Wolf, H. Peeters, K. Devriendt; and focused on the analyze of the cortical volume, surface and thickness. KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. These microcephalic patients have a normal mnesic functioning and preser- ved hippocampal volume compared to other cortical areas. Unlike most previous data that linked microcephaly to mental retardation, Autism Spectrumd eD nisoovroders (ASDs) are frequent genetic neurodevelopmen- these findings suggest i) that these microcephalic ASPM-related patients are tal disorders. Several studies have shown tChYeF IaPs1so, NciIaPtAio1n, NoIfP CAo2py NuTmUBbeGr- able to learn despite their cognitive disabilities and ii) that other master VCPar5iations, both and rare inherited, with ASD. Deletions of chromo- g m Se .an Pte iaos s nt s h aea nmn da A frudS n:P cNM toi ona ner ..e M n . e Sc ce hs asa er r:y N fo onr et .h Me . d Le av ue rl eo np tm : Ne on nt eo . f K h . i Hp ep ro nc aa nm dep zu :s for- som ,e a 1 re5C q aY1 sF s1I o.
P2  c1 i( aB teP d1 - wB iP t2 h r ineg teio lln e) c ti un ac ll u dd isin ag b ility, epilepsy, schizoF pM ha rnR ed1 n ia and None. O. Boespflug Tanguy: None. T. Billette de Villemeur: None. B. Isidor: None. B. Gérard: None. M. Elmaleh: None. P. Gressens: None. S. Eliez: autism. is an important binding partner of FMRP and muta- None. A. Verloes: None. tions cause Fragile X syndrome, often associated with autism (30%). Also, 162 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRpAatNienCtEs w| iWth WtheW P.rEaSdeHr-GW.iOlliR pGhenotype caused by paternal deletions of the 15q11-13 B
P1 -B
P3  region present a more severe behavioral phenotypeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (ADHD, autism and OCD) compared to those having the B
P2 -B
P3  deletion. morphology in rat neurons. The detected mutation completely removes part Together, this pinpoints the 15q11.2 deleted region as a risk variant for of the central α-helical coiled coil domain and the two functional C-terminal ASD. CYFI
P1  metal-bindingC mLIoPt-i1fs, disturbing CLIP-170 intramolecular conformational Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction is used to test the oc- changes and its interaction with other proteins. In order to prove the in- currence of deletions of in ASD patients with intellectual disability volvement of in neurodevelopmental disorders, we studied mutant (IQ<70), ASD patients with normal intelligence (IQ>70) and controls. We and normal established lymphoblastoid and skin fibroblast cell lines. Re- also performed exome sequencing on two ASD famCYilFieIPs1 with the proband verse transcriptase PCR confirmed the stop codon in all of the mutant cell carrying the del15q11.2, inherited from a normal parent. lines. Western blotting with antibodies against the N-terminus of CLIP-170 We present the results of an association study of deletions in ASD revealed a truncated protein in affected individuals’ cell lines; while a C- patients. Given the variability of the phenotype of del15q11.2, we hypothe- terminal-specific antibody didn’t detect any protCeLinIP. -I1mmunofluorescence size that additional variants in the other allele, genes of the FMRP network microscopy experiments confirmed the Western blot data, showing micro- or known ASD genes can contribute to the phenotype (multi-hit model). We tubule plus-end staining in wild type and mutant fibroblasts with N- present the results of exome sequencing of two ASD families, searching for terminal-specific antibodies, whereas C-terminal-specific CLIP-170 antibo- additional hits. dy just showed sCtaLiInPi-n1g(C iLnI Pn-o1r7m0a)l fibroblasts. Altogether, our data present The 15q11.2 deletion is likely to be a risk factor for ASD with/without men- the first evidence for the involvement of the CLIP-170 in cognitive function t Va.l Dreet aWrodlaft: iNonon. Ae. mH.u Pltei-ehteitr sm: oNdoenle c. oKu. lDd eevxrpielanidnt :t hNeo npeh.enotypic variability. aFn. dL awrtei: p Nroonpeo.s Ke . Kahrizi: None. L. Masu saa nnotev:e lN goennee. Hfo. rH AuR: NIDo.ne. T. Wienker: None. M. Banan: None. Z. Fattahi: None. N. Bazzazadegan: None. Z. Liu: None. E. Papari: None. H. Ropers: None. N. Galjart: None. H. Najmabadi: None. 
P05 .032 The genetic basis of autism spectrum disorders: identification and analysis of structural variants N. Brison1, S. Iqbal1, W. De la Marche2, J. Steyaert2, I. Noens3, K. Devriendt1, H. Peeters1; 
P05 .034 1Department of Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of De Novo Intragenic Deletion of AUT
S2  in a Patient with Developmental Adolescent and Child Psychiatry, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Parenting Delay: A Case Report and Special Education, K.U.Leuven, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. L. K. McGregor1, A. Jolley2, W. Waters2, S. Brown2, J. Nicholl2, S. Yu2,3; 1South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, Directorate of Genetics and Molecular Background: Pathology, SA Pathology at Women’s and Children’s Hospital, South Australia, Adelaide, Australia, 2Department of Genetic Medicine, Directorate of Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology at Women’s and Children’s Hospital, South Australia, Adelaide, The genetic causes of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are heterogeneous Australia, 3School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, The University of Adelaide, and still unknown in the majority of cases. Structural copy number variants Adelaide, Australia. (CNVs) were found in sufficiently high frequency to suggest that cytogenetic and microarray analyses are considered in routine clinical workup. An inte- AUT
S2  resting paradigm for clinical practice is that each rare CNV may account for Array CGH identified a de novo interstitial deletion of 683-806kb at chro- oMnaltye rai asml aanldl pmroetphoordtsio: n of variance in ASD at the population level but may mosome 7q11.22 involving multiple exons of the gene, in a 1d3e nyoevaor have a large effect in a few families in which it segregates. old male with learningA UdTifSfi2c.u lties, developmental delay, short stature, pto- sis and facial dysmorphism. This is the second report of an isolated CNV association studies are performed in a family based cohort. The sample intragenic deletion of contains 161 families ascertained through one or more autistic probands The proband was referred with a history of proportionate short stature, with normal intelligence or mild intellectual disability. The study cohort hypotonia, delay in speech and fine motor skilldse, pntoovsois and facial dysmor- contains 648 individuals: 227 probands, 324 parents, 97 unaffected siblings phism. Array CGH was performed using the BlueGAnUomTSe2 Cytochip oligo ISCA belonging to 161 families. All probands, unaffected siblings and parents are 8 x 60K array platform. Array CGH revealed a interstitial deletion genotyped with high-resolution Illumina OMNI 2.5-8v1 microarrays. For all at chArUomTSo2s ome 7q11.22 involving exons 3 - 5 of and no other copy Rinedsiuvlitds:uals, an extensive list of phenotypic information is collected inclu- number variants. His parents and unaAffUeTctSe2d brother had no deletion. ding IQ, SRS scores, 3DI, clinical genetic examination and family history. The gene spans 1.19Mb of genomic DNA on chromosome 7 coAnUtaTiSn2s 19 exons. The molecular function of is unknown. Previous publica- We present the results of a family based study on the validity of CNV de- tions describe a number of individuals with disruptions involving tection in ASD using a high resolution platform. We study the segregation who present with developmental dAelUaTy/S 2i ntellectual disability, hypotonia of known and novel rare CNVs with qualitative and quantitative autism and autism. EarlyA cUaTseSs2 all resulted from translocations or inversions which pCohnecnloutsyiopne:s. Additionally association studies are performed with respect to disrupted other genes in addition to and made it difficult to attribute amongst others gene content and parental origin. the phenotype to alone. The patient described in our repoArUt T(aSn2d a re- cent report of another two patients) who have intragenic deletions of AUT
S2  With this study we aim to contribute to the clinical validation of the current with no other CNVs provides strong evidence that disruption of alone k Nn.o Bwrilseodng:e N oof nAeS. DS .r Iiqskb avla: rNiaonnets. Wan. dD teo l ath Me aidrcehnet:i fNicoanteio. nJ .o Sf tneoyvaeelr tv: aNroiannet. sI.. r Le.sKu.l tMsc iGn rae gsyonr:d Nroomnei.c A n.e Juorloledye:v Neolonpem. Wen. Wtaal tdeirsso:r Ndoenr.e. S. Brown: None. J. Noens: None. K. Devriendt: None. H. Peeters: None. Nicholl: None. S. Yu: None. 
P05 .033 
P05 .035 New role for microtubule plus-end tracking proteins: mutation in A comprehensive study on Iranian patients with Bardet-Biedl the CLIP-1 (CLIP-170) gene causes autosomal recessive intellectual syndrome disability (ARID) Z. Fattahi1,2, P. Rostami2, A. Najmabadi3, M. R. Akbari4, A. Kariminejad2; F. Larti1, K. Kahrizi1, L. Musante2, H. Hu2, T. Wienker2, M. Banan1, Z. Fattahi1, N. 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Bazzazadegan1, Z. Liu3, E. Papari1, H. Ropers2, N. Galjart3, H. Najmabadi1; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad - Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3University of California,San Diego, San Diego, CA, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck United States, 4Women’s College Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Cell Biology and Canada. Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare genetic disorder affecting brain with In the context of a comprehensive research project, investigating novel a wide range of phenotypes, including deterioration of the intellect and neu- ARID genes, linkage analysis based on autozygosity mapping helped us to rological functions. BBS is a heterogeneous disorder, typically inherited in identify a new ID locus on Chr.12q24.13-q24.31 (LOD =3.7), in an IrCaLnIPia-n1 an autosomal recessive manner with 16 known genes. family. Next generation sequencing following exon enrichment in this ge- This study was performed to detect responsible genes and mutation spec- nomic interval, detected one nonsense mutation (p.Q1010X) in the trum in a cohort of 23 Iranian BBS patients. Initially, the most commonly gene. This gene encodes a member of microtubule plus-end tracking prote- mutated genes (BB
S1 , BB
S2  and BB
S10 ) accounting for about 50% of BBS ins that specifically associates with the ends of growing microtubules. CLIP- patients were screened by direct Sanger sequencing. Final diagnosis was de- 170 contributes to kinetochore–microtubule attachments, and has a role in termined for 4 patients in BB
S2  gene, including three novel mutations. Next, neuronal development. It is also necessarEyS foHr Gax o2n0 f1or3m |a tPioAnR anISd ,d FenRdAriNte CEt |h rWeeW ofW th.eE rSemHaGin.iOngR pGatients were chosen and whole exome seque1nc6in3gABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index was performed. Coverage of known BBS genes was 97% in average at 20x Three female carriers with random X-inactivation were symptomatic, with depth of coverage. Whole exome sequencing revealed novel BB
S4  mutation one of them having mild intellectual disability and the other two harboring in one patient, and other two patients had no mutations in any of the 16 suggestive craniofacial dysmorphism. Three asymptomatic female carriers known BBS genes. Finally, six other commonly mutated BBS genes (BB
S3 , had a skewed X-inactivation. Thus, X-inactivation, whether random or ske- BB
S4 , BB
S6 , BB
S7 , BB
S9  and BB
S12 ) accounting about 20% of BBS patients, wed, may determine the presence or the absence of mild signs of BFLS in were selected for screening in the remaining 16 patients, which is currently female carriers. underway. However, responsible mutations have been identified for 5 other At the molecular level, two PHF6 mutations had been previously reported patients in BB
S12  and BB
S9  genes, including three novel mutations. and three were novel missense mutations. On the whole, 17 different PHF6 Our result shows that despite the reported high prevalence of BB
S1  and mutations were identified in BFLS patients. BB
S10  mutations in BBS patients of other populations, these two genes may Our data are in line with those of the BFLS literature. This ongoing study will not play an important role in Iranian patients whilst other genes like BB
S2  fIo. cMuasr oeny: n Neounreo.p Rs.y Tcohuorloaginicea: lN pohneen. oF.t yPpriienugr o: fN BoFneL.S A p. aTtoieuntatsin.: None. S. a Zn. dF aBtBtaSh1i2: Nseoneem. Pto. Rhoasvtea am gi:r Neaotneer. rAo.l eN acojmmapbaardiin: gN toon eo.t hMe.rR p. Aopkbualarti:i ons. Blesson: None. M. Raynaud: None. P. Edery: None. J. Roume: None. V. Des None. A. Kariminejad: None. Portes: None. D. Héron: None. 
P05 .036 
P05 .038 Diagnosis and management of Bohring-Opitz Syndrome with or Mutations in TUBG1 and the MT-dependent Motor Proteins DYN
C1 H1, without ASX
L1  mutations KIF5C and KIF2A Cause Malformations of Cortical Development and J. M. Graham1, B. Russell2, J. Johnston3, L. Biesecker3; Microcephaly 1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2UCI Medical Center, Los K. POIRIER1, N. Lebrun1, L. Broix1, G. Tian2, Y. Saillour1, C. Boscheron3, E. Parrini4, S. Angeles, CA, United States, 3National Human Genome Research Institute NIH, Bethesda, Valence1, D. Lacombe5, D. Geneviève6, E. Fontana7, F. Darra7, C. Cances8, M. Barth9, D. MD, United States. Bonneau9, B. Dalla Bernadina7, S. N’Guyen10, C. Gitiaux1, P. Parent11, V. des Portes12, J. Pedespan13, P. Nitschke14, T. Hieu14, C. Masson15, D. Zelenika16, A. Andrieux17, F. Francis18, R. Guerrini4, N. Cowan19, N. Bahi- Buisson1, J. Chelly1; 1Institut Cochin; Université Paris Descartes; CNRS (UMR 8104); Paris, France. We define the characteristic features and management for Bohring-Opitz Inserm, U1016, Paris, Fr, Paris, France, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Syndrome (BOS), a rare genetic condition characterized by distinctive facial Pharmacology, New York University Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, NY, NY, United features, characteristic posture, microcephaly, severee ti natle.llectual didsaeb niolivtoy States, 3Institut des Neurosciences, Inserm, U836, Université Joseph Fourier – Grenoble and feeding problems. SiAnScXeL b1eing initially delineated in 1999, there are now 1, France, Grenoble, France, 4Pediatric Neurology Unit and Laboratories, Children‘s approximately 30 publAisShXeLd1 c ases. In 2011, Hoischen identified Hospital A. Meyer-University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 5Department of Medical nonsense mAuStXaLti1ons in in 7 out of 13 patients with BOS. Previously, Genetics, CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Université somatic mutations in have been detected in myeloid malignancies, Montpellier 1, INSERM U844, Montpellier, France, 7UOC di Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Azienda Ospedaliera Univesritaria di Verona, Verona, Italy, 8Département de Pédiatrie, suggesting might be involved in tumor suppression. We report natu- CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 9INSERM: U694, Université d‘Angers, Angers, France, ral hdeis ntoorvyo from 3 previously unpubAlSisXhLe1d patients with BOS, including the 10Clinique Médicale Pédiatrique, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 11Unité d‘hémato- first known case of BOS with bilateral Wilms tumors. All 3 patients had no- oncologie Hôpital des Enfants, Brest, France, 12Département de Pédiatrie, Centre vel frameshift mutations in , and 2 patients are normocephalic Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 13Service de Pédiatrie, CHU with varied feeding issues and distinctive personalities (interactive, happy, Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 14Bioinformatics plateform, Université Paris Descartes,, and curious). Surviving patients with BOS may have a risk for tumors, and Paris, France, 15Bioinformatics plateform, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2 previous patients with BOS had neoplasms. One patient with BOS dAiSeXdL a1t 16Centre National de Génotypage (CNG), Evry, France, 17Institut des Neurosciences, Inserm, U836, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France, 18INSERM - Institut du Fer à 5 months with bilateral nephroblastomatosis, and another patient with BOS Moulin, Paris, France, 19Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New developed medulloblastoma at ageA 5S XyLea1rs; neither had mutations in . York University Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, New york, NY, United States. With a malignancy potential for BOS, tumor surveillance should be conside- red in patients with and without mutations for disease monitoring and management. Diagnostic criteria may also need to be broadened to help The genetic causes of malformations of cortical development (MCD) remain iAdSeXnLt1if,y previously undiagnosed cases. We revieAwS XtLh3e,se 3 new cases and largely unknown. Here we report the discovery of multiple disease-causing compare them with previous cases of BOS with and without mutations in missense mutations in TUBG1, DYN
C1 H1 and KIF2A, as well as a single and also with patients with mutations in to broaden diagno- germline mosaic mutation in KIF5C. We find a frequent recurrence of mu- s Jt.iMc .c rGitrearhiaam a:n Nd osnueg.g Be.s Rt au stusemllo: rN sounrev. eJi.l lJaonhcnes ptoront:o Ncoonl.e. L. Biesecker: None. tations in DYN
C1 H1, implying that this gene is a major locus implicated in unexplained MCD. The mutations in KIF5C, KIF2A and DYN
C1 H1 drastically affect ATP hydrolysis, productive protein folding or microtubule binding, 
P05 .037 while suppression of Tubg1 expression in vivo interferes with proper neu- Phenotype of the french cohort of Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann ronal migration and expression of Tubg1 mutations in S. cerevisiae results syndrome in disruption of normal microtubule behaviour. Our data reinforce the im- I. Marey1, R. Touraine2, F. Prieur2, A. Toutain3, S. Blesson3, M. Raynaud4, P. Edery5, J. portance of centrosome- and MT-related proteins in cortical development Roume6, V. Des Portes7, D. Héron1; and strongly suggest that MTdependent mitotic and post-mitotic processes 1Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpetriere, paris, France, 2Service de Génétique,Centre a Kr.e P moairjioerr :c Noonntrei.b Nu.t oLresb rtou nt:h Ne opnaet.h Lo.g Benroeisxi:s N oof nMe.C GD.. Tian: None. Y. Saillour: Hospitalier Universitaire, Saint Etienne, France, 3Service de génétique médicale, None. C. Boscheron: None. E. Parrini: None. S. Valence: None. D. Lacombe: Centre hospitalier Universitaire, Tours, France, 4Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, None. D. Geneviève: None. E. Fontana: None. F. Darra: None. C. Cances: Centre hospitalier Universitaire, Tours, France, 5Service de génétique clinique, Centre None. M. Barth: None. D. Bonneau: None. B. Dalla Bernadina: None. S. hospitalier Universitaire, Lyon, France, 6Service de génétique médicale, Centre N’Guyen: None. C. Gitiaux: None. P. Parent: None. V. des Portes: None. J. hospitalier Intercommunal de Poissy, Poissy, France, 7Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Pedespan: None. P. Nitschke: None. T. Hieu: None. C. Masson: None. D. Centre hospitalier Universitaire Lyon, Lyon, France. Zelenika: None. A. Andrieux: None. F. Francis: None. R. Guerrini: None. N. Cowan: None. N. Bahi- Buisson: None. J. Chelly: None. Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (BFLS) is an X-linked mental retar- dation syndrome first described in 1962. It is characterized by the associati- 
P05 .039 on of intellectual disability, epilepsy, microcephaly, short stature and obesity, Prospective Study of Functional Outcomes in Children with Cerebellar hypogonadism and characteristic craniofacial features. Some heterozygous Atrophy females have mild clinical manifestations of BFLS. A. Al-Maawali, S. Blaser, X. Zhao, G. Yoon; BFLS is caused by mutations in the gene PHF6 whose function is unknown. The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. The encoded protein might play a role in chromatin remodeling, in tran- AIM: scriptional regulation, cell growth and proliferation. . In a National Clinical Research Project on Intellectual Disabilities linked to METHTOo DidSe:n tify clinical and radiological predictors of functional outcome in the X chromosome, we gathered the medical records of 8 french male pati- patients with childhood onset cerebellar atrophy ents with a mutation in PHF6 gene and 7 female carriers within 5 families. Over a period of 5 years, we evaluated 44 patients with confir- In males, intellectual disability, ranging from moderate to severe, characteri- med cerebellar atrophy on MRI. Patients were grouped according to whether stic craniofacial morphology, obesity, gynecomastia and hypogonadism were the cerebellar atrophy was isolated or associated with other radiological constant fetaures. Deafness and hypothyroidism were two frequent features 164 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRaAbnNorCmEa l|i tWiesW. PaWtie.EntSsH wGith.O poRsGterior fossa malformations or non-genetic in our cohort, whilst microcephaly and short stature were less frequent.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index aetiologies of cerebellar atrophy were excluded. MRI (1.5 T) was carried out 9q34.3 duplication we report is the smallest duplication among the cases 73 times on 44 patients. The severity of cerebellar atrophy using qualitati- reported thus far and includes the genes EHMT1 and NELF. The clinical ma- ve and quantitative scoring systems was recorded. Standardized activities nifestations in our patient were similar to those described in other reported of daily living (ADL) assessment was used to characterize the spectrum of cases of larger 9q34 duplications, implying that our small duplication en- fRuEnScUtiLoTnSa:l outcomes. The characteristics of the participants were analyzed compasses a critical region for brain, cardiac and craniofacial development. using descriptive statistics. We also compare our patient with its 9q34 deletion counterpart, Kleefstra We evaluated 44 patients, 26 male and 19 female. The mean age sMyn. Sdraolemh:e ,N aonnde .d Se.m Hoonrsstbruartgeh t:h Ne oonvee.r Mla.p S bheatgwoe: eNno nthee. Htw. Foa cgohnfoduitriyo:n Ns.one. of symptom onset was 20 months (range, birth to 10 years). The isolated cerebellar atrophy group had better functional outcomes compared to those with cerebellar atrophy associated with other radiological abnormalities. 
P05 .042 Age of onset of cerebellar atrophy before 2 years of age, progression of cere- Familial supernumerary chromosome composed of centromeric bellar atrophy on MRI, presence of seizures, and decreased size of transver- and pericentromeric regions of chromosome 8 cosegregating with sCeO cNeCrLeUbeSlIlOarN hSe: misphere diameter were associated with worse functional intellectual disability and psychiatric disorder outcomes. P. Blanchet1, J. Puechberty1, G. Lefort2, D. Cunz-Shadfar3, C. Baeza Velasco1, L. Pinson1, C. We present a prospective study of clinical and radiological Coubes1, J. Chiesa4, S. Taviaux2, D. Geneviève1, M. Willems1; predictors of functional outcome in patients with childhood onset cerebellar 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, atrophy. This information may be useful in the diagnosis and future manage- France, 2Département de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, m Ae. nAtl- oMfa tahwisa clio: mNopnleex. Sg.r oBulaps oerf :d Nisoonred. eXr.s Z.hao: None. G. Yoon: None. France, 3Département de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, Montpellier, France, 4Département de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Caremeau, Nîmes, France. 
P05 .040 We describe three generations of a family showing perfect cosegregation of A new family with SL
C9 A6 mutation expanding the phenotypic intellectual disability and psychiatric disorder with a small pericentromeric spectrum of Christianson syndrome chromosome 8-derived supernumerary chromosome. Two sisters aged 3 A. Masurel-Paulet1, A. Piton2, S. Chancenotte3, C. Redin2, D. Minot1, A. Creppy2,4, M. and 7 years were referred to our Genetics Department for delayed psycho- Ruffier-Bourdet3, C. Thauvin1,5, J. Thevenon1,5, A. Curie6, G. Blanchard6, M. Bonnet3, M. Archimbaud3, J. Mandel2,4, L. Faivre1,5; motor development, intellectual disability, behaviour disorder and autistic 1Centre de génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement et Syndromes spectrum disorder without associated dysmorphism or malformation. They malformatifs, CHU DIJON, France, 2Department of Neurogenetics and Translational are the first and third born from unrelated parents. Their mother had lear- medicine, IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM and University of Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 3Centre ning difficulties in her youth and as an adult suffers from psychiatric disor- Référent des Troubles du Langage et des Apprentissages, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU DIJON, der as well as severe depression and inadequate social behaviour. Their ma- France, 4Laboratoire de Diagnostic génétique, CHU Strasbourg, France, 5EA 4271 GAD, ternal grand-mother presented the same features, with alcohol and benzo- Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6Service de Neurologie diazepin dependence in addition. Molecular investigation for Fragile-X and Pédiatrique, CHU Lyon, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France. Steinert‘s disease, as well as metabolic screening and cerebral MRI, revealed no anomaly. All 4 have a small supernumerary chromosome, discovered on standard blood chromosome analysis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization High-throughput sequencing can broaden the clinical variability associated identified the marker as derived from the centromeric and pericentrome- to a known gene, by sequencing panels of genes in patients with no precise ric regions of chromosome 8. Comparative genomic hybridization array ( clinical diagnosis. From a sSeLrCie9sA o6f 50 patients with undiagnosed ID studied 25kb-resolution) confirmed a 9.1Mb partial trisomy for chromosome 8; The by targeted sequencing of 220 ID-genes, we identified a splicing mutation karyotype is: 47,XX,+der(8)(p11.2q11.21). (c.526-9_526-5del) in the gene in a 9-year-old boy with mild ID, mi- The two maternal half-sisters of the mother and the sister of the two child- crocephaly and social interaction disabilities. This intronic microdeletion ren, who don‘t carry the chromosomal anomaly, have neither ID nor psych- leads to skipping of exon 3 and to an inframe deletioSnL oCf9 2A66 aminoacids in iatric disturbance. There is little concerning this chromosomal anomaly in the TM4 domain. It segregates with cognitive impairment or learning diffi- the literature. Only two patients have been reported, with psychomotor culties in other members of the family. Mutations in have been re- retardation or mild intellectual disability. It is our opinion that that this ported in X-linked Christianson syndrome associating severe to profound supernumerary chromosome is responsible for a phenotype associating in- intellectual deficiency and an Angelman-like phenotype, with microcephaly, tellectual disability and psychiatric disorder without specific facial features absent speech, ataxia with progressive cerebellar atrophy, ophtalmople- n Po. rB mlaanlcfhoermt: aNtoionne.. J. Puechberty: None. G. Lefort: None. D. Cunz-Shadfar: gia, epilepsy, and neurologic regression. Interestingly, the proband and his None. C. Baeza Velasco: None. L. Pinson: None. C. Coubes: None. J. Chiesa: maternal uncle have an attenuated phenotype with mild intellectual disa- None. S. Taviaux: None. D. Geneviève: None. M. Willems: None. bility, attention deficit disorder, speech difficulties, microcephaly and mild asymptomatic cerebellar atrophy. The mutation cosegregated with learning disabilities and speech difficulties in the carrier females (mother and 3 si- 
P05 .043 sters of the proband). Detailed neuropsychological, speech and occupatio- The first familial case with the entire CNKSR2 gene deletion nal therapy investigations revealed a disorder of oral and written language corroborating its involvement in X-linked intellectual disability and acquisition, with dissociation between verbal and performance IQ. An ab- Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) normal phenotype has been described previously in a large proportion of R. HARBUZ, F. BILAN, D. COUET, P. DUMAINE, A. KITZIS, B. GILBERT-DUSSARDIER; carrier females, ranging fSrLoCm9 Ale6arning disability with predominant speech Service de génétique, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France. difficulties to mild intellectual deficiency. In conclusion, besides broadening CNKSR2 the clinical variability of gene mutations, we show an example of a m Ao. Mnoagseunreicl- oPraiuglient :o Nf omnield. Ale. aPrintoinng: Ndoisnaeb. iSli.t yC.hancenotte: None. C. Redin: (Connector enhancer of Kinase Suppressor of Ras 2) is exclusively None. D. Minot: None. A. Creppy: None. M. Ruffier-Bourdet: None. C. Thauvin: None. J. Thevenon: None. A. Curie: None. G. Blanchard: None. M. Bonnet: expressed in adult and fetal brain and encodes CNK2, a protein involved in None. M. Archimbaud: None. J. Mandel: None. L. Faivre: None. signal transduction in mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) Hpoauthgwe aeyt dalo. wMnoslt Sreyanmdr ofrmooml. R20A1
S2 . Until now, this gene has been reported as causing non syndromic intellectual disability only in one sporadic case ( ). We could see two brothers (age of 10 and 11 at 
P05 .041 the moment of investigation) with delayed psychomotor development (they A Novel 0.34 Mb Microduplication of 9q34.3 in a Patient with a could seat at 8-9 months and walk at 2 years of age), with especially seve- Congenital cardiac defects and Learning Disabilities re ADHD and speech delay. Furthermore, the youngest brother developed M. Saleh1, S. Horsburgh2,3, M. Shago1, H. Faghfoury2,3; 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, epilepsy. Physical examination did not show any dysmorphic feature, but ON, Canada, 3University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada. both brothers present flat and large feet and mild joint hyperlaxity. Whole genome oligonucleotide microarray CGH 105K (Agilent TecChNnKoSlRog2ies, Inc. Santa Clara, USA) revealed in both brothers a maternally inherited 513 kb We report a 19- year-old male with a learning disability and congenital deletion on Xp22.12, which removed the entire sequence of . This is heart defects. The patient also had mild dysmorphic features including facial the second observation of CNV affeCcNtinKgS Rth2i,s gene inherited from unaffected asymmetry and mid-facial hypoplasia, high-arched palate with dental crow- carrier mother, and the first familial case. In the previous case, a 234-kb de- ding. Chromosomal microarray analysis demonstrated a 0.34 Mb duplicati- letion, removing the major part of was observed. The main clinical on on 9q34.3, confirmed by FluorescenceE iS nH siG tu 2 H0 yb1 r3 id i| z aP tA ioR n I (S FI, S F HR ). A ThN e CEf e| aWtuWresW in. pEuSbHlisGhe.Od aRnGd present cases are: developmental delay, espe1ci6al5lyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CNKSR2 speech delay, ADHD and epilepsy. Until now, no point mutation in this gene sencephaly (16) (ii) microlissencephaly (10), (iii) central pachygyria (13), has been reported. We suggest that the gene would be analyzed in (iv) polymicrogyria-like cortical dysplasia either diffuse (6), central (11) male patients with non syndromic intellectual deficiency, when associated or multifocal (10) and (v) simplified gyral subtype (7). Dysmorphic basal wRi.t Hh asrebvuezr:e N AoDnHe.D F,. oBnilcaen t:h Neo fnrea.g Dil.e C Xo suyent:d Nroomnee. hP.a Ds ubmeeanin eex:c Nluodneed. .A. Kitzis: ganglia (45; 61.6%) are hallmark of tubulinopathies more visible in central None. B. Gilbert-dussardier: None. pachygyria, polymicrogyria, and simplified gyral malformations. Tubuli- nopathies are also characterized by a high prevalence of corpus callosum agenesis (35.6%), and mild to severe cerebellar hypoplasia and dysplasia 
P05 .044 (79.4%). Foetal cases (23) represent the severe end of the spectrum and Exome sequencing identifies a novel mutation in X-chromosomal gene show specific abnormalities (i.e. enlarged germinative zones, neuronal he- in brothers with congenital hypothyreosis, short stature and mental terotopia and disorganised corticospinal tracts) that provide insights in the retardation understanding of pathophysiology. S. Kivirikko1, E. Salminen1, S. Vanhanen2, K. Aittomäki1; Overlapping phenotypes may exist between tubulinopathies. TUBA1A mu- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, tations account for lissencephaly (15 ; 93.7%), central pachygyria (13 ; 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hyvinkää Hospital, Hyvinkää, Finland. 100%), microlissencephaly (7 ; 70%), but less frequently for PMG (6 ; 22%). By contrast, β-tubulin (TUBB2B, TUBB3B and TUBB5) mutations account for a higher prevalence of polymicrogyria (21;77.8%) and simplified gyral The proband is the 3rd child of healthy non-consanguineous Finnish parents. pattern (7;100%). However, phenotype genotype correlations with specific During pregnancy polyhydramnion was noted. Birth measurements were mNu. Btaathioi-nBsu aisrseo fonu: nNdo.ne. K. Poirier: None. F. Fourniol: None. I. Souville: 2982 g/ 48 cm/ 34 cm. The older brother of the proband was diagnosed None. Y. Saillour: None. C. Fallet-Bianco: None. S. Valence: None. N. Lebrun: with congenital hypothyroidism at the age of 6 months, with epilepsy at 3 None. D. Keays: None. F. Razavi: None. N. Boddaert: None. M. Ossando: None. T. Attie-Bitach: None. M. Moutard: None. F. Guimiot: None. Q. Chloé: years of age. He is moderately mentally retarded. His height was 88,1 cm None. L. Burglen: None. S. Passemard: None. V. Des Portes: None. S. (-2.1 SD) at the age of 3 years. The 2nd child of this family is a healthy girl. Blesson: None. M. Addor: None. A. Laquerriere: None. D. Heron: None. B. Muscle hypertonia was noted when the proband was 3 months old. Hypo- Heron: None. P. Parent: None. P. Jouk: None. E. Andrini: None. A. Datta: thyroidism was diagnosed when he was 6 months old and around the same None. F. Rivier: None. N. Philip: None. M. Milh: None. J. Amiel: None. M. Rio: time his growth started to lag. Proband’s height is 95,5 cm (-2.6 SD). He de- None. L. Pinson: None. C. Beldjord: None. J. Chelly: None. veloped his first seizures at age 1 year and 2 months. His global develop- ment has been moderately delayed. At the age of 4 years and 3 months he walks independently, but is not able to speak. 
P05 .046 The chromosomes (400 bands) and aCGH (44K) were studied because of Haploinsufficiency of CTNND2 on 5p15.2 is associated with short stature and mental retardation. Both of these results were normal. intellectual disability Because the family history fitted X-chromosomal inheritance and clinical T. Barøy1, C. Lund2, M. Fannemel1, O. K. Rødningen1, O. Røsby1, A. Blomhoff1, D. Misceo1, K. findings resembled Allan-Herndon-Dudley, MCT8 gene was analysed with K. Selmer1, E. Brodtkorb3, E. Frengen1; normal results. Exome sequencing (NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Human Exome 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Library v2.0) identified a novel 3 bp deletion in a X-chromosomal gene cau- Norway, Oslo, Norway, 2National Centre for Epilepsy, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, sing a known syndrome. Affected boys were hemizygous and their mother Norway, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, St. Olav, is a carrier of the mutation. The mother is healthy, but her height is 150 cm Oslo, Norway. ( S-2. .K5i vSiDri)k.ko: None. E. Salminen: None. S. Vanhanen: None. K. Aittomäki: None. Deletions of the short arm of chromosome 5 is associated with Cri-du-chat syndrome (CdCs), a condition characterized by a high-pitched cat-like cry in newborns. Patients usually present with microcephaly, round face, hyper- 
P05 .045 telorism, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, low-set ears, hypotonia, and severe The wide spectrum of alpha and beta-Tubulinopathies: Key features developmental delay. CdCs is a contiguous gene syndrome, and even though of phenotypic heterogeneity and approach for diagnostic and it is a well defined clinical condition, the exact genotype-phenotype corre- molecular orientation N. Bahi-Buisson1,2,3, K. Poirier3,2, F. Fourniol4, I. Souville5, Y. Saillour3,2, C. Fallet-Bianco6, lations remain to be established. However, the critical region for the cat-like S. Valence3,2, N. Lebrun3,2, D. Keays7, F. Razavi1,8, N. Boddaert9,10, M. Ossando1,8, T. Attie- cry has been located to 5p15.3, and the critical region for the intellectual Bitach1,11, M. Moutard12, F. Guimiot13, Q. Chloé14, L. Burglen15, S. Passemard16, V. Des disability has been suggested to be located within 5p15.2. We describe two Portes17, S. Blesson18, M. Addor19, A. Laquerriere20, D. Heron21, B. Heron12, P. Parent22, P. patients with deletions of 73 kb and 3.2 Mb, respectively, that CoTvNerNlaDp2 part Jouk23, E. Andrini23, A. Datta24, F. Rivier25, N. Philip26, M. Milh27, J. Amiel1,28, M. Rio28, L. of the CdCs critical re gion in 5p15.2. Clinically our patients lack many cha- Pinson29, C. Beldjord5, J. Chelly3,2; racteristicCsT NofN CDd2Cs, but both have intellectual disability. Only , en- 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Inserm, coding delta-catenin,is included in the deletion overlap betCwTeNeNnD o2ur two U1016, Paris, France, 3Institut Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 4Institute of Structural Molecular Biology, Birkbeck College, patients. is predominantly expressed in brain and has been sugge- London, United Kingdom, 5Molecular Biology, Hopital Cochin, APHP,, Paris, France, sted to be involved in neuronal cell adhesion. The deletion of in our 6Neuropathology, Hopital Cochin, APHP, Paris, France, 7Institute of Molecular Pathology, t Tw. oB apraøtyie: nNtosn ies .l iCk.e Llyu ncadu: sNinonge t.h Mei. rF ianntnelelmecetlu: aNl odniesa. bOi.lKit.y R. ødningen: Dr Bohr-Gasse, Vienna, Austria, 8Foetopathology, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, None. O. Røsby: None. A. Blomhoff: None. D. Misceo: None. K.K. Selmer: France, 9Université Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 10Pediatric Radiology None. E. Brodtkorb: None. E. Frengen: None. Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 11Genetic and Foetopathology, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 12Pediatric Neurology, Hopital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 13Foetopathology, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 14Medical Genetics, Hopital Rennes, Rennes, France, 15Genetic, Hopital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, 
P05 .047 France, 16Genetics and pediatric Neurology, Hopital Robert Debre, APHP, Paris, France, KBP-cytoskeleton interactions underlie developmental anomalies in 17Pediatric Neurology, Lyon, France, 18Medical Genetics, Hopital Tours, Tours, France, Goldberg-Shprintzen Syndrome 19Medical Genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 20Pathology, Hopital Charles Nicolle, CHU, L. Drévillon1, A. Megarbane2, B. Demeer3, C. Matar1, P. Benit4, A. Briand-Suleau1, V. Rouen, France, 21Medical Genetics, Hopital Pitie Salpetriere, Paris, France, 22Medical Bodereau1, J. Ghoumid1, M. Nasser1, X. Decrouy1, M. Doco-Fenzy5, P. Rustin4, D. Gaillard5, Genetics, Hopital Brest, CHU, Brest, France, 23Medical Genetics, Hopital Grenoble, CHU, M. Goossens1, I. Giurgea1; Grenoble, France, 24Pediatric Neurology, Hopitaux Universitaires de Geneve, Geneve, 1Groupe Hospitalier Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, Créteil, France, 2Université Saint- Switzerland, 25Pediatric Neurology, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 26Medical Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Hôpital Nord, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 4INSERM U676, Genetics, Hopital La Timone, Marseille, France, 27Pediatric Neurology, Hopital La Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5CHU de Reims, Reims, France. Timone, Marseille, France, Goldberg-Shprintzen syndrome (GOSHS, MIM #609460) is an autosomal re- Complex cortical malformations associated with mutations in tubulin ge- cessive disorder of intellectual disability, specific facial gestalt, and Hirsch- nes TUBA1A, TUBB2B, TUBB3 and TUBB5, commonly referred to as « Tu- sprung disease. In 2005, homozygosity mapping in a large consanguineous bulinopathies », are a heterogeneous group of conditions which include a family identified KIAA1279 as the disease-causing gene. KIAA1279 encodes wide spectrum of clinical severity. Of the 125 patients selected as having KIF-binding protein (KBP), whose function is incompletely understood. complex cortical malformations, 41 (32.8%) were found to carry TUBA1A, Studies have identified either the mitochondria or the cytoskeleton as the 18 (14.4%) TUBB2B mutations, 11 (8.8%) TUBB3 and 3 (2.4%) TUBB5 site of KBP localization and interactions. To better delineate the KIAA1279- mutations. Here, we describe their occurrence together as the two major related clinical spectrum and the molecular mechanisms involved in 166 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG findings in a group of at least five cortical malformation syndromes: (i) lis- GOSHS, we studied five new patients from three different families. The ho-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mozygous KIAA1279 mutations in these patients (p.Arg90X, Ser200X, or of daily life. Two male sibs and a male first cousin, born of two double con- p.Arg202IlefsX2) led to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and loss of KBP sanguineous marriages (first cousins once removed and second cousins), function. Despite the absence of KBP function, respiratory chain complex presented developmental delay and moderate mental retardation, craniofa- activity in patient fibroblasts was normal. KBP did not co-localize with mito- cial dysmorphisms and chronic diarrhea with or without recurrent hypogly- chondria in human fibroblasts but interacted with the actin and tubulin cy- cemia, gastro-esophageal reflux and progressive kyphoscoliosis. toskeleton. KBP expression directly affected neurite growth in a neuron-like SNP-array analysis (Affymetrix 6.0 platform) revealed no causative CNV. cell line (human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y), in keeping with the central (po- ROH analysis identified a shared region of homozygosity corresponding to lymicrogyria) and enteric (Hirschsprung disease) neuronal developmental the genomic coordinates chr7: 45,716,212-50,602,470. defects seen in GOSHS patients. The KBP interactions with actin filaments Whole exome analysis identified a homozygous variant g.50,531,015 G>A in and microtubules demonstrated in our study constitute the first evidence both affected sibs in the gene DDC (DOPA decarboxylase; aromatic L-amino that an actin microtubule cross-link protein is involved in neuronal deve- acid decarboxylase). This variant causes a non-synonymous substitution l Lo.p Dmreénvitl lionn h: uNmonaen.s A.. Megarbane: None. B. Demeer: None. C. Matar: None. P. p.Arg453Cys, predicted damaging by PolyPhen-2. Moreover, it co-segregates Benit: None. A. Briand-Suleau: None. V. Bodereau: None. J. Ghoumid: in the affected first cousin and is absent in 500 control Italian chromosomes. None. M. Nasser: None. X. Decrouy: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None. P. Rustin: It therefore seems causative of the clinical phenotype in the patients. None. D. Gaillard: None. M. Goossens: None. I. Giurgea: None. Mutations in DDC have been reported in autosomal recessive DOPA-decarb- oxylase syndrome (OMIM 608643), but the clinical characteristics of our patients appear different from those previously described. Current analyses 
P05 .048 are ongoing to verify dopamine and serotonin levels in blood and liquor of Analysis of the phenotypes in the rett syndrome networked database. the affected sibs, as well as functional studies on wild-type and mutant iso- E. Grillo1, A. Clarke2, B. Ben Zeev3, M. Pineda4, N. Bahi-Buisson5,6,7, T. Bienvenu6,7, J. forms, for a better definition of the clinical features and etiology of this DCC Armstrong4, A. Roche Martinez4, F. Mari1, E. Veneselli8, S. Russo9, A. Vignoli10, G. Pini11, M. variant. This work was supported by the EU-funded grant CHERISH (F
P7  Djuric12, A. M. Bisgaard13, V. Mejaski-Bosnjak14, J. Hayek15, R. Khajuria16, B. Montomoli15, HEe. aBltohn o-2ra0:0 N7o).ne. A.T. Wischmeijer: None. T. Pippucci: None. C. F. Cogliati9, K. Ravn13, M. Pintaudi8, B. Melegh17, D. Craiu18, A. Djukic19, A. Renieri1, L. Diquigiovanni: None. M. Giambartolomei: None. A. Kurg: None. L. Garavelli: Villard20,21; None. C. Fusco: None. C. Graziano: None. M. Seri: None. G. Romeo: None. 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 4Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 5Pediatric Neurology, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 6Inserm U1016, Paris, France, 7Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 8Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 
P05 .050 University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 9Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Genetica Molecolare, A further patient with a deletion 14q32.2, clinical features of Milano, Italy, 10Ospedale San Paolo, Milano, Italy, 11Ospedale della Versilia, Viareggio, maternal uniparental disomy 14 and pronounced intellectual Italy, 12Dpt of Neurology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 13Center for Rett Syndrome, The Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, 14Dpt. of Neuropediatrics, Zagreb disability: evidence for a novel microdeletion syndrome Children‘s Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia, 15Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital, B. Albrecht1, K. de Groot2, K. Buiting1, H. Lüdecke1; Siena, Italy, 16Dpt. of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2MRC, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 17Dpt. of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary, 18Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Al Obregia Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 19Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 20Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, We report on a female patient with a upd(14)mat-like phenotype. The pati- 21Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France. ent is the second child of non- consanguineous Tunisian-Lebanese parents. Pregnancy started as a twin pregnancy. Recurrent bleedings and reduced fetal movements were observed. The patient was born by cesarean section The Rett syndrome networked database (RSND) is a repository of clinical with normal birth measurements at 36 weeks of gestation. Muscular hypo- and molecular data for patients affected by Rett syndrome. Although it was tonia and poor sucking led to tube and PEG feeding during the first year of initially targeting the european population of RTT patients, it is now open life. She is severely delayed, walking with 2 ½ years and talking with 4 years. to countries outside of Europe. RSND is different from existing repository Precocious puberty occurrdred with 5 years. With 3 years all her body measu- for Rett syndrome clinical and molecular data. First, RSND records are cu- rements lay below the 3 centile, with 13 years she was short, but weight rated by experienced clinicians. This is important to exclude potential bias and head circumference were normal. She shows facial dysmorphism with existing when clinical data is gathered using questionnaires sent out by long, narrow face and hypertelorism, behavioral problems started with 12 mail to families. Second, RSND is currently the largest RTT database in the years. MEG3 de novo world with 1900 patients on file. This number could significantly increase Karyotyping was normal. SNP-array hybridization and quantitative real- in the next few months with the addition of cases from large countries such time PCR for the gene revealed a 1.1 Mb deletion, including as Russia or India. Third, RSND is an open access initiative and data can be most of the imprinted genes of thMeE rGe3g ion and 14 not imprinted genes (ar retrieved directly through a web-based search engine by all interested pro- r[hg19]14q32.2q32.31(100.405.409-101.504.293)x1). Using MS-MLPA we fessionals. Records are de-identified but access to the invidiual patient files detected hypomethylation of the promotor region, indicating that the can be granted through the participating clinicians in each country. deletion is of paternal origin. We are providing here a description of the first 1900 records contained in Our patient carries the recurrent microdeletion 14q32.2 with breakpoints the networked database and are discussing the content of RSND in the light inside TGG repeats, as described for two patients by Bena et al in 2010, and of published guidelines for RTT, the development of clinical trials and with two further patients, reported in 2012 by Ballif et al. She shows all clinical r Ee.s Gpericltlo t:o N ootnhee.r A R.T CTla crokheo: rNtosn.e. B. Ben Zeev: None. M. Pineda: None. N. features of the previously described upd(14)mat-like phenotype, except for Bahi-Buisson: None. T. Bienvenu: None. J. Armstrong: None. A. Roche Martinez: None. F. Mari: None. E. Veneselli: None. S. Russo: None. A. Vignoli: normal body measurements at birth. Haploinsufficiency of additional, non- None. G. Pini: None. M. Djuric: None. A.M. Bisgaard: None. V. Mejaski- imprinted genes may cause the intellectual disability of this novel microde- Bosnjak: None. J. Hayek: None. R. Khajuria: None. B. Montomoli: None. F. lBet.i Aonlb 1re4cqh3t:2 N.2o snyen. dKr.o dme eG.root: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Cogliati: None. K. Ravn: None. M. Pintaudi: None. B. Melegh: None. D. Craiu: MRC Holland. K. Buiting: None. H. Lüdecke: None. None. A. Djukic: None. A. Renieri: None. L. Villard: None. 
P05 .051 
P05 .049 Clinical and genetic: A study of 30 new cases with duplication of A mutation in the DOPA decarboxylase gene (DDC) causes a new 15q11-q13 region syndromic form of Intellectual Disability E. I. Al Ageeli1,2, S. Drunat3, C. Delanoe4, L. Perrin1, C. Baumann1, Y. Capri1, J. Fabre-Teste1, E. Bonora1, A. T. Wischmeijer1,2, T. Pippucci1, C. Diquigiovanni1, M. Giambartolomei1, A. A. Aboura5, C. Dupont5, L. El Khattabi5, D. Chantereau3, J. Gallard6, A. Tabet5, A. Verloes1; Kurg3, L. Garavelli2, C. Fusco4, C. Graziano1, M. Seri1, G. Romeo1; 1Medical Genetic Department, Denis Diderot Paris VII Universitiy and AP-HP, Robert 1Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, BOLOGNA, Italy, 2Clinical Genetics Unit, Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 2Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia, 3Molecular Genetic Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a carattere Scientifico, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova,, Reggio- Department, AP-HP, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 4Physiology Department, AP- Emilia, Italy, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, HP, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 5Cytogenetic Department, AP-HP, Robert Debré 4Dept of Child Neuropsychiatry, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a carattere Scientifico, Hospital, Paris, France, 6Medical Genetic Department, AP-HP, Robert Debré Hospital, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova,, Reggio-Emilia, Italy. Paris, France. Intellectual disability (ID) is characterized by a substantial below-average Duplication of 15q11-q13 region results either from a supernumerary mar- score on tests of mental ability, and limitaEtSioHnsG in 2 fu0n1ct3io |n sP rAelRatIeSd, tFoR arAeaNs CEk |e Wr (SWMCW) d.EerSivHedG o.fO chRrGomosome 15 or from an interstitial duplication 1 ( 6ID 7).ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CLDN5 G
P1 BB Duplications are characterized by hypotonia, developmental delay, speech levels. MLPA analysis was performed using P-245 B1 kit. A deletion in 22q11 delay, seizure, minor dysmorphic features and autism. A retrospective stu- region was detected located in the AB region ( and gene). De- dy of 30 unrelated patients with microduplication of the 15q11-q13 region letions in 22q11 are the most frequent cause of DGS, the majority include showed 15 cases have a SM
C15 . In 14 the SMC was of large size, encompas- the AB, BC and CD regions, though some deletions are smaller (AB only sing PWS/ASCR and one was paternal in origin. Furthermore, 15 cases with as our case) or larger. Patients with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion do not ID: 9 with typical duplication B
P2 -B
P3 , 1 with large duplication B
P2 -B
P5  always show all components of DGS. Hypoparathyroidism can be the only region and 4 with atypical duplication; one case had overlaps between B
P1 - abnormality and may exist with no accompanying cardiac or immunologic B
P2  and B
P2 -B
P3  regions and 3 with duplication limited to three paternally defects. DGS patients do not always have the typical dysmorphic features expressed genes located in B
P2 -B
P3  region. One case with duplication B
P1 - and may not be diagnosed until adulthood. DGS is relatively common and B
P2 . Four cases were inherited from normal parents (3 maternal and 1 pa- this diagnosis should be considered in patients with mental, behavioral, or ternal). Phenotypic features were highly variable and 74% presented with aFt.t eGnotnioznal edzis: oNrodneer.. A. Zuñiga: None. L. Pedrola: None. autism. Twelve patients showed cerebral anomalies and 14 patients had an unusual EEG pattern of diffuse fast rhythms even in absence of epilepsy that appears to be characteristic for duplication 15q11-q13 syndrome which 
P05 .054 c Eo.uI.l Ad lh Aeglpe einli: e Naorlnye d. Sia.g Dnrousnisa to: fN tohnise .s Cyn. dDreolamneo.e: None. L. Perrin: None. C. Global transcriptome profiling reveals involvement of genes localized Baumann: None. Y. Capri: None. J. Fabre-Teste: None. A. Aboura: None. C. across different chromosomes in pathogenesis of Down Syndrome Dupont: None. L. El Khattabi: None. D. Chantereau: None. J. Gallard: None. A. Tabet: None. A. Verloes: None. A. Pathak, S. R. Phadke; Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute Of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India. 
P05 .052 Clinical performance and diagnostic yield assessment of the Down syndrome (DS), the most frequent genetic disorder leading to mental Affymetrix CytoScan® Dx cytogenetic microarray system retardation is caused by partial or complete triplication of human chromo- A. Chaubey1, K. Kwiatkowski2, A. Roter2, S. Close3, R. Pfundt4, E. Thorland5, B. R. DuPont1, some 21. The differential expression of genes located on extra chromosome J. Reiswig2, R. Hockett6, E. T. Fung2; 21 is generally assumed responsible for phenotypic abnormalities but this 1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Affymetrix, Santa Clara, gene dosage hypothesis has not been fully assessed on genome-wide ba- CA, United States, 3GenEngine, Fishers, IN, United States, 4Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 6CombiMatrix sis. The expression patterns of genes related to phenotypic abnormalities Diagnostics, Irvine, CA, United States. may provide insights into their roles in pathogenesis of DS. To analyze the differential gene expression and understand the molecular mechanism un- derlying pathogenesis of DS, we performed global gene expression profiling Cytogenetic microarrays have demonstrated a significant increase in the dia- in blood samples of 9 DS and 1 normal subjects using human whole tran- gnostic yield assessment by identifying pathogenic copy number changes as scriptome microarray. The microarray analysis revealed total of 22 genes compared to traditional techniques such as karyotyping and fluorescence present on chromosome-21 showing differential expression. Genes involved in-situ hybridization. The diagnostic yield of CytoScan® Dx was assessed in in physiological pathways such as apoptosis regulation, cell cycle regulation, a cohort of individuals exhibiting intellectual disability, congenital anoma- signal transduction, cell maturation, and immunity showed dysregulation. lies, and/or dysmorphic features. Consecutive IRB-approved, DNA samples Several genes localized on chromosome-21 such as APP, SOD1, DYRK1A, CO- were de-identified and collected at three clinical laboratory sites. Routine 
L6 A1 showed similar expression levels across all DS subjects. Interestingly, patient care (RPC) comprised of one or more of traditional cytogenetic me- several non chromosome-21 genes such as RCAN3 (chromosome 1), ANK3 thods, Fragile X testing and microarray (excluding Affymetrix array) for de- (chromosome 10), CDK17 (chromosome 12) etc., having roles in cardioge- termining genomic alterations/rearrangements. Samples were run at one nesis, signal transduction and differentiation of neurons showed conserved site on CytoScan® Dx and the data were interpreted by an independent cy- levels of expression across the DS subjects. The gene dosage hypothesis on togeneticist blinded to any patient information. chromosome-21 may partially explain the neurological and other symptoms In total, 960 samples were analyzed. The diagnostic yield from RPC (ex- but our results substantiate the involvement of genes localized across diffe- cluding all microarray platforms) was 14.5% (95%CI = 9.6-21.3%). On rent chromosomes in pathogenesis of DS. Our data may provide the basis for the same sample set, the diagnostic yield from CytoScan® Dx was 23.9% a more systematic and improved understanding of molecular mechanism (95%CI = 17.6-31.7%), indicating a net 9.4% incremental yield provided u An.d Peartlhyainkg: Nthoen ep.a Sth.Ro.g Pehnaedsikse o: fN tohnee d.isease. by CytoScan® Dx. Notably, 20 pathogenic alterations were identified by Cy- toScan® Dx that were not detected by RPC methodologies. This is the largest study to date assessing the diagnostic yield of CytoScan® 
P05 .055 Dx as compared to RPC and confirms previous results that whole genome A complex chromosomal rearrangement with X-autosome m Ai.c Crohaarurbaeyys: pNroonveid. Ke .a K cwliinaitckaollwys skiig:n Ai.f iEcamnptl oinymcreenats (efu ilnl o dr ipaagrnt-otismtiec) ;y Mieoldde.st; translocation and PCDH19 gene duplication in a girl with drug Affymetrix. A. Roter: None. S. Close: None. R. Pfundt: None. E. Thorland: resistant epileptic encephalopathy None. B.R. DuPont: None. J. Reiswig: None. R. Hockett: None. E.T. Fung: M. Piechota1, M. Wysocki1, M. Badura-Stronka1,2, A. Wilczewska-Wiktor3, B. Steinborn3, None. A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; 1Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 2Chair and Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Chair and Department of Child Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. 
P05 .053 Small deletion detected by MPLA in the 22q11 region in a patient with attention deficit and behavioral disorders The advent of CGH microarray technique helps to define abnormalities in F. Gonzalez, A. Zuñiga, L. Pedrola; Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. chromosome structure very precisely and therefore seems to be a perfect tool for medical genetics. We describe a case of a 6 year old girl with profound mental retardation and DiGeorge syndrome (DGS, #188400) is actually a well-defined primary im- drug resistant epileptic encephalopathy. Derivative chromosome X, obser- munodeficiency disorder classically associated with congenital heart de- ved in karyotype was further characterized by CGH microarray technique. fects, and hypoparathyroidism with hypocalcaemia. The facial appearance Three pathogenic aberrations were identified: 34Mb duplication in chro- of patients with DGS is characterized by hypertelorism, micrognathia, short mosome 2 (2p25.3-2p22.3), 57Mb interstitial duplication in chromosome philtrum with “fish-mouth”, antimongoloid slant, and telecanthus with short X (Xq21.33-Xq28) and 2.7Mb duplication in chromosome X (Xq28), with a palpebral fissures. It has been reported that children and adults with DGS translocation of a fragment of the short arm of chromosome 2 onto the long have high rates of behavioral, psychiatric and communication disorders. arm of chromosome X. More than 600 genes have been characterized in the CASE REPORT: Our case report was a 13.8-year-old boy born to unrelated above mentioned regions. The 57Mb duplication encompassed protocadhe- healthy parents. Initially, he was admitted to the Neuropaediatric Depart- rin 19 (PCDH19) gene, involved in female-restricted epilepsy-mental retar- ment with attention deficit and socialization problems. At physical exami- dation syndrome (EFMR). So far, PCDH19 mutations have been identified nation, mild facial dysmorphism was noted. The laboratory investigations in affected heterozygous females and in asymptomatic hemizygous males. revealed normal parathormone levels, but the presence of hypocalcemia A random X inactivation is expected to disturb cell-to-cell interactions lea- and hyperphosphatemia suggested a possible hypoparathyroidism. Patient ding to the phenotype of mutated females. The influence of the X-autosome h1 a6 d 8 no cardiac defects, no immunodeficiency andE nS oH rmG al 2 th0 y1 ro3 id | h P oA rmR oI nS e, FR trA anN slC ocE a t| i oW n W in tW he. E paS tiH enG t o.O n tR hG e X-inactivation pattern and the phenotypeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index M. Sánchez-Morán: None. J.A. Hernandez: None. J.A. Duñabeitia: None. A. Estévez: None. D. Mosén-Ansorena: None. L. Bárcena: None. A. González- i Ms d. Pisiceucshsoetda :i nN odneet.a Mil.. Wysocki: None. M. Badura-Stronka: None. A. Lahera: None. M.T. Bajo: None. L. Fuentes: None. M. Carreiras: None. A.M. Wilczewska-Wiktor: None. B. Steinborn: None. A. Latos-Bieleńska: None. Aransay: None. 
P05 .056 
P05 .058 Case report of a de novo 17q12q21.32 duplication of 9.2 Mb in a girl STXB
P1  and KCNQ2 are mutated in a large number of patients having with hypotonia, facial dysmorphism, and cardiac abnormalities early onset epileptic encephalopathy. T. Ait Mouhoub1,2, M. Doco-Fenzy1,3,2, E. Landais1,4,2, C. Leroy1,2, A. Lannoy1,2, P. Mauran1,5, A. Abidi1,2, M. Milh1,2,3, N. Boutry-Kryza4, J. Sutera-Sardo1,3, C. Mignot5,6, S. Auvin7, C. P. Sabouraud1,5, P. Morville1,5, P. Feucher1,2, S. Clomes1,2, N. Gruson1,2, C. Mangeonjean1,2, D. Lacoste8, N. Villeneuve3, A. Roubertie9,10, B. Héron6, M. Carneiro9, A. Kaminska11, C. Gaillard1,3,2; Altuzzara12, G. Blanchard13, D. Ville13, M. Barthez14, D. Héron5,6, A. Afenjar6, N. Dorison6, 1CHU Reims, Reims, France, 2Service de génétique, Reims, France, 3SFR CAP-SANTE,URCA T. Billette de Villemeur6, I. Ann15, A. Jaquette5, P. Charles5, J. Perrier16, B. Isidor17, L. Reims, EA3801, Reims, France, 4PRBI, Reims, France, 5Service de pédiatrie, Reims, France. Vercueil18, B. Chabrol1,2,3, C. Badens1,2,8, G. Lesca4, L. Villard1,2; 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 3Neurologie Pédiatrique, CHU Timone Enfants, Marseille, France, 4Laboratoire de Background: Duplication in 17q21 region are rare. Microduplication of the Génétique, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Bron, France, 5Génétique et Cytogénétique, GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, region 17q21.31 (OMIM 613533) reciprocal to the classical 17q21.31 de- 7Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Génétique Médicale et Biologie letion of 500.000 bp has been reported in 6 cases with variable facial dys- Cellulaire, CHU Timone Enfants, Marseille, France, 9Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Montpellier, morphism, psychomotor delay, hypotonia, abnormal digits, hirsutism (deci- Montpellier, France, 10Inserm, U1051, Montpellier, France, 11Neurophysiologie clinique, pher and literature). We report a patient with a large duplication of 9.2Mb Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 12Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France, (17q12-q21.32) encompassing this microduplication. 13Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France, 14Neuropédiatrie, CHU Method: The duplication was diagnosed by classical cytogenetics showing a de Tours, Tours, France, 15Neurologie, GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 16Pédiatrie, longer 17q arm and mapped with array-CGH (Agilent 180k). 46,XX,dup(17) CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 17Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 18Electrophysiologie clinique, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France. (q12q21.32).arr 17q12q21.32(36,473,175-45,620,194)x3 dn. Parental ka- ryotypes were normal. Clinical report: We report a female patient born at 35 weeks of gestational Early onset epileptic encephalopathies (EOEE) are rare and severe disor- age with weight 2.6 kg(M), OFC 32 cm(M). She was referred for severe hy- ders in which patients have impaired cognitive development. A part of potonia, feeding difficulties, facial dysmorphism with large frontal bossing, EOEEs, known as Ohtahara syndrome (OS), is characterised by the associa- hypertelorism, asymmetrical eyeballs, strabism, synophris, anteverted nos- tion of frequent motor seizures occurring before three months of age, with trils, everted lower lip, micrognathia, plagiocephaly, hirsutism. On cardiac an EEG showing a “suppression-burst” pattern. The prognosis is classically ultrasound persistent foramen ovale, apical ventricular septum defect, per- poor with drug resistant epilepsy and a majority of patients evolving into sistent left superior venous cava were found. At 16 months of age she could West Syndrome. sit but not walk, she had feeding difficulties and growth delay with weight Cases related to brain structural or metabolic abnormalities have been dis- 7020 g (-3SD), length 78.5 cm (M) and OFC 45cm (-1SD). carded, to consider genetic causes. Several genes have been described in the Conclusion: To our knowledge, this case is the first reported with a de novo pathology ARX, SL
C25 A22, STXB
P1  and KCNQ2. 17q12-q21.32 duplication. Compared to the reported 17q21.31 duplication Here, we have collected a cohort of 105 patients with EOEE. In order to syndrome, in the present case, the common symptoms are : hypotonia, psy- identify key clinical features and perform genotype-phenotype correlations, chomotor retardation, synophris, hirsutism, micrognathia, high-vaulted pa- EOEE patients are screened for the known genes. We found 8 patients mu- late. The discrepant features are : ophthalmic asymmetry, hyperlaxity, facial d Ty. sAmito Mrpohuhisomu,b a: nNdo cnaer. dMia. cD aobcon-oFremnazyli:t iNeos.ne. E. Landais: None. C. Leroy: tated for STXB
P1  and 15 patients mutated for KCNQ2. Interestingly, the two None. A. Lannoy: None. P. Mauran: None. P. Sabouraud: None. P. Morville: groups evolve in the same feature with a remission of the epilepsy in the None. P. Feucher: None. S. Clomes: None. N. Gruson: None. C. Mangeonjean: majority of patients. We have already shown that the course of the epilepsy None. D. Gaillard: None. was unexpected in patients having a mutation of STXB
P1 . KCNQ2 patients all had a neonatal onset of the epilepsy and have heterogeneous evolution, with mild phenotype in some cases or dramatic outcome in other cases. In 
P05 .057 both groups, very few patients evolved into West syndrome, although this On the lookout for links between genetic variants and the occurrence has classically been described for OS patients. of Dyslexia in Spanish Children In conclusion, this study confirms that KCNQ2 and STXB
P1  are mutated in M. Sánchez-Morán1,2, J. A. Hernandez3, J. A. Duñabeitia2, A. Estévez3, D. Mosén- E AO. EAEb iadni:d N aosnseo.c Mia.t eMdil hw:i Ntho nvea.r iNa.b Bleo ouutrtyc-oKmryez.a: None. J. Sutera-Sardo: Ansorena1, L. Bárcena1, A. González-Lahera1, M. T. Bajo4, L. Fuentes5, M. Carreiras2,6, A. M. None. C. Mignot: None. S. Auvin: None. C. Lacoste: None. N. Villeneuve: Aransay1,7; None. A. Roubertie: None. B. Héron: None. M. Carneiro: None. A. Kaminska: 1CICbioGUNE, Derio, Spain, 2BCBL, San Sebastian, Spain, 3Universidad de La Laguna, None. C. Altuzzara: None. G. Blanchard: None. D. Ville: None. M. Barthez: La Laguna, Spain, 4Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain, 5Universidad de Murcia, None. D. Héron: None. A. Afenjar: None. N. Dorison: None. T. Billette de Murcia, Spain, 6Ikerbasque. Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain, 7CIBERehd, Villemeur: None. I. Ann: None. A. Jaquette: None. P. Charles: None. J. Perrier: Barcelona, Spain. None. B. Isidor: None. L. Vercueil: None. B. Chabrol: None. C. Badens: None. G. Lesca: None. L. Villard: None. Reading is one of the pillars of education and a central skill to succeed in our information-based society. Dyslexia is a reading disorder with a prevalence 
P05 .059 of approximately 10% of the population. The aim of this study is to iden- Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy caused by mutations in tify genetic variants associated with Dyslexia and to integrate genetic and PCDH19 and CDK
L5  genes cognitive-behavioural markers to establish causal links and promote early S. Tincheva1, A. Kirov1,2, P. Dimova3, A. Todorova1,2, B. Sukhudyan4, T. Todorov1, V. Mitev2; diagnosis. To that end, we performed a genetic association study to identify 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3St. Naum University Hospital of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sofia, patterns of DNA-polymorphisms that vary between individuals with diffe- Bulgaria, 4“Arabkir“ Joint Medical Center and Institute of Child and Adolescent Health, rent cognitive phenotypes following two strategies. On the one hand, we are Yerevan, Armenia. carrying out a Genome-Wide-Association-Study (GWAS), analyzing 730000 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) along the genome in a subset of dyslexics and controls. Preliminary analyses have identified 11 SNPs asso- Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE) is a severe form of epilepsy ciated with Dyslexia with a P-value of 10-6, which should be conveniently characterized by frequent tonic spasms with onset in the first months of validated. On the other hand, we are following a candidate gene associati- life. The disease course is severe with early death or marked psychomotor on approach focusing on individual polymorphisms that have been repor- retardation. ted to be implicated in cognitive disorders. We have genotyped variants of Here we report three female EIEE patients. All of them suffered by tonic KIAA0319, DCD
C2 , FOX
P2 , DYX1
C1 , COMT1, DBH, MAOA, DRD4 and DAT1 seizures in clusters, appearing soon after birth, at 5th and 6th month of age genes in 4700 individuals. The missense SNP rs4504469 located within the respectively. KIAA0319 gene shows the highest association with Dyslexia in the studied In both patients with onset between 5th and 6th month and the seizure population (p<10-2). In addition, we will present the relationships between type, suggested screening for mutations along the PCDH19 gene as a first the genotype of these candidate genes and cognitive-behavioural variables step. In contrast, the very early onset of the tonic seizures in the last patient such as Intelligence quotient and reading ability among the general Spanish ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEs |u WppoWseWd C.EDSKH
L5 G r.eOlaRteGd epileptic encephalopathy. The molecular-ge 1n 6et 9ic child population.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ESR2 testing of the PCDH19 gene showed the following mutations: c.2705dupA family illustrates the first human disease arising from mutation of . Bet- p.(Asp902Lysfs*6) and c.1091delC; p.(Pro364Argfs*4). Although the muta- ter understanding of the molecular and physiologic basis of the disease in tions are situated in different protein regions (extracellular domain 4 and this family will increase understanding of the genetic causes of intellectual cytoplasmic domain) the clinical features are almost the same. The possible iRm.p Rauirpmpse:n Nt oanned. tCh.e d cuo Smopuliecxh r: oNloen oef. eAs.t rCohgoeun: iNno hnuem. Pa. nA tpkhinyssi:o Nloognye.. P. explanation is the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Stankiewicz: None. C. van Karnebeek: None. C.F. Boerkoel: None. The last patient was found to be a heterozygous carrier of a de novo CDK
L5  missense mutation c.539C>T; p.(Pro180Leu). This mutation affects the ca- talytic domain of the protein and thus causes a typical clinical phenotype 
P05 .062 with very early onset. Whole-exome sequencing study in patients with intellectual disability. The EIEE syndromes are one of the main groups of severe neonatal epilep- M. Sauk1, M. Nõukas1, T. Pippucci2, F. Balombo2, L. Milani3, G. Romeo2, A. Kurg1; sies with suppression-burst pattern. Although, the phenotypes vary, some 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Estonian clinical features and the seizure onset could be used to guide the molecular Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia. genetic testing algorithm. Acknowledgements: The study was supported by the grant No49/2011, So- f Sia. MTinedchiceavla U: nNiovneers. iAty. ,K Biruolgva: rNiaone. P. Dimova: None. A. Todorova: None. B. Whole-exome sequencing is a powerful tool in discovery of disease causing Sukhudyan: None. T. Todorov: None. V. Mitev: None. mutations. Nevertheless the etiology of intellectual disability (ID) remains unknown in about 50% of the cases. Affecting 1–3% of the general populati- on, the cause of ID is very heterogeneous and can be involve environmental 
P05 .060 and genetic factors. Novel compound heterozygous mutations in TB
C1 D24 cause familial We carried out within the framework of EU FP-7 CHERISH project (#223692) Malignant Migrating Partial Seizures of Infancy. whole-exome sequencing analysis in 21 patients with idiopathic ID from 12 M. Milh1,2,3, A. Falace4, N. Villeneuve3, N. Vanni5, P. Cacciagli1,6, S. Assereto5, R. Nabbout7, F. families, where two of the families were known to be consanguineous. The Benfenati4,8, F. Zara5, B. Chabrol1,2,3, L. Villard1,2, A. Fassio4,8; patients were expected to have X-linked, recessive or dominant inheritance 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, pattern. For exome enrichment we used Illumina‘s TruSeq 62Mb Enrich- 3Pediatric Neurology, CHU Timone Enfants, Marseille, France, 4Experimental Medicine, ment Kit and next-generation sequencing experiment was performed using University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 5Muscular and Neurodegenerative Disease Unit, Gaslini Illumina‘s HiSeq 2000. The average read depth for sequenced exomes was Institute, Genoa, Italy, 6Génétique Médicale et Biologie Cellulaire, CHU Timone Enfants, 70-fold. Marseille, France, 7Centre de Référence des Epilepsies Rares de l‘Enfant, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 8Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Italian Institute of Technology, For the analysis we used BWA to map the data to reference human genome Genoa, Italy. version 19; GATK for local realignment, removing PCR duplicates and base quality recalibration; and ANNOVAR for annotating variants. We found variants in autosomal and X-linked genes, on average about 93 Early-onset epileptic encephalopathies (EOEEs) are a group of rare devasta- 000 variants per patient. After filtration, we found possibly clinically rele- ting epileptic syndromes of infancy characterized by severe drug resistant vant changes in upto six genes per family, that are important in development seizures and electroencephalographic abnormalities. The current study aims of nervous system. All the candidate variants were confirmed by Sanger se- to determine the genetic etiology of a familial form of EOEE fulfilling the dia- quencing and segregation within the family were checked. The further ana- gnosis criteria for malignant migrating partial seizures in infancy (MMPSI). lysis of these variants is currently in progress. We identified two inherited novel mutations in TB
C1 D24 in two affected sib- For additional analysis we plan to implement two split read–based approa- lings. Mutations severely impaired TB
C1 D24 expression and function, which ches Splitread and Pindel for discovery of medium size indels in these exo- is critical for maturation of neuronal circuits. The screening of TB
C1 D24 in m Me. Sdaautak :s eNtosn, eth. aMt. aNrõeu tkoaos l:o Nnogn feo.r T B. WPiApp.ucci: None. F. Balombo: None. L. Milani: None. G. Romeo: None. A. Kurg: None. an additional set of 8 MMPSI patients was negative. TB
C1 D24 loss of func- tion has been associated to idiopathic infantile myoclonic epilepsy, as well as to drug resistant early onset epilepsy with intellectual disability. Here we describe a familial form of MMPSI due to mutation in TB
C1 D24, revealing a 
P05 .063 d Me.v Masiltha:t iNnogn eep. iAle. pFtaicla pche:e nNootnyep. eN a. sVsiollecinaetuevde w: Nitohn TeB. NC.1 VDa2n4n di:y Nsofunnec. tPi.o n. Role of CTCF protein in regulating FMR1 locus transcription Cacciagli: None. S. Assereto: None. R. Nabbout: None. F. Benfenati: None. F. S. Lanni1, M. Goracci1, L. Borrelli1, P. Chiurazzi1, U. Moscato2, F. Ferrè3, M. Helmer- Zara: None. B. Chabrol: None. L. Villard: None. A. Fassio: None. Citterich3, E. Tabolacci1, G. Neri1; 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto di Igiene, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy. 
P05 .061 Disruption of estrogen receptor beta gene in a three generation family with mild intellectual disability Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited intellectual disabi- R. Rupps1, C. du Souich1, A. Chou1, P. Atkins1, P. Stankiewicz2, C. van Karnebeek1, C. F. lity, is caused by expansion and methylation of a CGG triplet repeat at FMR1 Boerkoel1; 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Baylor College of Medicine, gene. While DNA methylation of the promoter is the major cause respon- Houston, TX, United States. sible for FMR1 silencing, other factors may be implicated. Several nuclear proteins bind to the promoter of FMR1, like the insulator protein CTCF. Here we show that CTCF does not bind to FXS alleles, whereas it binds equally to We report an apparently balanced reciprocal translocation with breakpoints wild type (WT) and to unmethylated full mutation (UFM) alleles. In FXS cells at 14q22 and 18q21 segregating with mild inEtSeRll2e)ctual disability, speech de- CTCF binding cannot be restored by drug-induced demethylation of the DNA. lay and dysmorphic features in a three generation family. This translocation In UFM and WT cells CTCF binds to the methylation boundary upstream the interrupts the estrogen receptor beta gene ( . promoter, even though it does not act as insulator of the FMR1 locus. CTCF Routine cytogenetic analysis (>500 band resolution) showed an apparent- knock-down results in FMR1 transcription reduction and heterochromatic ly balanced translocation: 46,XY,t(14;18)(q22;q21) in the affected family histone configuration of the locus, which however is not accompanied by members. No significant copy number variations were detected on chromo- spreading of DNA methylation towards the FMR1 promoter. A CTCF binding somal microarray. site is present in intron 2 of FMR1, where one of the transcriptional start si- The translocation breakpoints were definEeSdR u2sing LR PCR. The breakpoint tes of antisense transcript is located. CTCF depletion is also associated with region on chromosome 18 does not contain any annotated genes and the antisense FMR1 transcript reduction. The antisense transcript is upregula- region on chromosome 14 contains only . Disruption of this gene was ted in UFM cells, its expression and splicing is closely paralleled by that of confirmed by FISH. the sense transcript. We conclude that CTCF has a complex role in regulating Estrogen receptor beta is part of the nuclear receptor superfamily, but pools FMR1 expression, probably through the organization of chromatin loops of this receptor are also localized to the plasma membrane and mitochon- between sense/antisense transcriptional regulatory regions, as suggested dria. Estrogen receptor beta is expressed in mammary glands, ovaries, bones by a bioinformatics analysis. and brain and has been implicated EinS Rc2ardiovascular and brain functioning Supported by Telethon Onlus, FRAXA Foundation and Italian Association for aEss rw2ell as in inflammation, bone physiology and various types of cancer. f MSra o. g sLi cale an tnX oi ::s NyNn oo ndn ereo .. FmM .e G. ero rr èa :c Nc oi: N eo n Me .. HL e. lB mo er rr -e Cll ii t: eN ro icn he :. NP. C neh .i u Er .a Tz az bi: N lao cn ce i. U. . F n . t o o : Evidence for th e pathogenicity of come from animal studies where None. G. Neri: None. knockout mice display morphologic brain abnormalities and disrupti- o1n7 o0f the geneimpairs memory, learning and moE odS . H ThG is 2 th0 r1 ee3 -g | e nP eA raR tiI oS n, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .064 Congenital RTT variant in a Bulgarian patient, caused by mutation in FOXG1 gene monstrated that 5-aza-2-deoxycytydine (5-azadC) treatment of FXS lympho- A. V. Kirov1,2, I. Litvinenko3, T. Todorov2, A. Todorova1,2, R. Tincheva3, V. Mitev1; blastoid cells reactivates the silent gene, allowing CpG sites demethylation, 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory increased acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and methylation of lysine 4 on Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, histone 3. Recently we observed that reactivation of FMR1 transcription is Bulgaria. long lasting, up to a month after a 7-days treatment with 1 µM 5-azadC, and that maximum level of transcription are reached 10-15 days after 5-azadC last administration. In order to check the specificity of the 5-azadC-induced Rett syndrome (RTT, MIM #312750) is mostly caused by mutations in the DNA demethylation, we performed bisulphite sequencing of the entire me- X-linked MEC
P2  gene and mutations have been identified in 95-97% of ty- thylation boundary upstream the FMR1 promoter region, which is preser- pical RTT patients, but only in 50-70% of atypical cases. This indicates both ved in WT cells [Naumann et al., 2009]. We did not observe any modification genetic and clinical heterogeneity of the RTT variants. Over the last years, of the methylation boundary after the treatment. Furthermore, methylation mutations in the FOXG1 genes have been associated with congenital RTT va- analysis by MS-MLPA of PWS/AS and BWS/SRS loci demonstrated that 5-az- riants. Here we report a 4 years old girl who has been clinically diagnosed as adC treatment has no demethylating effect on these regions. Taken together RTT. She had normal occipitofrontal head circumference (OFC) at birth and these data show that 5-azadC has a long lasting reactivating effect on the deceleration of head growth from birth, current OFC centile 45 cm, microce- mutant FMR1 gene and that its demethylating effect on genomic DNA is not phaly (standard deviation score, SDS - 3,43). The patient suffered from sleep random but rather restricted to specific regions. This specificity of action disturbances, mood lability and inconsolable crying. The regression started may open new perspectives for a drug-based epigenetic therapy of FXS. at 5 months of age. The seizure onset was after regression - 11 months of Supported by Telethon Onlus, FRAXA Foundation and Italian Association for age. Additional features were: severe intellectual disability, severely impai- fGra. gMilaen Xc àsnyno:d Nroomnee.. S. Lanni: None. M. Goracci: None. M. Moscarda: None. E. red language, hypotonia, stereotypic hand movements, no ability to walk, Tabolacci: None. P. Chiurazzi: None. G. Neri: None. bruxism and convergent strabismus. The molecular genetic analysis for mu- tations in MEC
P2  gene was negative. The specific phenotype classified the patient as congenital RTT variant and screening for FOXG1 mutations was 
P05 .067 performed. A novel heterozygous nonsense mutation c.406G>T, p.Glu136* BKCa channels: a new therapeutic target in Fragile X Syndrome was detected. The detected mutation is situated in the N-terminal protein treatment domain, in the region mostly affected by frameshift disruptions. Our results B. Hebert1, O. Perche2, A. Menuet1, N. Doisne1, J. Pichon1, B. Laudier1, S. Briault2; show how important the strict clinical criteria for distinguishing RTT vari- 1CNRS - UMR7355 - UNIVERSITY OF ORLEANS, Orleans, France, 2CHRO - CNRS - ants are, in order to be able to offer the family adequate molecular genetic UMR7355 - UNIVERSITY OF ORLEANS, Orleans, France. testing. Acknowledgements: The study was supported by the grant No52/2012, So- FMR1 f Aia. VM. eKdiriocva:l UNnonivee. rIs. iLtiyt,v Binuelngakroi:a None. T. Todorov: None. A. Todorova: The most common cause of inherited mental deficiency (MD) associated None. R. Tincheva: None. V. Mitev: None. with autistic features, Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), results fromf mthre1 gene silencing and loss of Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP). Among synaptic proteins deregulated by the absence of Fmrp in knock-out 
P05 .065 (KO2+) mice (murine model for FXS), Kcnma1 (α-subunit of large conductance Behavioral phenotype of 8 patients with fragile X syndrome Ca -activated potassium channels, BKCa) seems to be the most significant m. trabelsi1, r. sakka1, n. gharbi1, f. maazoul1, l. kraoua1, i. ouertani1, r. meddeb1, a. deregulated one. Since several papers showed an involvement of BKCa chan- belhadj2, r. mrad1, h. chaabouni1, T. Tunisian Network on Mental Retardation3; nels in MD, this channfmelr c1ould be a new therapeutic target for FXS. 1service des maladies congenitales et hereditaires, tunis, Tunisia, 2service de psychiatrie, The objectives of this study were: 1) to characterize the molecular BKCa hôpital Razi, tunis, Tunisia, 3Tunisian Network on Mental Retardation, tunis, Tunisia. channel anomaly in KO mfmours1e model and 2) to evaluate the thera- pfmeur1tic effect of a BfmKCr1a channel opener molecule (BCOM), BMS-204352, on dendritic spines maturation of KO neurons and on social behavior of Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common inherited cause of intellectual KO miceIn. Ivni tro KO mice, Kcnma1 protein quantity was lower in ce- disability due to an expansion in the full mutation range (>200 CGG repeats) rebral strucftmurr1es and neuronsIn, avnivdo associated with a reduced BKCa whole of the promoter region of the FMR1 gene leading to gene silencing. Lack of cell current. addition of BMS-204352 induced dendrite spines ma- the corresponding protein FMRP will cause FXS which is characterized by turation of KO neurons. , using a behavioral test of direct social intellectual deficiency, behavioral disorders, facial dysmorphy and macroor- interaction, a single injection of BMS-204352 rescued affiliative befmharv1iors chidism. Here we report on the behavioral profile of eight patients showing to wild-type level. a confirmed FXS. The parents’ interview revealed that all patients expressed In conclusion, we demonstrated 1) a Kcnma1 protein anomaly in KO symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Aggression and self-injury mice inducingf ma rd1ecrease in BKCa whole cell current, and 2) that a BCOM, were found in 6 patients, stereotyped patterns of behaviors, interests, and BMS-204352, restored a regular phenotype of dendrite spines and social activities were noted in 4 patients and attention issues were observed in interaction in KO mice. Therefore, BKCa channel could be a new thera- 4 patients. Only one patient fulfilled the criteria for infantile autism. Other pBe.u Htiecb tearrtg: eNto inne F. XOS. Ptreeracthme:e Nnto.ne. A. Menuet: None. N. Doisne: None. J. behavioral anomalies were also seen such hyperactivity (5 patients/8) and Pichon: None. B. Laudier: None. S. Briault: None. psychotic disharmony (1patient/8). These results confirm the heterogenei- ty of behavioral profile in FXS and the common association between FXS and autistic disorders. Such study, considering the behavioral phenotype 
P05 .068 of genetic syndromes, like FXS, allows us to explain associated psychiatric Detection of full mutation FMR1 and AFF2 alleles by Methylation- disorders, to adjust the assessment of intellectual disability level, to adapt Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification method in educational guidance and rehabilitative plans and to update patient scree- male patients with intellectual disability nMin. gtr ainb ethlsei :f uNtounree.. R. sakka: None. N. gharbi: None. F. maazoul: None. L. I. Sansović, I. Barišić; kraoua: None. I. ouertani: None. R. meddeb: None. A. belhadj: None. R. mrad: Children‘s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. None. H. chaabouni: None. T. Tunisian Network on Mental Retardation: None. Mutations in genes FMR1 and AFF2 on X chromosome cause Fragile X (FXS) 
P05 .066 and Fragile XE (FRAXE) syndromes respectively, two common forms of in- Reactivation of the FMR1 gene in fragile X lymphoblastoid cells herited intellectual disability in men. The most frequent alteration in the- by 5-aza-2-deoxycytydine does not cause random genomic DNA se genes is the abnormal extension of trinucleotide repeats in exon 1 and demethylation abnormal gene methylation. Based on the number of trinucleotide repeats, G. Mancàno, S. Lanni, M. Goracci, M. Moscarda, E. Tabolacci, P. Chiurazzi, G. Neri; there are four types of the alleles: normal, intermediate, premutation and Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. full mutation. Patients with full mutation alleles usually display classic form of FXS. Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by CGG expansion over 200 repeats at (MS-MLPA) method enables detection of deletions/duplications, and also the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene and subsequent DNA methylation of both the analysis of methylation status of promoter of FMR1/AFF2 gene. expanded sequence and the CpGs of the promoter region. This epigenetic We have analyzed 17 male patients with FXS and one male patient with FRA- change causes transcriptional silencing oEf SthHe gGe n2e0. W1e3 h |a vPeA pRreIvSi,o uFsRlyA dNe-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 171 XE by MS-MLPA method previously tested by Expand-long PCR method; 12ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SHANK3 with FMR1-full mutation, three mosaics with FMR1-full mutation and nor- aAdimdisti.on to haploinsufficiency, is likely. Because PMS is considered mal /premutation alleles, two with FMR1-normal allele and FXS phenotype to be underdiagnosed, the true prevalence is unknown. and one with AFF2-full mutation. MS-MLPA analysis has shown hyperme- We aim to define a possible genotype phenotype comparison to use thylation pattern of full mutation in all but one subject which has normal high-resolution deletion breakpoint mapping on a large cohort of patients, FMR1 allele. In subject in whom karyotype analysis showed 36% of cells aRdedsruelstsse. d the hypothesis that additional genes or regions of chromosome with fragile X chromosome and Expand-long PCR one normal allele, MS 22q13 besides SHANK3 may contribute to the PMS phenotype. MLPA revealed FMR1- full mutation allele. Terminal deletion breakpoints were identified for more than 50 MS-MLPA method enables clear and reliable distinction between normal/ individuals in a patient cohort using a custom-designed high-resolution oli- premutation and full mutation FMR1/AFF2 alleles in male subjects that gonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridisation platform, prompting makes it suitable for a screening method. Also, it is highly sensitive and this genotype phenotype association study. Most of them have been studied therefore useful in clarification of FXS mosaic cases which Expand-long PCR by FISH, MLPA and array-CGH and their clinical features have been defined. m I. eStahnosdo wviaćs: Nunonaeb.l eI. tBoa drieštiće:c tN.one. ICnotnercelustsiinognlys,. a great genetic variability, with deletion sizes between 10 Kb and as much as 9 MB was found. Preliminary data from this large cohort (first, with Spanish 
P05 .069 patients) were presented and may it provide additional data on genotype- pJh. eNneovtaydpoe: hNyopnoet. hMe.s Pisa.lomares: None. F. Santos: None. E. Vallespin: None. A. Genetic dissection of Intellectual Disability using SNP-arrays in Polish Delicado: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. M.L. de Torres: None. M.A. Mori: cohort. None. M. Milá: None. M. Del Campo: None. L. Armengol: None. E. Guillén: S. Dębicki1, M. Badura-Stronka1,2, M. Wysocki2, B. Budny1, M. Wiśniewska1,2, R. Glazar2, A. None. J. Rosell: None. E. Galán: None. L.D. Pablo: None. Materna-Kiryluk2, E. Bonora3, P. Magini3, K. Männik4, C. Graziano3, A. Kurg4, M. Piechota2, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; 1Department of Medical Genetics Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland, 3U.O. Genetica Medica, University 
P05 .071 of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology University of Tartu, A novel recessive intellectual disability syndrome caused by GPI- Tartu, Estonia. anchor deficiency M. Kvarnung1, D. Nilsson1, A. Lindstrand1, C. Korenke2, S. Chiang3, E. Blennow1, M. Bergmann4, T. Stödberg5, O. Mäkitie1, B. Anderlid1, Y. Bryceson6, M. Nordenskjöld1, A. The goal of the CHERISH project was to establish an interdisciplinary Ea- Nordgren1; stern Europe and Central Asia consortium of experts to perform a research 1Dept of Molecular Medicine and SurgeryKarolinska Institutet, Stockholm, program of clinical, scientific and public activities for generation of new Sweden, 2Klinikum Oldenburg Zentrum für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin (Elisabeth knowledge about genetic causes of Intellectual Disability (ID). One of the Kinderkrankenhaus), Oldenburg, Germany, 3entre for Infectious Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,, Stockholm, Sweden, 47Institute for Neuropathology, Klinikum Bremen- main objectives was to identify genomic rearrangements responsible for ID Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 5Department of Women´s and Children´s Health, Karolinska using SNP-arrays. To screen the CNVs in 24 patients, we used the Genome- Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 66Centre for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix, 1M). In 36 patients, the InfiniumHD Karolinska Institutet,, Stockholm, Sweden. whole-genome genotyping assay with the HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChips (Illumina Inc., 300k) was performed. Twelve potentially pathogenic (9 de novo) rearrangements were found in 10 out of 60 investigated individuals Syndromes with a phenotype that include intellectual disability and/or (16,7%), with all rearrangements confirmed by qPCR or MLPA. In Table 1 seizures are clinically and etiologically heterogeneous, rendering diagnostic the most interesting findings have been listed. challenges. In the present study, we used whole exome sequencing (WES) to T Pa ab til ee n 1 t . Selected genomic rearr Ga en ng oe mm ie cn ts in Polish patients identified by delineate the molecular basis for an autosomal recessive syndrome. We ex- SnNuPm-baerrrays wRietharinra tnhgee CmHeEntRISH pporosijteicotn. Comment amined four patients in a consanguineous kindred with a strikingly similar phenotype, characterized by distinct facial features, intellectual disability, SHANK2) 309-POL- 70,308,218- autism susceptibAiTliRty-X locus hypotonia and seizures, in combination with skeletal and ophthalmologic 001-045 dup11q13.3q13.4 70,478,809 ( findings. WES identified a homozygous mutation in a gene previously not deletion within gene for reported in any human disease, and Sanger sequencing of additional family 652-POL- delXq21.1 in a 76,907,922- 002-123 female patient 77,078,030 alpha talasemia mental retardation members confirmed segregation with the disease. The gene encodes a prote- syndrome in in the GPI-anchor pathway, and by flow-cytometry we found that leukocy- 655-POL- del11q13.1 65,952,841- e iN nnP vcA ooS lm v4 ep dBa B oss rSi 1 mng a yge bn ee is n t vh oa lvt ea dre i n ID: tes from the patients had significantly reduced levels of the protein, strongly 001-124 66,768,341 , supporting the pathogenicity of the mutation. In addition, loss of function of The research is funded by the European Community‘s 7th FP [F
P7 /2007- the gene in a morpholino-mediated zebra-fish knock-down model led to a 2 
S0 . 1D3ę]b uicnkdi:e rN gornaen. tM a. gBraedeumrean-St tnro° n2k2a3: 6N9o2n,e C. HME. RWIySsHo pckroi:j eNcotn.e. B. Budny: gastrulation defect. Our results demonstrate a new pathogenic mechanism None. M. Wiśniewska: None. R. Glazar: None. A. Materna-Kiryluk: None. E. in the GPI-anchor pathway and expand the spectrum of disorders belonging Bonora: None. P. Magini: None. K. Männik: None. C. Graziano: None. A. Kurg: t Mo .t hKev aermnuenrggi:n Ngo gnreo.u Dp. oNfi lGsPsoI-na:n Nchonoer. d Ae.f iLciinednsctireasn.d: None. C. Korenke: None. M. Piechota: None. A. Latos-Bieleńska: None. None. S. Chiang: None. E. Blennow: None. M. Bergmann: None. T. Stödberg: None. O. Mäkitie: None. B. Anderlid: None. Y. Bryceson: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. A. Nordgren: None. 
P05 .070 Study of a large Spanish cohort of 22q13 deletion syndrome´s patients. A genotype-phenotype correlation? 
P05 .072 J. Nevado1,2, M. Palomares1,2, F. Santos1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, A. Delicado1,2, S. García-Miñaúr1,2, HDA
C1 : a novel cause of autism, developmental delay and epilepsy M. L. de Torres1,2, M. A. Mori1,2, M. Milá3,4, M. Del Campo5, L. Armengol6, E. Guillén7, J. M. J. DASOUKI1, J. Roberts1, W. Zeng2, S. Mullegama3, K. Gonzales2, S. Elsea3; Rosell8, E. Galán9, L. D. Pablo1,2; 1University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, United States, 2Ambry Genetics, 1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 3Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United Spain, 4CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 6Q- States. Genomics, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 8Hospital Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 9Hospital Materno Infantil Infanta Cristina, Badajoz, Spain. Autism and epilepsy are clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders. Epilepsy occurs in 25% of patients with autism. Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA) and massively parallel sequencing have identified a large Phelan-McDermid SynSdHroAmNeK 3(PMS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder number of genomic regions as well as specific genes which confer suscep- caused by the deletion or disruption of a 22q13 region containing the post- tibility to autism. Six pathogenic copy number variants (4 deletions and 2 synaptic protein gene . The clinical features of PMS (also known duplications) which ranged from 1.3 -17.2 Mb and overlapping the HDA
C1  as 22q13 deletion syndrome) are highly variable and include hypotonia, gene had been reported. HDA
C1 , a histone deacetylase, directly interacts speech and otherdevelopmental delays, autistic traits and mildly dysmor- with MeC
P2  through the transcription co-repressor Sin3A/HDAC complex. phic features. Other less frequent features include seizures, brain, renal and Mutations in MEC
P2  cause Rett syndrome; however, no mutations have cardiac malformations, motor deficits, and lymphedema Patient deletion been described in HDA
C1  so far. In a 10 year old boy with non-syndromic sizes are also highly variable, Clinical expression also varies widely, even autism, developmental delay and epilepsy, routine karyotype, CMA, meta- among patients with small deletions, and no correlation between deletion s1iz7e2 and phenotype has been found. A role for addE iS tioH nG al g2 e0 ne1 t3 ic | fa P ctA orR s,I S in, FRbAolNic,C aEnd | nWeuWroiWma.EgiSngH sGtu.dOieRs Gwere normal. Whole exome sequencing ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index gDNA from the boy and his parents identified a de novo, novel variant in 250K Nsp chips, exome capture using NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Exome 60Mb HDA
C1  (c.154N>S) which was not detected in public or 1100 private exome and then we made an exome sequencing using Illumina HiSeq 2000. Mutati- databases. Expression of HDA
C1  was reduced by 40% while expression of ons and family segregation are validated by Sanger sequencing. HDA
C4 , RAI1 and MBD5 in the proband’s peripheral blood lymphocytes was Results: Homozygosity mapping defined three regions of interest. By exome normal. sequencing, we identified a previously unreported homozygous two base- Taken together, these data suggest that this novel HDA
C1  mutation prevents pair deletion in the last exon of the CCD
C88 C gene. This frameshift mutation transcription repression leading to autism, developmental delay and epi- p.
E1949 GfsX26 results in a premature stop codon. The mutation was homo- lepsy in this patient. Direct DNA sequencing of gDNA from additional pa- zygous in the affected foetuses and heterozygous in the parents and in both tients with autism +/- epilepsy and normal copy number state of HDA
C1  is healthy sisters. u Mn.dJe. rDwasayo.uki: None. J. Roberts: None. W. Zeng: A. Employment (full or Conclusions: These results confirm that combination of homozygosity map- part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. S. Mullegama: None. K. Gonzales: A. ping and exome sequencing is a valuable tool to discover new genes. The Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. S. Elsea: None. development of next-generation sequencing will help to better understand brain malformations by uncovering the multiple genetic mechanisms. OAt.h Derrise lpsamtiae:n Ntso naere. Mn.e Dedeeladu tnoo fyi:n Ndo nneew. C g.e Pneersa.zzolo: None. J. Désir: None. N. 
P05 .073 Van Regemorter: None. I. Pirson: None. M. Abramowicz: None. Identification of a novel missense mutation in HUW
E1  (Xp11.2) segregating with intellectual disability in a large family, by Targeted High-Throughput Sequencing. 
P05 .075 Y. Alembik1, J. Lauer Zillhardt2, B. Gerard2, C. Redin3,4, B. Van Loon5, L. Castelnau6, J. Hyperphosphatasia with Intellectual Disability (Mabry) Syndrome - Chelly6,7, J. Mandel2,3,4, A. Piton3,4; two adult patients 1Service de génétique médicale des Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, L. Poelsler, C. Fauth, B. Krabichler, B. Utermann, S. Tinschert, J. Zschocke; France, 2Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique des Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Division of Human Genetics; Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. Strasbourg, France, 3Department of Translational Medicine and Neurogenetics, IGBMC (CNRS, INSERM and Université de Strasbourg), Illkirch, France, 4Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Paris, France, 5Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 6Inserm U1016, Genetics The combination of persistent hyperphosphatasia, intellectual disability, and pathophysiology of neurodevelopmental and neuromuscular diseases, Paris, France, neurologic deficits and epilepsy, and variable morphological anomalies was 7AP–HP, Cochin-Saint Vincent de Paul Hospital, Biochimistry and molecular genetics first described in 1970 by Mabry et al (OMIM #239300). It is caused by de- laboratory, Paris, France. ficient synthesis of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor required fPoIrG Vthe attPaIcGhOment of cell-surface proteins to the plasma membrane and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Causative mutations in two genes, Genetic diagnosis in Intellectual Disability (ID) remains difficult because of and , have been identified. So far only children and adolescents the extreme genetic heterogeneity of this frequent condition. We report the have been reported in the literature. case of a large 4-generation family with suggestive X-linked inheritance of ID We report here on two adult siblings of Austrian descent, a 34-year-old man (XLID), in which 20 members are affected, with moderate to severe ID and (patient 1) and a 28-year-old woman (patient 2), who showed severe intel- mild dysmorphic features in males, and behavioral phenotype in females. lectual disability with very little speech development and hyperphospha- Standard cytogenetic and molecular investigations did not provide a diagno- tasia. Craniofacial features included macrocephaly, coarse facial features, sis. A young patient of this family was included in a strategy of targeted high- arched eyebrows, up-slanting palpebral fissures, a broad nasal root, down- throughput seqHuUeWncEin1g of 220 ID genes. It led to the identification of a novel turned corners of the mouth, a tented upper lip, and a bifid uvula. Their missense mutation (c.6437C>G; p.Thr2146Arg) affecting a highly conserved thumbs were broad and their fingers short, in particular the distal phalan- residue in the gene. We then showed its co-segregation with ID in ges. Patient 2 had a short perineum. At the age of 8 months a febrile seizure 3 affected males and 3 obligate carrier females while it was absent in 3 un- was suspected in patient 2 and EEG abnormalities were detected; she did affected males. Analysis of available DNA for others family members is on- not have antiepileptic treatment in years and no further seizures occurred. going. ThiHs UmWisEse1nse predicted to be damaging (SIFT, Polyphen2), is absent Patient 1 never had seizures. Both patients showed a pronounced change in from 10,563 chromosomes in the EVS database. Overlapping duplications facial phenotype with age which lead to a coarsening oPf IfGaVcial features. including have been found to segregate with ID in d1e2 nfaomvoilies (Froy- The parents are distantly related and SNP-array analysis in patient 2 showed en et al.2012). Three missense mutations were also shown to segregate with several regions of autozygosity, one of which included on chromosome ID in 3 families with probable or possible XLID, while a missense 1 L. .R Peoseullstlse or:f Nmoonlee.c Cu.l aFra auntha:l yNsoense a. rBe. pKernadbiicnhgl.er: None. B. Utermann: was recently observed in a boy with autism spectrum disorder but noHtU inW hEi1s None. S. Tinschert: None. J. Zschocke: None. more mildly affected brother. It is therefore probable that the p.Thr2146Arg missense is causative of ID in this large family. A functional test of activity on DNA repair is currently performed on patient’s cells to confirm 
P05 .076 iYts. Aplaetmhobgike:n Nicointye.. J. Lauer Zillhardt: None. B. Gerard: None. C. Redin: A patient with cryptic interstitial 0.72-Mb deletion in the 22q13.2 None. B. Van Loon: None. L. Castelnau: None. J. Chelly: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Piton: None. region R. Teek1,2, K. Simenson3, K. Kuuse1, E. Õiglane-Šlik2,4, K. Õunap1,2; 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Medical Faculty, 
P05 .074 University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing approachs to find new Estonia. gene(s) of recessive hydrocephalus A. Drielsma1, M. Delaunoy1, C. Perazzolo1, J. Désir2, N. Van Regemorter2, I. Pirson1, M. Abramowicz3; The 22q13 deletion syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability 1IRIBHM-Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Medical (ID),S dHeAvNelKo3pmental delay, speech deficit and hypotonia. Almost all of the Genetics, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 3Department published 22q13 deletions have been described as terminal. It is estimated of Medical Genetics and IRIBHM-Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. that gene, which maps to 22q13 region, is the major candidate gene for the neurologic features of the syndrome. Four cases with interstitial de- letions of 22q13 are reported previously. Background: Hydrocephalus is one of the commonest brain malformations. We report on a 7-year-old boy with ID, autistic behavior; abnormal EEG, spa- Its incidence is about 3 cases per 1000 live births. It is estimated that 40% sticity and mild dysmorphic features included ptosis, facial asymmetry, pro- of hydrocephalus would be of genetic origin. However, very few molecular minent ears, clinodactyly of F5, T2-3 syndactyly. Patient also suffers from causes are known. We recruit families with multiple cases of congenital hy- persistent urticaria with eosinophilia and elevatedde IngoEv olevel (2140 KU/L, drocephalus compatible with a recessive inheritance. normal<90). Chromosomal microarray analysis (HumanCytoSNP-12 Bead- Here, we report a large family in which a consanguineous couple had five Chip; Illumina Inc.) revealeSdR aE BsmF2a, llC iYnPte2rDs6ti,t iNoFnAaMl 1, TNFR 0S.7F213 MCb deletion female fetuses with hydrocephalus identified during the second trimester iSnH cAhNrKo3mosomal region 22q13.2. This region harbors several known genes of pregnancy. Affected fetuses presented with uni- to triventricular hydro- with different functions ( SHANK ), but not cephalus and small cerebellum. Histology showed an opened aqueduct of gene.Our patient has the smallest deletion among reported 22q13 Sylvius, ciliated ependymal cells and normal cortex architecture. region deletions and two copies of 3 gene. Our patient phenotype Material and methods: We perform homoEzSygHosGit y2 m0a1p3pi n| gP wAiRthI SAf,f yFmReAtrNix CEs |h WowWed Wso.mEeS dHifGfer.eOnRceGs in comparison with other patients with 22q1137 d3e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Conclussion: letion. Although he has ID and eTaNrFlyR SchF1il3dChood speech delay, he has normal This study confirms that the combination of MLPA analysis growth parametNerFsA. MIn1 addition he has immune system dysfunction, which and FISH still allows to resolve cases, where the genetic causes of the clinical may be caused by a deletion of gene (related to immune system f Ie. aNtuavreasrr roe Vmearain: Nunoneex.p Sla. iCneirdia. Abad: None. M. Cristina: None. R. Marín: dysfunction) or gene (cause atopic dermatitis and high IgE levels). None. P. Madero Barrajón: None. It has been previously supposed that 22q13 deletion syndrome may be as- sociated with immune system dysfunction in addition to neuropsychiatric d Ris. oTredeekr: sN.one. K. Simenson: None. K. Kuuse: None. E. Õiglane-Šlik: None. K. 
P05 .080 Õunap: None. Distal 16p11.2 duplication in two patients with intellectual disability C. Pagan, S. Drunat, L. Perrin, C. Dupont, B. Benzacken, A. Verloes, A. Tabet; Department of Genetics - Robert Debré Hospital - APHP, Paris, France. 
P05 .078 Homozygous intragenic duplication of TRAPP
C9  associated with intellectual deficiency, postnatal microcephaly, and brain anomalies. Several recurrent rearrangements have been described at 16p11.2 locus. C. Coubes1, A. Schneider2, N. Ruiz-Pallares2, A. Roubertie3, P. Blanchet1, M. Girard2, M. Deletions and duplications of a proximal 600 kb region (29.5-30.1 Mb) have Tournaire2, L. Pinson1, E. Haquet1, S. Taviaux2, F. Pellestor2, M. Willems1, V. Gatinois2, D. been associated with autism, intellectual disability, schizophrenia, and mir- Geneviève1, P. Sarda1,2, G. Lefort2, J. Puechberty1,2; ror metabolic phenotypes. In addition, deletions of an adjacent, distal 200 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, kb region (28.7-28.9 Mb) have been associated with obesity and develop- 2Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, mental delay. Here we describe two male patients presenting with mental France, 3Département de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Gui-de-Chauliac, Montpellier, France. retardation and carrying the reciprocal distal 16p11.2 duplication, identi- fied by whole genome SNP array (HumanCytoSNP-12, Illumina) in one case and CGH-array (Agilent, 180K) in the other one. Intellectual deficiency (ID) is a public health problem concerning 1 to 3% The first patient displayed intellectual disability, motor delay, attention defi- of children. ID is clinically and genetically heterogeneous, and can be divi- cit, dysmorphic features and dextrocardia. He had average height and weight. ded into non-syndromic- (isolated) and syndromic forms when associated The duplication (200 kb, 28.7-28.9 Mb) was inherited from his father. The with other features. We report a 5-year-9-month-old girl born to first-cousin second patient presented with intellectual disability, severe language delay, parents after an uneventful pregnancy. She presented with psychomotor de- mild hand tremor but without dysmorphic feathtures. His height was average, lay (walking achieved at 2.5 years), ID, behavioural troubles (hyperactivity, and his weight within low normal range (10 percentile). The duplication stereotypies, sleep disorders), speech defect, postnatal microcephaly, and (285 kb, 28.7-29.0 Mb) was inherited from his mother, while there was a spasticity of lower limbs. Brain MRI showed corpus callosum and vermis hy- marked history of language disorders for his father and paternal family. poplasia, and moderate bilateral symetric leucopathy. Microarray analysis These two observations suggest that the distal 16p11.2 duplication may revealed an intragenic duplication of the TRAPP
C9  gene in the 8q24.3 regi- be a risk factor for intellectual disability. One or few genes included in the on. qPCR identified 4 copies of the microrearrangement as well as an hete- duplicated region could be dosage sensitive. However, it is likely that unde- rozygous status for the duplication in both parents. TRAPP
C9  encodes for a termined, additional hits contribute to the phenotype of these patients, as protein involved in intracytoplasmic vesicular transport with a wide tissular indicated by the transmission of the duplication by an unaffected parent, the expression. TRAPP
C9  mutations have been reported in non-syndromic ID informative family history of the second patient, and the phenotypic diffe- patients from consanguineous families, with features similar to those ob- rCe.n Pceasg abne:t wNoeneen. tSh.e D trwuon apta: tNieonntes.. L. Perrin: None. C. Dupont: None. B. served in our patient. These mutations could represent a frequent cause of Benzacken: None. A. Verloes: None. A. Tabet: None. autosomal-recessive ID when associated with postnatal microcephaly, beha- vioural troubles, and corpus callosum anomalies. Although point mutations have often been published, to our knowledge, this is only the second report 
P05 .081 of a microrearrangement of the TRAPP
C9  gene, which may be responsible Clinical and cytogenetic features of Smith Magenis and Potocki-Lupski for autosomal-recessive ID (first case: homozygous 8q24.3 microdeletion). syndromes: about two Tunisian cases In a attempt to delineate a specific phenotype suggesting a TRAPP
C9  altera- t Cio. nC, owueb eresv: iNeowneed. Ath. eS pchantieeindtesr :r eNpoonret.e Nd. iRn utihze-P liatlelarraetsu:r eN.one. A. Roubertie: H. Ben khelifa1, N. Soyah2, I. Ben Abdallah1, A. Labalme3, D. SANLAVILL
E3 , H. ELGHEZA
L1 , None. P. Blanchet: None. M. Girard: None. M. Tournaire: None. L. Pinson: S. MOUGOU-ZRELLI1, A. SAAD1; None. E. Haquet: None. S. Taviaux: None. F. Pellestor: None. M. Willems: 1laboratory of cytogenetics,molecular genetics and reproductive biology - Farhat None. V. Gatinois: None. D. Geneviève: None. P. Sarda: None. G. Lefort: Hached hospital, sousse, Tunisia, 2pediatrics department Farhat Hached Hospital, sousse, None. J. Puechberty: None. Tunisia, 3laboratory of cytogenetics,CBPE - Bron, Lyon, France. Smith Magenis (SMS) and Potocki Lupski (PTLS) syndromes have long been 
P05 .079 known to display specific neurobehavioral traits. These syndromes are two Molecular characterization of a patient suffering Intellectual examples of Contiguous Gene Syndrome that are associated with a micro- Disability. deletion and microduplication respectively withRinA I1chromosome 17 band I. Navarro Vera1, S. Ciria Abad1, M. Cristina1, R. Marín2, P. Madero Barrajón1; p11.2. The dosage sensitive gene responsible for mRoAsIt1 p henotypes in SMS 1Centro de Análisis Genéticos, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain. has been identified: the Retinoic Acid Induced 1 ( ). Introduction: Studies on mouse models and humans suggest that is likely the dosage sensitive gene responsible for clinical features in PTLS. Intellectual disability is of major concern troughout the We carried out a complete cytogenetic analysis for two Tunisian patients world. In 40% of the cases etiology remains unknown. screened for craniofacial anomalies, intellectual disability and behavioral Here we present a four years old girl showing psychomotor retardation, lan- disorders with a diagnosis of SMS and PTLS syndromes. RHG banding naonvao- guage difficulty and dismorphic features. Parents were non consanguineous lyses were normal. Whole genome analysis with the Agilent Human Genome and healthy. In all of them, kariotype was normal, at 550 level banding GTG. CGH Microarray Kit 180K proceeded on our patients’ DNAs revealed deR AI1 WMee tpheordfosr:med MLPA analysis in order to detect possible subtelomeric rear- 3,5 Mb microdeletion and 7,5 Mb microduplication on chromosome 17p11i.2n rangements, and confirmed our results by FISH. eSintcuompassing OMIM genes especially Retinoic Acid Induced 1 Gene ( ). MLPA analysis were performed using the SALSA 
P036  Human The confirmation and parents‘analysis were performed by fluorescent Telomere-3 containing one probe for each subtelomeric region from chro- hybridation (FISH). mosome 1-22 and the two X/Y pseudoautosomal regions and SALSA 
P286  In the present study, the karyotype’s level of resolution did not achieve to containing eight probes specific for the 10q26.3 region (MRC Holland, Am- detect these aberrations. However, the whole genome coverage provided sRteesrudaltms:, The Netherlands). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with by high resolution level technique as array CGH has displayed these micro subtelomeric probes (Kreatech) were carried out. imbalances and achieved to delineate the breakpoints. This highlights the MLPA analysis with SALSA 
P036  showed evidence of a deletion effectiveness of this microarray which overcomes the standard karyotype. in the terminal region of chromosome 10q (probe PAOX gene in 10q26.3). So, our results enable us to discuss the role of the microarrays’ spot in cyto- Further analysis with SALSA 
P286  showed a deletion from at least 5.44Mb in g He.n Beetinc klahbeolirfaat: oNroiense .a Nnd. S wohyeathh: eNro int ec.a In. Breepnl Aacbed tahllea hst: aNnodnaer.d A k. aLrayboatlympee:. 10q26.3 involving all eight probes located in this region. FISH using probes None. D. Sanlaville: None. H. Elghezal: None. S. Mougou-zrelli: None. A. Saad: 10pter (D10
S2488 ) adned n 1o0vqoter (D10
S2290 ) confirmed this deletion detec- None. ted by MLPA in the index case and showed normal patterns in her parents, d 1e 7te 4rmining it was a alteration. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .082 
P05 .084 Contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital Loss of FMR2 further emphasises the link between deregulation unexplained intellectual and developmental disabilities in 149 of immediate early response genes FOS and JUN and intellectual patients: the first Lebanese study leading to new findings in CNVs disability N. Alam Choucair1, J. Abou Ghoch1, L. Villard2, A. Mégarbané1,3, E. Chouery1; L. Nguyen1, M. Melko2,3,4, M. Shaw1, L. Jolly1, B. Bardoni2,3,4, J. Gecz1,5; 1University of Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 2University of Aix-Marseille II, Marseille, 1School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, The University of Adelaide, North France, 3Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France. Adelaide, Australia, 2Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7275, Nice, France, 3Faculté de Médecine, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, Purpose: France, 4CNRS LIA “Neogenex”, Valbonne, France, 5Department of Genetics Medicine, SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia. Molecular karyotyping is nowadays the most adopted clinical test for patients with unexplained intellectual disability (ID) and developmental delay (DD). This study exposes the strategy and the conditions of analysis Loss of FMR2 causes Fragile X E (FRAXE) site associated intellectual disabi- leading to the determination of causative copy number variants (CNVs). It lity (ID). FMR2 regulates transcription, promotes alternative splicing with aMlseot hpordesse:nts de novo pathogenic CNVs and reviews for several described preference for G-quartet structure harbouring exons, and is localised to the ones. nuclear speckles. In primary skin fibroblasts from FRAXE patients (n=8), We have applied whole-genome technique to a cohort of 149 le- we found a significant reduction in the number but a significant increase banese patients with ID/DD using the 2.7M array of Affymetrix. Confirmati- in the size of nuclear speckles, when compared to the controls (n=4). Since oRne souf latrsr:ay findings was performed using quantitative PCR. Bioinformatical nuclear speckles are enriched with factors involved in pre-mRNA proces- and statistical analysis were used in order to reduce false positive CNVs. sing, we explored the consequence of these defects and the loss of FMR2 on Criteria were set to improve the reliability of CNVs. When the latter the transcriptome. We performed whole genome expression profiling using is greater than 62 Kb and contains at least 49 markers it is then considered total RNA extracted from these cell lines and found 27 genes significantly as certainly existing. deregulated by at least 2-fold at P < 0.05 in the patients. Among these ge- 14.8% abnormalities in 149 Lebanese ID/DD patients were detected, of nes, FOS was significantly upregulated and was further investigated due to which 15 aberrations overlapped known causative CNVs and 7 potentially its established role in neuronal cell function. We showed that i) 30% de- pathogenic. pletion of Fmr2 in mouse primary cortical neurons led to a 2-fold increase ACo dnactlaubsaiosen :of copy number polymorphisms was constructed displaying in Fos expression, ii) overexpression of FMR2 significantly decreased FOS CNVs carried by 30 healthy individuals. promoter activity in luciferase assays, and iii) as FOS promoter contains a This is the first Lebanese whole genome study of ID/DD pa- serum response element, we found that not FOS, but JUN, which encodes for tients. It has shown the importance of uncovering genomic imbalances in a protein that forms a transcriptional activator complex with FOS, was si- the diagnostic and research approaches. All CNVs found will be a guide to c Nli.n Aiclaiamn sC, hhoeulpcianigr: tNhoenme .i nJ. tAhbeo duia Gghnoocshis: oNfo fnuer.t hLe. rV iclalasreds:. None. A. gnificantly upregulated in the patients’ cell lines upon mitogen stimulation. Mégarbané: None. E. Chouery: None. These results suggest that FMR2 is an upstream regulator of FOS and JUN, and further link deregulation of the immediate early response genes to the p La. tNhgouloygeyn :o Nf IoDn ea.n Md. FMReAlkXoE: aNsosnoec.i aMt.e Sd hIDaw in: N poanreti.c Lu.l aJro.lly: None. B. Bardoni: None. J. Gecz: None. 
P05 .083 EPHA1 
C1475 T and 
C1891 T polymorphisms in Ukrainian patients with idiopathic intellectual disability R. V. Gulkovskyi1,2, G. M. Bychkova3, S. A. Kravchenko1, N. V. Hryshchenko1, S. Y. 
P05 .085 Chernushyn1, M. Nõukas4, M. Sauk4, L. Milani5, T. Pippucci6, F. Balombo6, C. Graziano6, L. Familial intellectual disability in Brazilian institutions A. Livshits1; A. F. Maris1, I. T. Barbato2, J. H. Barbato2,3, G. R. de Luca3, L. F. de Oliveira1, L. S. Linhares1, 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, N. Baretto1, N. Rigobeli1; Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Educational and Scientific 1Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil, 2Neurogene, Centre „Institute of Biology“, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3Research Centre for Radiation Medicine, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil, 3Hospital Infantil Joana de Gusmão, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil. NAMS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 4Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia, 6U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. We present the results of the first part of a project whose main purpose is to understand the relevance of familial intellectual disability among the po- pulation of individuals with moderate to severe intellectual disability who Exome analysis of an Ukrainian family with healthy unrelated parents and attend special day care institutions. two brothers affected by Intellectual Disability (ID) revEePaHleAd1 several vari- For this purpose we developed a survey instrument which was applied by ants in either homozygous or compound heterozygous state in five genes. members of our team to the guardians of 800 familial intellectual disability Among these gEenPeHsA, 1we decided to concentrate on the gene, where individuals in SC, Brazil, to select the families where two or more individuals 
C1475 T (maternal) and 
C1891 T (paternal) substitutions were detected in in three generations have familial intellectual disability. Possible familial ca- both patients . is an ephrin receptor gene, highly expressed in the ses were selected to proceed to the second part of this project (collect family human brain, and it seemed a good candidate for ID. history to validate the data, try to clarify diagnostics). The probandis a 12 year old boy with ID (IQ=43) and hyFpMerRa1ctivity. His Findings of our survey indicate: brother is a 4 year old boy with febrile convulsions, ID and multiple conge- 1) Etiology: 14% with Down Syndrome; 3% due to infectious diseases (me- nital anomalies. Standard karyotype, molecuElaPrH aAn1a lysis of gene and ningitis, rubella, toxoplasmosis, cytalomegalovirus and others; 1.5% due array-CGH analysis (400K) were normal in both patients. to known monogenic causes, 0.8% with known microdeletion/duplication We further investigated the possible role of gene variants in severe syndromes and about 1% with known syndromes of unclear cause. Cerebral ID. Case-control study included 51 patients with severe ID and 186 EinPdHiAvi1- palsy was reported for 11% of the cases, most of them attributed to neonatal duals as a population control. We performed a screening of the two variants oxygen deprivation. through PCR-RFLP (
C1475 T) anEdP HaAll1el e-specific PCR (
C1891 T). The 2) Other cases in the family: 52.5% reported other cases, 8% of which were 1475T allele frequency was significantly higher in ID patients (2,9%) as obviously not related, leaving 39.5% of potential familial cases to proceed compared to controls (0,5%).E PHA1 1891T variant was found neither in to the next part of our project. Of those, 16% had 2 cases; 10% had 3 cases; the control group, nor in ID patients. These preliminary resuElPtsH Ain1dicate a 14% had 4 or more cases (20% of those with 7 to 14 affected individuals). possible association between variants and ID amonEgP HUAkr1ainian pati- Even if many cases may show to be unrelated, the numbers are astonishing. ents. Further studies (especially the complete sequencing of coding T Ah.iFs. iMs athries :f iBrs. tR seusrevaerych o Gf trhanist k(pinrindc wipael kinnvoewst.igator, collaborator or consultant exons) will be conducted to confirm the involvement of mutations and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; CHAMADA in ID development. This study was supported by EC FP-7, CHERISH project PÚBLICA 003/2010 – MS/CNPq/FAPESC/SES PESQUISA PARA O SUS. I.T. n Ro..V 2. 2G3u6lk9o2v.skyi: None. G.M. Bychkova: None. S.A. Kravchenko: None. N.V. Barbato: None. J.H. Barbato: None. G.R. de Luca: None. L.F. de Oliveira: Hryshchenko: None. S.Y. Chernushyn: None. M. Nõukas: None. M. Sauk: None. L.S. Linhares: None. N. Baretto: None. N. Rigobeli: None. None. L. Milani: None. T. Pippucci: None. F. Balombo: None. C. Graziano: None. L.A. Livshits: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 175ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .086 
P05 .088 Analytical & clinical performance assessment of the Affymetrix Phenomic clues to genomic variation in patients with developmental CytoScan® Dx cytogenetic microarray system delay or intellectual disability R. Pfundt1, K. Kwiatkowski2, A. Chaubey3, A. Roter2, S. Close4, J. Reiswig2, E. Thorland5, R. E. Preikšaitienė1,2, A. Molytė1, Z. Ciuladaite1,2, J. Kasnauskiene1, A. Utkus1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; Hockett6, E. T. Fung2; 1Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Affymetrix, Santa Clara, Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. CA, United States, 3Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 4GenEngine, Background and aims Fishers, IN, United States, 5Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 6CombiMatrix Diagnostics, Irvine, CA, United States. . Unless high-resolution microarray technologies have been recommended as the first-tier cytogenetic diagnostic test for patients with developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), still not Identification of pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) by cytogenetic every laboratory has possibilities to perform this analysis to every patient microarrays has demonstrated a higher diagnostic yield as compared to con- wMietthh DodD./ID. Our aim was to determine whether patients with pathogenic ventional methods, such as karyotyping and FISH. This study’s objective was copy number variants (pCNVs) are confident to a distinct clinical subgroup. to characterize analytical and clinical accuracy of CytoScan Dx compared to Retrospective review of clinical and molecular karyotyping data routine patient care (RPC) in surplus samples from a post-natal population oRfe 2su11lt sp.a tients was performed. Clinical data of patients with chromosomal exhibiting developmental delay, intellectual disability, congenital anoma- alterations (n=29) were compared with those without pCNVs (n=182). lies/dysmorphisms. Samples were collected consecutively at 3 sites where The findings indicate the increased frequency of pCNVs in pati- RPC comprised of one or more methods (karyotyping/FISH/microarray) for ents with syndromic DD/ID (p=0.018), at least one congenital anomaly establishing a copy number call (excluding Affymetrix arrays). An indepen- (p=0.005), three and more minor anomalies (p=0.016), congenital malfor- dent cytogeneticist (with no previous patient information) interpreted the mations of CNS (p=0.026), congenital malformations of musculosceletal sy- samples processed at one site on CytoScan Dx. stem (p=0.037) and minor anomalies of eye, ear, face and neck subgroup 960 samples were analyzed. RPC reported 425 CNVs. Analytical accuracy (p=0.003). Statistically significantly several phenotypic traits were more was calculated as the percentage of RPC-identified regions that were corr- frequent in patients with pCNVs, as hydrocephalus (p=0.023), congenital oborated by CytoScan Dx. Excluding 12 RPC-reported regions below the malformations of corpus callosum (p=0.014), downward slantCinagfé paual lpaeit- reported resolution of CytoScan Dx, the analytical accuracy of CytoScan Dx bral fissures (p=0.008), minor anomalies of ear (p=0.002), micrognathia as compared to RPC was 97.3% (95% CI = 95.3-98.5%, 402/413 CNVs). (p=0.004), brachydactyly (p=0.005), umbilical hernia (p=0.008). The average percent CNV overlap between RPC and CytoScan Dx was spots more frequently were in patients without pCNVs (p=0.023). A multiva- 92.8%±11.23. Of the 402 samples that agreed analytically, 67.4% had the riate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the predictors same interpretation. of pCNVs. Three independent predictors of pCNVs were determined: conge- To date, this data represents the largest clinical study assessing both the nCiotnalc mluaslifoonrms. ations of corpus callosum, minor anomalies of ear and brachy- analytical and clinical accuracy of CytoScan® Dx as compared to RPC and dactyly, increasing the risk of pCNVs by 0.1, 3.3 and 7.5 times respectively. validates the high analytical accuracy of CytoScan® Dx. Differences in cli- Our results suggest, that clinical features, as syndromic DD/ nical interpretation are expected as they are influenced by many factors ID, specific congenital and minor anomalies might be possible indicators for including availability of clinical information, parental results, and the time p EC. NPVresi.k šaitienė: None. A. Molytė: None. Z. Ciuladaite: None. J. Kasnauskiene: period of evaluation, since the body of literature regarding the pathogenicity None. A. Utkus: None. V. Kučinskas: None. o Rf .C PNfuVns dcto: nNtoinnue.e Ks .t oK ewviaotlkvoe.wski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Affymetrix. A. Chaubey: None. A. Roter: None. S. Close: None. J. Reiswig: None. E. Thorland: None. R. Hockett: None. E.T. Fung: None. 
P05 .089 A wide spectrum of intellectual disability in two siblings with a 6p22.3-p23 microdeletion encompassing JARID2 
P05 .087 A. C. Foster, G. K. Hall, F. S. Togneri, D. McMullan, T. Cole; Clinical description of a female patient with a mutation in WRD45, a Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. gene involved in a new X-linked NBIA (neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation) C. Mignot1,2,3, A. Gregory4, P. Hogarth4, L. Sanford4, S. Hayflick4, D. Héron1,2; Interstitial deletions of 6p22-6p24 are associated with a variable phenotype 1APHP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Department of Genetics, Paris, France, 2Referral Center for Rare Genetic Intellectual Disabilities, Paris, France, 3APHP, Hôpital including intellectual disability, autistic spectrum disorder, hypotonia and Armand Trousseau, Neuropediatric Unit, Paris, France, 4Oregon Health & Science congenital abnormalities. There are many potential disease-causing genes University, Portland, OR, United States. in this region, including JARID2, DTNB
P1 , ATXN1, and MYLIP, and delinea- ting genotype-phenotype correlations has been a challenge. It has been sug- gested that deletions of JARID2, a DNA-binding transcriptional repressor Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of di- expressed in embryonic and adult neurones, are associated with a characte- seases characterized by the accumulation of iron in the basal ganglia. Six ristic facial appearance as well as intellectual disability. genes are presently involved in NBIA presenting in childhood/adolescence, Our first patient presented with mild to moderate learning disability and each of them having particular clinical and/or radiological features. We re- some Marfanoid systemic features, scoring 6/20 on the revised Ghent cri- port the clinical history of a young adult patient with a disease history sug- teria. Cardiac and ophthalmic investigations were normal. CGH microarray gestive of SENDA syndrome (static encephalopathy with neurodegeneration identified a 1.2Mb microdeletion on chromosome 6p22.3-p23 involving in adulthood), now called BPAN syndrome. JARID2 and DTNB
P1  only; targeted microarray and FISH studies did not A diagnosis of epilepsy and global developmental delay was made at first identify this deletion or a predisposing rearrangement in either parent. examination at 22 months. The evolution was characterized by: 1) easy epi- The patient’s younger brother presented with much more severe learning lepsy control with anti-epileptic drug, 2) severe intellectual deficiency that disabilities and autistic spectrum disorder. He had no similar skeletal fea- became obvious during the first years of life (independent walking achieved tures but both boys had similar prominent supraorbital ridges. Investigation at 2 years, absence of language, limited communication skills) associated with CGH microarray found the same microdeletion, suggesting low level with stereotypies and unmotivated laughters, 3) facial dysmorphism with somatic-gonadal mosaicism or true gonadal mosaicism as a cause for the body asymmetry, 4) the apparition of pyramidal signs with walking difficul- two affected siblings. ties after puberty, 5) an OFC growing on the -2SD curve. This case illustrates the wide spectrum of learning difficulties and behaviou- Brain MRI showed at the age of 16 yePaLrAs 2aG h6eterogeneous signal of the pal- ral difficulties that may be seen even in siblings with identical small micro- lidum on T1-weighted images and a hyposignal of the pallidum and locus deletions in this region. This may represent a challenge to the establishment niger onW T2D-RF4
L5 A.IR-weighted images. mutations were ruled out. The of a clinically recognisable phenotype for JARID2 deletions and highlights c.56-1G>A splice-site mutation not found in the proband’s mother was iden- t Ah.eC c. oFmosptleerx:i Ntyo onef .t hGe.K g.e Hnaeltli:c N aoentieo. lFo.gSy. Toof ginnteerlil:e Nctounael. dDi.s MabciMlituyl.lan: None. T. Cole: None. tified in Clinical and radiolWogDicRa4l 5characteristics in our patients are consistent with the diagnosis of SENDA/BPAN syndrome and with those of other patients with mutation in . Though the initial clinical picture suggested an atypical form of Rett syndrome, brain MRI features only guided the etiogo- g Cic. aMl idginaogtn: oNsoisn.e. A. Gregory: None. P. Hogarth: None. L. Sanford: None. S. Hayflick: None. D. Héron: None. 176 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .090 
P05 .092 Further delineation of medical and behavioural aspects of the KBG The common polymorphism of the KIBRA gene is associated with syndrome caused by ANKRD11 mutations academic achievement C. W. Ockeloen1, M. H. Willemsen1, S. de Munnik1, B. B. van Bon1, A. Verrips2, H. IJntema1, I. A. Alexeev1, L. M. Sungatullina2, E. S. Nasibulina1, A. S. Kruchkov3, I. I. Ahmetov1; N. de Leeuw1, C. C. van Heumen1, C. E. Carels1, T. Kleefstra1; 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2Kazan Federal University, 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Kazan, Russian Federation, 3Russian State University of Physical Education, Sport, Youth Paediatric Neurology, Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands. and Tourism, Moscow, Russian Federation. Introduction ANKRD11 Recently mutations were identified as the cause of The KIBRA protein is assumed to play an important role in synaptic plastici- KBG syndrome, an autosomal dominant intellectual disability (ID) syndro- ty. Genetic variation at the KIBRA gene rs17070145 polymorphism has been me with specific dental, craniofacial and skeletal anomalies. To further ex- linked to episodic memory and executive function. T allele carriers of SNP pand the phenotypic spectrum and knowledge on medical and behavioural rs17070145 have been reported to outperform individuals that are homo- manaAgNemKReDnt1, 1we present a comprehensive overview of clinical and molecu- zygous for the C allele in episodic and working memory tasks. Since acade- lMare cthhoardasc teristics of nine so far unreported cases from five different families mic achievement is directly related to the memory, we hypothesized that the with aberrations. KIBRA T allele could be associated with the ability to get a higher education Clinical features AoNf nKiRnDe 1c1ases with KBG syndrome were evaluated and a PhD degree. We have tested this hypothesis in three groups of the and a review of the existing literature on KBG syndrome was performed. Russian population (n=98; all Caucasians): primary school-aged children, Sequence analysis of the gene was performed using Sanger se- students of universities and PhD degree holders. The frequencies of the T qRueesnucltins g. An Affymetrix CytoScan HD array was used accordinAgN KtoR Dt1h1e allele and TT genotype in the Russian children were similar with those re- manufacturer’s protocol. ported in the European populations (T allele: 29.0% and 31.9%; TT geno- In the first family a heterozygous frameshift mutation in AN- type: 9.7% and 10.6%, respectively). We found an increasing linear trend wKRaDs 1id1entified in four affected children as well as their mother. Three other of T allele with increasing academic level of individuals (children - 29.0%, isolated KBAGN KsyRnDd1r1ome patients all harboured frameshift mutations in students - 37.7%, PhD degree holders - 64.3%; P=0.0032). Interestingly, the Discus.s Mioincr oarray analysis revealed a 100 kb deletion encompassing exons frequency of the T allele in students willing to apply for a PhD in future was 1-3 of the gene in one patient. higher (54.5% vs. 33.3%; P=0.08) in comparison with unwilling students. Hallmark characteristics of KBG syndrome are mild to mode- Compared with CC homozygotes, the odds ratio of being a PhD holder in TT rate ID, macrodontia and other dental anomalies, skeletal anomalies, short homozygotes was 12.44 [95% CI: 1.995-77.632, P=0.0108]. In conclusion, stature and typical dysmorphic features. Less common features are heart our results suggest that the rs17070145 C/T polymorphism of the KIBRA defects, palatal defects, hearing loss, ophtalmologic abnormalities and cen- gene seems to be associated with academic achievement, with the T allele tral nervous system involvement. Neurobehavioural problems, especially e Ix.Ae.r Atilnegx eae bve: nNeofnicei.a Ll .eMff.e Sctu.ngatullina: None. E.S. Nasibulina: None. A.S. autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, are Kruchkov: None. I.I. Ahmetov: None. often present but gained less attention so far in medical literature. However, we observed that these can be severe and require adequate management. Better recognition, a multidisciplinary approach and early intervention are 
P05 .093 eCs.sWen. Otiaclk teolo peant:i eNnotnse a. nMd. Hth. eWiril lfeammsileines: .None. S. de Munnik: None. B.B. van Neuroanatomical correlates of Klinefelter syndrome studied in Bon: None. A. Verrips: None. H. IJntema: None. N. de Leeuw: None. C.C. van relation to the neuropsychological profile Heumen: None. C.E. Carels: None. T. Kleefstra: None. A. Skakkebæk1, C. H. Gravholt2,3, P. M. Rasmussen4, A. Bojesen5, J. S. Jensen6, J. Fedder7, P. Laurberg8, J. Hertz9, J. R. Østergaard10, A. D. Pedersen11, M. Wallentin4,12; 1Department of Endocrinology an Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Department of Endocrinology an Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,, 
P05 .091 Aarhus, Denmark, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Exome Sequencing assesses the role of the KIAA2022 gene in the Denmark, 4Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, Aarhus University Hospital, aetiology of X-linked intellectual disability Aarhus, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Sygehus Lillebaelt, M. Rio1,2, S. Moutton2, A. Mazery1, C. Bole-Feysot3, P. Nitschle3, N. Bahi-Buisson4, A. Vejle, Denmark, 6The Research Clinic for Functional Disorders and Psychosomatics, Aarhus Munnich1,2, L. Colleaux2; University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 7Fertility Clinic, Department of Gynecology and 1Departement de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, APHP, Paris, France, 2INSERM781, Obstetrics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 8Department of Endocrinology, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Plateforme Génomique, Institut IMAGINE, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense Université Paris Descartes, paris, France, 4Departement de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 10Centre for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Necker, APHP, paris, France. Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 11Department of Neuropsychology, Hammel Neurohabilitation and Research Center, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 12Center for Semiotics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. Here we report on the clinical and molecular characterisation of an X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) family ascertained by next-generation sequen- cing (NGS) of most of the X-chromosome transcripts. Two brothers were Brain imaging in Klinefelter syndrome (47, XXY)(KS), a genetic disorder cha- referred for genetic work up because of intellectual disability. The youngest racterized by the presence of an extra X chromosome, may contribute to un- presented with severe intellectual disability, seizures and hyperactivity. The derstanding the relationship between gene expression, brain structure, and elder brother was highly social, communicated verbally with good sentence subsequent cognitive disabilities and psychiatric disorders. structure and was able to read and write. His IQ was 50. Their 38 years old We conducted the largest to date voxel-based morphometry study of 65 KS maternal uncle was unemployed, unable to read and write and his IQ was males and 65 age- and educational-matched male controls and correlated the- 46. All of them had normal neurological examination and no remarkable fa- se data to neuropsychological test scores. The KS males had significantly smal- cial features were present. The two affected sibs were tested using the XSeq ler total brain volume (TBV), total gray matter volume (GMV) and total white ™ Research Screening Panel developed by Raindance Technologies. The two matter volume (WMV) compared to male controls, whereas no volumetric dif- brothers shared only 3 previously unreported variants, two misseense vari- ference in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) was found. There were no differences in ants in DMD and PL
P2  gene and one frameshift variant in KIAA2022 gene. TBV, GMV, WMV or CSF between testosterone treated KS (T-KS) and untreated Additional analysis showed that only the KIAA2022 mutation segregated KS (U-KS) males. Compared to male controls, KS males had significantly de- with known carrier status and in all affected individuals. Interestingly, dis- creased GMV bilaterally in insula, putamen, caudate, hippocampus, amygdala, ruption of this gene have previously been identified in two mentally boys temporal pole and frontal inferior orbita. Additionally, right parahippocampal and this gene is highly expressed in fetal brain and the adult cerebral cortex. region and cerebellum was reduced in KS males. KS males had significantly lar- Our data confirm the role of the KIAA2022 gene in the aetiology of intellec- ger volumes in right postcentral gyrus, precuneus and parietal regions. Multi- t Mua. lR diois:a Nboilnitey. San. Md othuett oinnt:e Nreosnte o. fA N. MGSa ziner sym: Naolln XeL. ICD. Bfaomlei-liFeesy.sot: None. P. variate classification analysis discriminated KS males from male controls with Nitschle: None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None. A. Munnich: None. L. Colleaux: None. 96.9 % (p<0.001) accuracy. Regression analyses, however, revealed no signi- ficant association between GMV differences and cognitive and psychological factors within the KS males and male controls or the groups combined. These results show that although gene dosage effect of having and extra X-chromo- some may lead to large scale alterations of brain morphometry and extended c Ao.g Snkitaivkek edbiæsakb:i lNitoinees .n Co. Hsi.m Gpralev hcoorltr:e Nsopnoen.d Pe.Mnc. eR lainsmksu tshseesne: mNoenaes.u Are. sB.ojesen: None. J.S. Jensen: None. J. Fedder: None. P. Laurberg: None. J. Hertz: None. J.R. Østergaard: None. A.D. Pedersen: None. M. Wallentin: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 177ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .094 J. Thevenon: None. L. Corbin: None. G. Seabold: None. I. Dygai-Cochet: Transcriptome sequencing in patients with Koolen-de Vries syndrome None. L. Duplomb-Jégo: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. S. Gay: None. A. K. Neveling, E. Verwiel, P. de Vries, B. B. A. de Vries, J. A. Veltman, D. A. Koolen; Masurel-Paulet: None. V. Carmignac: None. J. Courcet: None. D. Minot: Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. None. S. Chancenotte: None. M. Bonnet: None. P. Callier: None. A. Mosca- Boidron: None. N. Marle: None. F. Mugneret: None. R. Petralia: None. C. Souchay: None. L. Faivre: None. The Koolen-de Vries syndrome is a multisystem disorder characterized by intellectual disability (ID), hypotonia, epilepsy, distinctive facial features, and congenital malformations of the heart, urogenital tract and central nervous 
P05 .096 system. The syndrome is also known as 17q21K.3A1N mSLic1r odeletion syndrome, KCNT1 is the major gene causing malignant migrating partial seizures due to typical microKdAeNleStLio1n-s that can cause the phenotype. Recently, we in infancy and others showed that haploinsufficiency of is sufficient to cause G. Barcia1,2, M. R. Fleming3, J. Lefranc4, M. Barthez5, V. Gazula3, M. R. Brown3, M. the syndrome. The gene encodes a chromatin-modifying protein Langouet6, H. Chen7, J. Kronengold3, A. Abhyankar8, P. Nitschke9, I. Scheffer10, A. Poduri11, A. Kaminska1,2, N. Boddaert12, R. Cilio13, J. Casanova8, I. Desguerre1, A. Munnich6, O. that is a member of the nonspecific lethal complex. This complex contains, Dulac1,2, L. Colleaux6, R. Nabbout1,2; among other proteins, the KaAceNtSyLlt1ransferase KAT8, which influences gene 1Department of Pediatric Neurology, Centre de Référence des Epilepsies Rares, Hopital expression through acetylation of H4K16 and p53. Necker Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 2INSERM To investigate the effect of mutations on genome-wide expression U663, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, levels, we performed transcriptome sequencing of twelve different samp- Paris, France, 3Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New les from patKieAnNtsS Lw1ith Koolen-de Vries syndrome. The mutations in these Haven, CT, United States, 4Department of Pediatrics, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire samples comprise six classical 17q21.31 microdeletions, two atypical dele- Morvan, Brest, France, 5Department of Pediatrics, Centre Régional Hospitalier et Universitaire de Tours, Tours, France, 6Inserm U781, Université Paris Descartes, tions, three point mutations and one so far unidentified mutation. Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Enrichment of mRNA was done using the MicroPoly(A)Purist Kit (Ambion), 7Department of biological sciences, State University of New York, Albany, NY, United whole transcriptome library preparation was performed using the SOLiD States, 8St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, The Rockefeller Total RNA-Seq Kit (STaR Kit, Life Technologies) and paired-end sequencing University, New York, NY, United States, 9Biostatistics Department, Hopital Necker was performed on a 5500XL sequencer (Life Technologies). The expression Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health levels of these trancriptomes were compared to expression levels of eight and Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Melbourne, healthy controls and functional annotation clustering of differentially ex- Australia, 11Department of Neurology, Children‘s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 12Department of Pediatric Radiology, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Assistance pressed genes was done using the Database for Annotation, Visualization Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 13Division of Neurology, Bambino Gesu and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy. We have detected new genes that are differently regulated in the 17q pati- ents compared to controls. Further investigation of these genes might give n Ke.w N einvseilginhgts: Ninotnoe t.h Ee. pVaetrhwwieal:y Ns othnaet. Pa.r ed eu nVdrieersl:y Ninogn eID. B. .B.A. de Vries: None. J.A. Veltman: None. D.A. Koolen: None. Migrating partial seizures of infancy (MPSI) is a rare epileptic encephalo- pathy characterized by i) seizure starting during the first months, ii) focal seizures randomly migrating from one cortical regKiCoNn Tto1 another, iii) arrest of psychomotor devKelCoNpTm1ent with a severe cognitive and motor outcome 
P05 .095 and acquired microcephaly. We identified de novo mutations in 6/12 Hemizygous deletion of LRFN2/SALM1 is responsible for a selective patients with MPSI. encodes a sodium-activated potassium channel. working memory deficit. We showed that MPSI-associated mutations are located in the C-terminal J. THEVENON1,2, L. Corbin3, G. Seabold4, I. Dygai-Cochet5, L. Duplomb-Jégo2, C. domain of KCNT1 and cause a gain of function. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, S. Gay6, A. Masurel-Paulet1, V. Carmignac2, J. Courcet2, D. Minot1, KCNT1 S. Chancenotte7, M. Bonnet7, P. Callier8, A. Mosca-Boidron8, N. Marle8, F. Mugneret8, R. Petralia4, C. Souchay9, L. Faivre1,2; We analyzed sequence in 16 additional patients with MPSI and in a 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2Equipe d’accueil EA 4271 GAD cohort of 14 patients with infantile multifocal epilepsy (IME), a rare epilepsy „Génétique des Anomalies du Développement“, IFR Santé STIC, Université de Bourgogne, syndrome of infancy sharing with MPSI Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 3LEAD-CNRS (Laboratoire d‘Etude de l‘Apprentissage et du Développement - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique), Dijon, France, 4Laboratory of Neurochemistry, NIDCD/National Institutes of Health, 50 South Dr., early onset, drug-resistance and severe cognitive outcome. Bldg. 50, Rm. 4144,, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Nuclear medicine, Georges François Leclerc Cancer Center, Dijon, France, 6Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Wiliam We found four novel de novo mutations in MPSI patients, all mapping within Morey, Chalon sur Saône, France, 7Centre de Référence des Troubles du Langage et the C-terminal domain. In two MPSI brothers, an inKhCeNriTte1d mutation from des Apprentissages, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 8Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 9LEAD-CNRS (Laboratoire d‘Etude de the unaffected father raises the issue of genetic counseling. Genotype-phe- l‘Apprentissage et du Développement - Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique), notype correlation .r eKvCeNaTle1d no differences between positive and ne- University of Bourgogne, Dijon, France. gative MMKPCSNIT c1ases regarding age of onset, pharmacoresistance, cognitive or motor outcome sequencing revealed no mutations in patients with IME. mutations are found in 43% of cases (12/26) of KCNT1 Learning disabilities (LD) are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disease. The identification of familial cases of clinically homoge- MPSI confirming as the major disease-causing gene in this syndro- neous endophenotypes of LD might help the management of the patients, me. Absence of KCNT1 mutation in IME may suggest a specific link between and precise the genetic counselling, Array-CGH and high-throughput se- KCNT1 and the «EEG migrating pattern » KCNT1 quencing dramatically expand the number of genes implicated in isolated ID, highlighting the implication of neuron specific post-mitotic transcription phenotype and confer to the genetic testing of a diagnostic value in factors and synaptic proteins as candidate genes. We report on a unique fa- the context of neonatal pharmacoresistant epilepsy with severe delay. mily diagnosed with a 6p21 microdeletion segregating in 3 patients with G. Barcia: None. M.R. Fleming: None. J. Lefranc: None. M. Barthez: None. V. learning disability of autosomal dominant heredity. Neuropsychological as- Gazula: None. M.R. Brown: None. M. Langouet: None. H. Chen: None. J. sessment identified a selective deficit of working memory, without ID in the Kronengold: None. A. Abhyankar: None. P. Nitschke: None. I. Scheffer: patients. Further investigations identified a defect in the executive functions, None. A. Poduri: None. A. Kaminska: None. N. Boddaert: None. R. Cilio: and auditoro-verbal processes. These data were consistent with brain MRI None. J. Casanova: None. I. Desguerre: None. A. Munnich: None. O. Dulac: and FDG-PET functional brain imaging that revealed atrophy and hypometa- None. L. Colleaux: None. R. Nabbout: None. bolism of cerebral region strongly implicated in working memory processes when compared to controls. The 870kb microdeletion encompassed 3 ge- nes with only one brain expressed gene encoding for a postsynaptic protein 
P05 .097 named LRFN2/SALM1. We performed an immuno-colocalization with elec- Characterization of supernumerary marker chromosomes by high tronic microscopy demonstrating the tight co-localization of LRFN2/SALM1 resolution array CGH with the NMDA (N-Methyl-D-Aspartate) receptors in the lateral part of the R. V. Vazharova1, I. Bradinova1, S. Andonova1, S. Bichev1, V. Bojinova2, V. Stoyanova3, A. postsynaptic density of cerebellar and hippocampal rat neurons. Altogether, Savov1, I. Kremensky1; the combined approaches highlighted the implication of LRFN2/SALM1 in 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2USBALNP „Saint Naum“, Sofia, Bulgaria, LD, specifically by its implication in working memory processes and executi- 3Department ot Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical University – Plovdiv, Plovdiv, ve functions. A medication by NMDA modulator could be discussed because Bulgaria. o1f 7th8e interaction of LRFN2/SALM1 with the NMDEAS reHceGp t2or0s1. 3 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .099 Identification of a complex MEC
P2  mutation in a 11 year-old male Background: Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are descri- with myoclonic encephalopathy and severe cognitive impairment bed as small structurally abnormal chromosomes that occur in addition to detected by targeted next-generation sequencing. the normal 46 chromosomes. The phenotypes associated with the presence J. Lauer Zillhardt1, A. Piton2,3, C. Redin2,3, S. Legras4, A. De Saint-Martin5, E. Flori6, B. of a marker vary from normal to severely abnormal. The rate of sSMC among Gerard1, J. Mandel1,2,3, B. Doray7; patients with mental retardation (MR) is estimated to be about 0.288%. In 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, a series of 165 patients with MR/developmental delay we found 3 with de Strasbourg, France, 2Department of Translational Medicine and Neurogenetics, IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 3Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Paris, novo sSMC by conventional GTG karyotyping. France, 4Microarray and Sequencing Platform, IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 5Service de Aim: The aim of the study was to clarify the chromosome origin of the su- Pédiatrie, centre de référence des troubles des apprentissages, centre de référence des pernumerary markers and to map the chromosome regions with aberrant épilepsies rares chez l’enfant, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, copy number. 6Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Materials & methods: Array CGH analysis was performed using custom desi- France, 7Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre de référence des anomalies du gned whole-genome oligonucleotide arrays (OGT, UK) with a median probe développement, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. spacing of about 2.5 kb and median resolution of about 10 kb. CytoSure In- terpret (OGT, UK) software was used for CNV detection. Results & discussion: The supernumerary marker chromosomes are found To date, the complexity of genetic causes of Intellectual Disability (ID) to originate from chromosomes 18 (arr 18p11.32p11.21(123,155-15- makes difficult the molecular diagnostic of patients who do not present with ,065,191)x5), 15 (arr 15q11.2q13.3(18,410,710-30,678,185)x4) and 20 (arr clinical features evoking a specific syndrome. We report here the case of a 20q13.33(60,446,113-62,382,429)x4), respectively. Clinical presentation of severely affected young boy for whom molecular, cytogenetic and bioche- the patients and some specific symptoms correlated well to the chromoso- mical investigations had faiMleEdC tPo2 i dentify the etiology of its ID. During the mal abnormalities found. We concluded that molecular techniques such as targeted high-throughput resequencing of 220 ID genes, a complex anomaly arrayCGH, associated to cytogenetic methods can help in detecting genomic was detected in exon 4 of gene in this patient. This mutation is a imbalances and unraveling the genes involved in the phenotype variability deletion of 139bp of exon 4 additioned by two inverted insertions of intron of patients with supernumerary marker chromosomes. Furthermore, the 2 sequences, which leads to the replacement of 41 amino acids but keeps molecular characterization of the alterations found provides valuable in- the reading frame downstream of the rearrangement. This mutation was in- formation for the follow-up of the patients and genetic counseling of their herited from the mother who presenMtsE wCPit2h mild cognitive impairment, but f Ram.Vi. lVieasz.harova: None. I. Bradinova: None. S. Andonova: None. S. Bichev: no Rett syndrome phenotype despite an unbiased X-inactivation in blood. None. V. Bojinova: None. V. Stoyanova: None. A. Savov: None. I. Kremensky: We review and discuss all the other rearrangements and mutations None. r Je.p Loaruteedr Zinil lmhaarldets: iNno lnitee. rAa.t uPriteo ann: dN othnee .a Css. oRceidatine:d N colinneic. aSl. pLheegnraost:y pNeosn.e. A. De Saint-Martin: None. E. Flori: None. B. Gerard: None. J. Mandel: None. B. Doray: None. 
P05 .098 MBD5 alteration by multiple mutational mechanisms leads to variable phenotypic outcomes 
P05 .100 C. Bonnet1, A. Ali Khan1, E. Bresso2, C. Vigouroux1, M. Dexheimer1, S. Lejczak1, B. Deemer3, Impact of the overexpression and deficiency of Mecp2 in mice: a J. Andrieux4, C. Philippe1, A. Moncla5, I. Giurgea6, M. Devignes2, B. Leheup1,7, P. Jonveaux1; balance always to maintain. 1Laboratoire de Génétique, INSERM U-954, Université de Lorraine, Centre Hospitalier R. El Khoury, N. Panayotis, A. Ghata, V. Matagne, G. Alcaraz, L. Villard, J. ROUX; Universitaire de Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 2LORIA UMR7503, CNRS, INRIA, UMR_
S910 , Marseille, France. Nancy-Université, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie et Génétique, Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 5Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 6Service de Biochimie-Génétique, APHP, The X-linked methyl-CpG binding protein 2 gene (Mecp2) plays a role in Groupe hospitalier Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 7Service de Médecine Infantile III the regulation of chromatin architecture, gene expression and fine tune of et génétique clinique, Hôpital d’enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nancy, adult neurons. An abnormal dosage of this protein causes a large group of Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France. neurological disorders. Mutations or deletions in MeC
P2  gene cause Rett syndrome in females, whereas its overexpression causes the Mecp2 dupli- cation syndrome in boys. A fine control of the amount of MeC
P2  protein is Just recently, partial or complete deletion of methyl-CpG-binding domain 5 necessary for a normal function of neurons. Several mouse models were ge- (MBD5) gene has been implicated as causative in the phenotype associated nerated to mimic the Mecp2-pathies. Here, we studied mice with a double with 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome. The core phenotype observed inclu- expression of Mecp2 (Mecp2Tg1) (Collins et al, 2004) to get closer to the hu- des intellectual disability (ID), seizures, significant speech impairment and man case of duplication. We used a battery of behavioral tests: grip strength, autistic-like symptoms. In the course of systematic whole-genome screening rotarod, open field and the respiratory profile of the Mecp2Tg1 mice during of individuals with unexplained ID by array-based comparative genomic hy- postnatal development. In parallel, in vivo studies were made in different bridization, we identified de novo intragenic deletions of only the 5’-non- parts of the nervous system, on a set of transcripts regulated by Mecp2. Our coding region of MBD5 in three patients leading, as previously documented, results show that Mecp2Tg1 mice exhibit behavioral disorders: At 5 weeks, to haploinsufficiency of MBD5. In addition, we described two patients with these mice appear hyperactive and anxious. Much later (from 35 weeks), two different unreported MBD5 intragenic duplications. The first one leads they develop spasticity and seizures. This is followed by a period of hypoac- to the presence of numerous aberrant transcripts with premature termina- tivity and kyphosis. The clinical implications of our study are twofold: first tion codon. The second one is inherited from a healthy parent suggesting we seek to understand the phenotypic effects of a double dose of Mecp2. either this duplication is unrelated to the phenotype or this mutated allele Second, gene therapy projects are being evaluated on MeC
P2 -deficient mice. in not fully penetrant. To further elucidate the involvement of MBD5 in ID, Since the level of MeC
P2  must be tightly regulated, a good control of Mecp2 we sequenced coding and non-coding exons in a selected cohort of 78 sub- d Ro.s Ealg Ke hwoiullr yb:e N noencee.s Nsa. rPya inna oyordtiesr: Ntoo pnere. vAe. nGth oavtear: dNoosnaeg.e V o. fM tahtea gpnroe:t ein. jects with a phenotype reminiscent of 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome. We None. G. Alcaraz: None. L. Villard: None. J. Roux: None. identified for the first time a de novo nonsense mutation associated with a much more damaging phenotype without walking and verbal speech at the age of 10 years. Besides this fully penetrant mutation, we identified four 
P05 .101 missense variants most often inherited from a healthy parent. One of these, GABA and Glutamate metabolisms are affected in the brain of Mecp2- the p.Gly79Glu variant, has been recently described as an allele risk for au- deficient mouse. tism spectrum disorders. Taken together, our findings suggest MBD5 gene R. El Khoury, N. Panayotis, A. Ghata, V. Matagne, G. Alcaraz, L. Villard, J. ROUX; is sensitive to perturbation by multiple mutational mechanisms, leading to INSERM UMR_
S910 , Marseille, France. v Ca.r Biaobnlen epth: eNnoontey.p Aic. Aolui tKcohmane:s N.one. E. Bresso: None. C. Vigouroux: None. M. Dexheimer: None. S. Lejczak: None. B. Deemer: None. J. Andrieux: None. C. Philippe: None. A. Moncla: None. I. Giurgea: None. M. Devignes: None. B. Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurological disorder that affects female Leheup: None. P. Jonveaux: None. patients. RTT is caused by mutations in the X-linked methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MEC
P2 ) with an incidence of 1/15000. RTT patients develop nor- mally until 6-18 months of age, before the onset of deficits in autonomic, cognitive, motor functions (stereotypic hand movements, impaired loco- motion) and autistic features. Studies on Mecp2 mouse models revealed a ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 179 severe deregulation in the neurotransmission. In particular, bioamine de-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index None. C. Rooryck-Thambo: None. C. Le Caignec: None. H. Journel: None. A. Afenjar: None. L. Burglen: None. D. Héron: None. C. Baumann: None. P. Jouk: ficits have been primarily and extensively studied in Mecp2 deficient mice. None. F. Devillard: None. D. Lacombe: None. N. Philip: None. A. Moncla: Dysfunction of the gabaergic and glutamatergic systems has been also poin- None. M. Delrue: None. R. AChro-Puce: None. L. Perrin: None. J. Alessandri: ted out since the balance between brain excitation and inhibition appears None. V. Des Portes: None. L. Olivier-Faivre: None. affected in the brain of the Mecp2 deficient mouse. However, the results are divergent due to the differences in the age and tissues studied. To date few projects have been dedicated to the follow GABA and Glutamate metabolism 
P05 .103 in eight different brain areas of the Mecp2-deficient mice. In the present stu- Cytogenetic Microarray for Delineation of Cryptic Genomic dy we used real-time PCR, western blotting and HPLC to compare the GABA Rearrangements in Mental Retardation and Glutamate metabolism in several key areas of the Mecp2 mutant mice S. Agarwal1, S. Muthuswamy1, I. Panigrahi2; brain at different developmental stages (early and late symptomatic). Key 1Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India, 2Post enzymes (Kcc2, Nkcc1, Vglut1/2, Gad1/2) will be considered. In conclusion, Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Chandigardh, India. our results revealed a spatial and temporal deregulation of the glutamater- gic and gabaergic systems for all levels of regulations studied. Moreover, we found that pharmacological stimulation of the gabaergic system is efficient Mental retardation (MR) is a variable, heterogeneous manifestation of cen- t Ro .i mEl pKrhoovue rtyh:e N loifnees.p Na.n P oafn Mayeocptis2: dNeofincei.e Ant. Gmhicaeta.: None. V. Matagne: tral nervous system dysfunction, present in 1-3% of general population. None. G. Alcaraz: None. L. Villard: None. J. Roux: None. Many environmental and genetic factors can cause MR, including premature birth, prenatal infections, chromosomal abnormalities, and single-gene mu- tations. Though an etiology can be established in 60-75% of cases of severe 
P05 .102 MR, it is only 38-55% in mild cases. Moreover, genetically determined MR The French cohort of MEC
P2  duplication patients: clinical delineation accounts by for 17 to 41% of cases, depending on use of the different tech- of 45 affected patients niques. In the present study, we report the cryptic genomic rearrangements S. EL CHEHADEH1, R. Touraine2, F. Prieur2, L. Pasquier3, S. Julia4, C. Sarret5, C. identified MR cases by selective use of chromosomal microarray. Francannet5, O. Boespflug-Tanguy6, M. Doco-Fenzy7, A. David8, B. Isidor8, J. Vigneron9, B. Methodology: Two cases of unexplained MR after initial biochemical, radio- Leheup9, L. Lambert10, G. Plessis11, J. Cuisset12, B. Delobel13, B. Duban-Bedu13, C. Vincent- logical and chromosomal evaluation were studied. DNA was extracted from Delorme14, A. Toutain15, J. Amiel16, V. Cormier-Daire16, M. Rio16, C. Philippe17, T. Bienvenu18, whole blood and analysed on Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12 array. Raw data J. Andrieux19, J. Bonnefont20, S. Drunat21, V. Malan20, S. Chantot22, A. Goldenberg23, C. obtained was analysed with KaryoStudio software. The rearrangements Rooryck-Thambo24, C. Le Caignec8, H. Journel25, A. Afenjar26, L. Burglen26, D. Héron27, C. were checked in DECIPHER database. Baumann28, P. Jouk29, F. Devillard30, D. Lacombe24, N. Philip31, A. Moncla32, M. Delrue24, R. AChro-Puce33, L. Perrin34, J. Alessandri35, V. Des Portes36, L. Olivier-Faivre1; Results and Conclusion: Both the samples showed a male karyotype and 1Centre de référence Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs, CHU some cryptic genomic rearrangements. First case had multiple rearran- de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Service de génétique clinique chromosomique et moléculaire, gements-duplications in the chromosome 7q11.21 (398kb) and 17q12 CHU de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France, 3Service de Génétique Moléculaire et (186kb), and 1.6Mb hemizygous deletion at cytoband 14q13.3-q21.1. Se- Génomique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 4Service de génétique médicale, CHU de cond case was observed to have a duplication of 549Kb at 7q36.2, region as- Toulouse, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 5Service de génétique médicale, CHU de sociated with autism spectrum disorder and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 6Service de neurologie pédiatrique et a 2.6Mb hemizygous deletion at 22q11.21 q11.22 region. All these regions des maladies métaboliques, hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 7Service de génétique, CHU de Reims, Reims, France, 8Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Nantes, Institut (non-recurrent genomic aberrations) have been implicated as pathogenic de Biologie, Nantes, France, 9Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre- in several other patients as per DECIPHER database. Thus, chromosomal les-Nancy, France, 10Service de neuropédiatrie, CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, microarray analysis can help in identifying underlying cause of MR in some France, 11Service de génétique, CHU de Caen, Caen, France, 12Service de neuropédiatrie, apparently unexplained cases, and should be a diagnostic tool for evaluation CHRU de Lille, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 13Centre de génétique o Sf. M ARga.rwal: None. S. Muthuswamy: None. I. Panigrahi: None. chromosomique, Hôpital St Vincent de Paul, Lille, France, 14Service de génétique clinique, CHRU de Lille, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 15Service de génétique, CHRU de Tours, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 16Département de génétique, Hôpital Necker- Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 17Service de cytogénétique et génétique moléculaire, 
P05 .104 CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 18Laboratoire de biochimie et biologie Plasma levels of leptin and adiponectin in Fragile X syndrome moléculaire, CHU Paris Centre, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 19Laboratoire de généti M. Z. Lisik1, A. Pyrkosz1, E. Gutmajster1, J. E. Zejda2, M. Olszanecka-Glinianowicz3, A. L. MEC
P2  Sieron1; 1Department of General, Molecular Biology and Genetics, Katowice, Poland, 2Department of Epidemiology Medical University of Silesia, ul. Medyków 18,, Katowice, Poland, Duplication of Xq28 including the genehas been primarily described 3Department of Pathophysiology Medical University of Silesia, ul. Medyków 18,, in male patients with severe developmental delay, constipation, epilepsy, Katowice, Poland. hand stereotypies andM rEeCcPu2rrent infections. In the first part of this work, we carried out an epidemiological study that permitted to identify 95 patients in France carrying a duplication of less than 4 Mb (86 males and 9 Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of familial mental retar- females ranging from 0 to 40 years) since the implementation of MLPA and dation FaMndR o1ne of the leading known causes of autism. The mutation respon- array-CGH. 84 patients carried a pure interstitial duplication of various size sible for FXS is a large expansion of the CGG repeats in the promoter region and 11 patients a complex rearrangement. In the second part of the study, of the gene resulting in its transcriptional silencing. Leptin may be we report on the clinical manifestations of 45 patients of the series. 27 pa- considered a cytokine-like hormone with pleiotropic actions since it may tients were examined by the same physician and a standardised form was be involved in the regulation of neuroendocrine functions, immune system, sent in the remaining 18 patients. Besides to the classical clinical features, in addition to its role in development. Leptin and adiponectin may act in we describe frequent manifestations insufficiently reported in the literatu- parallel as opposing metabolic counterparts. Thus, we hypothesized on in- re including tapering fingers, flessum attitude due to progressive spasticity volvement of adiponectin in the pathophysiology of autism. and translucent skin with prominent veins. 77% of patients had brain ab- Material and meFthMoRd1s normalities consisting mainly in corpus callosum malformations anMd EvCePn2- 23 male patients, mean age 19,3 ± 6,6, affected by Fragile X syndrome (full tricular dilatation. We particularly focus on the affected females phenotype mutation in the gene), were enrolled into the study. Controls were 24 that can be similar to that observed in males, especially when the healthy males, mean age 21,8 ± 5,8. Plasma leptin and adiponectin levels duplication results from an unbalanced X-autosome translocation. Careful were determined by ELISA method. genetic counselling should be given to couples at risk, given the risk of ab- Results normal phenotype in females. The third part of the study consisting in sear- Plasma leptin levels in Fragile X syndrome patients were similar as in con- ching genotype-phenotype correlations is in progress, in order to check if trol group (11,53 ± 10,24 ng/ml) vs (5,73 ± 4,52) were not significantly dif- the different sizes of the duplication can be associated to variable clinical ferent from those found in controls (p = 0,5). f Sea. tEul rcehse.hadeh: None. R. Touraine: None. F. Prieur: None. L. Pasquier: None. S. Julia: None. C. Sarret: None. C. Francannet: None. O. Boespflug- While plasma adiponectin levels in Fragile X syndrome patients (6,68 ± 3,44 Tanguy: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None. A. David: None. B. Isidor: None. J. ng/ml) were significantly lower in controls (8,95 ± 4,24) (p< 0,04). Vigneron: None. B. Leheup: None. L. Lambert: None. G. Plessis: None. J. Conclusion Cuisset: None. B. Delobel: None. B. Duban-Bedu: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: Adiponectin may be involved in autistic features observed in FXS patients in None. A. Toutain: None. J. Amiel: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. M. Rio: light of its anti-inflammatory properties. Further investigations are necessa- None. C. Philippe: None. T. Bienvenu: None. J. Andrieux: None. J. Bonnefont: ry to evaluate the role of adipokines in FXS. None. S. Drunat: None. V. Malan: None. S. Chantot: None. A. Goldenberg: The work was in part financed from Institutional grant KNW-2-021/10 180 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRaAwaNrdCeEd t|o W MWZLW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index M.Z. Lisik: None. A. Pyrkosz: None. E. Gutmajster: None. J.E. Zejda: None. M. 
P05 .107 Olszanecka-Glinianowicz: None. A.L. Sieron: None. Genome-wide expression studies in 14 patients with microdeletion 5q14.3 syndrome - A novel tool for the systematic study of functional interactions and pathways A. M. Zink1, E. Wohlleber1, M. Zweier2, M. Stefanova3, S. Heilmann1,4, S. Parkel5, S. 
P05 .105 Jacquemont6, N. Fricker1,4, D. Martinet6, C. Fagerberg7, J. A. Lee1,4,8, A. Dufke9, A. Gregor2, E. Clinical utility of the chromosomal microarray analysis in patients Rossier9, H. V. Firth10, J. P. Fryns11, J. R. Vermeesch11, F. F. Brockschmidt1,4, T. J. L. de Ravel11, with neurodevelopmental disorders. A. Rauch2,12, T. Becker13, J. R. Wendland14, H. Fröhlich15, H. Engels1; M. Rosello, F. Martinez, S. Mayo, S. Monfort, S. Oltra, C. Orellana; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Bonn, Germany, Hospital Universitario y Politecnico „La Fe“, Valencia, Spain. 2Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Rheinische Developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID) affects 1-3% of the po- Friedrich-Wilhelms-University, Bonn, Germany, 5Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Estonian Biocentre Biotechnology Laboratory, Tartu, Estonia, 6Service of Medical pulation. The study of the DD/ID is one of the most complex fields of human Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland, genetics because of their high clinical and genetic heterogeneity. In the last 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 8Greenwood Genetic decade, the application of genome analysis technologies to the study of chro- Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 9Institute of Human Genetics, University of mosomes has enabled dramatic progress in the field of clinical genetics. Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 10Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s The objective of this work is the study of these anomalies, which not only Hospital NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 11Center for Human Genetics, helps to determine the genetic causes of these disorders, but also allows University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 12Institute of Medical Genetics, University to correlate genotype-phenotype and to define the clinical and behavioral of Zurich, Zurich-Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 13Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 14Genetic Basis characteristics of these microduplication and microdeletion syndromes. An of Mood and Anxiety Disorders, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, Bethesda, accurate diagnosis is the key providing genetic counseling that helps the fa- MD, United States, 15Bonn-Aachen International Center for Information Technology, mily to take reproductive decisions. Algorithmic Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. We have applied array-CGH (44,000 60 mer probes and/or 6,000 BAC clo- nes) in a cohort of 246 patients with DD/ID, congenital anomalies (CA), fa- cial dysmorphysm and/or positive family history for ID, CA or miscarriages. Many novel candidate genes for intellectual disability (ID) have been iden- We have collected 109 different clinical variables for each patient. tified in microdeletions. However, our etiological understanding of these We have found a pathogenic or potentially pathogenic chromosomal imba- genes often remains unclear. So far, only targeted expression experiments lance (pCNVs) in 29.7% of patients. Comparison of the clinical data showed provided evidence e.g. for functional interactions between novel and well- that hands and/or feet abnormalities were the most frequent congenital established ID genes or for the haploinsufficiency of deleted candidate ge- anomaly (55%) and was statistically more frequent in children with pCNVs nes. However, genome-wide and hypothesis-free expression analyses have (63%; p-value 0.05). Further clinical criteria indicate a higher probability of not yet been applied to non-recurrent microdeletion syndromes to systema- a chromosomal aberration causative for DD/ID was skeletal defects, micro- tically study functional interactions and pathways. cephaly, genital abnormalities and congenital heart defects. We performed genome-wide expression studies on 14 patients with non-re- Our results reinforce the importance of clinical criteria in the application of current 5q14.3-q15 microdeletions using Illumina HT12 expression arrays a Mrr. aRyo-CseGlHlo :i nN ponaeti.e Fn. tMs awrittinhe nze: uNroondee. vSe.l oMpamyoe:n Ntaoln dei. sSo.r Mdeornsf.ort: None. S. Oltra: None. C. Orellana: None. and whole blood RNA. Adapting an established analysis protocol, we first compared all transcripts with reliably detectable signals (detection p-value / DPV<0.01) between patients and controls and demonstrated significant- ly reduced TRABD expression in patients (verified by qPCR). However, this 
P05 .106 protocol may exclude those transcripts with the largest expression diffe- Searching for microcephaly genes amongst an endogamous rence between patients and controls. Thus, we developed a novel strategy to population identify transcripts that met the above-mentioned DPV threshold EITHER S. A. Lynch1, H. Murphy2, S. Ennis3, J. P. Casey4; in controls OR in patients. We identified several additional genes. Due to 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2Dept of Genetic Medicine, limited RNA, only one of these, COX7B, was verified by qPCR. Both the signi- Manchester, United Kingdom, 3School of Medicine and Medical Science UCD, Dublin, Ireland, 4National Children‘s Research Centre, Dublin, Ireland. ficant correlation of the transcript levels of TRABD / COX7B with MEF2C, the recently identified causative gene in 5q14.3 microdeletion syndrome, and the fact that TRABD and COX7B were connected to MEF2C over only two „nodes“ in a network analysis pointed to a biological significance of the Irish Travellers are an endogamous population numbering 26,000 in the interactions. Irish Republic. First cousin marriage is common and they operate a clan Thus, both analysis protocols yielded verifiable and biologically significant within a clan structure. This project focuses on two clans with microcephaly results, demonstrating the applicability of genome-wide expression studies (<3SD) and normal MRI scans. Microcephaly is common and proving it is t Ao .nMo. nZ-irnekc:u Nrorenne.t Em. iWcroohdlelelebteiro:n Nso.ne. M. Zweier: None. M. Stefanova: homogeneous is difficult clinically. The first family (A) consist of 3 affected None. S. Heilmann: None. S. Parkel: None. S. Jacquemont: None. N. Fricker: children. One child is more severely disabled than his siblings raising the None. D. Martinet: None. C. Fagerberg: None. J.A. Lee: None. A. Dufke: possibility of sibship heterogeneity. The second family (B) consist one affec- None. A. Gregor: None. E. Rossier: None. H.V. Firth: None. J.P. Fryns: ted child and 4 affected maternal grandaunts with a similar microcephaly None. J.R. Vermeesch: None. F.F. Brockschmidt: None. T.J.L. de Ravel: phenotype. None. A. Rauch: None. T. Becker: None. J.R. Wendland: None. H. Fröhlich: SNP homozygosity mapping showed that the affected individuals from both None. H. Engels: None. families share 12 and 6 regions of homozygosity (ROH) respectively. Comparison of the homozygosity patterns across the families identified a single shared ROH (5.6 Mb) on chromosome 11. However, exome sequen- 
P05 .108 cing did not identify a shared recessive mutation within the candidate locus, An emerging phenotype of microdeletion Xq22 involving PL
P1  gene in suggesting that (i) the two families may have different disease genes or (ii) females. Case reports of four independent patients the shared disease mutation is regulatory/non-coding. One affected from M. Stefanova1, A. Wilsdon2, S. Joss3, A. Erlandsson1, K. Shimojima4, M. Suri2, S. Shimada4, each clan share mutations in a candidate gene, but these mutations are not N. Sangu4, L. Samuelsson1, T. Yamamoto4; found in other affecteds from either family. 1Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 3Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, Exomic sequencing unexpectedly revealed that 1 affected individual each 4Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. from family A and B had McArdles disease confirming that they are from the same wider clan. Neither had signs of this disease. Our analytic approach has been to accommodate heterogeneity both bet- Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease commonly results from duplications of the ween and within families. This study highlights the complexities of this PL
P1  gene at Xq22, with males being affected and females usually healthy analysis & the unexpected identification of disease genes through exomic s Se.qAu. eLnycnicnhg:. None. H. Murphy: None. S. Ennis: None. J.P. Casey: None. carriers. Microdeletions encompassing PL
P1  in females with severe intel- lectual disability have not been described previously. Here we present four females with deletions at Xq22.1-q22.3 involving PL
P1 . The four patients of British, South Asian, Swedish and Japanese origin are aged 19, 8, 7 and 3 years respectively. All presented with severe intellectu- al disability and cerebral abnormalities including generalized white matter and corpus callosum hypoplasia, atrophy and delayed myelination. The two ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE e | l dW esW t paW tie.E ntS sH wG alk.O edR inG dependently from 6 and 7 years, but have no sp1e8ec1hABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MYT1L and impaired comprehension. Additional features seen in one or more cases is a member of the myelin transcription factor 1 gene family and is include: polyhydramnios, distinct sleeping disturbances, purposeless hand highly expressed in mouse embryonic brain. MYT1L interacts directly with movements, mutilation, hearing loss, overgrowth/delayed growth, slow DIS
C1 , which is involved in schizophrenia. We describe a family in which growing hair and deep palmar creases. Neurological features include severe the father, his son and his daughter have a 549 kb interstitial duplication in hypotonia, seizures and cortical blindness. Skeletal features include advan- the 2p25.3 region detected by array coMmYpTa1rLative genomic hybridization and ced bone age, proximal placed thumbs, severe pes equinovarus, extremely confirmed by quantitative PCR. This duplication encompasses the five first short feet and overriding toes. No patient showed developmental regression exons and is predicted to disrupt the gene. The phenotype includes: or periventricular leucomalacia. There is no distinctive dysmorphology. slight facial features including bulbous nasal tip, wide mouth, overfolded Array analysis detected de novo Xq22 deletions 3Mb, 85kb, 4.5Mb and 4.9Mb helix, strabismus, moderate intellectual disability (ID) with speech impedi- in size, all encompassing PL
P1 . X-inactivation studies in blood were unquan- ment, hypotonia, hyperactivity, mood disorder with aggressive behaviour, tifiable but skewed in two, 79:21 skewed and non-informative respectively. neonatal feeding difficulties followed by a tendency to hyperMphYaTg1iLa with Clinical and molecular features of all four females with Xq22 deletions sug- overweight and a prominent abdomen with thick panniculus adiposus. Par- gest a new microdeletion syndrome separate from Pelizaeus-Merzbacher tial deletions of chromosomMeY bTa1nLd 2p25.3 encompassing the gene disease. The smallest deletion contains only PL
P1 , along with transmem- have been reported in patients presenting with ID and overweight whereas brane protein 31 (TMEM31) and glycine receptor, alpha 4 (GLRA4) about duplications disruptingM tYhTe1 L gene have been reported in patients pre- w Mh. iSchte wfaen ohvaav:e N voenrey. lAim. Witeilds dinofno:r Nmoanteio. Sn.. Joss: None. A. Erlandsson: senting with autism and schizophrenia. Moreover, single-nucleotide poly- None. K. Shimojima: None. M. Suri: None. S. Shimada: None. N. Sangu: morphisms (SMNYPTs1)L of contribute to major depressive disorder and None. L. Samuelsson: None. T. Yamamoto: None. schizophrenia. Recently, de Ligt et al. reported a „de novo“ splice site mu- tation of the gene identified by exome sequencing in a patient with severe ID, autistic features, neonatal hypotonia and feeding difficulties, as 
P05 .109 wellM aYsT m1iLld facial features. 20 ans après: a second family with mutation in X-linked monoamine This report and previous publications strongly suggest that alterations of oxidase A gene affecting cognition and behavior the gene are responsible for diverse neuropsychiatric disorders with A. Piton1,2, H. Poquet3,4, R. Claire1,2, A. Masurel3, J. Lauer5, J. Muller1,5, J. Thevenon3,6, Y. i Mnt.e Wlleilcletumasl: d Nisoanbei.l iAty. Sacnhdn ae itdeenrd: eNnocnye .t oM o. vGeirrawredi:g Nhot.ne. M. Tournaire: Herenger5, S. Chancenotte7,8, M. Bonnet8, J. Pinoit9, F. Huet3, C. Thauvin-Robinet3,6, S. None. N. Ruiz-Palares: None. M. Barat: None. I. Touitou: None. B. Echenne: LeGras1, B. Jost1, B. Gérard5, K. Péoc’h10, J. Launay10, L. Faivre3,6, J. Mandel1,5,2; None. G. Lefort: None. D. Geneviève: None. L. Pinson: None. J. Puechberty: 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Paris, None. France, 3Centre de génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement et Syndromes malformatifs, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Service de Pédopsychiatrie, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 5Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 
P05 .111 6EA 4271 GAD, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 7Centre Zooming into the chromosomal breakpoints by genome paired-end de génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement et Syndromes tag sequencing: application in patients with intellectual disabilities malformatifs, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 8Centre Référent des K. H. Utami1,2, A. M. Hillmer3, E. C. G. Yan3, S. H. K. Tay2, I. Aksoy4, S. Briault5, L. Stanton4, Troubles du Langage et des Apprentissages, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, R. Jamieson6, S. Davila1, V. Cacheux1; 94 Service de Pédopsychiatrie, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 109 Service 1Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Department de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Louis of Pediatrics, National University of Health System, National University of Singapore, Lariboisière Fernand-Widal, AP-HP, Paris, France. Singapore, Singapore, 3Genome Technology and Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Stem Cells and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 5INEM UMR7355 CNRS-University, Centre Hospitalier Intellectual disability (ID) is characterized by an extraordinary genetic he- Regional d’Orleans, Orleans, France, Orleans, France, 6Eye and Developmental Genetics Research, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia. terogeneity, with more than 200 genes implicated in monogenic forms. This complexity precluded systematic testing for mutations and because clini- cal features are often non-specific, for some of these genes only few cases Structural variations are common genetic hallmarks in patients with deve- or families have been unambiguously documented. It is the case of the the lopmental delay or congenital ma-4lformations. Although SVs are pdere nsoevnot in X-linked gene encoding monoamine oxidase A (MAOA), for which only one relatively hea,l thy individuals (10 mutation rate) and have been annotated nonsense mutation has been identified in Brunner syndrome, characterized comprehensively in 1000 Genome Project, however, when arise in in one unique family by borderline ID and impulsive and aggressive behavi- the germline it has been shown to be an indfoer nmoavtoi ve path towards iden- ors. We have developed targeted NGS sequencing of 220 ID-genes in patients with undiagnosed ID. We identified a p.
C266 F missense mutation in MAOA tifying causative mutations in human diseases. We apply genome-wdidee n poavio- red end tag sequencing in 8 patients carrying or familial segregating in a boy with autistic features and behavioral disturbances. He has good ver- chromosomal aberrations with intellectual disability (ID). For one bal comprehension but IQ could not be measured due to attention deficit patient, we included the parents for genome sequencing investigation, and and heterogeneous results in WISC-IV test. Two maternal uncles carry the applied variants filtering to exclude parentadle S nVosv. oT he ratio of paternal and mutation and have severe ID, with a history of maltreatment in early child- maternal inheritance rate is relativeGlTyD bCa1lanced (52% : 46 %) and after ap- hood. The phenotype overlaps with Brunner syndrome. This novel missense plying variants filtering, we obtained four SVs, in which 2 SVs are mutation decreases MAOA activity, as shown by abnormal levels of urinary balanced translocation disrupting gene at chromGoTsDom
C1 e 2 and two monoamines and by measurement of enzymatic activity. The identification other SVs did not coincide within a coding region/TF-binding s.i tes from re- of this point mutation confirms, for the first time since 1993, the monogenic cent ENCODE reGlTeDasCe1 dataset. The transcript level of all isoforms is implication of the MAOA gene in ID, autistic features and behavioral abnor- reduced in the patient’s lymphoblasts compared to the contGrToDlCT1h e expres- malities. Variable expressivity might be due to environmental factors. We sion profile of is ubiquitous across different tissues, including the will discuss possible therapeutic options and hypotheses that could account brain. We further investigated the loss ofG fTuDnCct1i on effect of in neural for the very long time lag between the initial and highly publicized report a An.d P tihtoen f:i nNdoinneg. Hof. aP oseqcuoent:d N foanmei.l yR.. Claire: None. A. Masurel: None. J. Lauer: precGuTrDsCor1 cells and neurons derived from mouse embryonic stem cells, and None. J. Muller: None. J. Thevenon: None. Y. Herenger: None. S. Chancenotte: found reduced number of neurons in the depleted cells. This implica- None. M. Bonnet: None. J. Pinoit: None. F. Huet: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: tes as an eligible candidate for ID and screening validation in larger None. S. LeGras: None. B. Jost: None. B. Gérard: None. K. Péoc’h: None. J. cohort of patients is required to provide a stronger evidence for its involve- Launay: None. L. Faivre: None. J. Mandel: None. m Ke.Hn.t Uinta ImDi.: None. A.M. Hillmer: None. E.C.G. Yan: None. S.H.K. Tay: None. I. Aksoy: None. S. Briault: None. L. Stanton: None. R. Jamieson: None. S. Davila: None. V. Cacheux: None. 
P05 .110 Microduplication disrupting the MYT1L gene in a familial case of intellectual disability, and neuropsychiatric disorder. 
P05 .112 M. Willems1, A. Schneider2, M. Girard2, M. Tournaire2, N. Ruiz-Palares2, M. Barat3, I. Two brothers with mental retardation and microduplication Xp22.32- Touitou3, B. Echenne4, G. Lefort2, D. Geneviève1, L. Pinson1, J. Puechberty1; p22.31 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, M. Pizzino, S. Meduri, C. Pidone, I. Loddo, E. Germanò, A. Gagliano, S. Briuglia; 2Département de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, Genetics and Pediatric Immunology, Messina, Italy. 3Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 4Département de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, Montpellier, France. 182 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FR NA euN roC liE gi n| sW (NW L)W ar. eE sS yH naG pt. iO c cR elG l adhesion molecules that bind specificallyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index to a set of synaptic membrane proteins called neurexins. In humans, this scription results in two isoforms α and β. The α neurexins are transcribed protein family is encoded by five genes, NLGN1, -2, -3, -4 and -4Y. Several from a promoter located upstream of exon 1, while the β neurexins are tran- recent studies have implicated NL in autistic disorders and mental retar- scribed from an intragenic downstream promoter. dation. The functional role predicts that mutations and/or polymorphisms The main majority odfe o nuorv doeletions (7/8) alter the α isoform only, and five of in NLGN genes may be implicated in the development of neuropsychiatric them involve exonic sequences whereas three deleted intronic regions only. disorders. One case occurred . Two cases are familial ones and the exonic de- We describe two brothers born to non-consanguineous parents, with a fa- letion is inherited from one parent who presented learning difficulties. The mily history of mental retardation (elder brother 16 years-old). Both had five other cases are inherited from an asymptomatic parent or do not segre- showed delayed psychomotor development and language disorders; phe- gate with the phenotype in the siblings, even if the deletion involves exoNnRic- notypic examination were negative except for long and asymmetric face; XreNg1ions. clinodactyly of the 5th finger of hands were present only in the second brot- This heterogeneity of genotype-phenotype correlations of intragenic her. Brain MRI were normal. The karyotype analysis and genetic analysis for deletions implies that the greatest care must be taken in the cytogenetic X-fragile syndrome were negative. Both have performed array-CGH which report, and that deletions of this gene may participate in the phenotype but showed a microduplication Xp22.32-p22.31 (5,842,988-6,106,308)x2 mat. a Cr.e D purboobuabrgly: Nnoont es.u Hff.i cHiaemntd tio: Ngiovnee r. iLs.e P taos tqhuei enre: uNroondee.v Ae.l oFpiemveetn:t Nalo dneis.o Cr.d er. The mother was heterozygous unaffected. Our observation helps to con- Quélin: None. S. Jaillard: None. H. Journel: None. M. Beaumont-Epinette: None. J. Mosser: None. S. Odent: None. V. David: None. firm the pathogenic role of this microriarrangements. The microduplication highlighted our patients is in the short arm of the X chromosome that inclu- des NLGN4 gene. Our cases and the data in literature suggest that neurode- velopmental defects in autism spectrum disorders and mental retardation 
P05 .115 ( MM.R P)i zczoiunold: bNeo nree.l aSt.e Md etod uar ri:e Ndouncee.d C f.u Pnicdtoionne :o Nf tohnies. pI.r Lootedidno.: None. E. More or Less: reverse phenotypes as a consequence of reciprocal Germanò: None. A. Gagliano: None. S. Briuglia: None. 5q35 deletions and duplications O. Zilina1,2, R. Mägi3, A. Kurg1, K. Õunap2,4; 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian 
P05 .113 Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University Alteration in synaptic genes NRXN1 and NLGN4 may predispose to of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. neurological syndromes V. Becvarova1, L. Hnykova1, H. Machkova1, E. Hlavova1, G. Kreckova1, J. Horacek1, I. Soldatova1, M. Putzova1, D. Stejskal1, M. Godava2, E. Zemankova3, M. Trkova1; 1GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of medical genetics, University Hospital, The recent implementation of array techniques in research and clinical prac- Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3E-med, Benesov, Czech Republic. tice has revealed the existence of recurrent reciprocal deletions and dupli- cations in several genome loci. The most intriguing feature is that some re- ciprocal genomic events can result in opposite phenotypic outcome. One of Neurexins and neuroNligRiXnNs 1are proteins funNcLtiGoNn4ally connected by interac- such examples is 5q35.2-q35.3. Deletions in this locus, encompassing NSD1 tion in synaptic network formation and maitenance. According to recent gene, lead to Sotos syndrome (Sos) characterized by childhood overgrowth studies alteration in (2p16.3) and (Xp22.3) genes can pre- with advanced bone age, craniofacial dysmorphic features including macro- dispose to the wide spectrum of NnReXuNro1developmental disorders including cephaly, and learning difficulties; while duplications have been proposed to autistic spectrum disorders, intellectual disability, speech and language de- manifest in opposite phenotype related to growth. Short stature since the lay, hypotonia and schizophrenia. as one of the largest known human birth, microcephaly, brachydactyly, delayed bone age, mild to moderate in- genes (1,1 Mb) tends to frequent intragenic alterations. Whole genome ge- tellectual disability and mild facial dysmorphism seem to be characteristic notyping was performed using the IlNluRmXNin1a HumanCytoSNP 12v2.1. features of 5q35.2-q35.3 duplication. It has been proposed that NSD1 plays We present 3 children of comparable age (5-6 year old), having different size a role in regulation of somatic growth in humans. Obviously, gene expressi- of microdeletion in isoform alpha1 gene (40 - 360 kb ) and slightly on studies might be the first step towards the understanding the exact me- different phenotype. All children had mild to moderate mental retardation, chanisms of the influence of 5q35.2-q35.3 structural changes in general and two of them had spNeReXchN 1delay and anxiosity, hypoNtoRnXiaN 1and facial dysmor- NSD1 particularly on human growth. phism. Two of detected deletions were intronic, the third deletion covered We aimed to figure out the gene expression pattern differences in patients exones 1 to 11 of . As the deletion in the may NnLoGt Nb4e fully with 5q35.2-q35.3 deletion and duplication. The expression of 16 genes penetrant, we examine also parental DNA. from Sos critical region and flanking regions was studied by RT-qPCR. Most Microduplication (300 kb) spanning the exones 1,2 and 3 of gene of the genes showed correlation between their copy number and expression was found in 22 year old patient with hyperkinetic syndrome, attention level. In addition, whole-genome expression was analyzed using HumanHT- failure, but without mental retardation. The same duplication was detected 12 v4 Expression BeadChip (Illumina Inc.) to estimate the global influence in clinically normal mother and maternal cousin with Asperger syndrome. of these chromosomal aberrations. Although, some expected changes were ThanksN tLoG tNh4is family examination prenatal array diagnosis in a new preg- observed, more patients are needed to make any statistically significant con- nancy could be provided. Consequently proband´s brother without duplica- c Olu. sZiiolinnsa.: None. R. Mägi: None. A. Kurg: None. K. Õunap: None. tVio. nB einc varova: wNoanse b. oLr.n H.nykova: None. H. Machkova: None. E. Hlavova: None. G. Kreckova: None. J. Horacek: None. I. Soldatova: None. M. Putzova: None. D. Stejskal: None. M. Godava: None. E. Zemankova: None. M. Trkova: 
P05 .116 None. Molecular diagnosis of deletions and duplications associated with syndromic obesity C. S. D‘Angelo, C. P. Koiffmann; 
P05 .114 Institute of Biosciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Genotype-phenotype correlations of NRXN1 deletions C. Dubourg1,2, H. Hamdi1, L. Pasquier3, A. Fievet1, C. Quélin3, S. Jaillard4, H. Journel5, M. Beaumont-Epinette1, J. Mosser6,2,7, S. Odent3,2, V. David1,2; Some rare genetic syndromes lead to obesity, often associated with intellec- 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Rennes, France, 2UMR 6290 CNRS, IGDR, tual disability, abnormal development, dysmorphic features and congenital Rennes, France, 3Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU, Rennes, France, 4Laboratoire de malformations. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is the most common syndro- Cytogénétique, CHU, Rennes, France, 5Service de Génétique Médicale, CHBA, Vannes, France, 6Laboratoire de Génomique, CHU, Rennes, France, 7Plateforme Biogenouest mic form of obesity, caused more specially by deletions in the paternally de- Génomique Santé, Rennes, France. rived 15q11q13 region. Other genomic disorders associated with copy num- ber variants (CNVs), such as chromosomal deletions of 1p36, 2q37, 6q16, 9q34, 11p13 and 17p11.2, have an increased prevalence of obesity. Moreo- Chromosomal microarNraRyX Nis1 now a key diagnostic test for patients with de- ver, an increasing number of CNVs linked to obesity are being identified in velopmental disabilities. This analysis led us to the identification of intra- recent years. Nearly 300 patients with syndromic obesity were evaluated for genic deletions of the (neurexin 1) gene, in eight unrelated patients chromosomal imbalances by MLPA after DNA methylation analysis ruled out with intellectual disability (8/8), speech delay (8/8), autism spectrum dis- PWS. Half of these patients were further investigated with different array ordeNrsR (X5N/18) and epilepsy (2/8). The size of these deletions varies from 50 platforms. Among the pathogenic CNVs, we identified syndromic genomic to 600 kb. NRXN1 disorders, such as deletions of 1p36 (7 cases), 2q37 (HDA
C4 ; 5 cases), 6q16 The gene encodes a protein that belongs to a family of cell adhesion (SIM1; 2 cases), 9p24 (3 cases), 9q34 (EHMT1; 1 case), and 17p11.2 (RAI1; molecules and plays a fundamental role E inS sH ynG a p2 ti0 c 1 fu3 n c| t P ioA n.R IS, FR tA raN n-C
E5  | cWasWes)W, a.sE wSeHll Gas. OspRecGific CNVs already linked to obesity, such as 1p12813.3ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and 2p25.3 deletions. Additionally, we identified 22q11.2 deletion causing In conclusion, the same partial deletion of TCF4 can cause typical Pitt- DiGeorge syndrome (6 cases), 22q11.2 duplication syndrome (1 case), and Hopkins syndrome and aspecific intellectual disability, respectively, in two 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome (2 cases). Known genomic disorders with sisters. Apparently, the phenotype of TCF4 disruption is broader than pre- incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity included 15q11.2 deletion viously thought. As far as we know, this is the second report of recurrence of NIPA1 (2 cases), 16p11.2 deletion of SH2B1 (1 case), 16p11.2 duplication in sibs and somatic mosaicism in the parent, which is important for genetic of TBX6 (1 case), 16p13 deletion of MYH11 (1 case), 17q11.2 duplication of cAo.uSn. sPelloinmgp.: None. R.C.M. Hennekam: None. J. Kleyer: None. L.C. Knegt: NF1 (1 case), and 17q21.31 duplication of MAPT (1 case). Clinical variability None. A.M. Polstra: None. in well-known syndromes may facilitate the identification of disease genes. F Cin.Sa.n Dc‘iAaln Sgueplop:o Nrot:n CeE. CPI.PD. -KFAoiPffEmSaPn, CnN: NPqon.e. 
P05 .119 Three novel WDR62 mutations in a consanguineous Turkish family 
P05 .117 and in a non-cansanguineous European patient: further molecular Pallister-Killian syndrome: an under-diagnosed syndrome? investigations and clinical manifestations P. Letard1, C. Dupont1, Y. Capri2, C. Baumann2, S. Drunat3, M. Montagnon1, A. Verloes2, B. S. Moortgat1, I. Maystadt1, M. Abramowicz2, J. Parma2, J. Désir1; Benzacken4,5, A. C. Tabet1; 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Charleroi 1Cytogenetic Department, AP-HP, Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France, (Gosselies), Belgium, 2Centre de Génétique Humaine, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, 2Medical Genetic Department, AP-HP, Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France, Belgium. 3Molecular Genetic Department, AP-HP, Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris, France, 4Cytogenetic Department, AP-HP, Jean Verdier University Hospital, Bondy, France, 5University of Paris North Paris XIII, Bobigny, France. Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a genetic disorder of brain growth characterized by small brain, variable degree of mental retar- dWaDtiRo6n2 and occasionally mild seizures. It is genetically heterogeneous with Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is usually described as a rare syndrome nine genes involved so far. ASPM. caused by the presence of a supernumerary mosaic isochromosome 12p , coding for a centrosomal protein, is the seWcoDnRd6 m2 ost commonly im- (i(12p)) in patients presented with multiple congenital anomalies, charac- plicated gene, preceded by Cortical malformationsW, nDoRt 6d2escribed in teristic dysmorphic features, pigmentary skin anomalies, seizures and seve- classical MCPH phenotype, are often present in mutated patients. re developmental delay. The gold standard diagnostic requires skin biopsy We report on 2 families with three novel mutations in . The first establishing the karyotype in normal and abnormal pigmented skin. Never- proband is the only child of a non-consanguineous European couple. She theless, PKS can be associated with mild or unusual phenotype making the presents with mild microcephaly (-2.5SD), developWmDenRt6a2l delay, moderate diagnosis and the genetic counselling difficult. mental retardation and epilepsy. Cerebral MRI shows mild pachygyria and Here we report two cases; the first one is a 1-year-old patient with seve- simplified cerebral cortex. Sanger sequencing of identified com- re developmental delay, atypical facial features, cardiac malformation, pound heterozygous mutations: a nonsense mutation c.2788C>T resulting in hirustism and ulnar drift. Chromosome analysis on peripheral lymphocytes a premature stop codon (p.Gln930X) and a synonymous variant c.1521G>A showed a normal karyotype. The PKS diagnosis was suspected because the (p.Leu507Leu). Functional studies were performed on cDNA and an aber- assessment of subtelomeric rearrangements by MLPA technique showed a rant splicing of exon 11 confirms the pathogenicity of this unknown variant. trisomy 12pter. The PKS was confirmed by FISH using D12Z1 probe on ju- Both parents are healthy heterozygous carriers of one of the mutations. gal and peripheral blood smears. The second case is a patient with prenatal The second proband, third child of consanguineous Turkish parents, pre- diagnosis of tetrasomy 12p. Despite a reserved counselling, a boy was born sents with moderate microcephaly (-4SD) and mental retardation. Cerebral at term. At 5 years old, he presented with minor pigmentary skin anomalies, MRWI DdoRe6s2 .not reveal any brain malformation, except microcephaly. Sequen- no dysmorphic features and very mild developmental delay. cing identified a homozygous missense mutation c.1526C>T (p.Ser509Leu) The first case highlights the difficulty of the diagnosis in absence of typical in phenotype. It also confirms that the diagnosis can be performed by buccal These three mutations have not been reported before. We discuss the mole- and/or peripherical blood smears using FISH techniques without skin bio- cular results, the phenotypic heterogeneity and the prevalence of this gene psy. The second observation highlights the variability of the phenotype lea- in MCPH patients from variable ethnicity, even in non-consanguineous po- ding to a difficult prenatal genetic counselling. Together, these observations pulations, and in patients with mild phenotype and no obvious cortical mal- s Pu. gLgeetsatr dth: aNto PnKe.S C is. Da upproonbta:b Nlyo nuen. dYe. rC-dapiargi:n Noosneed. sCy.n Bdaruommaen.n: None. S. fSor. mMoatoirotngsa.t: None. I. Maystadt: None. M. Abramowicz: None. J. Parma: Drunat: None. M. Montagnon: None. A. Verloes: None. B. Benzacken: None. J. Désir: None. None. A.C. Tabet: None. 
P05 .120 
P05 .118 Revealing the complexity of a monogenic disease: Rett Syndrome Partial deletion of TCF4 in two sisters of whom only one had typical exome sequencing Pitt-Hopkins syndrome L. Bianciardi1, E. Grillo1, C. Lo Rizzo1,2, V. Bizzarri1,2, M. Baldassarri1, O. Spiga3, S. Furini4, A. S. Plomp1,2, R. C. M. Hennekam1, J. Kleyer3, L. C. Knegt1, A. M. Polstra1; C. De Felice5, C. Signorini6, S. Leoncini6,7, A. Pecorelli6,7, L. Ciccoli6, M. Mencarelli1,2, J. 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Netherlands Institute for Hayek7, I. Meloni1, F. Ariani1, F. Mari1,2, A. Renieri1,2; Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Medische Dienst Talant, Drachten, Netherlands. 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 4Department of Surgery and Bioengeneering, University Haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 gene is known to cause Pitt-Hopkins syndro- of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Neonatal Intensive Care Unit University Hospital, Azienda me, characterized by severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, hyperventilati- Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese (AOUS) of Siena, Siena, Italy, 6Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 7Child Neuropsychiatry on, microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Unit, University Hospital, AOUS, Siena, Italy. The proband is a 23-year-old female with psychomotor retardation since birth. She walked without support at the age of three years and has never had any meaningful speech. She walked somewhat ataxic with flexed el- Rett syndrome (RTT) is a monogenic disorder manifesting as a large va- bows. She has brachycephaly, a broad nose, a large mouth with full, everted riety of phenotypes ranging from very severe to mild disease. Since there lips, laxity of finger joints and flat feet. Her nine years younger sister also is a weak correlation between the mutation type in the Xq28 disease gene has intellectual disability. She walked independently at the age of two years. MEC
P2 /X-inactivation status and phenotypic variability, we used this disea- Speech development was retarded, but eventually she learned to speak well. se as a model to unveil the complex nature of a monogenic disorder. Exome She visited a normal primary school for two years followed by special edu- sequencing was used to analyze the functional portion of the genome of two cation. She can read and write a little and plays computer games. She has pairs of sisters with RTT. Although each pair had the same MEC
P2  muta- obesity (BMI=32), mildly upslanting palpebral fissures, otherwise no dys- tion and balanced X-inactivation, one individual from each pair could not morphism. speak or walk, and had a profound ID (classical RTT), while the other could Array CGH analysis (Agilent 180K oligo-array; AMADID 023363) revealed speak and walk, and had a moderate ID (Zappella variant). In addition to an interstitial deletion of 67 kb at chromosome band 18q21.2 comprising the MEC
P2  mutation, each patient has a group of variants predicted to im- part of the TCF4 gene in both sisters. Array CGH analysis and FISH examina- pair protein function. The classical RTT girls, but not their milder affected tion in the phenotypically normal father showed the same deletion in about sisters, have an enrichment of variants in genes related to oxidative stress, o1n8e 4third of his lymphocytes. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FR mA uN scC E | pW airW meW nt. E aS ndH IG . aO ndR /G le im D or autism. On the other hand, a subgroupABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of variants related to immune system modulation, exclusive to the Zappella to screen it in female patients with mental impairment and some features variant are driving toward a milder phenotype. Togheter our results indicate rMem. Minadrcinhgi: oNfo Rneet.t F s. yCnodgrloiamtie: None. M. Estienne: None. E. Freri: None. V. that the final phenotype is likely the result of a combination of MEC
P2  mu- Saletti: None. M.T. Bonati: None. L. Larizza: None. S. Russo: None. tation, X-inactivation and around 40 disrupting variants in other genes. We demonstrate that exome analysis has the potential to provide insights into disease pathophysiology. Most importantly, hereby identified genetic modi- 
P05 .123 fiers of speaking, walking and intellectual capabilities may represent targets GluD1 is a Common altered player in Rett syndrome due to MEC
P2  or f Lo.r Bnieawnc tiharedria:p Nieosn e(a. cEc. eGprtielldo :b Nyo PnLeO. CS .O LNoE R).izzo: None. V. Bizzarri: None. M. CDK
L5  mutations Baldassarri: None. O. Spiga: None. S. Furini: None. C. De Felice: None. C. I. Meloni1, G. Livide1, M. Amenduni2, C. Lo Rizzo1, T. Patriarchi1,3, G. De Falco4, C. Ulivieri5, Signorini: None. S. Leoncini: None. A. Pecorelli: None. L. Ciccoli: None. M. F. Ariani1, F. Mari1,6, M. Mencarelli1,6, A. Renieri1,6; Mencarelli: None. J. Hayek: None. I. Meloni: None. F. Ariani: None. F. Mari: 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Child Study Center, Yale University, None. A. Renieri: None. New Haven, CT, United States, 3Department of Pharmacology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, United States, 4Department Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 6Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. 
P05 .121 Bio-distribution and efficacy of a self-complementary AAV9 construct expressing a codon-optimized Mecp2 transgene for further use in a MEC
P2  CDK
L5  Rett syndrome is a monogenic disease due to de novo mutations in either preclinical model of Rett Syndrome V. Matagne1, M. Barkats2, L. Villard1, J. Roux1; or genes on the X chromosome. In spite oCf DthKeLir5 involvement 1INSERM U910 / Université Aix-Marseille, Marseille, France, 2Institut de Myologie, in the same disease, a functional interaction between the two genes has Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France. not been proven. MeC
P2  is a transcriptional regulator; encodes for a kinase protein that might be involved in the regulation of gene expres- sion. Therefore, we hypothesized that the two genes may lead to similar Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder primari- phenotypes by dys-regulating the expMreEsCsPio2n of common genes. To test this ly affecting CNS functions but also peripheral functions. There is currently hypCoDtKhLe5sis we used induced pluripotent stem (iPS)C DceKllLs5 d-erived from fibro- no cure for the disease and treatments available are aimed at improving blasts of one Rett patient mutated in and 2 patients withC mDKuLta5tions RTT symptoms. Most RTT cases are due to mutation in methyl CpG binding iMnE C
P2  . Expression profiling was performed in mutated cells and protein 2 (MEC
P2 ), whose main function is that of a global transcriptional gMeEnCePs2 of interest werCeD cKoLn5firmed by real-time RTG-PRCIDR 1in both and repressor. mutated cells. The only major change in gene expression common to The recent findings that reactivation of Mecp2 rescued adult diseased RTT -mutated and -mutated cells was for , encoding for glut- mice not only indicates that MEC
P2  is needed for normal adult function (Ro- amate d1 receptor (GluD1), a member of the delta family of ionotropic glut- binson et al, Brain 2012) but also that gene therapy might be beneficial for amate receptors. GluD1 ability to form functional AMPA or NMDA glutamate RTT patients, even after the disease has started. receptors has not been demonstrated. It acts like an adhesion molecule by AAV9 has been shown to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) and infect brain linkinGgR ItDh1e postsynaptic and presynaptic coMmEpCaPr2tments and indCuDcKinLg5 exci- cells after intravenous injection in both rodent and primates (Foust et al, Nat tatory and inhibitory presynaptic differentiation. Our results demonstrate Biotech 2009; Duque et al, Mol Ther 2009; Gray et al, Mol Ther 2011). that gene is down-regulated in both -mutated and -mu- We generated an AAV9 expressing GFP (control virus) or a codon-optimi- tated iPS cells and up-regulated in neuronal precursors, providing the first zed version of Mecp2 under the regulation of the mouse Mecp2 promoter functional link between the two genes. These data provide novel insights (named scAAV9-MCO) and confirmed their efficacy in vitro by infecting into disease pathophysiology and identify possible new targets for thera- NIH/3T3 mouse fibroblasts and primary mixed neurons/glia cultures. Pre- peutic treatment of Rett syndrome. liminary experiments investigating the efficacy and bio-distribution of the- I. Meloni: None. G. Livide: None. M. Amenduni: None. C. Lo Rizzo: None. T. se viruses in vivo after intravenous injection show that scAAV9 crosses the Patriarchi: None. G. De Falco: None. C. Ulivieri: None. F. Ariani: None. F. Mari: BBB, which is in agreement with results from other groups. Our next expe- None. M. Mencarelli: None. A. Renieri: None. riments will be aimed at the in vivo testing of both control and scAAV9-MCO virus in the RTT mouse model and the determination of a potential rescuing effect in these mice. 
P05 .124 S Vu. pMpaotratg :n AeF: MNone. M. Barkats: None. L. Villard: None. J. Roux: None. Mutation analysis of MEC
P2 , CDK
L5 , and FOXG1 genes in Czech patients with Rett syndrome and Rett-like phenotype D. Zahorakova1, A. Puchmajerova1, A. Baxova2, P. Martasek1; 1Department of Pediatrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and 
P05 .122 General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Clinical MEC
P2  mutations in girls with intellectual disabilities. Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General Teaching M. Marchi1, F. Cogliati1, M. Estienne2, E. Freri2, V. Saletti2, M. T. Bonati1, L. Larizza1, S. Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Russo1; 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino (MI), Italy, 2Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy. Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder affecting mostly females and primarily caused by de novo mutations in the Rett syndrome (RTT,OMIM 312750) is a progressive neurologic develop- MEC
P2  gene. It is characterized by developmental regression, acquired mi- mental disorder mainly affecting females with an incidence of 1:10000. Cli- crocephaly, loss of purposeful hand use and speech, stereotypic hand mo- nical presentation appears very heterogeneous. “Classical” phenotype inclu- vements, autistic features, gait apraxia, breathing anomalies, and seizures. des impaired communication and hand skills, stereotypic hand movements, Mutations in other genes have been identified in early-onset seizure variant and a gradual decrease in acquired gross motor abilities over time; among (CDK
L5 ) and congenital variant (FOXG1) of Rett syndrome. We report the atypical variants the “Zappella variant shows more moderate traits, in pres- results of molecular analysis of MEC
P2 , CDK
L5 , and FOXG1 genes in patients ence of crucial diagnostic criteria. Mutations in the MEC
P2  gene is the most with Rett syndrome and mental retardation with Rett-like features from common cause of RTT. Out of a cohort of 138 girls with MEC
P2  mutation, Czech Republic. we distinguished three mentally impaired patients with “high-functioning” MEC
P2  and CDK
L5  were analyzed by high-resolution melting analysis and phenotype, preserved hand skills and able to articulate even complex sen- DNA sequencing of coding regions and exon/intron boundaries. FOXG1 was tences; no microcephaly and clear regression were observed but occurrence analyzed by DNA sequencing. Large deletions in all three genes were analy- of hand stereotypies or dyspraxic gait were suggestive of RTT. Molecular te- zed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. sting revealed two MEC
P2  mutations already described in Zappella-variant We identified MEC
P2  mutations in 65 out of 86 patients with classic Rett or mild phenotypes, while the third is a mutation reported in carriers males syndrome (76%). 20 patients with Rett syndrome variants were initially showing learning impairment and spasticity, who inherited the mutation screened for MEC
P2  mutations and 6 MEC
P2  mutations were identified from their unaffected XCI balanced mothers and in a mildly affected spora- (30%). The subsequent analysis of CDK
L5  gene in patients with early-onset dic mental retardation- Non Rett syndrome female with completely skewed seizure variant revealed mutations in 2 cases (6,7%). No mutation has been XCI. For two out of three patient we could perform mRNA investigation to identified in FOXG1 gene in the patients with congenital variant of Rett syn- confirm preferential expression of a single MEC
P2  allele. Our data under- drome. line the broad phenotypic spectrum of tEheS HMEGC 
P220  m1u3t a|t PioAnsR aInSd, FsuRgAgeNst CEW | eW coWnfWirm.EeSd HthGe .hOigRh Gfrequency of MEC
P2  mutations in classic Rett 1 s 8yn 5-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index drome. On the other hand, MEC
P2  mutations are not a frequent cause of causative mutations were identified in the GP
C3  gene mapping at Xq26 (ma- early-onset seizure and congenital variant of Rett syndrome or mental re- jor gene of SGBS). Since the first description, many other cases have been tardation with Rett-like phenotype. reported with a wide clinical range of symptoms and severity. Among them, Supported by grants NT 13120-4/2012, MZCR RVO-VFN64165/2012, 
P24 / a few cases were significantly different as they had atypical clinical presen- L DF.1 Z/a3h, oarnadk oUvNaC: NE o2n0e4. 0A1. 1P/u2c0h1m2a.jerova: None. A. Baxova: None. P. Martasek: tation with more severe prognosis and/or numerous congenital malforma- None. tions. However, these descriptions occurred before the availability of mole- cular analysis. Moreover the mutation detection rate in SGBS is only 37% to 70%, suggesting that some patients could have different disorders. Finally, 
P05 .125 in the family reported by Golabi and Rosen, a duplication of GP
C4 , mapping Astrocyte transcriptome from Mecp2-deficient mice: relevance to the close to GP
C3 , was recently identified, suggesting that GP
C4  could be the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome second gene for SGBS. C. Delépine1, J. Nectoux1, F. Letourneur1, S. Reibel2, J. Chelly1, T. Bienvenu1; In order to better delineate the phenotypic spectrum of SGBS caused by 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, Paris, France, GP
C3  mutations, and to try to define specific clinical criteria for GP
C3  mole- 2Chronobiotron, IFR37, Strasbourg, France. cular testing, we reviewed the clinical features of all male cases with a GP
C3  MEC
P2  mutation identified in the two molecular laboratories providing this test in France. A clinical questionnaire based on literature data was send to the re- Mutations in the gene cause the neurodevelopmental disorder Rett ferring physicians in order to collect relevant information i.e. family history, syndrome which is one of the most frequent causes of intellectual disability prenatal and postnatal data. with genetic origin in women. Although MeC
P2  levels are roughly five-fold We present here the results of the clinical and molecular analysis of 42 pati- lower in astrocytes than in neurons, recent studies showed that Mecp2 loss eEn.t Cs ointtcelruedaiun:g N 8o fnoee. tIu. sMeosr oterm stoiullsbqouren: bNaobniee.s .M. Moizard: None. L. Bürglen: in astrocytes contributes to Rett-like symptoms and restoration of Mecp2 None. D. Lacombe: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. S. Sigaudy: None. O. can rescue some of these defects. Moreover, mutant astrocytes have a non- Boute: None. A. David: None. L. Faivre-Olivier: None. J. Amiel: None. R. Robertson: None. F. Viana Ramos: None. E. Bieth: None. S. Odent: None. B. cell autonomous effect on neuronal properties, probably resulting from Demeer: None. M. Mathieu: None. D. Gaillard: None. L. Van Maldergem: aberrant secretion of soluble factor(s). To identify these soluble factors, None. G. Baujat: None. I. Maystadt: None. D. Heron: None. A. Verloes: we have compared the 3g0e8/nye expression profiles of wild type and mutant None. N. Philip: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. M. Frouté: None. L. Pinson: astrocytes from Mecp2 mice using Affymetrix mouse 2.0 microarrays. None. P. Blanchet: None. P. Sarda: None. M. Willems: None. I. Ratbi: None. J. The results obtained were confirmed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. A Van Den Ende: None. M. Lackmy-Port lys: None. A. Goldenberg: None. D. false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 was applied to the lists of differentially ex- Bonneau: None. S. Rossignol: None. A. Toutain: None. pressed genes between wild-type and mutated samples. 2152 genes passed the stringent FDR filter of 0.05 including 1784 coding transc3r08i/pyts. However, only 80+ a/ ylso had an expression fold change >1.25 in Mecp2 cells versus 
P05 .127 Mecp2 cells. Interestingly, among these genes, several genes encode se- Characterization of novel “de novo” mutation in the SL
C6 A8 gene creted proteins such as myocilin, lipocalin 2, SHH or Wnt7b, implicated in J. Aguirre-Lamban1, C. Cervera-Acedo1, E. Sarasola2, L. Calvo-Perez3, A. Garcia-Oguiza3, neuronal maturation. Others contribute to major astrocytic functions such as J. Garcia-Peñas4, M. Garcia-Barcina2, M. Poch Olive3, E. Dominguez-Garrido1; the exocytotic release of glutamate (Slc17a8), glutamate metabolism(GAD1) 1Fundacion RiojaSalud-CIBIR, Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, and glucose metabolism (Adcy8, Acot4). We need to confirm these data at 3Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain, 4Hospital Niño Jesus, Madrid, Spain. the proteomic level in astrocyte and conditional medium from symptomatic Mecp2-deficient mice. Therefore, insights into astrocyte secretion are criti- SL
C6 A8 cally important for understanding physiological responses and pathological Introduction: Cerebral creatine deficiency is an X-linked disorder caused by m Ce. cDhealénpisinmes: Nino Rnee.t tJ s. yNnedcrtooumxe: .None. F. Letourneur: None. S. Reibel: None. J. mutations in the gene (Xq28). It consists of 13 exons and encodes a Chelly: None. T. Bienvenu: None. protein of 635 amino acids. This disorder causes an increase of creatine le- vels in urine and plasma, and urinary creatine/creatinine ratio. The clinical presentation of males affected is mental retardation, expressive speech and 
P05 .126 language delay, epilepsy, developmental delay and autistic behaviour. Phenotypic spectrum and GP
C3  mutations in a series of 42 patients Subjects and Methods: An 8 year-old male patient presents learning diffi- with Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome. culties, behaviour diSsLoCrd6eAr8 a nd epilepsy. An increase of creatine/creatinine E. Cottereau1, I. Mortemousque1, M. Moizard1,2, L. Bürglen3, D. Lacombe4, B. Gilbert- ratio, guanidineacetate and glycine levels (plasma and urine) was detected. Dussardier5, S. Sigaudy6, O. Boute7, A. David8, L. Faivre-Olivier9, J. Amiel10, R. Robertson11, The 13 exons of the gene, including the intron-exon junctions, were F. Viana Ramos12, E. Bieth13, S. Odent14, B. Demeer15, M. Mathieu15, D. Gaillard16, L. Van analyzed by PCR and direct sequencing reaction. Maldergem17, G. Baujat10, I. Maystadt18, D. Heron19, A. Verloes20, N. Philip6, V. Cormier- Results: We detected a 34 pb deletion (c.1016+11_1017-52del34) in intron Daire10, M. Frouté21, L. Pinson22, P. Blanchet22, P. Sarda22, M. Willems22, I. Ratbi23, J. Van 6, that was predicted to cause an aberrant splicing into acceptor splice-site. Den Ende24, M. Lackmy-Port lys25, A. Goldenberg26, D. Bonneau27, S. Rossignol28, A. At the cDNA level, this mutation produces a 30 pbd de enloetvioo.n in exon 7 and Toutain1,2; 1Service de Génétique, CHU de Tours, Tours, France, 2UMR INSERM U930, Université a single amino acid insertion (p. K339_
S349 delinsN). This variant was not François Rabelais, Faculté de Médecine, Tours, France, 3Service de Génétique et detected in the mother and is therefore considered Embryologie médicales, CHU Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 4Service de Génétique Discussion: DNA and RNA analysis were necessary to characterize this novel médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 5Service de Génétique médicale, pathogenic mutation. The detected change in the creatine transporter could CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 6Département de Génétique médicale, CHU de be responsible for a lower and/or no activity of the prote in. Functional stu- Marseille, Marseille, France, 7Service de Génétique clinique Guy Fontaine, CHU de dies in cultured skin fibroblasts will be necessary to showa deficiency of the Lille, Lille, France, 8Service de Génétique médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, cJr.e Aagtiunierr ter-aLnasmpboarnte:r N founnec.t iCo.n C. ervera-Acedo: None. E. Sarasola: None. L. 9Centre de Génétique, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 10Département de Génétique, CHU Calvo-Perez: None. A. Garcia-Oguiza: None. J. Garcia-Peñas: None. M. Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 11Ultrasound Department, Sydney, Australia, Garcia-Barcina: None. M. Poch Olive: None. E. Dominguez-Garrido: None. 12Hospital Pediatrico, Coimbra, Portugal, 13Service de Génétique médicale, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 14Service de Génétique clinique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 15Département de Pédiatrie, Unité de Génétique clinique, CHU d‘ Amiens, Amiens, France, 16Service de Génétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU de Reims, 
P05 .128 Reims, France, 17Service de Génétique, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France, 18Centre Characterisation of de novo dicentric supernumerary marker de Génétique humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, chromosome 15 (Prader-Willi / Angelman critical region included) in 19Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière,, Paris, France, 20Département de Génétique, UF de Génétique Clinique, CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, a boy with subtle phenotype 21Service Maternité, Hôpital Bagatelle, Talence, France, 22Service de Génétique, CHU P. Tesner, M. Vlčková, J. Drábová, V. Zimanová, E. Kočárek; de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 23Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, Dept. of Biology and Medical Genetics, University hospital Motol and 2nd Faculty of 24Centrum Medische Genetica, Universiteit, Antwerpen, Belgium, 25Unité de Génétique Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. clinique, CHU de Pointre à Pitre, pointre à Pitre, France, 26Unité de Although it is estimated almost 3 million of people of the world population Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS), a rare X-linked MCA/ID syndro- are carriers of supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMCs), only less than me, is characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, distinctive craniofa- 5000 SMCs are reported in their largest database, Liehr´s SMC-homepage cial features, congenital malformations, visceromegaly, an increased risk of assembled in Universitätsklinikum Jena. More than every fifth gathered SMC t1u8m6our and mild/moderate intellectual deficiencEy SinH sGom 2e0 c1as3es |. IPnA 1R99I
S6 ,, FRisA dNerCivEed | fWromW cWhr.oEmSoHsoGm.eO 1R5G, most of them in isochromosome 15 syn-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index drome patients. sing epileptic encephalopathy. Mutations in STXB
P1  have been first repor- SMC(15)s containing Prader-Willi/Angelman critical region (PWACR, ted in early onset epileptic encephalopathy with suppression-bursts, then in 15q11-q13) are usually associated with severe phenotype, according to infantile spasms and, more recently, in patients with non syndromic mental N.R.Dennis et al. (2006): hypotonia, motor and speech delay, seizures, mo- retardation without epilepsy. derate to severe learning disability, and autism while dysmorphic features To better define the clinical phenotype and to determine the occurrence of are absent or subtle, growth is usually normal. specific neuroradiological abnormalities in patients with STXB
P1  mutati- We report a case of a 4-year-old boy with de novo dicentric SMC(15). The ons, we analyzed clinical and neuroradiological findings in a series of pati- FISH analysis of this abnormal chromosome revealed two copies of PWACR ents having STXB
P1  mutations. region and only one signal of the acro-p-arm probe. The patient has short We included patients with STXB
P1  abnormalities followed at our institution stature and suffers from moderate intellectual disability. He has no history and who underwent a high resolution brain MRI. of seizures and his muscle tone is evaluated as slightly decreased. J.A.Crolla We identified 7 unrelated children (6 females, 1 male) with STXB
P1  mu- et al. (2005) pointed out that SMC(15)s are the only SMCs, which incidence tations. Age at seizure onset ranged from 1 day to 3 months. All children could be related to increased maternal age - our proband was born to 36- presented with infantile spasms and 5 had a suppression-burst pattern on years-old mother. EEG. Although all patients were seizure free before the age of 2 years, they Other analyses are to be done to define the exact range of this abnormal showed global and severe developmental delay. Neuroimaging analysis sho- chromosome and to explain parental origin and DNA-methylation pattern of wed a peculiar aspect of thin and dysmorphic corpus callosum associated every individual copy of the critical region. Their results will be presented with cortical frontal atrophy. and discussed on the poster. STXB
P1  mutations are detected only in a minority of patients with early Our work is supported by Grant Agency of Charles University (No. 264811) epileptic encephalopathy. We suggest that patients with thin corpus cal- a Pn. dT eTsencehrn: oNloongey. AMg.e Vnlcčyk oovf át:h Ne oCnzee.c Jh. RDerápbuobvliác: (NNoon.e T. AV0. 1Z0im1a0n9o3v1á):. None. E. losum and frontal cortical atrophy on brain MRI, especially if seizures are Kočárek: None. controlled in the first years, could represent the best candidate to genetic aNn.a Clyhseism oafl yS:T NXoBnPe1. .G. Barcia: None. S. Gobin: None. M. Milh: None. P. Van Boggaert: None. A. Kaminska: None. O. Dulac: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. N. Boddaert: None. R. Nabbout: None. 
P05 .129 SRS-like phenotype associated with mono-allelic expression of the IGF-I receptor gene and NF1 gene microduplication K. H. Chrzanowska1, A. Tańska1, M. Kucharczyk1, D. Jurkiewicz1, E. Ciara1, A. Gutkowska1, 
P05 .131 M. Ginalska-Malinowska1, M. Kalina2, A. Marczak-Hałupka3, M. Jędrzejowska1, M. Expanding the phenotype of IQSE
C2  mutations: truncating mutations Krajewska-Walasek1; in severe intellectual disability 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University of F. Tran Mau Them1, M. Willems1, B. Albrecht2, E. Sanchez1, J. Puechberty1, S. Endele3, A. Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 3Paediatric Centre, Sosnowiec, Poland. Schneider4, N. Ruiz Pallares4, F. Rivier5, M. Girard4, M. Holder6, S. Manouvrier6, I. Touitou7, G. Lefort4, P. Sarda1, S. Drunat8, D. Wieczorek2, D. Genevieve1; 1Département de génétique médicale, CHRU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous 2Institut fur Humangenetik, Universitatsklinikum Essen, Universitat Duisburg-Essen, syndrome characterized by intrauterine growth restriction, body asymme- Essen, Germany, 3Humangenetisches Institut Erlangen, Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Service de Genetique Chromosomique, Plateforme Puce a ADN, try, relative macrocephaly and a triangular face. SRS is mostly caused by hy- Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU Montpelliere Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, pomethylation of the imprinting control r IeGgFio1nR 1 (ICR1) on chromosome 5Departement de Neuropediatrie, Hopital St Eloi, CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 11p15.5, but cytogenetic aberrations have also been described in sporadic 6Departement de Genetique, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 7Laboratoire cases. Microdeletions 15q26 including the gene with clinical features de Genetique, Unite Medicale des Maladies Auto-Inflammatoire, Hopital Arnaud de overlapping with SRS have been reported few times in the literature. Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 8UF de Genetique Moleculaire et de Biochimie, Pole Here, we report clinical and molecular findings in a 12-year-old boy with Biologie et Pharmacie, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France. features suggestivIGeF o1fR SRS. The MS-MLPA method did not reveal ICR1 hy- pomethylation. On the other hand array-CGH identified 3.37 Mb deletion in 15q26.3 causNiFn1g gene haploinsufficiency and 1.21 Mb duplication in Intellectual disability (ID) is frequent in the general population, with 1 in 17q11.2 including region of the Neurofibromatosis 1 with intellectual disa- 50 individuals directly affected worldwide. The multiple etiologies include bilities with gene. X-linked ID (XLID). Among syndromic XLID, few syndromes present seve- Clinical features suggestive of SRS included small anthropometric parame- re ID associated with postnatal microcephaly and midline stereotypic hand ters at birth (SGA) and lack of postnatal catch-up growth, feeding problems, movements. We report on two male patients with ID, non inherited and gastro-esophageal reflux, dysmorphy including triangular and asymmetric postnatal onset microcephaly, midline stereotypic hand movements, hypo- face and micrognathia, as well as minor skeletal abnormalities. The discri- tonia, hyperkinesia, strabismus, as well as seizures for one of the patients. minating feature was microcephaly, which has been described in cases with Using array-CGH and exome sequencing we characterized two truncating del15q26.3, carrying also characteristics overlapping with SRS, such as SGA, mutations in IQSE
C2 , namely a de novo intragenic duplication mapped to postnatal growth retardation and the triangular face. The del15q26.3, along the Xp11.22 region and a nonsense mutation in exon 7. We propose that with 17q11.2 duplication, could also contribute to motor and speech delay, truncating mutations in IQSE
C2  are responsible for syndromic severe ID as well as intellectual disability. in male patients and should be screened in patients without mutations in The presented case proves the array-CGH method is a powerful diagnostic M F.E TCrPan2 ,M FaOuX GTh1e, CmD: KNLo5ne a.n Md. MWEilFle2mCs.: None. B. Albrecht: None. E. Sanchez: None. J. Puechberty: None. S. Endele: None. A. Schneider: None. N. Ruiz tool confirming genetic etiology in patients with ambiguous phenotypes. Pallares: None. F. Rivier: None. M. Girard: None. M. Holder: None. S. The study was supported by MNSW grant No_2853/B/
P01 /2010/39. The Manouvrier: None. I. Touitou: None. G. Lefort: None. P. Sarda: None. S. Roche NimbleGen microarray platform was co-financed by ERDF (EU_Struc- Drunat: None. D. Wieczorek: None. D. Genevieve: None. t Ku.rHa.l _CFhurnzdasn)o pwrsokjeac: tN PoOneIG. A.0.2 T.0ań1s.0k0a-:1 N4o-n0e5.9 M/0. K9.ucharczyk: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. E. Ciara: None. A. Gutkowska: None. M. Ginalska- Malinowska: None. M. Kalina: None. A. Marczak-Hałupka: None. M. Jędrzejowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. 
P05 .132 A new disorder of neurotransmission associated with SYT1 mutation K. Baker1, M. van Kogelenberg2, D. Grozeva1, N. Roberts1, M. Pike3, E. Blair3, M. E. Hurles2, W. Chong4, T. Baldeweg5, M. A. Kurian5, S. Boyd5, L. Raymond1; 
P05 .130 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Early epileptic encephalopathy associated with STXB
P1  mutations: Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, could we better define the phenotype? United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, N. Chemaly1, G. Barcia1, S. Gobin2, M. Milh3, P. Van Boggaert4, A. Kaminska1, O. Dulac1, V. London, United Kingdom, 5UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom. Cormier-Daire2, N. Boddaert5, R. Nabbout1; 1Department of Neuropediatrics, Inserm U663, hôpital necker enfants malades, Paris, France, 2Department of Genetics, Inserm U781, hôpital necker enfants malades, Paris, France, 3Department of Neuropediatrics, Hopital La Timone, Marseille, France, SYT1 is an essential regulator of fast, synchronous vesicle exocytosis. We 4Department of Neuropediatrics, Hopital Erasme, Bruxelles, Belgium, 5Department of report the first case of a human disorder associated with SYT1 mutation. Pediatric Radiology, hôpital necker enfants malades, Paris, France. The clinical features are severe dyskinetic movement disorder and profound cognitive impairment. Epileptic seizures have not been observed and clini- cal MRI is normal. EEG demonstrates extensive low-frequency oscillations, STXB
P1  (Munc18.1), encoding syntaxin bE inS dH ingG p 2 ro0 te1 in3 1 ,| i sP aA nR ewIS g, eF nR e cA aN u-CEa |b WnoWrmWal p.EaiSreHd-Gpu.OlseR dGepression of visual evoked potentials, and imm1a8tu7-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index re auditory evoked potentials. Whole exome sequence analysis revealed a de anomalies, aCGH found 3 deletions (one of 10Mb in 2q24.3, one of 3,24Mb in novo missense mutation (I368T) at a functionally-critical residue in SYT1. 5q14.3 including region up to MEF2C, one of 256 kb in 9q34 corresponding This case suggests that activity-dependent regulation of vesicle release is to the Kleefstra syndrome), and 2 duplications (one of 671 kb including SC- n Ke.c Besaskaerry: Nfoorn me. oMto. vr acno nKtorgole laenndb eforgr :e Nmoenreg.e Dn.c Ge roofz heivgah:e Nr ocnoeg.n Nit. iRono.berts: N2A gene and one of 11.93 Mb in Xq28). None. M. Pike: None. E. Blair: None. M.E. Hurles: None. W. Chong: None. T. So, 13.6% of our cohort presented pathogenic mutations. These concerned Baldeweg: None. M.A. Kurian: None. S. Boyd: None. L. Raymond: None. the most severe patients, most of which presented a history of neonatal seizures. These results stress the importance of genetic screening for pati- eNn.t Bs owuittrhy -WKeryszt as:y Nndonroe.m Ae.. Labalme: None. D. Ville: None. R. Touraine: 
P05 .133 None. A. Poulat: None. M. Till: None. M. Rossi: None. E. Ponchel-Bourel: None. A. Delignières: None. F. Prieur: None. J. de Bellescize: None. S. Differential expression of the Ubiquitin-conjugating genes (
E2 ) during Dimassi: None. P. Edery: None. A. Calender: None. D. Sanlaville: None. G. the differentiation of hippocampal neurons and after stimulation by Lesca: None. NMDA A. Paubel1,2, P. Vourc‘h3,2, S. Tourlet3, C. Michelle4, G. Bouchez4, J. Colas4, J. Tastet4, S. Marouillat4, S. Segura4, F. Laumonnier4, C. R. Andres3,2; 1Service de Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHRU de Tours, TOURS, France, 2INSERM 
P05 .135 U930, Université François-Rabelais, Tours, France, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie William’s neural stem cells: microRNA deregulation moléculaire, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHRU de Tours, TOURS, France, 4INSERM U930, C. Palacios1, A. M. Espinosa2, A. Contreras3, R. M. Ordoñez4, G. Benitez5, A. Hidalgo6, I. Université François-Rabelais, TOURS, France. Rubio1, N. Nájera1, I. Palma-Lara7; 1Sección de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, México, Mexico, 2Hospital General, México, Mexico, The Ubiquitin pathway controls protein stability and signalling during neu- 3Hospital Infantil de México, México, Mexico, 4CMN S XXI, IMSS, México, Mexico, 5Instituto ronal development, maturation and plasticity. Mutations in genes encoding Nacional de Psiquiatría ‘Ramón de la Fuente Muñiz’, México, Mexico, 6Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, México, Mexico, 7Departamento de Morfología, Ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (
E2 ) and Ubiquitin-ligases (
E3 ) have been Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y Zootecnia (FMVZ); Universidad Nacional Autónoma described in neurodevelopmental diseases (i.e. UB
E2 A in XLMR, UB
E3 A in de México (UNAM), México, Mexico. Angelman syndrome for example). We identified 38 
E2  genes in the Human genome, 39 in the Mouse genome (Michelle et al., 2009). To better understand their role during brain develop- Williams Syndrome (WS) is a developmental neurogenetic disorder caused ment and function we analyzed their expression during the differentiation by hemizygous deletion at 7q11.23, distinguised by a characteristic neuroco- of hippocampal neurons in vitro and after stimulation. RT-QPCR analyses gnitive profile wich include intellectual disability (ID). Haploinsufficiency of were performed on RNA extracted from primary cultures of hippocampal some genes in the region has been associated with the cognitive phenotype. neurons from mouse embryos (
E17 ). A large majority of the 39 
E2  genes ID is difficult to address because of multiples etiologies, intrinsic complexity were expressed during the differentiation of hippocampal neurons, and in neural tissue and high degree of regulation in neural development and interestingly their expression varied with the stage of differentiation and function. The aim of this work is to determine if there are differences in the maturation. Moreover, we observed important variations of expression for expression of microRNAs in neural cells derived from olfactory neuroepi- several 
E2  genes after N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) stimulation. Using in thelium of patients with WS in regards to controls, and to assess its possible silico analysis, we identified several potential binding sites for neural tran- involvement in neurodevelopment or neural function. Relative expression scription factors, such as Creb1, Pdx1, Runx1, in the promoters of many 
E2  was assessed by Real-time PCR, using the TLDA Human MicroRNA Panel genes. v2.0 (Applied) and prediction for potential neural targets and pathways in- The variations of expression coupled with the presence of potential binding volved, by in silico analysis (software TargetScan, miRecords and PITA Top sites for transcription factors important during brain development gave in- Targets). Results show 15 deregulated microRNAs (3 over-expressed and 12 sight into the regulation and the roles of 
E2  genes in neurons. These results under-expressed), wich themselves include brain rich miRNAs as miR-32, support further studies on 
E2  genes in neurodevelopmental diseases such miR-125b, let-7c and miR200, and others previously reported with specific a As. iPnateulbleecl:t uNaoln dei.s Pa.b Viloituyr.c‘h: None. S. Tourlet: None. C. Michelle: None. G. Bouchez: None. J. Colas: None. J. Tastet: None. S. Marouillat: None. S. neural functions or deregulated in brain diseases. For the majority potenti- Segura: None. F. Laumonnier: None. C.R. Andres: None. al targets were found associated with neural developmental pathways and function or other entities that present with intellectual disabilities. These data suggest miRNAs contribute greatly in regulating intrinsic neurodeve- lopmental processes and that specific miRNAs could be involved in various 
P05 .134 m Co. Pleaclualcairo sp:a Nthownea.y As .iMn. t Ehsep nineousroab: iNoolonge.y A o.f CWoSn.treras: None. R.M. Ordoñez: West syndrome : molecular screening of 73 patients with infantile None. G. Benitez: None. A. Hidalgo: None. I. Rubio: None. N. Nájera: None. I. spasms Palma-Lara: None. N. Boutry-Kryza1,2,3, A. Labalme4, D. Ville5, R. Touraine6, A. Poulat4, M. Till4, M. Rossi4, E. Ponchel-Bourel7, A. Delignières7, F. Prieur6, J. de Bellescize8, S. Dimassi4,2,3, P. Edery4,2,3, A. Calender1,3, D. Sanlaville4,2,3, G. Lesca4,2,3; 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hospices civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2CRNL, 
P05 .136 CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Lyon, France, 3Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Exploration of Williams-Beuren syndrome-like cases Lyon, France, 4Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Hospices civils de Lyon, S. Bezieau1, S. Küry1, B. Leheup2, B. Isidor1; Lyon, France, 5Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 1CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 2CHU Nancy, Service de 6Service de Génétique, Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, Médecine Infantile, Vandoeuvre-Lès-Nancy, France. Hôpital Nord, Amiens, France, 8Service d‘épilepsie et explorations fonctionnelles neuropédiatriques, Hospices civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. Background: Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; OMIM#194050) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by an abnormal development expressed by West syndrome is characterized by the association of infantile spasms with congenital heart defects, suggestive facial dysmorphy, as well as cognitive an age onset between 3 and 7 months, characteristic EEG pattern (hypsar- and behavioural impairments. About 95% of WBS cases are due to a 1.5 to rythmia) and developmental delay. Incidence is 1/6000 and unfavourable 1.8 microdeletion of chromosomal region 7q11.23, containing 26 to 28 ge- outcome is observed in 80% of patients. Etiologies are numerous, acquired nes. The remaining 5% of cases, which cannot be explained by a contiguous- or congenital, including genetic anomalies. Genetic causes include Down gene deletion syndrome, may be classified as WBS-like cases. syndrome, 1p36 deletion, tuberous sclerosis and mutations in ARX or CD- Purpose: We focused on patients with a WBS-like disorder to determine the K
L5  genes. However, 50% of the patients remain without etiological diagno- molecular cause of these atypical forms. sis. Knowledge of etiological diagnosis is critical because it represents a ma- Method: Seven individuals of three different WBS-Dlike en ofavmoilies were tested jor prognostic factor and underlies the possibility for genetic counselling. by whole-exome sequencing: two trios composed by a male patient and his We present the molecular analysis of 73 patients with West syndrome or asymptomatic parents, and a third female patient. , X-linked and re- infantile spasms without etiological diagnosis. aCGH was performed and 5 cessive mutations were searched in patients of trios, and their variants were genes were screened : CDK
L5 , STXB
P1  and KCNQ2 for their implication in compared to the ones observed in the third patient. A fourth WBS-patient early epileptic encephalopathy, GRIN2A and MAGI2, candidate genes from was subsequently tested by Sanger sequencing for mutations in candidate the literature. genes. We found 2 mutations in CDK
L5  including an atypical case of 2 mosaic popu- Results: Predicted deleterious mutations very likely related to their disorder l1at8io8ns and 3 mutations in STXB
P1 . All of these weErSe HdeG n o2v0o.1 A3m |o nPgA oRthIeSr, FRwAerNe CfoEu n|d W inW thWe t.wEoS pHaGtie.nOtsR fGrom trios, yet none in a common gene. NoABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P05 .139 Difficulties in screening small families with X linked Intellectual potentially pathogenic variant were found in the third and fourth patients in disability inferred candidate genes. I. REJEB1, L. BEN JEMAA1, L. KRAOUA1, M. CHOGRANI1, H. JILANI1, F. MAAZOU
L2 , J. Conclusions: Our study points to the genetic heterogeneity of Willams- CHELLY3, H. CHAABOUNI1,2; Beuren-like syndrome. It highlights however strong candidate genes, which 1Department of Human Genetics Faculty of Medicine, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of might contribute to a better understanding of WBS pathogenesis. Additional Hereditary and Congenital Diseases, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Institut Cochin, Université Paris- c Sa.s Bese zwieoauuld: N noeneed. tSo. bKeü rtye:s tNeodn teo. Bco. nLfeihrmeu opu: rN ponrees. eBn. tI soibdsoerr: vNaotnioen.s. Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104 ); INSERM U1016, Paris, France. Intellectual disability (ID) is characterized by significant limitations in co- 
P05 .137 gnitive abilities and social/behavioural adaptive skills. It is estimated that Partial monosomy 1q23 associated with severe seizures and profound 1-3% of the general population is affected with ID. Intellectual disability is mental retardation due to a mosaic translocation (1q,16q) (q23; qter) one of the primary reasons for paediatric, neurologic, and genetic referrals. E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, G. Ilievska, N. Angelkova, S. Palcevska, E. S. We investigated 3 families with mentally retarded males, clinical examina- Stefanovska; Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. tion, cytogenetic and molecular studies and basic metabolic screening were performed. We identified in each family a mutation in X-linked genes. The mutations Reciprocal translocations are common cytogenetic anomalies occurring were a splice mutation in PAK3 gene, a frame shift mutation in PQB
P1  gene with frequency of about 1 in 500 births. Mosaic state of the translocation and a missense one in NHS gene. All the founded mutations that segregate is a rare event which indicates that the breakage occurred in the first mito- with intellectual disability were described for the first time. tic divisions of the zygote. Sometimes a certain amount of DNA within the Despite the fact that our families were small, a mutation was identified each breakage region could be lost and determines clinical presentation depen- time. This is due to the fact that a good clinical examination was performed ding on the lost genes. A newborn girl have been evaluated because of poor first followed by good literature search which was essential to compare the sucking and dysmorphism. It was the first child in the family. Diminished fe- clinical features of our families to those reported in the literature. This high- tal movements and intrauterine growth retardation were noticed. The baby lights the importance of clinical data in genetic linkage studies. Our study was full-term neonate with birth weight and length under 3rd percentile. shows that in a lack of large families, small families like ours can be intere- Dysmorphic features were present - narrow forehead, hypotelorism, ptosis, s It. iRngej teob :s tNuodnye.. L. Ben jemaa: None. L. Kraoua: None. M. Chograni: None. H. Jilani: None. F. Maazoul: None. J. Chelly: None. H. Chaabouni: None. telecantus, micrognathia, low-set simple ears. Hemangioma of lumbosacral region was present. Hypotonia, brisk reflexes were present, primitive refle- xes persist after 6 months. At the age of 3 months she developed refracto- ry generalized seizures. MRI showed global cortical atrophy, especially in 
P05 .140 frontal and temporal areas. Anticonvulsive drugs had poor effect. At the age X-exome analysis detects novel mutations in XLID genes in a cohort of of 1 year the girl have profound mental retardation. Chromosomal finding male patients with intellectual disability showed translocation between chromosomes 1q and 16q in 50% of the A. Tzschach, C. Dufke, C. Bauer, M. Kehrer, U. Grasshoff, A. Riess, M. Sturm, C. Schröder, A. Dufke, O. Riess, P. Bauer; analyzed mitoses; the rest of the cells showed normal karyogram. FISH for University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. subtelomeric ragions on 1q and 16 q were present on marker chromosome 16. The breakpoint was on 1q23 with probable microdeletion in that region. There are several genes within the region that could be disrupted by the Intellectual disability (ID) has a prevalence of 1-3 % and is a major medi- deletion, therefore further investigation is needed to acquire the exact cause o Ef. d Sisuokragraonvaiz-eAdn gcoelrotevxs.ka: None. M. Kocova: None. G. Ilievska: None. N. cal problem. Mutations in X-chromosomal genes are estimated to account Angelkova: None. S. Palcevska: None. E.S. Stefanovska: None. for approximately 10 % of male ID patients. Apart from fragile X syndrome, which is at cause in about 25 % of X-linked ID (XLID) and which has been part of the routine diagnostic work-up for many years, more than 90 other XLID genes are known to date. The low prevalence of mutations in each in- 
P05 .138 dividual gene has, however, rendered routine testing of these genes imprac- CGH analysis in a cohort of 54 males with unexplained X-linked tical in patients with unspecific clinical features. intellectual deficiency. The advent of new sequencing technologies has enabled us to establish a C. Mignon-Ravix1,2, P. Cacciagli1,3, S. Sigaudy3, C. Badens1,2,3, N. Philip1,2,3, L. Villard1,2; 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, platform combining in-solution enrichment of the coding regions of all XLID 3Génétique Médicale et Biologie Cellulaire, CHU Timone Enfants, Marseille, France. genes and subsequent next-generation sequencing (NGS). We have em- ployed this XLID panel for analyzing a cohort of more than 120 unselected male ID patients in whom chromosome aberrations and fragile X syndrome In order to assess the presence of submicroscopic deletions/insertions in had already been excluded. As a result, we found unambiguously disease- X-linked genes, we screened a cohort of 54 male individuals suffering from causing mutations in genes such as ATRX, MED12, CU
L4 B, DLG3, SL
C9 A6, moderate to severe intellectual disability using custom-designed Roche KDM5C and UB
E2 A in more than 5% of the patients, and variants of unclear Nimblegen 720K oligonuclotide array CGH. These individuals were selected pathogenicity were present in additional patients. Considering the high in families were the phenotype is transmitted through unaffected (or mildly recurrence risks for X-linked disorders, XLID panel analysis has thus been affected) carrier females. Our custom arrays contain 720,000 probes with shown to be a valuable diagnostic tool in male patients with non-syndromic average probe spacing across the X chromosome of 50bp in genic regions o Ar. aTtzyspcihcaalc shy: nNdornoem. Cic. IDDu.fke: None. C. Bauer: None. M. Kehrer: None. U. Grasshoff: None. A. Riess: None. M. Sturm: None. C. Schröder: None. A. and 20kb and intergenic regions. Dufke: None. O. Riess: None. P. Bauer: None. We found 70 copy number variations (CNVs) affecting the X chromosome in this cohort. The CNVs were all confirmed using Q-PCR. 42 CNVs are known in the control population, including 20 CNVs located in the pseudoautoso- mal region. 28 CNVs are unknown in variation databases (17 deletions, 8 du- 
P05 .141 plications, 3 found both deleted and duplicated in our cohort). Among these The Kaiso gene region is implicated in X-linked mental retardation. E. Londin1, J. Adijanto1, N. Philp1, A. Novelli2, E. Vitale3, G. Serra4, V. Alesi5, S. Surrey1, P. later cases, 8 CNVs are located in the pseudoautosomal region. For the 20 Fortina1; remaining CNVs, 15 are located in introns and 5 affect exons of 17 different 1Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS X-linked genes. Two CNVs affecting already known XLID genes (I
L1 RAP
L1  Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Cibernetics CNR, and OPHN1) were considered to be pathogenic. We identified 4 « potential- Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy, 4Institute of Child Neuropsychiatry, University of Sassari, Sassari, ly pathogenic » aberrations, involving genes not yet implicated in XLID but Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, San Pietro Hospital Fatebenefratelli, Rome, Italy. c Co.n Msiidgenroend- Raas vnixe:w N coanned. iPd. aCtaec gceiangelsi :f oNro innet.e Sll.e Scitguaaul ddyis: aNboilniety. .C. Badens: None. N. Philip: None. L. Villard: None. X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is the most common form of mental retardation in males. Syndromic MR encompasses intellectual disability deficits associated with other medical and behavioral symptoms. Recently, a large Sardinian family with a novel form of syndromic XLMR was cha- racterized. Eight of 24 members of the family are male and have MR, short stature, aphasia, skeletal abnormalities and dysmorphic features. Previous ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 189 linkage studies identified a region of 16 cM around DX
S1001  in Xq24 withABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index a maximum Lod score of 3.61. Whole-exome sequencing was performed on nose with hypoplastic alae nasi, micKroLgHnLa1t5hia and deep-set eyes. Massively the parents, three affected sons and one unaffected daughter. One SNP was parallel sequencing of all X-chromosome specific exons in the index patient found in the 3’-UTR of the ZBTB33 (Kaiso) gene which maps within the pre- identified a frameshift mutation in which resulted in a premature viously associated region of linkage and segregates with the disease pheno- stop codon. This KmLuHtaLt1i5on co-segregated with XLID in the family. These fin- type in the family. This SNP was not found in 30 unrelated control samples. dings were concordant with previous linkage results showing a significant Kaiso binds to methylated DNA, represses target genes in the Wnt signaling LOD Score in the containing region Xp22.22-Xp22.1K1L. HX-Li1n5activation pathway and is highly expressed in the brain. The SNP creates a binding site studies in female carriers, who are all asymptomatic, revealed an extremely for miR-4999 and miR-4774; however, luciferase expression assays failed to skewed X-inactivation profile in their blood lymphocytes. encodes validate increased targeting of these miRs to the variant 3’-UTR. This SNP an 
E3  ubiquitin ligase adaptor, which has been recently shown to promote may affect 3’-UTR structure leading to decreased mRNA stability, or the SNP the turnover of a brain-specific P
P2 A regulatory subunit by ubiquitylation may be closely linked to the disease-causing mutation, which is not located and proteasomal degradation. Our results endorse further need for focusing in an exon. While the functional consequences of this base change are not oMn. uBbaidquuriati-nSatrtoionnk aa:s N aonn iem. Bpo. rBtuadnnt yc:o Nntornieb.u Hto. rH tuo: iNnotenlel.e Sct.uAa. lH daiassa:b Niliotnye.. T. y Ee.t L konnodwinn:, Noounre r.e Js.u Altdsi jiamnptoli:c Natoen eth. iNs. r Pehgiilopn: Naso nae n. eAw. N loocvuesll if:o Nr oXnLeM. ER.. Vitale: Żemojtel: None. M. Raynaud: None. R. Glazar: None. H.H. Ropers: None. A. None. G. Serra: None. V. Alesi: None. S. Surrey: None. P. Fortina: None. Latos-Bieleńska: None. V.M. Kalscheuer: None. 
P05 .142 
P05 .144 Non-syndromic X-linked intellectual disability caused by a missense Investigation of the interstitial microduplication of Xp22.31 with mutation in RP
S6 KA3, the gene responsible for Coffin-Lowry array-CGH syndrome A. Alexandrou1, M. Moutafi1, P. Antoniou1, P. Evangelidou1, V. Anastasiades2, C. Sismani1, A. B. Sousa1, J. Dupont1, V. M. Kalscheuer2, A. Medeira1, A. P. M. de Brouwer2,3, I. Cordeiro1; P. C. Patsalis1; 1Serviço de Genética, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria/CHLN, 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Arch Makarios III Lisboa, Portugal, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Human Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. The pathogenicity of the Xp22.31 duplication is a debatable subject amongst several authors. Some describe the microduplication as pathogenic; others RP
S6 KA3 as a normal variant whilst others remain unclear about its clinical signi- Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is a rare X-linked intellectual disability disor- ficance. The region contains 7 genes: STS, VCX, VCX3A, VCX2, MIR4767, der caused by mutations in , which encodes RSK2, a growth factor- HDHD1A, PNPLA4. Here we present our findings after investigation of two regulated protein kinase acting in the MAPK signaling pathway. Affected cases where the same microduplication of Xp22.31 region was detected. The males usually present with severe intellectual disability and characteristic first case involves a 12 year old boy with Intellectual Disability (ID). Array- facial and hand features allowing a gestalt diagnosis. The face coarsens over CGH was performed using Cytochip BAC array (BlueGnome) and revealed a time and typically includes a prominent forehead, hypertelorism, narrow duplication of approximately 2 Mb on the region of Xp22.31. The duplication downward slanting palpebral fissures, anteverted nares, thickened alae nasi was suspected to be causative for the phenotype. The duplication was pre- and nasal septum, and wide mouth with thick everted lips. The hands are sent in the patient’s mother and grandmother. The second case was a female broad and soft with stubby tapering fingers. Additional CLS features include carrier of the same duplication, detected using Cytochip ISCA array (Blue- short stature and progressive scoliosis. Gnome). QRT-PCR revealed the same duplication in the carrier’s mother. We describe three boys with non-syndromic intellectual disability in a fa- Both have normal phenotype. X-inactivation was determined by methyla- mily with a patterRnP cSo6mKApa3tible with X-linked transmission. Sequencing of tion analysis for the androgen receptor (AR) locus and revealed skewed X- all exons on the X-chromosome identified a missense mutation, c.646A>G inactivation pattern for the mother and a normal pattern for the carrier. All (p.Lys216Glu), in (NM_004586.2) that segregated with the phe- male family members tested did not have any copy number gain. To further notype in the family. Two of the patients were reassessed a posteriori and define the breakpoints, Chromosome X exon specific array, designed by Ox- found to have subtle facial CLS features (narrow palpebral fissures, broad ford Gene Technology (OGT) was used. Based on the current literature, there based nose with thick septum and alae nasi, and slightly everted lower lip), is a possibility that this duplication is predisposing to the onset of deve- uncharacteristic digits, normal growth and no spinal deformity. Several cli- lopmental delay and ID, possibly having an additive effect or represents a nical geneticists agreed that the diagnosis of CLS would not easily be consi- very rare population variant. Therefore genetic counselling for the Xp22.31 dered on clinical grounds. A few other such cases have been reported, also m Ai.c Aroledxuapnldicroauti:o Nno pnoes. eMs .g Mreoautt acfih:a lNleonngee. sP.. Antoniou: None. P. Evangelidou: caused by proximal missense mutations or small in frame deletions. Tog- None. V. Anastasiades: None. C. Sismani: None. P.C. Patsalis: None. ether these patients illustrate the potential spectrum of clinical variability in CLS and the power of massive parallel sequencing to produce etiological d Aia.Bg.n Soosiuss ian: sNitounaet. iJo.n Ds uopf ownitd: eN goenne.e Vti.cM h. eKtaelrsocgheenueeirt:y .None. A. Medeira: 
P05 .145 None. A.P.M. de Brouwer: None. I. Cordeiro: None. A de novo loss of function mutation in an individual with short stature, microcephaly and ID establishes ZNF238 as a candidate gene for the 1q43q44 microdeletion syndrome and Floating-Harbor like 
P05 .143 syndrome ‚A frameshift mutation in the ubiquitinylation-related gene KLH
L15  S. A. de Munnik1, S. García-Miñaúr2, B. W. van Bon1, K. M. Boycott3, C. Gilissen1, A. causes a novel X-linked intellectual disability syndrome associated Hoischen1, J. Schoots1, L. H. Hoefsloot1, N. V. A. M. Knoers4, H. G. Brunner1, E. M. H. F. with hypogenitalism, short feet and hypoplastic alae nasi‘ Bongers1; M. Badura-Stronka1,2, B. Budny3, H. Hu4, S. A. Haas5, T. Żemojtel5, M. Raynaud6, R. 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Hospital Universitario Glazar2, H. H. Ropers4, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2, V. M. Kalscheuer4; La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 1Chair and Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 4University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Poznań, Poland, 2Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland, 3Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, Poznan University SRCAP of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Floating-Harbor syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute for muStRaCtiAoPns in , and is characterized by short stature, speech delay, Molecular Genetics, Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Berlin, Germany, intellectua.l disability, and distinctive facial features. At present, mutations 6Unite de Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France. in have been identified in nineteen individuals with Floating-Harbor syndrome The phenotype of individuals with a chromosome 1q43q44 microdeletion consists of intellectual dis ability wit h limited or no speech, X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a clinically complex and genetically growth retardation, microcephal,y , recognizable facial features, seizures, and heterogeneous group of disorders with a growing number of disease-asso- agenesis of the corpZuNsF c2a3l8losum. Severalcandidategenes for microcephaly, ciated proteins impliCcaUtLe4dB in U uBbEiq2uAit iHnU-mWeEd1iated proteolysis. To date, three agenesis of the corpus callosum and/or seizures have been proposed in li- XLID genes involved in the ubiquitination pathway have been identified on terature, including . So far, however, no mutations in this gene have the X-chromosome ( , , ). We report a four-generation been described. family with 7 affected males with mild to moderate intellectual disability, We performed exome sequencing in an individual with a phenotype re- small penis and testes, very short, flat feet, and relatively mild dysmorphic f1ea9t0ures including flat philtrum, thin upper and proEmSiHneGnt 2lo0w1er3 l i|p ,P sAtraRigISht, FRsAemNbClinEg |F WloaWtinWg-H.EaSrbHorG s.yOnRdrGome, and her parents. The phenotype ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index de novo theZ NgiFr2l 3c8omprised intellectual disability with speech delay, short stature, marfanoid habitus in the majority of patients. Delay in gross psychomotor microcephaly, and dysmorphic facial features. A nonsense mutation acquisition was not systematically noticed; contrasting with severely impai- in was deZtNecFt2e3d8: 397G>T (p.(Glu133)). red communicative skills with speech delay and psychiatric troubles. Skele- Sequencing in ten individuals with a similar phenotZyNpFe2 r3e8vealed no additio- tal manifestations, when present, included scoliosis, arachnodactyly, or feet nal mutations in . anomalies, pectus excavatum, flat feet, long and thin habitus with low BMI. We present the first indZivNidFu2a3l8 with a mutation in with phenotypic Two smallest regions of overlap were defined. The first one, on the 3q27.3 overlap with the 1q43q44 microdeletion syndrome and Floating-Harbor locus, was common to all patients and associated with bipolar troubles with syndrome. We propose as tZhNe Fc2a3n8d idate gene for the phenotype of psychotic manifestations and facial dysmorphism. It includes several candi- the 1q43q44 microdeletion syndrome and Floating-Harbosr.d-leimkeu snynnikd@rogmene.. date genes (MAS
P1 , ADIPOQ, and SST), and SST seemed especially relevant Mumocren .innldividuals with mutations in need to be identified to support because of its implication in interneurons migration and differentiation, our findings and further delineate the clinical phenotype. frequently altered in schizophrenia. A familial case with a smaller deletion S.A. de Munnik: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. B.W. van Bon: None. K.M. permitted to define the second region outside their interval, associated with Boycott: None. C. Gilissen: None. A. Hoischen: None. J. Schoots: None. L.H. severe intellectual disability, marfanoid habitus, long and thin habitus, and Hoefsloot: None. N.V.A.M. Knoers: None. H.G. Brunner: None. E.M.H.F. localised on the 3q27.2 locus, notably containing the AHSG gene. The AHSG Bongers: None. gene encodes a secreted protein implicated in bone maturation, TGFb si- gnalling pathway, and was associated to leanness in several studies. In con- clusion, we report on a putative new microdeletional syndrome associating 
P06 .01 intellectual disability, bipolar disorder with psychosis, a recognisable facial Familial segregation of 15q11.3-13.3 duplication: phenotypic dLy. sFmaiovrrpeh: iNsomn ea.n Hd. mPoaqrfuaento: iNdo hnaeb. Pit.u Csa.llier: None. Z. Tumer: None. B. variability and lack of association with depression. Dallapiccola: None. L. Bernardini: None. A. Masurel-Paulet: None. C. Thauvin- C. du Souich1,2, B. Millar1,2, M. S. Peñaherrera3, P. Eydoux4, W. P. Robinson3, C. F. Robinet: None. A. mosca-Boidron: None. N. Marle: None. F. Mugneret: Boerkoel1,5; None. S. El Chehadeh: None. J. Petit: None. V. Malan: None. F. Huet: None. B. 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2The Rare Disease Foundation, Menten: None. B. Loeys: None. S. Lyonnet: None. J. Thevenon: None. Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Bethesda, MD, United States. 
P06 .03 Genetic bases of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in 300 Spanish patients: Preliminary results. C. Gomez-Sanchez1, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1, P. Tirado Requero2, V. Soto Insuga1, M. Rodrigo We report a 3 generation family segregating a 15q11-q13 duplication with Moreno1, M. Prados Alvarez3, A. Segura Frontelo4, J. Carballo Belloso1, C. Ayuso1; variable expressivity and lack of association with depression. 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain, The proband presented with severe clinical depression, aggression and intel- 2Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Universitario Infanta Elena, lectual impairment. Comparative genomic hybridization showed a duplica- Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain. tion at 15q11.2-q13.1. A similarly affected sister (autism spectrum disorder, anxiety and intellectual impairment) and their clinically depressed mother also carried the duplication. The mother has normal intellect. Another clini- Aim: The purpose of this study is to preliminary describe the information cally depressed sibling with normal intellect did not carry the duplication. available on the main group of genes that have been related with a suscepti- Methylation studies showed that the duplication had been inherited from bility to Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. the maternal grandfather who had normal intellect and absence of psych- Patients and Methods: 304 Spanish patients (between 6 and 17 years old) iatric disease. with clinical diagnosis of ADHD were evaluated over the following scales: Duplication of 15q11-q13 has previously been associated with cognitive ADHD Rating Scale-IV, Apgar Family function test, Parents-Rated Strengths impairment, autism, and psychiatric disease. Furthermore, the maternally and Difficulties Questionnaire, Children´s Depression Inventory, Children´s inherited duplication most likely confers this phenotype whereas paternally Global Assessment Scale and Clinical Global Impression. derived duplications primarily show normal phenotypes. Patients were genotyped for 7 genetic variants in genes in the dopaminergic Our family provides additional evidence that autism, psychiatric disease and system (DRD4: Exon 3-48bp VNTR, 5´120bp duplication; DAT1: 3´UTR 40bp intellectual disability segregate with a maternally inherited duplication at VNTR; and DRD2: rs1800497), in the serotonergic system (SL
C6 A4: VNTR 15q11-q13 although with variable presentation. The presence of depression intron 2) and the latrophilin 3 gene (LPHN3: rs1397548, rs2305339). Allelic in the non carrier sister however, suggests a lack of association between cli- frequencies were assessed and compared to data reported in Caucasians, nical depression and the chromosomal duplication in this family, providing using chi-squared test. e Cv.i ddeun Scoe utihcaht: tNhoisn ed.u Bp.l iMcailtliaorn: Ndoonees. nMo.tS p. lPaeyñ aa hsterrorenrga :r oNloen ien. dPe. pEryedsosuioxn: . Results: For all the above-mentioned variants, allelic association analysis None. W.P. Robinson: None. C.F. Boerkoel: None. showed no significant differences between Spanish patients with ADHD and control population: Exon 3-48bp VNTR (p=0.846), 5´120bp duplication (p=0.09), rs1800497 (p=0.559), 3´UTR 40bp VNTR (p=0.147), VNTR intron 
P06 .02 2 (p=0.862), rs1397548 (p=0.076) and rs2305339 (p=0.699). 3q27.3 microdeletional syndrome: a recognizable clinical entity Conclusions: Although in recent years there has been an increase in the associating dysmorphic features, developmental delay with psychotic number of genetic studies conducted on ADHD, findings differ significantly bipolar troubles and a marfanoid habitus. from one study to another. Our preliminary results suggest the need of: 1) L. Faivre1, H. Poquet2, P. Callier3, Z. Tumer4, B. Dallapiccola5, L. Bernardini6, A. Masurel- examination of refined phenotypes; 2) recruitment of control population Paulet1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, A. mosca-Boidron3, N. Marle3, F. Mugneret3, S. El Chehadeh1, matched for sex, age, and in which ADHD symptoms have been specifical- J. Petit7, V. Malan8, F. Huet9, B. Menten10, B. Loeys11, S. Lyonnet8, J. THEVENON1; ly excluded. Therefore, these considerations may reduce the heterogeneity 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2Service de psychiatrie, CHU de Dijon, a Cn.d G hoemlpe zto-S parnocvhiedze: eNnoonueg. hR .s tRaitviestirioca-Al plvoawreezr: tNoo tnhee. sPe. Tasirsaodcoia Rtieoqnuero: Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Applied Human None. V. Soto Insuga: None. M. Rodrigo Moreno: None. M. Prados Alvarez: Molecular Genetics, Kennedy Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, None. A. Segura Frontelo: None. J. Carballo Belloso: None. C. Ayuso: None. Glostrup, Denmark, 5Medical Genetics, Cytogenetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza” Hospital, San Giovani Rotondo, Italy, 7service d‘endocrinologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 8Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital 
P06 .04 Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 9Service de pédiatrie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, Genetics of Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in the Portuguese France, 10Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital & Ghent University, population: candidate genes from GABAergic system Ghent, Belgium, 11Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, A. Marques1, S. Faria1, J. Boavida2, S. Nogueira2, C. Alfaiate2, M. Almeida2, A. M. Belgium. Cardoso1,3; 1Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit of the National Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic Sciences, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Child Development Center of Coimbra Children´s Since the advent of array-CGH, numerous new microdeletional syndromes Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, 3IBILI-Faculty of Medicine of University of Coimbra, have been delineated. We report on the first clinical delineation of 7 pati- Coimbra, Portugal. ents with interstitial deletions restricted to 3q28q27.3 gathered through the Decipher database and suggest this existence of a new microdeletional syndrome. The patients shared a recognisable facial dysmorphism psychia- Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a frequent childhood- tric troubles and intellectual disability ofE vSarHiaGble 2 in0t1en3s i|t yP, aAsRsoIcSia, tFedR wAiNth CEo |n WsetW psWyc.hEiaStHricG d.iOsoRrdGer and despite its high prevalence and herita1bi9li1tyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index the identification of ADHD risk genes has been challenging. Recent evi- (65%). Genic CNVs integrated between 1 and 17 genes, and included genes dences suggest that dysfunctions in the GABAergic neurotransmission might implicated in ASD etiology like NRXN1 and CHD2, as well as novel genes. be implicated in the etiology of ADHD, namely through genes encoding the CNVs were mainly inherited, with only 10% de novo. GABA A receptors. Since no genetic studies have addressed this hypothesis, We further evaluated the presence of autistic traits in parents, using appro- the current study aimed to investigate whether polymorphisms in GABRG2 priate questionnaires, and the type of inheritance of the CNV (inherited vs (G3145A) and GABRA1 (A15G) genes are associated with ADHD in a sample de novo). We observed a significant excess of autistic traits in the fathers of the Portuguese population. Blood samples were acquired from parents- that transmitted CNVs, mainly for the “aloof” personality, defined as lak- offspring trios consisting of two parents and respective offspring, diagnosed king interest in social interaction. Analysis of familial correlation data from with ADHD according to DSM-IV-TR, and genomic DNA was extracted from parents and probands showed a significant correlation between parents. We leukocytes through an enzymatic procedure. The GABRG2 G3145A and GA- therefore show evidence for an excess of subthreshold autistic traits in CNV BRA1 A15G polymorphisms were investigated by PCR-RFLP. We used either transmitting parents of children with ASD, particularly for paternal trans- haplotype relative risk (HRR) and transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) mission. We also observed a tendency for assortative mating in families of and both strategies found no biased transmission of the alleles of GABRG2 affected individuals, in particular for inherited CNVs. G3145A polymorphism (HRR: χ2 = 0.104, P = 0.747; TDT: χ2 = 0.047, P = We conclude that a large fraction of CNVs are inherited and correlate with 0.829) and GABRA1 A15G polymorphism (HRR: χ2 = 0.426, P = 0.514; TDT: aI.uCt.i sCtiocn tcreaiiçtsã oin: Npoanreen. Cts. iCno trhree isat:u Ndoiende. sBa.m Oplilvee.ira: None. M.M. Rama: χ2 = 0.275, P = 0.600). The results seem to contradict the role of GABRG2 None. C. Café: None. J. Almeida: None. S. Mouga: None. F. Duque: None. G. Oliveira: None. A.M. Vicente: None. G3145A and GABRA1 A15G polymorphisms in the pathophysiology of ADHD in the Portuguese population. However, additional studies using a larger sample are being carried out to strengthen these preliminary results. This work was supported by the Portuguese Science and Technology Foun- 
P06 .07 d Aa.t Mioanr q(PuheDs: gNroannet. SSF.R FHar/iBa:D N/o6n9e2.7 J0. /B2o0a1v0id)a.: None. S. Nogueira: None. C. Missing heritability of Korean patient with autism spectrum Alfaiate: None. M. Almeida: None. A.M. Cardoso: None. disorder(ASD) J. E. Park1, S. A. Kim2, M. Park3, I. H. Cho4, H. J. Yoo5; 1Department of Psychiatry, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital and Department of Agricultural Biotechnology , College of Agricaltural Life Science, Seoul 
P06 .05 National University, Seoungnam-si, Korea, Republic of, 2Department of Pharmacology, The association analysis of ABHD11 gene (rs2293484 and College of Medicine, Eulji University, Daejeon, Korea, Republic of, 3Department of rs10279013 with autism in a South African population. Preventive Medicine, College of Medicine, Eulji University, Seoungnam-si, Korea, Z. Arieff1, J. R. Sharma1, M. Davids1, M. Kaur2; Republic of, 4Department of Psychiatry, Gacheon University School of Medical Science, 1Department of Biotechnogy,University of Western Cape, Private Bag X17, Bellville 7535, Incheon, Korea, Republic of, 5Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, Seoul South Africa, South Africa, 2Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah National University Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoungnam-si, Korea, University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 2355-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Republic of. Saudi Arabia. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been identified SNPs asso- Background : Autism is genetically inherited neurodevelopmental disorder ciated with complex traits. However, a great deal of the heritable variation characterized by significant impairments of social interaction, difficulties associated with common traits remains unaccounted for within the geno- in communication and displays of restrictive or repetitive behaviors activi- me. The objective of this study is to discover large parts of additive gene- ties and interests. Genome scan data have pointed towards the long arm of tic variance not typically associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) chromosome 7 as a strong candidate region. Various association and linkage through GWAS in Korean population and estimates of ASD heritability. studies are being undertaken in order to screen candidate genes mapping Subjects with ASD were recruited through the Korean Autism Genetic Study to the long arm of chromosome 7 as susceptibility loci. The anhydrolase do- Consortium. Each child was diagnosed as ASD by using the Korean versions main containing 11 gene (ABHD11) is located on 7q11.23 which is a hotspot of ADOS and ADI-R (Lord et al. 1994; Lord et al. 1997). region for autism. This gene has not been investigated for its association to Total 146 patients were genotyped on the Affymetrix 5.0 platform. Geno- autism. Aims : The aim of this study was to investigate the association of two type data for n=858 sex-matched controls were drawn from the Korea As- SNPs from genes ABHD11 (rs2293484 and rs10279013) in South African sociation Resource database. Genotype data were filtered for <5% missing- autistic population.Methods : A total of 435 individuals were recruited in- ness/sample or /SNP; MAF >0.01; HWE p>0.0001. Cases were verified as cluding 217 autistic and 218 control subjects. The Taqman ®Real-Time PCR unrelated using identity-by-descent estimation in PLINK v1.07. In order to and geno typing assay was utilized to determine the genotypes. Results: A examine the missing heritability in ASD, we applied genome-wide complex significant association of SNP rs10279013 but not for SNP rs229348 with trait analysis (GCTA) to 142 case and 842 controls after data filtering. autism in the South African (SA) population is observed. Conclusion: There The results identified phenotypic variants of 84.5% (±0.313 SE) with affec- might be a possible role of ABHD11 in autism especially for SA populations. ted status of ASD, 7.0% (±0.027 SE) with topGWAS SNPs (± 1mb region) and The present study represents the first report on genetic association studies 81.0%(± 0.313 SE) with nonGWAS SNPs. Increase from the genetic variance o Zn. AArBieHffD: 1N1o ngee.n Je. Rin. SSAha prompau: lNatoinoen. M. Davids: None. M. Kaur: None. identified by top GWAS hits region indicates there might be more risk loci to be identified. Our results suggest that many common variants of small effect remain to be discovered, although GWAS is useful in identifying the most 
P06 .06 c Jo.mE. mPaornk :v aNroinaen.t sS .aAs.s oKcimia:t eNdo nwei.t hM A. PSaDr.k: None. I.H. Cho: None. H.J. Yoo: CNV characterization, inheritance and phenotypic correlations in None. families with autism I. C. Conceição1,2,3, C. Correia1,2,3, B. Oliveira1,2,3, M. M. Rama1, C. Café4, J. Almeida4, S. Mouga4,5, F. Duque4,6, G. Oliveira4,5,7, A. M. Vicente1,2,3; 
P06 .08 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Center for A rare microdeletion disrupting KLH
L23  may influence the autism Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 4Unidade Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo, Centro de phenotype Desenvolvimento, Hospital Pediátrico (HP), Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de S. Lomartire1, E. Bacchelli1, F. Ceroni1, F. Minopoli1, C. Cameli1, R. Tancredi2, I. M.G.S.A.C.3, Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal, 5Instituto Biomédico de Investigação em Luz A. P. Monaco4,5, A. Battaglia2, E. Maestrini1, A. G.P.6; e Imagem, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 1FaBiT – Dipartimento di Farmacia e BioTecnologie, Bologna, Italy, 2Stella Maris Istituto 6Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Centro de Scientifico per la Neuropsichiatria dell‘Infanzia e dell‘Adolescenza, Calambrone, Pisa, Investigação e Formação Clinica do HP-CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal. Italy, 3International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford,, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom, 5Office of the President, Tufts University, Boston, MA, United States, 6Autism Genome Project, USA, CA, United States. In this study, we characterized potentially pathogenic CNVs in a sample of 342 Portuguese children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs), geno- typed by the Autism Genome Project whole genome CNV analysis. We selec- Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder ted high confidence CNVs (detected by 3 algorithms) not overlapping more with highly complex genetic predisposition. than 20% with CNVs in 8000 controls. Rare copy number variants (CNVs) are known to play a role in the genetic We identified 165 CNVs in 132 individuals, 78% with only one CNV. CNVs etiology of ASD. The follow-up of these rare events, by targeted gene sequen- ranged from 5 kb to 3 Mb, and 67% were deletions. However, genic CNVs, w1h9ic2h represented 53% of all CNVs, were moreE S frH eqG ue 2 nt0 ly1 d3 u | p lP icA atR ioI nS s, FRcAingN aCnEd f|u WnctWionWal. sEtSudHieGs, .hOasR pGroven to be a powerful tool for the identi-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index fication of novel candidate genetic loci. dance with microarray data (p<0,01), but miR-486-3p. In a genome wide CNVs screening performed by the AGP, a rare inherited Finally, to study the modulation in protein-coding gene expression that may microdeletion, disrupting two genes transcribed in the same direction, be associated with specific miRNAs changes, target studies were carried out KLH
L23  and SSB, was identified in an Italian ASD individual. This deletion, using publically available database, miRWalk (http://mirwalk.uni-hd.de). potentially resulting in a gene-fusion transcript, causes a frameshift with the We identified some genes connected with neuronal development as RELN introduction of a premature stop codon. No fusion transcript was detected and PTEN, other involved in epigenetic processes: DNMT and DICER, as by RT-PCR, suggesting that it is subject to “nonsense-mediated mRNA decay”. downstream targets of the dysregulated miRNAs. All these findings clearly KLH
L23  encodes for a brain expressed Kelch-repeat protein of unknown support the integrative genomic hypothesis of heterogeneous neurodeve- function. While several CNVs affecting SSB are reported in controls making lopmental disorder, where specific changes in gene function contribute to it an unikely dosege-sensitive gene, no CNVs have been previously described dTi.s Veaacseh epvh: eNnoontey.p Ve.. Stoyanova: None. I. Minkov: None. N. Popov: None. in KLH
L23 . KLH
L23  expression analysis in peripheral blood of the CNV car- riers did not show reduction of RNA levels, although we can’t exclude that the deletion could have an effect on the brain. 
P06 .11 In a mutation screening of KLH
L23  in 85 multiplex familis with ASD we Runs of homozygosity associated with speech delay in autism in a identified a damaging variant (M65V), absent in controls, and segregating Taiwanese Han population with the ASD in an affected sibling pair. P. Lin1,2, P. Kuo3, S. S. Gau2,3,4; Taken together our results suggest that rare variants altering KLH
L23  func- 1Cincinnati Children‘s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 2National t Sio. nL oinm tahreti rber:a Nino,n ceo. uEl.d B caocncthriebllui:t eN oton eA.S FD. Criesrko nini: aN somnea.l lF .n Muminboepro loi:f Ncaosnees. .C. Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3National Taiwan University College of Cameli: None. R. Tancredi: None. I. M.g.s.a.c.: None. A.P. Monaco: None. A. Public Health, Taipei, Taiwan, 4National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Battaglia: None. E. Maestrini: None. A. G.p.: None. Taiwan. Background 
P06 .09 Methods : Runs of homozygosity (ROH) may play a role in schizophrenia Identification of MicroRNA -486-3p and miR-361-5p molecular and Alzheimer disease. Here, we aimed to test if ROHs are linked to autism. signatures associated with autism in whole blood samples as a : A total of 315 Han Chinese affected with autism and 1,115 con- promising candidate biomarkers trols were genotyped with the Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array. ROH was defined N. Popov1, T. Vachev2,1, V. Krasteva1; as an extended homozygous haplotype spanning at least 500 kb. We also 1Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2University of Plovdiv „Paisii uRseesdu lAtsffymetrix GeneChip HG U133_Plus 2.0 to perform gene expression Hilendarski“, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. analysis. p: The case-contr ol analysis yielded no genome-wide significant asso- ciations. An ROH reg-i1o1n on 11q22.3 was significantly associated with speech For molecular diagnostic purposes, it would be desirable to develop peri- delay ( = 2.51 x 10 ).Among these genes, NPAT (nuclear protein, ataxia- pheral blood-based biomarkers which effectively identify disease state. As telangiectasia locus) and ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) are linked to autism is one of the most debilitating neurocognitive disorders and only cli- ataxia telangiectasia characterized by language impairment; CU
L5  (culin 5) nical criteria are available, some more effective and not so subjective signs may regulate neuronal migration to influence cortical layering associated are needed. To verify that pooled miRNA expression, reproduce the average with language development. Our gene expression analysis also show that of single subject values, we chose 3 micro RNAs (mir-766-3p, mir-486-3p the NPAT gene was less expressed in cases with lan-1g0uage impairment than and mir-361-5p), that were found to be dysregulated in autism patients cases without language impairment (p = 5.67 x 10 ). We further obtainped whole blood in previous our work. Concordance between pooled and single nominal evidence for the association between speech delay and an ROH subject results were demonstrated for 2 of the selected miRNAs by qRT-PCR region on 11q22.3 in another independent sazmple of 1,387 subjects ( = analyses, identifying significant difference only for down-regulated mir-361 0C.o0n3c7l)u. sTiohne sROH on 11q22.3 remained to be significantly associated with -5p (p<0,0001; mean RQ: - 0,38) and up-regulated mir-486-3p (p<0,0001; speech delay in combined samples (Stouffer’s trend = 0.0005). mean RQ: 8,003), but not for miR-766-3p (p=0,995) in autistic group. The : Our findings suggest that extended recessive loci on 11q22.3 expression changes of the miRNA signature were then evaluated for their may play a larger role in in language impairment than susceptibility to au- correlation with the patients‘ clinical symptoms measured by Gilliam Au- tism. More research is warranted to investigate if these genes, especially tism Rating Scale (GARS) which reveals correlation of the communication NPP. ALiTn, :i nNfoluneen. Pc.e K supoee: cNho npea.t hSo.Slo. gGya ub:y Npoenretu.rbing cerebellar functions. and stereotype subscales with mir-361-5p (p=0,028/ p=0,043). The results indicated that the whole blood-based miRNA profiling is a promising way to identify candidate biomarkers for autism, and the identified miRNA signa- 
P06 .12 ture warrants further investigation. Further molecular analysis on miRNA Large deletion 11q13.3 encompassing SHANK2 in a patient with gene expression changes will give a more detailed picture about the miRNA autism a Ns.s oPcoipaotevd: Nmoenceh. aTn. iVsamc hinev a:u Ntiosnme.. V. Krasteva: None. A. C. Tabet1, R. Delorme2, L. Perrin3, S. Drunat4, A. Thaly1, C. Dupont1, B. Benzacken1,5, A. Verloes3, T. Bourgeron6; 1Cytogenetic Unit, Robert Debre Hospital APHP, Paris, France, 2Department of child and adolescent psychiatry, Robert Debre Hospital APHP, Paris, France, 3Clinical genetic 
P06 .10 Unit, Robert Debre Hospital APHP, Paris, France, 4Molecular genetic Unit, Robert Debre Undestending MicroRNA gene expression signiture in peripheral Hospital APHP, Paris, France, 5Cytogenetic Unit, Jean Verdier Hospital, Bondy, France, blood of children with autism 6Pasteur Institut, Paris, France. T. Vachev1, V. Stoyanova2, I. Minkov3, N. Popov2; 1University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3University of Plovdiv „Paisii Hilendarski“, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are characterized by deficits in social interaction, communication, and repetitive behaviour. Recent studies have highlighted the involvement of rare copy-number variations in the genetic MicroRNAs are a class of sophisticated regulators of gene expression, acting etiology of ASD particularly those affecting genes involved in the neuronal as post-transcriptional negative regulators of gene expression that reco- synaptic complex. Among them, the SHANK gene family consists of three gnize their target mRNAs molecules through complementary base pairing. members: SHANK1, SHANK2 and SHANK3, which encode scaffolding pro- Due to the dynamic nature of the whole blood transcriptome, understan- teins required for formation and function of neuronal synapses. SHANK2 ding miRNAs expression profile by examining mature miRNA signature in mutations have been associated with ASD and mild intellectual disability. autism is a promising tool for discovery of novel disease-related biomarkers. Recently, three patients with autism carrying a de novo deletion of SHANK2 To perform large-scale miRNA profiling we employed a pooled-RNA tech- associated with a duplication of the alpha 7 nicotinic receptor CHRNA7 were nique of 30 autistic patients’ and 25 healthy controls’ whole blood. Using reported. Based on these observations, a „multiple hit model“ for ASD has μParafloTM miRNA microarray assay based on the Sanger miRBase v18.0 been proposed for SHANK2. database, we found a set of 77 differentially expressed miRNAs (p<0,05) Here we reported a patient with autism, minor dysmorphic features, hypo- including miR-766-3p, log2 -1,10; miR-128, log2 - 0,97; miR-29a-3p, log2 tony, and multiple ear infections. The whole genome SNP array (Human- 0,67; miR-361-5p, log2 -0,70; miR-148a-3p, log2 0,96; miR-663, log2 -0,10; CytoSNP-12, Illumina) analysis revealed a de novo 11q13.3q13.4 deletion miR-486-3p, log2 -1,14. To validate the results of the microRNA microarray (69,789,180-71,783,240) of 1.9 Mb encompassing 6 referenced OMIM genes assay, we examined the expression of these miRNAs, by stem-loop qRT-PCR shoE wS eH aG g2 n0 if1 ic3 | P chA anR gI eS s, nF aR cA coN r-CEi n| cWludWinWg S.HEASNHKG2.. IOn RadGdition, the patient carried an intermediate CG1G9 r3e- using pooled assay. All tested miRNAs d si an t iABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index peat length at the Fragile X mental retardation (FMR1) locus inherited from sPp. eDcetrlluom R udsissoor:d Neorns.e. M. Robazza: None. E. Demori: None. L. Bortotto: his mother. None. D. Romagno: None. N. Passon: None. G. Crichiutti: None. A. Pusiol: None. A. Rosolen: None. G. Damante: None. We discuss the genotype-phenotype correlation of the 11q13.3 deletion and the co-occurrence of the 11q13.3 deletion and the FRAXA intermediate al- l Ael.eC.. Tabet: None. R. Delorme: None. L. Perrin: None. S. Drunat: None. A. Thaly: None. C. Dupont: None. B. Benzacken: None. A. Verloes: None. T. 
P06 .15 Bourgeron: None. Synaptic transmission: looking for clues to Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) etiology in Copy Number Variants containing synaptic genes 
P06 .13 B. A. Oliveira1,2,3, C. A. Correia1,2,3, I. C. Conceição1,2,3, C. Café4, J. Almeida4, S. Mouga4,5, F. Mosaic copy number variation in the autism and schizophrenia brain: Duque5,6, G. Oliveira7,5,6, A. M. Vicente1,2,3; 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Centre for providing a basis for a new (mitotic) theory of neuropsychiatric Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Instituto Gulbenkian diseases de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 4Unidade Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo, Centro de I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, I. A. Demidova1,2,3, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, A. D. Kolotii1,2, V. S. Desenvolvimento, Hospital Pediátrico (HP), Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Kravets1,2,3, M. A. Zelenova1,3, T. Liehr4, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3; Coimbra (CHUC);, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Instituto Biomédico de Investigação em Luz 1Mental Health Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian e Imagem, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Federation, 2Institute of Paediatrics and Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, 6Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Unidade Russian Federation, 3Moscow State University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo, Centro de Desenvolvimento, Hospital Pediátrico (HP), Russian Federation, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal. A plethora of data on germ-line genomic rearrangements in brain disorders Copy Number Variants (CNVs) play an important role in susceptibility to including autism and schizophrenia does exist. On the other hand, the con- ASD, often mediated by the deletion or duplication of genes involved in tribution of non-heritable genomic alterations to the pathogenesis is hardly synaptic structure and function. In this study we tested the hypothesis that appreciated. Here, we have assessed post-zygotic autosomal aneuploidy in there is an enrichment in CNVs encompassing synaptic transmission genes prefrontal cortex of the diseased and normal brain by molecular cytogenetic in ASD. techniques (FISH and interphase chromosome-specific multicolor banding To obtain a list of genes involved in synaptic structure and function, we que- with DNA probes for chromosomes 1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17 and 18). Twel- ry pathway databases for synaptic pathways (KEGG and GO). By intersecting ve autistic, 19 schizophrenic and 27 control samples provided by the Brain this list with the results of a large CNV genomic screening in ASD patients and Tissue Bank for Developmental disorders, University of Maryland and (performed by the Autism Genome Project), and CNV information on the bank of our institute were analyzed. Aneuploidy rate per autosome was 0.3- Database of Genomic VarianPts (DGV), we found a significantly increased bur- 0.8% in all three cohorts analyzed (0.46%, 0.62% and 0.59%). However, we den of CNVs encompassing synaptic g-1e6nes in ASD subjects compared to DGV observed statistically significant increase of chromosome 9 aneuploidy in controls (Fisher exact test =2.2X10 , OR=1.47). the autistic brain. In schizophrenia, chromosome 1 and 18 aneuploidy rates Detailed analysis of the frequenciePs of each synaptic gene duplicated or de- were significantly increased. Additionally, we performed array CGH and in leted by CNVs in ASD and control subjects identified 39 genese gthat were si- silico analysis of our data on genomic rearrangements in childhood neuro- gnificantly more frequent in ASD ( <0.05). Closer inspection oNf F
C1 N, VG oAvBeRrlGa1p, developmental diseases (124 individuals) and found that CNV burdens in CbHetRwNeAe7n the ASD sample and additional control databases ( SAGE, Pop- these individuals typically affect two pathways specific for brain cells: cell PGLeAne2)G 1hBig, hPlPigPh2tRe3dC s, yKnCaNpKti7c, AstDruCcYt7u re o rR AfuPnScNtion genes (eg cycle regulation and programmed cell death. We concluded that somatic ) that warrant further investigation. Additionally, 5 synaptic genes, genome variation (chromosome-specific mosaic aneuploidy) is a non-heri- and , were disrupted by CNVs ex- table genetic factor contributing to pathogenesis of brain disorders, that is, clusively in the ASD dataset, and were also absent from the additional con- however, a result of specific CNV burdens. Our data provide a basis for a new trol CNV databases queried. (mitotic) theory of neuropsychiatric diseases. Supported by the President of The present results show an excess of structural alterations encompassing t Ih.Ye. RIouusrsoiav:n N Foendee.r Sat.Gio.n V Gorrsaannto MvaD:- 4N4o0ne1.. 2I.0A1. 3D.e7m ainddo vRaF:B NRo n1e2.- O04.S-0. 0215-а. Kurinnaia: None. A.D. Kolotii: None. V.S. Kravets: None. M.A. Zelenova: synaptic genes in ASD and highlight candidate genes for sequencing and None. T. Liehr: None. Y.B. Yurov: None. f Bun.Ac.t iOolnivael isratu: dNioense.. C.A. Correia: None. I.C. Conceição: None. C. Café: None. J. Almeida: None. S. Mouga: None. F. Duque: None. G. Oliveira: None. A.M. Vicente: None. 
P06 .14 Microdeletion in the 4p16.3 region in a case of autism 
P06 .16 P. Dello Russo, M. Robazza, E. Demori, L. Bortotto, D. Romagno, N. Passon, G. Crichiutti, A. A NCAM2 deletion in a patient with autism Pusiol, A. Rosolen, G. Damante; C. Scholz1, D. Steinemann2, M. Arslan-Kirchner1, M. Stuhrmann1, M. Roy3, J. Schmidtke1; Azienda Ospedaliro-Universitaria S. Maria della Misericordia, Udine, Italy. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute for Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Psychiatric Clinic, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. A large body of evidence suggests that autism is a multifactorial disease with a strong genetic component; however the underlying mechanisms are not yet clear. We report a patient with a normal development up to the third An 8-year-old boy with autism spectrum disorder, speech delay, behavioural year of life. At this age the child presented impairment of reciprocal social problems, disturbed sleep and macrocephaly presented in our genetics cli- interaction, deficit in verbal communication ability, stereotyped behavior nic. He is the firPsTtE cNhild of non-consanguineous parents. Chromosomal ana- with head banging, brief attention span, poor eye contact. The diagnosis of lysis had revealed a normal male karyotype 46,XY, and testing for fragile X autism was done according to the “Autism diagnostic Observation Scale”. Ac- syndrome and sequencing was inconspicuous. tually the child is 10 years old. Brain NMR and vision are normal. Electroen- Array-CNGCHA Ma2nalysis showed a microdeletion of 1.6Mb: arr 21q21.1- cephalogram shows spike/wave complexes at 2-3Hz over the right frontal q21.2(22444986-24047363)x1. This part of the chromosome contains the region. Conventional karyotype is 46, XY. Array-based comparative genomic entire gene and no other functional genes. His mother also carries hybridization (aCGH) reveals a 647 Kb microdeletion of 4p16.3. The micro- this microdeletion. She has no obvious behavioural features of autism, but deletion found in our analysis is closed to but does not include the critical also is macrocephalic. Three maternal blood relatives are reported to have region associated with the Wolf-Hirschorn syndrome (WHS); accordingly, speech problems. Results of psychological assessments of the mother and the child exhibited mild dysmorphic features, which included a prominent the other affected individuals are pending. forehead and glabella, but not the typical WHS appearance. Evaluation of Autism spectrum disorder (ASD, OMIM 209850) encompasseNs CdAiMffe2rent both parents demonstrates that the microdeletion of the child is a “de novo” forms of autism with a broader phenotype. Two-thirds of all patients with mutation. Only limited number of coding genes (namely ZNF595, ZNF718, ASD suffer from mental retardation. Among the genes involved, has PD
E6 B, ZNF732, ZNF141, ZNF721, PIGG, MY
L5 ) are located in the deleted been assumed to play a role in the development of ASD because of its func- chromosomal area. Since a different patient with autism and a similar mi- tion iNn CnAeMur2it es (outgrowth, bundling). In the literature, theGrReI iKs1 one report crodeletion in the 4p16.3 region has been recently described (Velinov et al., of an autistic boy with an 8.8N MCBA-Mm2icrodeletion involving 19 genes inclu- Annual Meeting of American Society of Human Genetics, 2008), we hypo- ding and another autism-related candidate gene, . Our case t 1h 9es 4ize that such genome alteration might be asEsoScHiatGed 2 w0i1th3 t h| eP aAuRtisISm, FRsAupNpoCrEts |th We aWssuWm.pEtSioHn Gtha.Ot RG deficiency, as other cell adhesion pro-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tein defects, plays a role in the development of autism, speech development Even if the frequency of exonic deletions of CTNNA3 is not significantly dif- a Cn.d S mchaoclrzo: cNeopnhea.l yD, .p Setrehinaepms awninth: Nvaorniea.b Mle. Aexrpslraens-sKivirictyh.ner: None. M. ferent between ASDs cases and controls (17/2446 cases and 35/5097 con- Stuhrmann: None. M. Roy: None. J. Schmidtke: None. trols, P=.88), no homozygous exonic deletions were found in a sample of 5097 controls, suggesting that only the complete knockout of CTNNA3 could cause or confer susceptibility for ASDs. Expression analysis of alfaT-catenin 
P06 .17 and alfaN-catenin proteins in mouse cortex and hippocampus (
P0 -
P90 ), Targeted high-throughput gene sequencing of the NMDA receptor provided further support of a role of CTNNA3 in early mid-fetal develop- multi-protein complex and high-resolution genomic study of 100 ment of the brain. families with autism spectrum disorder While the exact biological significance of CTNNA3 homozygous deletion is S. Alirol1,2, S. Marouillat1,2, A. Paubel1,2,3, P. Vourc‘h1,2,3, C. Andres1,2,3, C. Barthelemy1,2,3, D. yet to be determined, we hypothesize that it could have clinical relevance to Campion4, N. Juteau3,5, A. Toutain1,2,3, E. Lemonnier6, P. Goupille3,5, F. Bonnet-Brilhault1,2,3, tEh.e B AaScDcsh eplhlie: nNootnyep. eF .i nC ethroisn Ii:t aNlioanne .p Dat. iPeinntt.o: None. M. Giannandrea: None. S. F. Laumonnier1,2; Lomartire: None. P. D’Adamo: None. R. Tancredi: None. I. M.g.s.a.c.: None. A.P. 1INSERM UMR930, Tours, France, 2University François-Rabelais, Tours, France, 3Centre Monaco: None. A. Battaglia: None. E. Maestrini: None. A.G. P.: None. Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Tours, France, 4INSERM UMR1079, Rouen, France, 5INSERM CIC 0202, Tours, France, 6Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Brest, France. 
P06 .19 Copy number variant analysis using SNP microarrays identified novel candidate genes in patients with autism spectrum disorders Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is an early childhood neurodevelopmental C. Nava1,2,3, B. Keren4, C. Mignot5, A. Rastetter1,2,3, S. Chantot-Bastaraud6, A. Faudet5, disorder characterized by a significant genetic aetiology and a prevalence E. Fonteneau4, C. Amiet7, C. Laurent7, A. Jacquette5, S. Whalen5, A. Afenjar8, D. Périsse7, currently estimated at 1/100. Epidemiological studies described that ASDs D. Doummar8, N. Dorison8, M. Leboyer9, J. Siffroi6, D. Cohen7, A. Brice1,2,3, D. Héron5, C. are heterogeneous at both clinical and genetic levels, which has been further Depienne1,2,3; illustrated by the large number of loci and genes that have been identified to 1INSERM, U975 - CRICM, Institut du cerveau et de la moelle épinière (ICM), Paris, date (>100). Several biological pathways have been highlighted, particularly France, 2CNRS 7225, CRICM - Hôpital de la Pité-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Université the NMDA receptor multiprotein (NRC) complex, affected by copy number Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC) - Paris 6, Paris, France, 4Département de Génétique et de variations (CNV) and mutations enriched in NRC proteins encoding genes. Cytogénétique, Unité fonctionnelle de cytogénétique - Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Département de Génétique et de Cytogénétique, Unité fonctionnelle We performed a global genetic study of 100 French families including at de génétique clinique - Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6Service de least 1 individual with ASD, which was included in the research project Génétique et Embryologie Médicales - Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, “Neurophysiological Molecular and Developmental Analysis of the Glutama- 7Service de psychiatrie de l’enfant et de l’adolescent - Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, te Synapse in Autism (NMDA-Autism)“ (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01770548). France, 8Service de neuropédiatrie - Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 9Pole de For each family, we firstly performed a high-resolution pangenomic compa- Psychiatrie et Fondation FondaMental - Hôpital A. Chenevier, Créteil, France. rative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis with 1M CGH Agilent Array for- mat to identify rare or de novo CNVs; Secondly, a high-throughput targeted sequencing of 216 genes mostly belonging to the NRC complex was carried Copy number variants (CNVs) have repeatedly been found to cause or pre- out with the SureSelect Agilent strategy in order to assess the contribution dispose to Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs). For diagnostic purposes, of gene mutations in our cohort. we screened 194 patients with ASDs for CNVs using Illumina SNPd aer nraoyvso. Preliminary results on CGH experiments led us to identify small rare CNVs in In several patients, we also analyzed candidate genes located in inherited several known regions (20p12.1 MACROD2; 18q21.1 KATNA
L2 ; 11p13.11) deletions to unmask autodseo nmovaol recessive variants. Three CNVs, a or novel potential candidates such as FRMPD4, GUCY2F and NXPH3. We triplication of chromosome 15q11-q12 of paternal origin, a deletion on have also observed several large genomics variations previously described chromosome 9p24 and a 3q29 deletion, were identified as the cause (1,2Mb amplification at 16p13.11 and 5,6 Mb deletion at 11q14.2-q14.3). of the disorder in one patient each. We also identified multiple private or The results from the high-throughput sequencing analysis, which is current- recurrent CNVs, the majority of which were inheritePdT GfrEoRm3 asymptomatic l Sy .b Aeliinrogl :p Nerofnoer.m Se. dM, awroilul ibllea ta:l Nsoo nper.e Ase. nPtaeudb.el: None. P. Vourc‘h: None. C. parents. Finally, an autosomal recessive cauDseO CwKa1s0 considered in two pati- Andres: None. C. Barthelemy: None. D. Campion: None. N. Juteau: None. A. ents: a homozygous 1p31.1 deletion encompassing was identified Toutain: None. E. Lemonnier: None. P. Goupille: None. F. Bonnet-Brilhault: in a patient and a rare missense variant in was found in a second None. F. Laumonnier: None. patient in association with an inherited deletion that deleted the entire gene. Although highly penetrant CNVs or variants inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion were detected in rare cases, our results mainly support the 
P06 .18 hypothesis that CNVs contribute to ASDs in association with other CNVs or Homozygous exonic deletion in CTNNA3 suggests a role for alfaT- point variants located elsewhere in the genome. Identification of these gene- catenin in susceptibility to Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) tCic. iNnatevraa: cNtioonnes. Bin. iKnedrievnid: uNaolnse w. Cit.h M AigSDnost c: oNnosnteit.u Ate. sR aas ftoertmteird: aNbolnee c. hSa. llenge. E. Bacchelli1, F. Ceroni1, D. Pinto2, M. Giannandrea3, S. Lomartire1, P. D’Adamo3, R. Chantot-Bastaraud: None. A. Faudet: None. E. Fonteneau: None. C. Amiet: Tancredi4, I. M.G.S.A.C.5, A. P. Monaco6,7, A. Battaglia4, E. Maestrini1, A. G. P.8; None. C. Laurent: None. A. Jacquette: None. S. Whalen: None. A. Afenjar: 1FaBiT – Dipartimento di Farmacia e BioTecnologie, Bologna, Italy, 2Departments of None. D. Périsse: None. D. Doummar: None. N. Dorison: None. M. Leboyer: Psychiatry, and Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Seaver Autism Center, The Mindich None. J. Siffroi: None. D. Cohen: None. A. Brice: None. D. Héron: None. C. Child Health & Development Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, Depienne: None. United States, 3Dulbecco Telethon Institute, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Stella Maris Istituto Scientifico per la Neuropsichiatria dell‘Infanzia e dell‘Adolescenza, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy, 5International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
P06 .20 University of Oxford,, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom, 7Office of the President, Tufts 0.12Mb microdeletion at 19p13.2 including NFIX in an individual with University, Boston, MA, United States, 8Autism Genome Project, USA, CA, United States. autism spectrum disorder. I. Ohashi1, Y. Kuroda1, T. Naruto1, K. Ida1, K. Enomoto1, K. Tanoue2, K. Kurosawa1; 1Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are highly heritable, neurodevelopmen- 2Division of Integrated Pediatrics, Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. tal conditions, showing extreme genetic heterogeneity. While it is well esta- blished that de novo genetic variation plays an important role in ASD risk, recent studies have demonstrated a convincing evidence of a rare recessive Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS) is the overgrowth syndrome, characterized contribution to the heritability of ASDs. by tall stature, macrocephaly, distinctive facial appearance, and intellectual In the genome-wide CNV study carried out by the Autism Genetic Consorti- disability. Recently, Sotos-like and MSS were found to be caused by muta- um (AGP), we identified one homozygous deletion intersecting the CTNNA3 tions of Nuclear factor I-X (NFIX). We describe an additional male patient gene in an Italian proband with ASD and moderate intellectual disability with microdeletion at 19p13.2 encompassing NFIX. He was born to noncon- (PIQ=50). This deletion includes a coding exon, leading to a putative frames- sanguineous parents at 40 weeks of gestation. His birth weight was 2570 g, hift and premature stop codon, inherited from both parents, each heterozy- and height 46 cm. At the age of 2 years and 8 months, he was referred to our gote for a deletion of slightly different length. The unaffected sister is also clinic for a diagnostic evaluation because of developmental delay and grow- heterozygote for the deletion. th retardation. His weight was 10.6 kg (-1.8 S.D.), height 86.7 cm (-1.2 S.D.), CTNNA3 encodes for the alfaT-catenin protein that has a crucial role in cel- and OFC 48.0 cm (-0.7 S.D.). He could crawl, but could not walk alone and lular adherence showing suggestive association in GWAS and a de novo de- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEs |p WeakW a Wsig.nEifSicHanGt w.OorRdG. He had some autistic traits and stereotypes.He1 w9a5s letion.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index O. López-Guarnido: None. L. Hernández-Bellido: None. B. Gutiérrez: None. M. Álvarez-Cubero: None. M. Saiz-Guinaldo: None. M. Ruiz- Veguilla: medicated with antiepileptics for recurrent febrile convulsions. Array CGH None. revealed 0.12 Mb deletion at 19p13.2 encompassing NFIX. Further analysis with quantitative PCR confirmed the deletion of NFIX as a de novo event. Our patient had a relative macrocephaly, but did not present overgrowth 
P06 .23 and characteristic facial features as MSS. The autistic traits are the most pro- Genome-wide association study identifies a potent locus associated minent clinical feature in our patient. Haploinsufficiency and mutations in with human opioid sensitivity the DNA-binding /dimerization domain of NFIX causes Sotos-like syndrome, D. Nishizawa1, K. Fukuda2, S. Kasai1, J. Hasegawa1, Y. Aoki1,2, A. Nishi1, N. Saita2, Y. whereas the truncated mutations of NFIX represent MSS [Malon et al., 2010; Koukita2, M. Nagashima3, R. Katoh3, Y. Satoh4, M. Tagami4, S. Higuchi5, H. Ujike6, N. Ozaki7, Yoneda et al., 2012; Priolo et al., 2012]. The present report provides insight T. Inada8, N. Iwata9, I. Sora1,10, M. Iyo11, N. Kondo12, M. Won13, N. Naruse14, K. Uehara15, M. into consideration of genotype-phenotype correlation in NFIX mutations. Itokawa16, M. Koga17, T. Arinami17, Y. Kaneko2, M. Hayashida18, K. Ikeda1; I. Ohashi: None. Y. Kuroda: None. T. Naruto: None. K. Ida: None. K. Enomoto: 1Addictive Substance Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, None. K. Tanoue: None. K. Kurosawa: None. Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Oral Health and Clinical Science, Division of Dental Anesthesiology, Orofacial Pain Center Suidoubashi Hospital, Tokyo Dental College, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Surgery, Toho University Sakura Medical Center, Sakura, Japan, 4Department of Anesthesiology, Toho University Sakura Medical Center, Sakura, 
P06 .21 Japan, 5National Hospital Organization, Kurihama Alcoholism Center, Yokosuka, Japan, Analysis of the hexonucleotide repeat expansion and founder 6Ujike Nishiguchi Clinic, Okayama, Japan, 7Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan, 8Department of Psychiatry, Seiwa Hospital, haplotype at 
C9 ORF72 in an Irish psychosis case-control sample. Institute of Neuropsychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, 9Department of Psychiatry, Fujita Health C. A. Fahey; University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Japan, 10Department of Psychobiology, Tohoku TCD, Dublin, Ireland. University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan, 11Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan, 12Seimei Hospital, Fuji City, Japan, 13Koujin Hospital, Nagoya, Japan, 14Saitama Seishin-iryo Center, Kita-adachi, A hexonucleotide repeat expansion ‘GGGGCC’ in an intronic region of the Saitama, Japan, 15Kanagawa-Kenritsu Seisin Iryo Senta Serigaya Byoin, Yokohama, 
C9 ORF72 gene has been found to account for up to 70% of amyotrophic Japan, 16Schizophrenia and Depression Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of lateral sclerosis (ALS), and this locus also being implicated in the patho- Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan, 17Department of Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan, 18Department of genesis of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Study of an independent FTD Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. sample showed a strong association between 
C9 ORF72 mutations and psy- chotic symptoms. We sought to screen a large Irish psychosis case-control sample for evidence of association between the repeat expansion and psy- Opioids, such as morphine and fentanyl, are widely used as effective anal- chosis. We carried out haplotype analysis on this region, due to reports of a gesics for the treatment of acute and chronic pain. In addition, the opioid founder haplotype. Our sample included 1,165 cases and 1,283 controls. We system has a key role in the rewarding effects of morphine, ethanol, cocaine used a reverse-primed PCR method to amplify the hexonucleotide repeat and various other drugs. Although opioid sensitivity is well known to vary expansion. Haplotype analysis was carried out using available GWAS data widely among individual subjects, several candidate genetic polymorphis- for these samples. The distribution of repeat numbers was very similar for ms reported so far are insufficient for fully understanding the wide range cases and controls. We identified four samples that carried a repeat number of interindividual differences in human opioid sensitivity. By conducting a approaching the pathogenic range >30. There were two controls samples multistage genome-wide association study (GWAS) in healthy subjects, we (26 and 25 repeats respectively) and two schizophrenia cases (27 and 28 re- found that genetic polymorphisms within a linkage disequilibrium block peats). Haplotype analysis found that for the 512 samples that carried more that spans 2q33.3-2q34 were strongly associated with the requirements for than 7 repeats, 482 (94%) carried the founder haplotype. The significance postoperative opioid analgesics after painful cosmetic surgery. The C allele of the intermediate number of repeats (between 24 and 29) is still unclear. of the best candidate single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs2952768, Haplotype analysis showed a clear association between repeat number and was associated with more analgesic requirements, and consistent results the founder haplotype. It would appear that this haplotype is not unique to were obtained in patients who underwent abdominal surgery. In additi- ALS-FTD cases, but its presence predisposes this region to the repeat expan- s Cio.An., aFnahde iyn: tNuornne t.his may lead to a greater risk of molecular instability. on, carriers of the C allele in this SNP exhibited less vulnerability to severe drug dependence in patients with methamphetamine dependence, alcohol dependence, and eating disorders and a lower ‘Reward Dependence’ score on a personality questioCnRnEaBir1e in healthy subjects. Furthermore, the C/C ge- 
P06 .22 notype of this SNP was significantly associated with the elevated expression Effects of cocaine use on the expression of psychotic symptoms, with of a neighboring gene, . These results show that SNPs in this locus respect to the age at onset and COMT polymorphism are the most potent genetic factors associated with human opioid sensitivity O. López-Guarnido1, L. Hernández-Bellido2, B. Gutiérrez3, M. Álvarez-Cubero1, M. Saiz- known to date, affecting both the efficacy of opioid analgesics and liability Guinaldo1, M. Ruiz- Veguilla4; to severe substance dependence. Our findings provide valuable information 1Department of Legal Medicine and Toxicology. University of Granada., Granada, Spain, fDor. Nthiseh pizearwsoan: aNloizneed. Ktr.e Fautmkuednat: oNfo pnaei.n S a. nKda sdariu: gN doenpe.e Jn.d Heansceeg. awa: None. Y. 2. Department of Experimental Psychology and Behaviour Physiology, University of Aoki: None. A. Nishi: None. N. Saita: None. Y. Koukita: None. M. Nagashima: Granada., Granada, Spain, 3Department of Psychiatry. University of Granada, Granada, None. R. Katoh: None. Y. Satoh: None. M. Tagami: None. S. Higuchi: None. H. Spain, 4Group of Neurodevelopment and Psychosis. Institute of Biomedicine of Seville Ujike: None. N. Ozaki: None. T. Inada: None. N. Iwata: None. I. Sora: None. M. (IBIS). Virgen del Rocío University Hospital, Sevilla, Spain. Iyo: None. N. Kondo: None. M. Won: None. N. Naruse: None. K. Uehara: None. M. Itokawa: None. M. Koga: None. T. Arinami: None. Y. Kaneko: None. M. Hayashida: None. K. Ikeda: None. Objective: To determine if the age at onset of cocaine use affects the mani- festation of psychotic symptoms and if there are differences on the age at onset of cocaine use that are dependent on the expressed polymorphism of 
P06 .24 the Catecol-O-Metil Transferase (COMT). Genetics of the development of heroin addiction and the Methodology: The sample consists of 138 cocaine users. In order to evaluate pharmacogenetics of the substitution therapy the presence of psychotic symptoms we used the Community Assessment A. Vereczkei1, Z. Demetrovics2, A. Szekely2, P. Sarkozy3, P. Antal3, A. Szilagyi4, M. Sasvari- Psychic Experience (C.A.P.E.) test. This test evaluates the expression of both Szekely1, C. Barta1; positive (paranoia, deliriums, hallucinations⋯) and negative (lack of social 1Department of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, and emotional skills⋯) symptoms, and the associated discomfort. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Institute of Psychology Eötvös Loránd Results: The results show differences among the cocaine users in the expres- University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Technical University of Budapest, Measurement and sion of psychotic symptoms, depending on age. The individuals that started Information Systems, Budapest, Hungary, 43rd Department of Internal Medicine, using cocaine when they were 17 or younger scored higher in expression of Research Laboratory, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. positive psychotic symptoms (p=0.078) and associated discomfort (0.047) when compared with individuals that started using cocaine when they were 18 or older. In addition we have found significant differences in the age at Primary goal of this study was to clear the role of the dopaminerg genes in onset of cocaine use associated to the expressed COMT polymorphism. Co- the pathophysiology of heroin addiction and also expanding the research, caine users with Met-Met polymorphism had an earlier age at onset (17.5 using modern molecular biology technics in order to investigate gene vari- DT=2.6) than those with Val-Val (18.1 DT=2.1) o Met-Val (19.5 DT=3.7) po- ants in the shar eidn gseinliecotics of common addicitons. lymorphisms. In addition to our case-control study, we carried out a TaqMan® OpenAr- 196 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRraAyN®C sEtu d| yW oWn W.ESH sGel.eOctRedG addiction candidate genes. InvestigatedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index polymorphisms of the case-control study were: the dopamine D4 receptor with early adversity to predict amygdala reactivity to threat. The transcripts gene (DRD4) III.exon VNTR; rs1800955, rs747302, rs936462 polymorphis- regulated by these functional MDD risk variants in human blood are also ms and the 120bp duplication; the dopamin trasporter 3’ and VIII.intron regulated by GR activation and chronic adolescent stress in mouse brain VNTRs; rs1800497 of the ANKK1 and rs1079597, rs1800498 of the dopa- and point to ubiquitination and proteasome degradation and their impact mine D2 gene (DRD2). Further goal was to determine environmental and on neurite outgrowth as important stress-sensitive systems influencing the genetic factors effecting the efficiency of the substitution therapy of heroin rJis. kA rtloo tshu:f fNeorn fero. Am. MMeDnDk.e: None. G. Frishman: None. R. Bogdan: None. P. dependence. Previously in our lab two polymorphisms of the dopamine D4 Weber: None. N. Karbalai: None. D. Mehta: None. T. Klengel: None. A. Erhardt: None. K. Wagner: None. D. Trümbach: None. W. Wurst: None. M. Schmidt: receptor gene showed association with the therapeutic response of metha- None. M. Uhr: None. A. Ruepp: None. A. Hariri: None. B. Müller-Myhsok: done-treated patients. None. E.B. Binder: None. The results of the case-control study showed significant association between the ANKK1 rs1800497 (p=0.009), the DRD2 rs1079597 (p=0.003) and the DRD4 rs1800955 (p=0.007) and heroin dependence. Additional bioinforma- tic analyses revealed an indirect effect of the DRD4 rs936462 (p=0.0013). 
P06 .27 The OpenArray analysis found 5 nominally significant associations, from Upregulation of GCHFR gene expression in peripheral blood of first which only one SNP in the ALDH2 gene (aldehyde dehydrogenase 2) stayed episode psychosis patients before and after antipsychotic treatment M. L. Santoro, V. K. Ota, C. S. Noto, A. Gadelha, P. N. Silva, J. J. Mari, M. I. Melaragno, M. A. significant after multiple correction. ALDH2 is thought to be involved in the C. Smith, Q. Cordeiro, R. A. Bressan, S. I. Belangero; metabolism of dopamine so probably has a role in the pathophysiology of UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. other addictions. This study reinforces the results of a previous Chinese as- s Ao.c Viaetrieocnz skteui:d Ny obneet.w Ze. eDne tmheet rAoLvDicHs2: Naonnde h. eAr.o Sinze dkeeplye:n Ndoennec.e P.. Sarkozy: None. P. Antal: None. A. Szilagyi: None. M. Sasvari-Szekely: None. C. Barta: None. Schizophrenia is a severe mental health disorder with a high heritability. The study of gene expression levels in peripheral blood, screening exclusi- vely drug-naïve patients at two time points, may be useful to detect changes across disease progression and treatment. In this study we aimed to compare 
P06 .25 the expression levels of neurotransmission genes in peripheral blood of 30 Expression of neurotransmitter regulatory and neurodevelopment drug-naïve first episode psychosis patients (FEP) before and after antipsy- genes in peripheral blood of patients at the first episode of psychosis chotic treatment with risperidone. All patients were evaluated by a psych- V. K. Ota1, C. S. Noto1, A. Gadelha1, M. L. Santoro1, P. N. Silva1, J. J. Mari1, M. I. Melaragno1, M. A. C. Smith1, Q. Cordeiro2, R. A. Bressan1, S. I. Belangero1; iatrist twice (at admission and 8 weeks after treatment). Expression levels 1UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2ISCMSP, Sao Paulo, Brazil. of 40 genes were quantified with a customized PCR Array which is based on SYBR Green detection of cDNA amplification. We compared 2-ΔCt values of FEP patients before and after treatment using paired T-test, considering Schizophrenia is a severe mental health disorder with a high heritability. p<0.05. GTPcyclohydrolase I feedback regulator gene (GCHFR) was signi- The study of gene expression levels in blood of patients in the beginning of ficantly upregulated in FEP patients after risperidone treatment (p=0.025). the disease, such as first-episode of psychosis (FEP) may be useful to detect GCHFR is an important modulator of GTPcyclohydrolase I (GCH1), their changes in gene expression despite treatment efNfe=cts. In this study we aimed interaction influence directly the synthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), toN =compare the expression levels of genes related to neurotransmission and which is a vital cofactor maintaining availability of some monoamine neu- neurodevelopment, in blood of FEP patients ( 30) and healthy controls rotransmitters. These data agree with other study in literature that descri- ( 29). Whole blood was collected from each participant during clinical as- bed a deficiency of BH4 in patients compared to controls. Interestingly, in sessments. Expression levels of 40 genes related to neurotr2ansmission and another study of our group that investigated the same FEP individuals, we neurodevelopment were quantified with a customized RT Profiler™ PCR found a downregulation in GCH1 gene compared to healthy controls. In this Array, which is based on SYB-RΔC tG reen detection of cDNA amplification. For way, we suggest this upregulation of GCHFR after treatment could be related data analysis, we compared 2 values of FEP patients and healthy controls to risperidone effectiveness, by altering BH4 synthesis. Our study may con- using t-test. Twenty-eight of 40 genes presenteGdC uHn1d etectable expression le- tribute to a better understand the BH4 and GTPcyclohydroxylase system in vels inp whole blood aTnAdC, Rh2en ce were excpluded fromGC tHh1e analyses. Significant p SMs il.y vLc a.h :S o Nas onis nt o ear .n o Jd: Na no Mnti aep r.s iV :y . NcKh o. o nO etit .ca :t r .N Ie .o a Mntem e. aeC rn. aSt g.. N oo t No o: nN eo .n Me. AA .. G Sad me il th ha : N oo nn ee . P .. N. . J . M l n : . C . : N . Q downregulation of two genes was observed: (Fold regulation (FR)= Cordeiro: None. R.A. Bressan: None. S.I. Belangero: None. -1.32, =0.005); and (FR= -1.32, =0.017). codes for GTP cyclo- hydrolase I, an enzyme involved in the synthesis of BH4, which is an essen- tial cofactor for tyrosine, serotonin aTnAdC RL-2D opa. Moreover, it was previous- ly suggested as a candidate gene in a linkage analysis in bipolar disorder. 
P06 .28 Although no study had investigated gene (Tachykinin receptor 2) in A de novo 16p11.2 microdeletion encompassing SRCAP gene identified psychosis, its antagonists exhibited anti-depressant-like activity. Therefore, by array-CGH in a patient with Floating-Harbor syndrome. F. Gerundino1, C. Giachini1, C. Antonelli2, B. Federighi2, G. Marseglia1, C. Pescucci1, M. both genes seem to have a role in the genesis of psychosis leading towards Benelli1, F. Torricelli1; a better understanding of illness. Funding for this study was provided by 1Genetic Diagnostic Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Neurologic and FVA.KP.E OSPta 2: 0N1o0ne/.0 
C8 .9
S6 . 8N-o6t oan: dN o2n0e1. 1A/. 5G0a7d4e0lh-5a.: None. M.L. Santoro: None. P.N. Psychiatric Department, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Silva: None. J.J. Mari: None. M.I. Melaragno: None. M.A.C. Smith: None. Q. Cordeiro: None. R.A. Bressan: None. S.I. Belangero: None. We describe a patient referred to our diagnostic centre for speech delay, glo- bal developmental delay and behaviourald pe rnoobvloe ms with normal standard 
P06 .26 karyotype, as indications for array-CGH analysis.SRCAP Investigating the first genomic response to stress - insights into the Molecular karyotyping revealed a 186 kb . microdeletion in 16p11.2 genetics of major depression that encompasses 9 RefSSeRqC AgePn es including gene (Snf2-related J. Arloth1, A. Menke1, G. Frishman2, R. Bogdan3, P. Weber1, N. Karbalai1, D. Mehta1, T. CREBBP activator protein, MIM #611421) Klengel1, A. Erhardt1, K. Wagner1, D. Trümbach2, W. Wurst2, M. Schmidt1, M. Uhr1, A. Ruepp2, A. Hariri3, B. Müller-Myhsok1, E. B. Binder1; Recently, mutations in the gene have been shown to cause Floating- 1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum München - Harbor syndrome (FHS, MIM#136140), a rare disorder characterized by German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Laboratory peculiar facial features, short stature with delayed osseous maturatioSnR CaAndP of NeuroGenetics, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, speech impairment. To date, 19 out of 22 patients with clinical dthiagnosis of Durham, NC, United States. FHS and heterozygous truncating mutations in the final exon (34 ) of have been reported. The absence of mutations in 3 patients suggests the genetic heterogeneity of the syndrome. After the arrayCGH result, a new Exposure to adverse life events, which is associated with an activation of clinical evaluation was performed to evaluate the possibility of clinical over- the stress hormone system, is an important risk factor for the development lapping between our patient and reported patients with a clinical and mole- of major depressive disorder (MDD). A main effector of this system is the cular diagnosis of FHS. On the basis oSfR tChAisP second examination, it appears glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a nuclear receptor that functions as a tran- evident that the patient fulfils the diagnostic criteria for FHS. This is the first scription factor. We characterize genetic variants that moderate short-term report of an heterozygous deletion of gene indicating that in addition effects of GR activation on mRNA transcription in peripheral blood cells. We to truncating mutations reported so far partial or whole-gene deletion may demonstrate that these functional variant Es Sar He Gsig 2ni 0fi 1ca 3n t |l y P e Anr Ric Ih Se ,d F a Rm Aon Ng CEb |e W prWeseWnt.. ETSheHreGfo.rOe,R itG could be suggested to perform copy number a 1n 9al 7y- variants associated with MDD in a large case-control study and interactABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SRCAP. sis in patients whose clinical examination is strongly suggestive of FHS and understanding of the pathophysiology and molecular mechanisms leading w F.h Gicehr uanred inneog: aNtoivnee f. oCr. pGoiaincth minui:t Natoinoen.s C in. A tnhteo fninelalil: e Nxoonne o. fB . Federighi: to this disorder. These epigenetic alterations could provide early diagnostic None. G. Marseglia: None. C. Pescucci: None. M. Benelli: None. F. Torricelli: biomarkers for OCD which may influence treatment strategies, including None. b Po.tDh. pAhrnaromlda: cBo. lRogeisce aanrcdh cGorgannitt (ipvrein bceiphaal viniovuesratigl athtoerr, acpoylla.borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; DNA Genotek. D.T. Butcher: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; 
P06 .29 DNA Genotek. J.L. Kennedy: None. G.L. Hanna: None. D.R. Rosenberg: F. Genetic syndromes are frequently found in patients manifesting Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Shire Pharmaceuticals, Guidepoint Global. R. with primary neuropsychiatric disorders and developmental co- Weksberg: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant morbidities and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; DNA Genotek. J. So1,2,3, H. Faghfoury2, J. Silver2, T. Gofine3, J. L. Kennedy1; 1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Fred A. Litwin Family Centre for Genetic Medicine, University Health Network and Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences, Whitby, ON, 
P06 .31 Canada. ‚Association of ADARB1 gene with major psychiatric disorders‘ S. Djurica1, J. Miladinovic1, M. Pantovic2, M. Ivin1, S. Svikovic1, G. Brajuskovic1, S. Romac1, M. Ivkovic2, D. Savic Pavicevic1; 1University of Belgrade, Faculty of Biology, Centre for Human Molecular Genetics, Background: Many genetic syndromes present with psychiatric disorders. Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinical Centre of Serbia, Institute of Psychiatry, Belgrade, Serbia. We aim to determine the role and prevalence of hidden genetic conditions in patients with psychiatric disorders and comorbidities. This has the po- tential to significantly impact the standard of care and treatment of selected Adenosine to inosine RNA editing, catalyzed by ADARs, is a major mecha- individuals with psychiatric impairment. Methods: We prospectively recruit nism for transcriptome diversification in the nervous system with an impor- patients ≥16 years of age with psychiatric disorder(s) and at least one of tant role in neurotransmission, neuronal outgrowth and plasticity. Changes 1) neurologic abnormality, 2) developmental delay (DD), autism spectrum in the editing of a few transcripts have been reported in postmortem studies disorder (ASD) or pervasive DD (PDD), 3) dysmorphic features, 4) conge- on brains of individuals with psychiatric disorders, with the most consistent nital anomalies or 5) family history of DD, ASD or PDD. A clinical database resAuDltAs Robtained for suicide victims. Moreover, studies on mice suggest an- of phenotypic correlates is being established to delineate the highest yield tipsychotAicDs AmRBay1 reverse altered editing. To test hypothesis that variants data that lead to the most effective and efficient diagnosis of genetic syn- in genes may contribute to these phenomena, we study association dromes in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders. Results: Of the initial between gene and major psychiatric disorders. A population based 62 patients recruited, 15 (24.2%) have been diagnosed with genetic condi- case-control study included 128 individuals with schizophrenia (SCZD), 140 tions. This includes seven patients with six different single gene disorders, with mAaDjoAr RdBe1pressive disorder (MDD) and 77 with bipolar disorder (BD), six patients with six distinct chromosomal variants and two patients with all diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria, and 163 controls. Twelve tagS- different metabolic disorders. Discussion: Our preliminary results have be- NPs in gene were selected using HapMap database and HaploView. gun to demonstrate that genetic syndromes are common in patients with Genotyping was performed by TaqMan probes and data were analyzed by primary psychiatric disorders. Many of the genetic conditions identified in PLINK. ADARB1 this cohort have implications for medical surveillance, management and, in We show association of rs1051385 with SCZD (p=0.04, Pearson chi-square some cases, treatment. The high diagnostic yield in patients with “psychia- test). rs1051385 is located in the 3’UTR and may affect expressi- tric plus” phenotypes demonstrates the significance of psychiatric disorders on. This may be cAoDnAsiRsBte1nt with previously reported increased expression in genetic syndromes and vice versa. Identifying phenotypic ‘red flags’ will of ADARB1 variants with reduced catalytic activity in SCZD. Furthermore, enable development of algorithms to make important, possibly treatable, g Je. nSeot:i cN doinaeg.n Ho.s Feas ginh fposuyrcyh: iNaotrniec. pJa. tSieilnvtesr :i nN oan me.o Tr.e G eofffiicniee:n Nt omnaen. Jn.eLr.. we show specific haplotypes association with attempted suicide in Kennedy: None. MDD (p=0.0002, Pearson chi-square test) and SCZD (p=0.009, Pearson chi- square test) paAtDieAnRtsB, 1and with SSRIs response in MDD patients (p=0.001, Pearson chi-square test). To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting association of gene with psychiatric disorders, and it further un- 
P06 .30 d Se.r Dscjuorriecsa :t hNeo nime.p Jo. rMtailnacdein oofv RicN: AN oendeit.i Mng. Pina nptsoyvcihci:a Ntroince p. aMth. oIvliong: yN.one. S. DNA methylation profiles of paediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder Svikovic: None. G. Brajuskovic: None. S. Romac: None. M. Ivkovic: None. D. (OCD) Savic Pavicevic: None. P. D. Arnold1,2, D. T. Butcher1, J. L. Kennedy3,2, G. L. Hanna4, D. R. Rosenberg5, R. Weksberg1,6; 1Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Psychiatry and Institute of Medical Science, University of 
P06 .32 Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Interrater reliability of hypernasality amongst psychiatrists Canada, 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United T. S. Eapen1, N. I. Erdmann2; States, 5Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, Wayne State University, 1Montfort Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2none, Berlin, Germany. Detroit, MI, United States, 6Department of Paediatrics and Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome is a significant risk factor for the development of psychiatric disorders. Although 22q11.2DS is commonly detected by Obsessive-Compulsive disorder (OCD) is a complex, common and debili- other specialties in infancy, individuals are not screened if the anomalies tating psychiatric disorder. Heritability estimates range from 40% to 65% do not warrant medical or surgical interventions. Facial dysmorphisms in suggesting that genetic factors play a role in the etiology of this disorder. Ho- 22q11.2DS are not clinically reliably detected. If hypernasality, found in wever, there are other potential important determinants, including epige- ~90% of adult pOrbojbeacntidvse, :i s accurately and reliably detected by psychiatrists netics. Epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation, have increasingly untrained in voice resonance Mabenthoormdsa:l ities, it may increase the detection been shown to be important in the etiology of complex disorders. We hypo- of 22q11.2DS. To determine if psychiatrists can accurately and thesized that there are alterations in DNA methylation patterns in children reliably detect hypernasality. 40 adult psychiatrists from the Ot- with OCD compared to controls. We used a novel genome-wide approach tawa Hospital or the Royal Ottawa Mental Health Center listened to 20 voice to identify epigenetic variants. Analysis of blood DNA methylation patterns samples (10 male, 10 female) repeated three times. Psychiatrists characRtee-- in 10 OCD patients compared to 10 controls identified both gain and loss sriuzletds: each voice sample according to a 4-point Likert scale (1 = normal, 2 of methylation at a number of CpG sites. Candidate DNA methylation al- = mildly hypernasal, 3 = moderately hypernasal, 4 = very hypernasal). terations identified in this initial investigation were highly relevant to the Sensitivity and specificity of hypernasality detection (95% CI) were as OCD phenotype and include altered DNA methylation in promoters of genes follows: 88.5% (86-90) and 64.4% (61-67). Using logistic regression analy- that function in glutamate signaling, myelin synthesis and lipid transport. sis, sensitivity and specificity were not affected by psychiatrist gender (p = We then obtained DNA methylation profiles using the Illumina Infinium 0.803; p = 0.520); native language (p = 0.637; p = 0.542); general vs. subspe- Methylation4 50 array in an expanded cohort of 30 OCD patients compared cialty psychiatry (p = 0.487; p = 0.550); gender of voice sampleC (opn =c l0u.s8i8o7n; sp: to 30 tissue, age and sex-matched controls based on saliva collected using = 0.416). Repeated exposure significantly affected the sensitivity (p = 0.003) Oragene•Dxsaliva kits (DNA Genotek). Data were analyzed using the IMA of hypernasality detection but not specificity (p = 0.877). package in R and Genome Studio software from Illumina. The identification With no prior training, psychiatrists accurately and reliably detect hyperna- o1f 9e8pigenetic modifications in children with OCDE wSiHll lGea d2 0to1 a3n |i mPpArRovIeSd, FR sA al N spC eeE c h| ; W deW tecW tio. nE oS f H hyG pe.O rnR asG ality is not affected by native language andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .35 Genetic association of RG
S2  gene polymorphic locus with p Ts.Syc. hEiaaptreins:t Ngeonned.e Nr, .vI.o Eicrde msaamnnp:l eN goneen.der, and psychiatric subspecialty. schizophrenia and typical antipsychotics response. A. Gareeva1, D. Zakirov2, E. Khusnutdinova2,1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific center of Russian academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. 
P06 .33 Duplications of RB1C
C1  on 8q11.23 in neuropsychiatric disorders: presentation of a further patient. K. Varvagiannis1, S. Gimelli2, J. Fluss3, S. Eliez4, E. Stathaki2, F. Sloan-Béna2, S. E. Several lines of evidence indicate that Regulator of G Protein Signaling 2 Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani2; (RG
S2 ) contributes to schizophrenia (SZ) vulnerability because it modu- 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, lates signal transduction of neurotransmitter receptors that play a role in Switzerland, 3Geneva Children’s Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 4University of Geneva the pathogenesis of SZ. DNA samples of 258 patients with paranoid schi- Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. zophrenia and of 263 healthy controls of Russian and Tatar ethnic group living in the Republic of Bashkortostan (RB) of Volga-Ural region of Russia were involved into the present study. All patients met the ICD10 criteria for Duplications of RB1C
C1  have been associated with various neurodevelop- SZ. Clinical response was determined by administering PANSS at base line mental and psychiatric disorders such as psychomotor delay, epilepsy, au- and at days 21 and 45. The severity of extrapyramidal symptoms was as- tism spectrum disorder (ASD), and schizophrenia. A damaging de novo mu- sessed using The Simpson-Angus Scale (SAS). Genomic DNA was isolated tation in this gene has recently been identified in a schizophrenia patient. from peripheral blood using the standard procedure. Differences between However, duplications of this locus have also been described in healthy indi- groups were tested by using unpaired t-test, analysis of variance (ANOVA), viduals, thus complicating interpretation of such findings. Altogether, there and chi-square test. is growing evidence suggesting a possibly incomplete penetrance as well as The present study is aimed at exploring whether rs2746071 of RG
S2  gene an important phenotypic variability of RB1C
C1 -associated disorders. could be associated with SZ and whether it could predict clinical outcomes We report on a 5-year-old male, referred for initial genetic evaluation becau- in Russians and Tatars from RB. se of psychomotor delay and ASD. On clinical examination the boy presented In the result of the present study SZ high risk genetic markers RG
S2 *G/*G with marked truncal obesity and mild dysmorphic features. The proband (rs2746071) in Russians (OR=4.08) and in Tatars (OR=4.88); allele RG
S2 *G underwent several neurologic evaluations for his delay as well as for an epi- in Russians (OR=2,37) and Tatars (OR=2,51), genetic markers of treatment sode of seizure, occurring in the context of a probable benign occipital epi- efficacy in Tatars RG
S2 *G/*G (rs2746071) were obtained in individuals lepsy. At 9 years, he was reported to have severe anxiety and psychotic sym- from the RB; considerable inter-ethnic diversity of genetic risk factors for ptoms, notably auditory hallucinations, with poor response to risperidone. this disease was revealed The results of this study support the hypothesis Array-CGH analysis showed a maternally inherited 444 kb duplication of that RG
S2  gene polymorphism contributes to interindividual variability in 8q11.23 encompassing RB1C
C1  and FAM150. t Ah.e Graapreeuevtiac: eNffoencet.s Da.n Zda akrireo ivn:v Noolvneed. Ein. KSZh upsantuhtwdainyo.va: None. Re-evaluation of the family history revealed possible psychiatric symptoms in his mother, as well as a maternal uncle suffering from chronic depression with psychotic episodes. 
P06 .36 Our case demonstrates the phenotypic variability of duplications involving Association between variants of candidate genes in 22q11.2 region RB1C
C1  and underscores the need to carefully assess the phenotype and and schizophrenia and refractoriness to antipsychotic treatment r Ke.l eVvaarnvta gfaiamninlyis h: iNstoonrey. oSf. sGuimche pllia:t Nieonntes.. J. Fluss: None. S. Eliez: None. E. Stathaki: None. F. Sloan-Béna: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. A. Bottani: P. N. O. Silva1, V. Ota2, A. Gadelha1, M. L. Santoro2, F. T. S. Bellucco3, D. M. Christofolini3, None. L. M. N. Spindola2, M. A. C. Smith3, R. A. Bressan1, M. I. Melaragno3, J. J. Mari1, S. I. Belangero2; 1São Paulo Federal University - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences / Psychiatry Department, São Paulo, Brazil, 2São Paulo Federal University - 
P06 .34 Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences / Department of Morphology and Genetics, São Paulo, Brazil, 3São Paulo Federal University - Department of Morphology Investigation of a non-synonymous variant at ABCA13 in family with and Genetics, São Paulo, Brazil. bipolar disorder M. Almuallimi1, W. Corona2, S. Detera-Wadleigh2, F. J. McMahon2; 1Georgetown University, Washington, DC, United States, 2National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. Schizophrenia is a mental disorder arising from a complex interaction of genetic and environmental factors. One of the strongest genetic risk factors is the 22q11 deletion and it has been suggested thaCt OgMenTesZ DloHcHatCe8d, UinF Dth1iLs Bipolar disorder (BD) is a major mental illness across all populations, with regi oPnR OmDigHh t contribute to susceptibility to the disease. Our aim was to in- an estimated heritability of 80%, indicating a large genetic component. Ho- vestigate the association between polymorphisms in , wever, it is unclear how genetic variation such as rare single nucleotide vari- and genes, located at 22q11.2 region, with schizophrenia and treat- ants (SNVs) contributes to the risk of the disease. Genome-wide association ment resistance schizophrenia (TRS). A total CoOf M2T60 patients withZ DsHchHizCo8- studies (GWAS) have shown support for the role of common genetic varia- phrenia was compared with 192 healthy cUoFnDtr1oLls. The patients were geno- tion in increasing risk for bipolar disorder albeit, only modestly. Hence, the typed for rs4680, rs737865 and rs165599 for , rs175174 for , contribution of rare genetic variants that may exert a strong effect has been rs5746744, rs5992403 and rs1547931 for , rs481
P9 R7O5D6H, r s137852934, proposed. Complex diseases such as bipolar disorder are potentially caused rs16983466, rs2238731, rs2904551, rs2904552, rs3970559, rs2238730, by a combined effect of rare and common genetic alterations that would re- rs2870984, rs287®0983, rs4550046 and rs372055 for polymorphis- sult in the disruption of gene networks. In this study, we investigated the ms using TaqMan PCR assay, PCR-RFLP or sequencing. Chi-square test and effect of a potentially functional non-synonymous SNV (rs74859514) in the logistic regression were used to verify Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium aCnOdM tTo gene ABCA13 located in chromosome 7p21.3, which cause the amino acid investigate the association of polymorphisms and disease or TRS respective- substitution (Ala2223Pro) .This SNV was one of several uncommon func- ly. All polymorphism PsR wOeDrHe in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium except for tional variants shared by members of an extended family with BD who were rs737865 in patient grouCpO.M STignificant associations were observed between exome-sequenced on Illumina arrays. Expression analysis using RT-qPCR schizophreniaP aRnOdDH rs2904552 polymor CpOhMismT (p=0.004, OR=2.52, was performed on patient-derived fibroblasts from two siblings carrying 95%CI=1.33-4.76) and rs737865 (p=0.034, OR=0.20, 95%CI=0.05- the mutation and diagnosed with BD. ABCA13 gene was found expressed in 0.88). Higher GG frequencies and lower CC frCeOqMueTncies were very low levels in fibroblasts as well as in other cell lines we tested previous- observed in patient group PcoRmODpHar ed to control group. None polymorphism ly, such as SH5Y5 and HeLa. We did not find significant differences in ex- analyzed was associated with TRS. No functionality data of rs737865 pression levels between heterozygous carriers of the ABCA13 variant when is available to this variant. rs2904552 is a functional polymorphism, compared to a wild type fibroblast cell line. Sequencing of both genomic which changes an aminoacid and modifies the protein structure, supporting DNA (gDNA) and complementary DNA (cDNA) was performed to confirm an association between this gene and schizophrenia pathogenesis. Funding e Ma.c hA limnduiavlilidmuia: lN’so gneen. oWt.y Cpeo.rona: None. S. Detera-Wadleigh: None. F.J. s Pu.Npp.Oo.r St:i lFvAaP: ENSoPn e2. 0V1. 1O/t5a:0 N74on0e-5. A, 2. 0G1a2d/e1lh2a6:6 N9o-n0e.. M.L. Santoro: None. F.T.S. McMahon: None. Bellucco: None. D.M. Christofolini: None. L.M.N. Spindola: None. M.A.C. Smith: None. R.A. Bressan: None. M.I. Melaragno: None. J.J. Mari: None. S.I. Belangero: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 199ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .38 Association study of candidate gene polymorphisms with paranoid schizophrenia susceptibility in Russian population be important in its pathogenesis. The limbic system-associated membrane D. Galaktionova1, A. Chudinov1, V. Kuznetsova1, A. Gareeva2, E. Khusnutdinova2, T. protein (LSAMP) is a 64-68-kDa glycoprotein that is found on the somata Nasedkina1; and dendrites of 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, neurons of cortical and subcortical regions comprising the adult mammali- Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Russian Academy of an limbic system, which is involved in the mediation of emotional behaviour, Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. learning, and memory. We studied the relationship between single-nucleoti- de polymorphisms (SNPs) of LSAMP gene from chromosomal region 3q13.2- q21 and schizophrenia. The association study design was used: 22 Schizophrenia is a common, chronic and complex psychiatric disorder, af- SNPs covering the LSAMP gene were analyzed in 127 fecting 1.0% of the worldwide population. The data collected from fami- unrelated patients and in 171 healthy control subjects. All ly, twin, and adoption studies show unequivocally that schizophrenia is a subjects were individuals of Caucasian origin living in Estonia. The most predominantly genetic disorder with heritability ranged from 70-80%. common diagnose of patients was paranoid schizophrenia. The SNPlex Ge- Traditionally, genetic research of schizophrenia was focused on identifying notyping System and tetra-primer ARMS-PCR method were applied for ge- linkage regions or on candidate genes and polymorphisms. Based on pre- notyping, following association and haplotype vious molecular genetic studies the following polymorphisms: CACNA1C analyses with Haploview program. Association analysis revealed the most (rs1006737), ANK3 (rs10761482), TPH1 (rs1800532), PLAA (rs7045881), prominent associations with SNPs rs16824691 and rs9874470 (corrected SNA
P25  (rs3746544, rs1051312), PLXNA2 (rs1327175) have been chosen allelic p values 0.0176 and 0.0033, respectively). Haplotype analysis re- and analyzed in 189 patients with paranoid schizophrenia and 195 healthy vealed six haplotype blocks. Significant individuals. The genotyping procedure included multiplex PCR with fluo- haplotypic associations confirmed allelic associations. These results suggest rescently labeled nucleotides and allele-specific hybridization of labeled that LSAMP gene from 3q13.2-q21 chromosomal region may possibly be re- PCR products with a biochip. The statistically significant association bet- lKat.e Kdo tiod os:c hNioznoep.h Sr.e Jnaian.no: None. T. Traks: None. M. Parksepp: None. R. ween AA genotype of rs1800532 (TPH1) and risk of paranoid schizophre- Balotsev: None. T. Eller: None. A. Must: None. S. Koks: None. J. Shlik: None. I. nia was found (p = 0.027). Also it was shown that C allele of rs1327175 Toru: None. E. Maron: None. V. Vasar: None. E. Vasar: None. (PLXNA2) was associated with family history in schizophrenic patients (p = 0.0001). The work was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research ( Dg.r aGnatl a#k1ti1o-n0o4v-a0:1 N9o9n8e).. A. Chudinov: None. V. Kuznetsova: None. A. 
P06 .41 Gareeva: None. E. Khusnutdinova: None. T. Nasedkina: None. Transcriptomic profile of microRNAs and protein coding genes in peripheral blood of schizophrenia patients V. Stoyanova1, T. Vachev1,2, N. Popov1; 
P06 .39 1Medical University of Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2University of Plovdiv „Paisii Gender specific epigenetic profiles in patients with schizophrenia Hilendarski“, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. B. B. Rukova1, R. Staneva1, S. Hadjidekova1, V. Milanova2, D. Toncheva1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Psychiatry, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding RNA molecules that are now thought to regulate the expression of many mRNAs. There is strong evidence that in schizophrenia inadequate or mistimed expression of a functional protein Background: Schizophrenia is one of the major psychiatric disorders in the may occur due to post-transcriptional events such as abnormal miRNA re- world, characterized by severely debilitating behavioral abnormalities. Alt- gulation of a normal gene expression. hough it affects men and women equally, the illness has varying expressi- The present study aims to shade a light on the epigenetic aspect of schizo- on between the sexes. DNA methylation is a dynamic process that can be phrenia pathophysiology. Therefore, we explore the dysregulation of miRNA influenced by environmental factors. It is a major epigenetic modification expression levels and profile the transcriptom of protein coding genes of that stably alters gene expression pattern in cells and is important for nor- peripheral blood pooled samples from 30 schizophrenia patients and 25 mal organismal development and cellular differentiation. This modification healthy matched controls. can be inherited through cell division. Materials and methods: We analy- From microarray expression of 1898 miRNA in schizophrenia and control zed age-matched pools of 110 female, 110 male schizophrenia patients groups, 25 miRNAs were differentially expressed (p>0.05), where 15 are up- and corresponding healthy controls. We have performed high-resolution regulated and 10 down-regulated. genome-wide methylation array analysis (Agilent 1x244K). We analyzed Performed digital gene expression tag profiling showed 1012 up-regulated the methylation status of 27,627 CpG islands of all groups to identify me- and 2582 down-regulated genes. By qRT-PCR, 8 of the dysregulated miRNAs thylation profile differences. Results: Our experiments show difference in were tested and the analysis validated 7 of them (down-regulated hsa-mir- the methylation profile between patients and controls. Comparing patients 320c, hsa-mir-320a, hsa-mir-3173-5p, hsa-mir-421 and up-regulated mir- to healthy controls we established 69 differentially methylated genes (43 106a-5p, hsa-mir-192-5p and hsa-mir-222-3p). in female group and 26 in malPeY gGrOo2u,p G).A HByBpRe1rmethylated in the gene pro- Web based tool was used to assess potential miRNA-mRNA interactions. moter region are 22 geneLsR (F1N33 i, nF XfeYmDa5l,e RsM aNndD 59B i nи mARaHleGsE).F T1h9ey play a role Among the predicted targets of dysregulated miRNAs, we discovered spe- in neural system funFcOtXioHn1in, ZgN (F488, EIF4
E3 , HE),X cIMel1l adhesion, cell division cific differentially expressed genes in periferal blood transcriptome, that and signal transduction ( ), transcripti- were previously associated with schizophrenia (STAT3, BC
L2 L11
, RAD9A, on and translation ( ) etc. Conclusions: Our ERBB2, MYB and TFRC genes). Findings from this study strongly suggest data suggest that there is a major differences in methylation profile between that dysregulation of miRNA expression in periferal blood in patients with males and females patients and controls. This dysregulation can play a cri- schizophrenia: 1) can contribute to the observed alterations in protein tical role in schizophrenia etiopathogenesis. Acknowledgements: funded by coding gene expression; 2) may lead to the pathophysiological conditions p Br.oBj.e Rctu DkoMvYa :0 N3o-3n6e./ R20.  S11
ta, nMeivnai:s Ntroyn oef. ESd. Hucaadtjiiodnek aonvda :S Ncioennec.e V.. Milanova: underlying schizophrenia; 3) provide an empirical source of non-invasive None. D. Toncheva: None. b Vi.o Smtoayrkaenrosv fao: rN socnhei.z oT.p Vharcehneiav.: None. N. Popov: None.  P06
.40  P06
.42 Relationship between LSAMP gene and schizophrenia Sequencing of the 22q11.2 deletion in VeloCardioFacial syndrome to K. Koido1,2, S. Janno3, T. Traks1,2, M. Parksepp3, R. Balotsev3, T. Eller3, A. Must1,2, S. Koks1,2, J. identify genetic variants predisposing to Schizophrenia Shlik4, I. Toru3, E. Maron3, V. Vasar3, E. Vasar1,2; M. Guipponi1, F. Santoni2, C. Gehrig1, X. Bonilla Bustillo2, S. Dahoun1, W. R. Kates3, B. E. 1Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Centre of Excellence for Morrow4, S. Eliez2, S. E. Antonarakis2; Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Psychiatry, 1Dpt of Genetic Medicine and Laboratory, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva 4, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Ottawa, Switzerland, 2Dpt of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical Ottawa, ON, Canada. School, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 3Dpt of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States, 4Dpt of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. Schizophrenia is a devastating psychiatric syndrome with a median lifetime prevalence of 4.0 per 1000 and a lifetime morbid risk of 7.2 per 1000 per- sons and genetic heritability 80 %. It is now generally Hemizygous deletions of a 3Mb region of chr22q11.2 region result in the a 2c 0ce 0pted that the origins of the disorder lie eaErlSy HinG n e2u0ro1d3ev |e PloApmReISnt, FRVAelNo-cCaErd |io W-faWciaWl sy.EndSrHomGe. O(VRCFGS). The incidence of schizophrenia in VCFS and that synaptic dysfunction and altered neural connectivity are likely toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index patients is 30x higher than in the general population making the del22q11.2 small number of potential suicide susceptibility genes have been identified. one of the most important risk factor for schizophrenia. The 22q11.2 dele- In order to unravel the underlying genetic architecture, additional studies tion reduces the normal diploid to an haploid state and therefore can result are warranted. It is reasonable that these will include the analysis of copy in the unmasking of otherwise recessive alleles that may remain on the in- number variants (CNVs). Rare CNVs have been identified as a risk factor for tact homolog. By sequencing the remaining copy of the chr22q11.2 in VCFS psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia (SCZ). patients with and without psychosis/schizophrenia, we expect to identify Recently, the first CNV analysis in 189 patients with major depressive dis- variations in genes or functional elements that could increase the risk for order (MDD) who attempted suicide was published (Perlis et al. 2012). The this psychiatric phenotype. aim of our study was to further elucidate the potential role of CNVs as a risk We have selected 67 VCFS patients; 37 of them showed no psychiatric sym- factor for suicidal behaviour in a larger sample. ptoms, and the rest (n=30) showed psychosis, schizoaffective disorder or We used genome-wide SNP array data from: 1637 patients with SCZ (~27% schizophrenia. The whole 3Mb region on chr22q11.2 was captured and se- attempted suicide), 882 patients with bipolar disorder (BPD;~35% at- quenced using Agilent and Illumina technologies, respectively. Genetic va- tempted suicide), and 575 patients with MDD (~30% attempted suicide). riants were called using an pipeline based on current best practices. The All individuals were genotyped on HumanHap550v3, Human610-Quadv1, complete haplotype of the targeted 22q11.2 region was created for each or Human660W-Quad arrays (Illumina, USA). CNVs were identified using subjects and compared between the two diagnostic groups. Two different QuantiSNP and PennCNV. loci showed a clustering of positive signals (pvalue < 0.001); a locus contai- Two separate analyses were performed: genome-wide CNV analysis and CNV ning the TXNRD2, COMT and ARVCF genes which are involved in regulation screening in genes reported by Perlis et al. (2012). The genome-wide CNV of redox environment, degradation of catecholamine transmitters and ad- analysis is still ongoing and the results will be presented at the conference. herens junction complexes, respectively and a locus containing the RTN4R In LO C339822
 (Perlis et al.), duplications in five patients were detected. gene which plays a role in axonal regeneration and plasticity. The sequen- Three patients (two SCZ and one BPD) attempted suicide while one of the cing of the remaining allele of microdeletion syndrome provides an excel- two affected MDD patients reported severe suicidal ideation. LO C339822
 is l Men. tG oupipppoortnui:n Nitoyn teo. iFd. eSnatniftyo nrii:s kN ovnaeri.a Cti.o Gne fhorri gc:o Nmopnlee.x X p. hBeonnoiltlyap Beus.stillo: iFn. cDloegsee nphraorxdimt: iNtyo nteo. SLN. TPGri2eb, ae :g Nenonee i.m Jp. lFicisactheder i:n N posnyec. hAia. tHroicf mdiasnonr:d Nerosn.e. J. None. S. Dahoun: None. W.R. Kates: None. B.E. Morrow: None. S. Eliez: Strohmaier: None. M. Lang: None. S. Cichon: None. M. Rietschel: None. M.M. None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. Nöthen: None.  P06
.43  P06
.45 Resequencing of TBX1 Gene as a Candidate of Schizophrenia in Han Effect of antipsychotics drugs in gene expression and promoter Chinese Population methylation of neurotransmisson genes in brain of Spontaneously Y. Chuang1, M. Cheng1, S. Hsu1, H. Tsai1, C. Chen2,3,4; Hypertensive Rats (SHR) 1Yuli Veterans Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan, 2Institute of Population Health Sciences, S. I. Belangero1, M. L. Santoro1, V. K. Ota1, P. N. O. Silva2, R. S. Stilhano3, C. M. Santos2, M. National Health Research Institutes, Chunan, Taiwan, 3Chang Gung Memorial Hospital C. Diana4, A. Gadelha2, L. M. N. Spindola1, M. A. C. Smith5, R. A. Bressan2, S. W. Han3, V. C. at Linkou and Chang Gung University School of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 4Institute of Abilio4; Medical Sciences, Tzu-Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan. 1São Paulo Federal University - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences / Department of Morphology and Genetics, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2São Paulo Federal University - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences / Psychiatry Recent studies substantiate a higher-than-expected frequency of schizo- Department, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3São Paulo Federal University - CTCMol, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4São Paulo Federal University - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical phrenia in patients with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS), suggesting Neurosciences, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 5São Paulo Federal University - Department of that chromosome 22q11.2 harbors the susceptible genes related to the Morphology and Genetics, Sao Paulo, Brazil. pathophysiology of schizophrenia. TBX1 (TTB-bXo1x 1), a member of the T-box transcription factor family, is of particular interest for the identification of a family with a T2B3X-b1p frameshift deletion of and schizophrenia. We used Recently our group suggested the SHR strain as an animal model to study the systemic mutation detection approach to identify anTyB Xd1isruption or rare schizophrenia aspects. Our aim was to verify treatment effect with antipsy- mutations in among 500 healthy controls and 500 non-22q11DS schi- chotics drugs (APD) on the expression of 84 genes and the promoter region zophrenic patients. A total of 39 genetic variants of the were identified methylation of differentially expressed genes in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in this study, including 16 known SNPs and 23 rare mutations. Six known and nucleus accumbens (NAC). Each group was composed of 8 rats treated SNPs in which minor allele frequencies were above 5 % were selected to 30 days with saline, risperidone, clozapine (CL) or haloperidol (HA). To ex- analyze the association between the genotype and allele frequencies of the- pression analysis we used the PCRarray and t-test to investigate the signi- se SNPs and schizophrenia. Twenty three rare variants including five mis- ficance, considering p≤0.001. Four genes were downregulated in PFC: Brs3 sense variants were identified. Three missense mutations (p.Asp151Glu, (CL: p=0.001; HA: p=0.0007), Drd2 and Drd3 in CL (p=0.001, p=0.0004) and p.Glu257Ala, p.Arg342Gln) were only detected in schizophrenic patients, Glra1 in HA (p=0.0008). Only Glra1 promoter showed hypermethylation in and one (p.Asp155Asn) was only detected in control group. The mutation treated group (p=0.027). Drd2 and Drd3 downregulation demonstrate APD of p.Ala393Thr was found in both groups. There was no increasing burden are playing a role in dopaminergic pathway of SHR. Brs3 is a bombesin neu- of these missense mutations being found in the patient group (p= 0.4812). ropeptide receptor modulating pathways including dopaminergic. Studies Missense mutations were examined by the amino acid analysis programs found bombesin reduction in cerebrospinal fluid of schizophrenia patients Polyphen-2 and SIFT toT iBdXen1tify those predicted to be possibly or probably and decreased social interaction in Brs3 knockdown mice. Our results sug- deleterious to protein function. Our study suggests some private genetic va- gest Brs3 dowrexpression may be correlated to elevated social interaction riations might occur in gene, and their relationship to the pathogene- after APD, described previously in SHR. There is no study involving Glra1 sis of schizophrenia needs further investigation. and APD, however, the downregulation in expression and hypermethylati- Y. Chuang: None. M. Cheng: None. S. Hsu: None. H. Tsai: None. C. Chen: on of promoter in the treated group suggest this drug can change the Glra1 None. expression by an epigenetic mechanism. In conclusion, our study indicated two genes related to APD action, pointed new pathways whereby APD may be acting and, that changes in the pattern of Glra1 expression could be mo-  P06
.44 dulated by hypermethylation of its promoter region. Financial Support: Fa- Genome-wide copy number variant analysis in a large sample of p Se.sI.p B 2e0la1n0g/e0r9o6: N8-o6n.e. M.L. Santoro: None. V.K. Ota: None. P.N.O. Silva: suicide attempters None. R.S. Stilhano: None. C.M. Santos: None. M.C. Diana: None. A. Gadelha: F. Degenhardt1,2, L. Priebe1,2, J. Fischer1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, J. Strohmaier3, M. Lang3, S. None. L.M.N. Spindola: None. M.A.C. Smith: None. R.A. Bressan: None. S.W. Cichon1,4,5, M. Rietschel3, M. M. Nöthen1,2,6; Han: None. V.C. Abilio: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Mannheim, Germany, 4Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel and Department of Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland, 5Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany, 6German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. Suicidal behaviour is influenced both by environmental and genetic fac- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 201 tors. Based on twin studies, its heritability was estimated to be ~30%. AABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P06
.46 Candidate genes for sleepwalking from exome sequencing in an autosomal-dominant sleepwalking family ly 0.1%) suggesting that genetic testing may prove worthwhile for individu- B. Schormair1,2, H. Slawik3, B. Högl4, B. Frauscher4, T. Wieland1, T. Mitterling4, E. Graf1, T. als with language and literacy problems, enabling therapies associated with M. Strom1,5, M. Wiegand3, T. Meitinger1,5, J. Winkelmann1,2,5; tNh.eHs.e S siemxp cshorno:m Noosnoem. Le. aAbdndoisrm: Naolinteie. sW t.oM b. eB irmanpdlleemr:e Nnotende. mV.o Srelo pnrimoms:p tly. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, None. A. Clark: None. J. Watson: None. T.S. Scerri: None. J. Stein: None. J.B. 2Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Talcott: None. G. Conti-Ramsden: None. A. O‘Hare: None. G. Baird: None. J.C. Munich, Germany, 3Center of Sleep Medicine, Department of Psychiatry; Klinikum Knight: None. S. Paracchini: None. S.E. Fisher: None. D.F. Newbury: rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, 4Department None. S.L.I. Consortium: None. of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.  P06
.48 Identification of a genomic homozygous deletion of ZNF277 in a child Sleepwalking is a common childhood parasomnia that seldom persists into with SLI adulthood. Twin studies have shown higher concordance in monozygotic F. Ceroni1, N. H. Simpson2, C. Francks3,4, G. Baird5, G. Conti-Ramsden6, A. E. O‘Hare7, E. twins and relatives of sleepwalkers have a 10-fold increase in disease risk. Maestrini1, E. Bacchelli1, S. E. Fisher3,4, D. F. Newbury2, I. M.G.S.A. C1
,2, S. L. I. Consortium2; A linkage study has suggested a candidate region on chromosome 20, but 1Dipartimento di Farmacia e Biotecnologie, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, no responsible gene has been identified. We performed exome sequencing 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United in an autosomal-dominant sleepwalking family. We sequenced two affected Kingdom, 3Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Donders siblings and the unaffected mother using Agilent SureSelect All Exome Kit Institute for Brain, Cognition & Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Guy‘s & St Thomas NHS Foundation Trust, Newcomen Children‘s Neurosciences Centre, St Thomas‘ for enrichment and Illumina 100bp paired-end reads for sequencing. We Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6School of Psychological Sciences, The University generated on average 14.9Gb of sequence with 89% covered >= 20x. For of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Child Life and Health, University of candidate variant identification, we used an autosomal-dominant disease Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. model and looked for heterozygous missense, nonsense, splice-site, sto- ploss and frameshift variants shared by the affected siblings. We excluded variants present in dbSN P135
, the 1000genomes data, and an in-house exo- Specific language impairment (SLI) is a common neurodevelopmental dis- me database of unrelated phenotypes with a MAF > 1%. Subsequently, we order in which language abilities are below age expectations, in the absence excluded those variants shared by the two siblings but also found in the un- of explanatory environmental or medical conditions, such as hearing loss, affected mother. This approach left 47 variants for co-segregation analysis intellectual disability or autism.SLI affects 3-7% of English-speakiZnNgF p2r7e7- in the pedigrCe1eR. Of these 47 variants, 23 were compatible with tPhZeP disease school children. During a genome-wide CNV scan using a multi-algorithm segregation pattern observed in the pedigree. The respective candidate ge- approach, we identified a homozygous deletion of 21,379bp in the nes include , a component of the complement system, and , which gene, overlapping exon 5, in an indZiNviFd2u7a7l with severDeO rCeKce4ptive IaMnMd Pe2xL- has been implicated in Alzheimer’s disease. Sequencing of the variant-con- pressive SLI. This deletion was of particular interest as it falls within the taining regions of the candidate genes in a cohort of 30 parasomnia cases AUT S1
 region of linkage to autism. flanks the and detected neither the candidate nor additional variants in these genes. We genes, which have been suggested to playZ aN Fro2l7e7 in autistic spectrum dis- are currently expanding the sleepwalking cohort in order to pinpoint the orders (ASD). We thereforeZ NscFr2e7e7ned cohorts of children with SLI or ASD cBa.u Ssaclh voarmriaanirt: iNno tnhee. Hfa.m Sillayw.ik: None. B. Högl: None. B. Frauscher: None. T. and control subjects for the presence of deletions. We observed Wieland: None. T. Mitterling: None. E. Graf: None. T.M. Strom: None. M. Wiegand: None. T. Meitinger: None. J. Winkelmann: None. an increased frequency of deletions in probands with SLI (6/318, 1.9%) comparIeMdM tPo 2bLotDhO pCrKo4bandsZ wNFit2h7 7ASD (1/253, 0.4%) and indepen- dent controls (2D/O2 C2
K44, 0.8%). We performeZdN qFu2a7n7ti tative PCR analyses of the expression ZoNf F277 , and in lymphoblastoZidN Fc2el7l 7lines car-  P06
.47 rying either a mDOicCroKd4e letiIoMnM oPr2 aL microdeletionD. WOCeK f4ound Increased prevalence of sex chromosome aneuploidies in Specific that, while microdeletions affect the expresZsNioFn2 7o7f , they do Language Impairment and Dyslexia. not alter the levels of ZNF27o7r transcripts. Similarly, mi- N. H. Simpson1, L. Addis2, W. M. Brandler1, V. Slonims3, A. Clark4, J. Watson4, T. S. Scerri5, J. crodeletions do not affect the expression levels of . Given these fin- Stein6, J. B. Talcott7, G. Conti-Ramsden8, A. O‘Hare9, G. Baird3, J. C. Knight1, S. Paracchini10, dings, we postulate that microdeletions may contribute to the risk S. E. Fisher11,12, D. F. Newbury1, S. L. I. Consortium1; 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United of speech and language impairments in a manner that is independent of the Kingdom, 2Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom, 3Newcomen Centre, Guy’s autism risks previously described in this region. Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh, United F. Ceroni: None. N.H. Simpson: None. C. Francks: None. G. Baird: None. G. Kingdom, 5The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Conti-Ramsden: None. A.E. O‘Hare: None. E. Maestrini: None. E. Bacchelli: Australia, 6University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Aston Univeristy, Birmingham, None. S.E. Fisher: None. D.F. Newbury: None. I. M.g.s.a.c: None. S.L.I. United Kingdom, 8University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9Univeristy Consortium: None. of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 10University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 11Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 12Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands.  P06
.49 A balanced translocation t(3;9)(q25.1;q34.3) leading to OLFM1 fusion transcripts in a patient with Tourette syndrome and comorbidity Specific language impairment (SLI) and dyslexia are developmental disor- disorders ders exhibiting deficits of spoken (SLI) or written (dyslexia) language in the B. Bertelsen1, L. Melchior1, L. R. Jensen2, C. Groth3, N. M. Debes4, L. L. Skov3, K. Brøndum- absence of comorbid neurological deficits, despite adequate intelligence Nielsen1, W. Chen5, Z. Tümer1; 1Applied Human Molecular Genetics, Kennedy Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, and education. Sex chromosome aneuploidies increase the risk of spoken Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Institute for Human Genetics, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt- or written language disorders but, compared to other developmental disor- University Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 3Tourette Clinic, Herlev Hospital, Herlev, ders, e.g. autism, individuals with SLI or dyslexia do not routinely undergo Denmark, 4Næstved Hospital, Næstved, Denmark, 5Max Delbrück Center for Molecular cytogenetic analysis. Medicine, Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Berlin, Germany. To assess the frequency of sex chromosome aneuploidies within individuals with SLI or dyslexia, genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism geno- typing was performed in three sample sets: a clinical cohort of individuals Karyotype analysis of a male with Tourette syndrome (TS), obsessive- with SLI referred to a child development centre (87 probands), a replication compulsive-disorder and attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder revealed cohort of individuals with SLI, from both clinical and epidemiological samp- an apparently balanced and maternally inherited translocation, t(3;9) les (209 probands) and a set of individuals with dyslexia (310 probands). (q25.1;q34.3).O TLhFeM m1other had tics, but no TS-diagnose. Using mate-pair In the clinical SLI cohort, three abnormal karyotypic results were identified sequencing we mapped the translocation breina ksipliocionts. The 9q breakpoint in probands, representing a proband yield of 3.4%. In the SLI replication co- truncated the gene, while the 3q breakpoint was within a region wi- hort six abnormalities were identified providing a consistent proband yield thout known protein coding genes. However, analyses revealed that (2.9%). In the sample of individuals with dyslexia, two sex chromosome ab- this breakpoint truncated two OLFM1 errations were found giving a lower proband yield of 0.6%. In total two XYY, transcripts of unknown coding potential. Since translocations can unmask four XXY (Klinefelter syndrome), three XXX, one XO (Turner syndrome) and recessive mutations, sequencing of the gene and the unknown tran- one proposed XO/XY mosaic karyotype were identified. scripts was performed; however, OnLoF Mm1utations were identified. Reverse The frequency of sex chromosome aneuploidies within each of the three co- transcription of RNA from blood of both individuals identified two fusion 202 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG horts was increased over the expected population frequency (approximate- transcripts including the 5’-end of and the 3’-end of either of the twoABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index In silico unknown transcripts, respectively. analysis revealed open reading of affected individuals involves genes that share relevant functional connec- frames for both transcripts and resulting protein products predic ted to en- tions. The network observed in the ALS muscles includes genes (PRKR1A, code a truncated OLFM1 protein lacking the olfactomedin domain. FOXO1, TRIM32, ACTN3, among others), whose functions connect the sar- Although widely expressed in neuronal tissues, the function ofOLFM1 is comere integrity to mitochondrial oxidative metabolism. In particular con- relatively unknown. OLFM1 has not been directly associated with any neu- nection between PRKAR1A, FOXO1 and the ubiquitin ligase TRIM32 provide ropsyOcLhFiaMtr1i c disorders, but has been shown to interact with several pro- some hints towards the delineation of the molecular events associated to teins encoded by schizophrenia susceptibility geOnLeFsM. W1 e therefore suggest human muscle atrophy. that could be invOoLlvFeMd1 in the TS/tic-symptoms of the patient and In conclusion, the results obtained in this study, supported by some of the his mother, eitheinr tshitruough haploinsufficiency of or presence of fusi- most recent literature data, could pave the way to future targeted studies fo- on transcripts/proteins. expression levels will be measured in both cusing on the functional link between genes involved in metabolic pathways individuals and hybridization will be used to investigate whether the aWn.d L matutasnclzei: c Noonntrea. cFt.i Cliteyn.si: None. G. Calcagnini: None. A. Giuliani: None. M. u Bn.k Bneorwtenls terna:n Nscorniep.t Ls .s Mhoewlch biorar:in N sopneec. iLfi.cR e. xJpenressesni:o Nn.one. C. Groth: Barba: None. M. Sabatelli: None. E. Ricci: None. F. Michetti: None. C. None. N.M. Debes: None. L.L. Skov: None. K. Brøndum-Nielsen: None. W. Bernardini: None. Chen: None. Z. Tümer: None.  P07
.03  P07
.01 Deletion of UB E3
A gene in brothers with Angelman syndrome close to R521C mutation in the FUS gene in a large Italian family breakpoint of inversion at 15q11.2 and 15q26.1 R. Mazzei1, R. Tortelli2, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, M. Muglia1, R. Cortese3, E. D‘Errico3, Y. Kuroda1, I. Ohashi1, T. Naruto1, K. Ida1, T. Wada2, K. Kurosawa1; C. Ungaro1, G. Logroscino2, I. L. Simone2, F. L. Conforti1; 1Division of Medical Genetics, Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Neurosciences 2Division of Neurology, Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan. and Sense Organs -Università, Bari, Italy, 3Department of Neurosciences and Sense Organs-Università, Bari, Italy. Angelman syndrome (AS) is characterized by severe intellectual disability with major speech impairment, ataxia and behavioral uniqueness. The un- FUS/TLS gene mutations were identified in familial and sporadic amyotro- derlining molecular deficit is the failure of maternal copy of the imprinted phic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Genotype-phenotype correlation for this gene is UB E3
A gene due to maternal deletions, the most common present in 70-75% mostly characterized by early age at onset, high rate of progression, early in- of case, which is detected by FISH of the UB E3
A region. Only a small number volvement of neck and axial muscles and predominant lower motor neuron of intragenic or whole genomic microdeletions of UB E3
A have been repor- involvement, but a high variability has been described. ted. We report on two brothers with AS with microdeletion of 15q11.2-q12 We studied a four-generation family in which eight individuals of both se- emcompassing UB E3
A gene, close to breakpoint of inversion at 15q11.2 and xes were affected by motor neuron disease. The pedigree showed a domi- 15q26.1. The brothers were the first and second children of unrelated and nant pattern of inheritance. Neurological examination was performed and healthy parents. They were born at term after uneventful pregnancy. Patient these patients wSeOrDe1 c, lAinNicGa, lVlyA PdBia gnos TeAdR aDsB APLS. We performed mutational 1 (older brother) had developmental delay, walked with ataxic gait, and did analysis of FUS exons 5, 6, 12, 14 and 15 in the proband, resulted negative not speak word at 6 years old. He developed seizure at 4 years-old. Patient for mutation in and genes, identifying the known 2 (younger brother) had also developmental delay and started sitting at 15 heterozygous missense mutation c.1561C>T (p.R521C) in exon 15. Further months. They had mild phenotype and behavior of AS. Karyotype revealed analysis demonstrated the same mutation in the DNAs from the proband’s pericentric inversion of 15q and FISH test revealed deletion of UB E3
A re- affected mother and the paucisymptomatic aunt, confirming segregation of gion. Array CGH revealed 467kb deletion at 15q11.2-q12, only emcompas- the mutation with disease in this family. sing UB E3
A and a part of SNORD115, and 53kb deletion at 15q26.1. Their R521C is the most common dominant missense mutation in familial ALS re- mother revealed normal karyoptype and no deletion of 15q11.2-q12 with lated to FUS gene. However this is the first report of a large four-generation array CGH, so we assumed germline mosaicism. This report is a rare familial Italian ALS family with this mutation. The genotype-phenotype correlation case with AS detected by routine FISH test. We suggest that array CGH can in this family confirmed that the expression of FUS R521C mutation extends detect atypical submicroscopic deletion of UB E3
A in patients with mild AS beyond classical ALS. Early involvement of neck and proximal limb muscles phenotype. and a predominant LMN phenotype were confirmed as typical features, but Y. Kuroda: None. I. Ohashi: None. T. Naruto: None. K. Ida: None. T. Wada: the phenotypic expression may be characterized by a high variability in None. K. Kurosawa: None. terms of age at onset and site of onset of the disease also within the same f Ram. Milay.zzei: None. R. Tortelli: None. A. Patitucci: None. A. Magariello: None. M. Muglia: None. R. Cortese: None. E. D‘Errico: None. C. Ungaro: None. G. Logroscino: None. I.L. Simone: None. F.L. Conforti: None.  P07
.04 Altered splicing of the BIN1 muscle-specific exon in human and dogs with highly progressive centronuclear myopathies J. Böhm1, N. Vasli1, M. Maurer2, D. Shelton3, U. Schara4, T. J. Anderson5, J. Weis6, L. Tiret2,  P07
.02 J. Laporte1; Mitochondrial network genes in skeletal muscle of amyotrophic 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2ENVA, Maisons-Alfort, France, 3University of California, San lateral sclerosis patients Diego, CA, United States, 4University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 5University of Glasgow W. Lattanzi1, F. Censi2, G. Calcagnini2, A. Giuliani3, M. Barba1, M. Sabatelli4, E. Ricci4, F. Veterinary School, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6RWTH, Aachen, Germany. Michetti1, C. Bernardini1; 1Insitute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Department of Technologies and Health, Rome, Italy, 3Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Department of Environment and Health, Rome, Italy, We have identified a splice mutation of the muscle-specific exon 11 of BIN1 4Institute of Neurology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy. as the genetic cause of the Inherited Myopathy of Great Danes (IMGD). This severe canine muscle disorder typically starts before 10 months of age with severe debilitating muscle weakness. BIN1 codes for amphiphysin 2, a key Recent evidences suggested that muscle degeneration might lead and/or factor in muscular membrane remodeling implicated in excitation-contrac- contribute to neurodegeneration and play a key role in the etiopathogenesis tion coupling (ECC). The muscle-specific exon 11 codes for a phosphoino- and progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Dobrowolny et al, sitide-binding domain, which is essential for the membrane-deforming J Cell Biol 2005; Wong et al Hum Mol Genet 2010). To test this hypothesis, properties of amphiphysin 2. In humans, BIN1 mutations have been asso- this study attempted to categorize the functionally relevant genes within the ciated with centronuclear myopathy, showing an abnormal internalization genome-wide expression profile in the skeletal muscle of ALS patients, using of nuclei on muscle biopsies. All mutations were found in the ubiquitous microarray technology and gene regulatory network analysis. The correla- exons and together with the IMGD model we present the first mutation in tion network structures significantly change between patients and controls, humans affecting the muscle-specific exon 11. Both human and canine mu- indicating an increased inter-gene connection in patients compared to con- tations have a strong impact on the splicing of exon 11 and patients and dogs trols. have a very similar etiopathology. Comparative histological and ultrastruc- Looking at the biological functions of the strongly connected genes of the tural analyses demonstrated striking similarities between the human and ALS patients, a large number of mitochondrial genes belonging to the oxida- the canine conditions and immunolabeling revealed a defective structure of tive phosphorylation pathway were represented. the triad, harboring the ECC machinery. Myotubes transfected with the exon On the whole the perturbation of gene eE xpS rH esG sio 2 n 0 o1 cc3 ur | r iP nA g iR nI tS h, e F mR uA scN le C E1
  |1
 W coWntaWin.iEngS HisoGfo.OrmR sGhowed massive tubulation, whereas the cons2tr0u3ctABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index without exon 11 did not have this effect. Our data suggest that the amphi- patients with schizencephaly, which may be similarly caused by disturbed physin 2 muscle isoform plays an important role in triad buildup and/or vCaOsLc4uAla1r supply leading to cerebral degeneration, but can be distinguished maintenance and that defective excitation-contraction coupling is a prima- depending on time of insult. ry cause of the progressive human and dog diseases. The identification and mutations were identified in 15 patients (21%, 10 mutations in characterization of a spontaneous canine model represents a faithful model porencephaly and 5 mutations in schizencephaly), who showed a variety f Jo.r B pörhecmli:n Nicoanle t.r Nia.l Vs aosf lpi:o Nteonneti.a Ml t. hMearuapreier:s N. one. D. Shelton: None. U. Schara: of associated findings including intracranial calcification, focal cortical dys- None. T.J. Anderson: None. J. Weis: None. L. Tiret: None. J. Laporte: None. plasia, pontocerebellar atrophy, ocular abnormalities, myopathy, hyper-CK- nemia, and hemolytic anemia. Mutations include 10 missense, a nonsense, a frameshift, and three splice site mutations. Five mutations were confirmed  P07
.05 as de novo events. One mutation was co-segregated with familial porence- First French family of cerebello-cerebral atrophy with new SEPSECS phaly, and two mutations were inherited from asymptomatic parents. Aber- mutations rant splicing was demonstrateCdO bLy4 Are1verse transcriptase PCR analyses in Y. CAPRI1, D. GRA S2
, M. GERARD3, D. RODRIGUEZ4,5,6, J. FABRE-TEST E1
, Y. LIU7, A. two patients with splice site mutations. VERLOE S1
,5, D. SOL L7
, O. BOESPFLUG-TANGUY2,5, L. BURGLEN5,6,8; Our study first confirmed that mutations are associated with schi- 1Department of Genetics, APHP-Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, zencephalyC aOnLd4 hAe1molytic anemia. Based on the fact that CO L4
A1 mutations 2Reference center for Leukodystrophies, Child Neurology and Metabolic Disorders, were frequent in patients with porencephaly and schizencephaly, genetic APHP-Robert Debre University Hospital, Paris, France, 3Caen University Hospital, Caen, t Hes. tSinagit sfour: None. Y. Yshoonuedlda :b Ne ocnoen.s Kid. eHraegdi nfoory ac:h Nildonreen. Mw. iKtha ttoh:e Nseo nceo.n Hd.i tions. France, 4Department of Pediatric neurology, APHP-Trousseau University Hospital, Osaka: None. K. Yokochi: None. H. Arai: None. A. Kakita: None. T. Yamamoto: Paris, France, 5Inserm U676, Paris, France, 6Centre de référence des malformations et None. Y. Otsuki: None. S. Shimizu: None. T. Wada: None. N. Koyama: None. Y. maladies congénitales du cervelet, APHP-Trousseau University Hospital, Paris, France, Mino: None. N. Kondo: None. S. Takahashi: None. S. Hirabayashi: None. J. 7Department of molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Takanashi: None. A. Okumura: None. T. Kumagai: None. S. Hirai: None. M. CT, United States, 8Department of Genetics, APHP-Trousseau University Hospital, Paris, Nabetani: None. S. Saitoh: None. A. Hattori: None. M. Yamasaki: None. A. France. Kumakura: None. N. Matsumoto: None. et al Progressive cerebello-cerebral atrophy is an extremely rare entity described  P07
.07 in 2003 in less than 10 patients (Ben-Zeev .). Clinical findings consist A novel mutation in the FRMD7 gene in an Iranian pedigree exhibiting of severe spasticity, profound mental retardation with progressiv SeE mPSicErCoS- congenital Nystagmus: A case report cephaly. Brain imaging shows progressive cerebellar atrophy followed by m. noruzinia1, M. Garshasbi1, G. M. Bahrami1, R. Weissmann2, Y. Shafeghati3, A. W. Kuss2; severe cerebral atrophy. The disease is caused by mutations in the 1Department of Medical Genetics; Faculty of Medical Sciences; Tarbiat Modares gene. The Sepsecs protein needs a cofactor, pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), and University; Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human is involved in the syntheses of Selenocysteine, an essential component of the Genetics, Interfaculty Institute of Genetics and Functional Genomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt active sites of some enzymes (selennodenzymes). We describe a family with 2 University, 17475, Greifswald, Germany, 3Department of medical genetics, Sarem Women affected children. Patient A is the 2 child of non-consanguineous parents. Hospital, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The boy was born with normal parameters, after an uneventful pregnancy. Bilateral adductus thumb were noticed at birth and generalized stiffness appeared rapidly with tetra spastic paraplegia. He developed with a pro- Congenital nystagmus is a genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized found mental retardation. His best milestones were smiling at 4,5 months by repetitive, involuntary, to and for oscillation of the eyes, which may be in- and head control at 24 months. Spontaneous movements were very poor. He herited with the pattern of X-linked, Autosomal dominant and rarely Autoso- developed severe postnatal microcephaly (-3SD at 6 months and -7SD at 7 mal recessive. To date, three X-linked types of congenital nystagmus (NY S1
, 5 years). Successive brain MRI found progressive cerebetlhlar atrophy, rapidly and 6) have been introduced, which the most prevalent form (NY S1
) results followed by severe cerebral atrophy. Patient B is the 4 child of the family. from mutations in the FERM domain-containing-7 gene (FRMD7). Here, we Recurrence of the disease was sSuEsPpSeEcCteSd in the young sister of patient A be- report a large 5-generation Iranian pedigree consistent with the pattern cause she displayed dystonic movements, stiffness of the trunk at 3 months of recessive inheritance. Twelve individuals in the pedigree were suffering and progressive microcephaly. sequencing revealed in the affected from congenital nystagmus and all of them presented involuntary, pendular children, 2 novel mutations: a splice mutation predicted to affect splicing of movement of the eyes, and decreased visual acuity without any neurologic exon 1, and a missense predicted to disrupt folding of the protein or affect abnormalities. STR markers‘ analysis did not show any linkage with known b Yi.n Cdainpgri :w Nitohn eP.L DP.. Gras: None. M. Gerard: None. D. Rodriguez: None. J. autosomal recessive gene. Due to large locus heterogeneity and absence of Fabre-teste: None. Y. Liu: None. A. Verloes: None. D. Soll: None. O. net inheritance pattern in this family, we performed exome sequencing to Boespflug-tanguy: None. L. Burglen: None. elucidate the pathogenic mutation. A novel truncating mutation (Q13X) in exon 1 of FRMD7 was detected in the proband, which was confirmed by direct sequencing. This mutation co-se-  P07
.06 gregated with the disease in the family and we could not find this mutation Phenotypic spectrum of CO L4
A1 mutations: porencephaly to in 100 chromosomes from ethnically matched healthy controls by restric- schizencephaly t Mio.n n forraugzmineian:t Nleonnget.h M p. oGlyamrsohrapshbii:s mNo (nReF. LGP.M) .t eBcahhnriaqmuie:. None. R. Weissmann: H. Saitsu1, Y. Yoneda1, K. Haginoya2,3, M. Kato4, H. Osaka5, K. Yokochi6, H. Arai7, A. Kakita8, None. Y. Shafeghati: None. A.W. Kuss: None. T. Yamamoto9, Y. Otsuki9, S. Shimizu9, T. Wada10, N. Koyama11, Y. Mino12, N. Kondo12, S. Takahashi13, S. Hirabayashi14, J. Takanashi15, A. Okumura16, T. Kumagai17, S. Hirai7, M. Nabetani18, S. Saitoh19, A. Hattori19, M. Yamasaki20, A. Kumakura21, N. Matsumoto1; 1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2Tohoku University School of Medicine,  P07
.08 Sendai, Japan, 3Takuto Rehabilitation Center for Children, Sendai, Japan, 4Yamagata Salbutamol-responsive limb-girdle congenital myasthenic syndrome University Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan, 5Clinical Research Institute, Kanagawa due to a novel missense mutation and heteroallelic deletion in MUSK Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 6Seirei-Mikatahara General Hospital, C. Gallenmüller1, W. Müller-Felber2, M. Dusl1, R. Stucka1, V. Guergueltcheva1,3, A. Blaschek2, Hamamatsu, Japan, 7Morinomiya Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 8Brain Research Institute, M. von der Hagen4, A. Huebner4, J. S. Müller5, H. Lochmüller5, A. Abicht1,6; University of Niigata, Niigata, Japan, 9Seirei Hamamatsu General Hospital, Shizuoka, 1Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, Japan, 10Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 11Toyohashi Municipal 2Haunersche Kinderklinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany, 3Clinic Hospital, Toyohashi, Japan, 12Tottori University Faculty of Medicine, Tottori, Japan, of Neurology, University Hospital Alexandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Children‘s Hospital, 13Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan, 14Nagano Children‘s Hospital, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine, Azumino, Japan, 15Kameda Medical Center, Chiba, Japan, 16Juntendo University Faculty Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Medizinisch Genetisches of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 17Aichi Welfare Center for Person with Developmental Zentrum (MGZ), Munich, Germany. Disabilities, Kasugai, Japan, 18Yodogawa Christian Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 19Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan, 20Takatsuki General Hospital,, Osaka, Japan, 21The Tazuke Kofukai Medical Research Institute, Osaka, Japan. Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are clinically and genetically hete- CO L4
A1 rogeneous disorders characterized by a neuromuscular transmission defect. In recent years, causative mutations have been identified in at least 15 genes Recently, mutations have been reported in porencephaly and other encoding proteins of the neuromuscular junction. Mutations in MUSK are cerebral vCaOsLc4uAla1r diseases, often associated with ocular, renal and muscular known as a very rare genetic cause of CMS and have been described in only 3 features. In this CsOtuLd4yA, 1we aimed to clarify phenotypic spectrum and inci- families, world-wide. Consequently, the knowledge about efficient drug the- dence of mutations. W2e0 s4creened for mutations in 61 patients wES ithH pG or 2 en0 c1 ep3 h a| lP y A anR d I 1S 0, FRraApNy iCs Eve |r yW limWitWed..E WSeH idGen.OtifRieGd a novel missense mutation (p.Asp38Glu)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index heteroallelic to a genomic deletion affecting exons 2-3 of MUSK as cause of strategy - to uncover the causes of often phenotypically indistinguishable a limb-girdle CMS in two brothers of Turkish origin. Clinical symptoms in- mKy. oKgoemnliócs ain: Nd onneeu. rKo.g Henadicz sdiiesve:a Nseosn.e. L. Garbes: None. L.A. Martínez cluded fatigable limb weakness from early childhood on. Upon diagnosis of Carrera: None. E. Pál: None. J.H. Sigurðsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. O. Magnusson: A. Employment a MUSK-related CMS at the age of 16 and 13 years, respectively, treatment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. B. Melegh: with salbutamol was initiated leading to an impressive improvement of cli- None. B. Wirth: None. nical symptoms, while treatment with esterase inhibitors did not show any benefit. Our findings highlight the importance of a molecular diagnosis in CMS and demonstrate considerable similarities between patients with MUSK and  P07
.11 D CO. KG7a-llreenlamteüdlle CrM: NSo inne t. eWrm. Ms üolfl ecrl-iFneiclbael rp:h Neonnoet.y Mpe. Daunsdl :t rNeoantem. eRn. tS otupctikoan:s . Occurrence of a duplication-inverted triplication-duplication (DUP- None. V. Guergueltcheva: None. A. Blaschek: None. M. von der Hagen: TRP/INV-DUP) rearrangement mediated by inverted repeats at the None. A. Huebner: None. J.S. Müller: None. H. Lochmüller: None. A. Abicht: DMD locus None. A. Ishmukhametova1,2, J. M. Chen3, R. Bernard4, F. Baudat5, B. de Massy5, D. Méchin1, D. Thorel1, M. C. Vincent1, P. Khau Van Kien1,6, M. Claustres1,2,7, S. Tuffery-Giraud2,7; 1CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Université Montpellier 1, UFR médecine, Montpellier, France,  P07
.09 3INSERM U1078 and Établissement Français du Sang (EFS) – Bretagne, Brest, France, Combined linkage analysis and exome sequencing in a large Italian 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital de la Timone CHU, Marseille, France, family with distal myopathy 5Institut de Génétique Humaine, UPR1142, CNRS, Montpellier, France, 6present address: M. L. Mostacciuolo1, C. Bertolin1, F. Boaretto1, C. Salvoro1, W. Hairong2, W. Bin2, C. CHU de Nîmes, Laboratoire de Cytologie Clinique et Cytogénétique, Nîmes, France, Angelini3, E. Pegoraro3, G. Vazza1; 7INSERM, U827, Montpellier, France. 1Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy, 3BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. The implementation of newly developed dose-sensitive methods of quanti- tative analysis results in wide interpretation of complex genomic rearrange- Distal myopathies (DM) belong to a larger group of rare progressive gene- ments as a cause of hereditary diseases. Sophisticated models of multiple- tic disorders characterized by atrophy and weakness of the voluntary distal step pathways for their generation were proposed but still remain contro- muscles of the upper and lower limbs. Based on clinical and molecular fin- versial. We report a case of complex duplication-triplication rearrangement dings, more than 20 different genetic entities have been reported to date involving exons 45 to 60 of the DMD gene. These copy number changes were and for 14 of them, the causative gene has been identified. We studied a detected by conventional diagnostic methods, and lately confirmed by a large Italian family affected by an autosomal dominant form of DM charac- custom-designed array-CGH. Successful sequencing of the breakpoint junc- terized by adult onset of the disease and a more prominent involvement of tions disclosed that a 690-kb region comprising exons from 45 to 60 was hand muscles. After exclusion of known DM-causing genes, we performed a duplicated in tandem, and another 46-kb segment containing exon 51 was genome-wide linkage analysis with high density SNP-array and identified 3 inserted in between them in inverted orientation, leading to the DUP-TRP/ regions co-segregating with the disease in all affected subjects. Two patients INV-DUP structure recently identified at the PL P1
 and MEC P2
 loci. For the were then subjected to whole exome sequencing and the obtained sequence first time in DMD, the elucidation at the nucleotide level of the junctions of variants were prioritized in accordance with linkage information. We iden- such a complex rearrangement evidences that the inverted repeat-mediated tified a heterozygous mutation in the CHRNE gene ( L241
F) which encodes mechanism takes place at the DMD locus as two inverted homologous LINE for the ε-subunit of muscle nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (AChR). This 1 repeated elements were found to be involved in the formation of one of the mutation has been already associated to slow-channel congenital myasthe- junctions. The identification of a 13-bp consensus motif CCnCCnTnnCCnC, nic syndrome (SCCMS), a disease clinically characterized by the selective which specifically binds to PRDM9, a well-established trans determinator of weakness of cervical, scapular, and finger extensor muscles. Interestingly, allelic meiotic recombination hotspots in the vicinity of the repeat-junction all patients share a second functional relevant mutation in a gene located in suggests that the double strand break that initiated the complex DMD re- the same linkage region. Despite the recognized power of combining exome combination may be indeed catalysed by meiotic-specific proteins. While sequencing and linkage information for studies of mendelian disorders, we microhomology-mediated processes prevail in simple DMD deletions and cannot rule out the possibility that the phenotype in our family may result duplications, we show that the formation of complex rearrangements fol- f Mro.Lm. Mthoes ctaocnctiruiboulot:i oNno onef .m Cu. lBtieprlteo rlianr:e N monuet.a Fti.o Bnosa.retto: None. C. Salvoro: l Aow. Iss ham duifkfehraemnet tmovoad:e Nl.one. J.M. Chen: None. R. Bernard: None. F. Baudat: None. W. Hairong: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BGI-Shenzhen, None. B. de Massy: None. D. Méchin: None. D. Thorel: None. M.C. Vincent: China. W. Bin: None. C. Angelini: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; None. P. Khau Van Kien: None. M. Claustres: None. S. Tuffery-Giraud: None. BGI-Shenzhen, China. E. Pegoraro: None.  P07
.12  P07
.10 Modelling and severity prediction in Moldavian DMD/DMB patients Novel phenotypic variant of MYH7 mutation associated with V. C. Sacara1, E. Mocan2, V. Scurtu1; dominant distal myopathy in a Roma family 1the Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 2the State University K. Komlósi1, K. Hadzsiev1, L. Garbes2, L. A. Martínez Carrera2, E. Pál3, J. H. Sigurðsson4, O. of Medicine and Pharmacy “Nicolae Testemitanu”, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. Magnusson4, B. Melegh1, B. Wirth2; 1Department of Medical Genetics and Szentagothai Research Center, University of Pécs, Hungary, Pécs, Hungary, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Institute for Genetics, and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Neurology Clinic, University of Pécs, The main taskM oTfH oFuRr study was to evaluaMteT tRhe relationMshTiRpR between the Hungary, Pécs, Hungary, 4deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. progress and/or severity of DMD/DMB and the four different genetic po- lMymetohropdhsis:ms  C677
T and A1298C, A2756G, A66G as the main participants in the folat/homocysteine metabolism (FHMG). We describe a Hungarian Roma family, in which the clinical picture origi- A retrospective long-term follow-up study was carried out in DMD/ nally raised the possibility of a novel form of autosomal dominant atypical DMB patients included in the NRMHTDH. FTRhe genotyping of dystMroTpRhin gene spinal muscular atrophy. To identify the causative genetic abnormality, who- wMeTrReR performed by the MPCR to detect the long deletion in dystrophin gene le-exMoYmHe7 capture and next-generation sequencing was performed in two af- and the PCR-RFLP to identify the  C677
T and A1298C, A2756G, fected girls and their unaffected father. The analysis unexpectedly revealed A66G polymorphisms using HinfI, MboII, HaeIII and NdeI enzymes re- the mutation c.4849_4851delAAG (p.K1617del) in both affected girls, sRpeescutlivtse:l y. Sotdateisl tAical analysis were included 179 corticosteroids-free DMD/ a mutation previously reported to be causative for Laing distal myopathy. DMB patients using software SPSS 20.0 for Windows 15.0. Subsequent dideoxy sequencing confirmed the same mutation in the affec- M - dependent variables was wheelchair up 9 years and ted mother and her third affected daughter. In contrast to reported cases factMorTsH-4F Rmutation of FHMG - general model fitting is not significant, but of Laing distal myopathy, our patients presented a more severe phenotype, -2log-likelihood of reducedM mToHdFeRl gave theM siTgHnFifRicant parameteMrsT eRstimates with proximal and distal muscle involvement, and loss of ambulation at the for  C67
M7TT H(pF=R0.011) aMnTd RtwRo variants MwTitRh heterozygous compound age of 27 years, in the case of the mother. Furthermore, all three daughters polymorphisms of 3 loci (  C677
T, A1298C and A2756G presented with steppage gait at the age of 3 years. Progression of symptoms (β=33.7) and (  C677
T, A66G anMdo del CA2756G (β=34,7) showed is variable among the affected family members. Muscle biopsies were non- as the highest category of dependent variables, respectively, have a high de- specific, showing both myogenic and neurogenic lesions. Our family further gree of influence on wheelchair up 9 years. for appreciating the role underlines the importance of whole exoE mS eH sG eq 2 ue0 n1 ci3 ng | -P aA sR aI nS u, nF bR iaA seN d CEo |f Win/WouWt o.fE frSaHmGe m.OutRatGion in DMD gene and “modifier genes” and dia2g0n5o-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index . Conclusion sis (DMD/DMB) on up 9 years wheelchair is significant depending on the type of mutations. Deletion mutations seemed to occur :Prognosis frequencies that the MDD patient will be in more often as de novo mutation. On the other hand, the carrier frequency wheelchair up to 9 years if he has out of frame deletion in DMD gene and was 57.6% in DMD cases including all types of mutations, which was signi- heterozygous compound of MTR, MTRR and MTFHR1298 and homozygous ficantly lower than that in BMD cases (89.5%) (p<0.05). BMD cases can lea- M V.TCH. FSRacTa6r7a7: TN oisn e7.5 E.4. %Mo.can: None. V. Scurtu: None. vTe. Loeffes:p Nrionnges., Nw. hKicuhs urnesouklit: sN ionn teh. eM h. iYgahgeir: cNaornreie. rY .f rTeaqkueesnhcimy.a: None. M. Matsuo: None. K. iijima: None.  P07
.13 Pharmacokinetic studies of 2’-O-methyl phosphorothioate antisense  P07
.15 oligonucleotides in mdx mice Fragile X syndrome, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and X-linked I. E. C. Verhaart1, C. L. Tanganyika-de Winter1, J. C. T. van Deutekom2, S. J. de Kimpe2, J. A. ichthyosis in a single carrier. How these pathologies are transmitted Sipkens2, J. E. Ridings3, S. R. Hood3, A. Aartsma-Rus1; to the next generation? 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Prosensa Therapeutics, Leiden, A. Todorova1,2, I. Litvinenko3, T. Todorov2, R. Tincheva3, D. Avdjieva3, S. Tincheva1,2, V. Netherlands, 3GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Ware, United Kingdom. Mitev1; 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, The exon skipping approach is a promising therapy for Duchenne muscular Bulgaria. dystrophy (DMD), aiming to correct the underlying genetic defect, which is currently being evaluated in phase III clinical trials. DMD is characterized by the absence of functional dystrophin, an important protein for maintai- The human X chromosome is characterized by genomic instability and re- ning muscle stability during contractions and protection against damage, arrangements, associated with X-linked disorders. Deletions in the Xp22.31 due to frame-shifting mutations and/or premature stop codons. The exon region, involving steroid sulfatase gene (STS) cause X-linked ichthyosis. Re- skipping therapy aims to restore the DMD transcript’s open reading frame arrangements in the Xp21.2 region are associated with Duchenne/Becker by skipping a specific exon during pre-mRNA splicing with antisense oli- muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD). The Xq27.3 unstable region, containing gonucleotides (AONs). This allows production of partly functional proteins, the (CGG)n repeated expansion in the FMR1 gene is associated with fragile similar to those found in the typically milder BMD patients. To support clini- X syndrome. We report a family with two affected boys, the elder diagnosed cal studies pre-clinical experiments on optimization of treatment regimens as fragile X syndrome, the younger as DMD, and both suffering from severe in dystrophin-deficient animal models, i.e. mdx mice, are highly informative. ichthyosis. The family members were analyzed by PCR, MLPA and genoty- We studied the pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) profile of ping analysis. The mother was proved to be a nonsymptomatic carrier of all 2’-O-methyl phosphorothioate AONs in mdx mice. First, we tested the effect three noncontiguous mutational events, involving STS gene, DMD gene and of different dosing regimens, i.e. the same total dosage (200 mg/kg/wk for FMR1 expansion. The boy with fragile X syndrome has inherited a recom- eight weeks) divided over one, two or seven injections per week. Multip- binant maternal X chromosome, this way inheriting FMR1 expansion and le smaller doses showed increased effects at PK, mRNA and protein level, ichthyosis, originating from different X chromosomes and overcoming the compared to other regimens. Furthermore, we studied the effect of different DMD gene deletion. The most probable explanation of this finding is DMD maintenance regimens on the preservation of AON-effects, the time-course gene conversion between the deleted and nondeleted X chromosome and of the turn-over of the compound and its effect on RNA and protein level. double-strand-break model for recombination with two Holliday joints for- This revealed that the AON and its induced exon skipping could still be de- mation, resulting in recombination of the flanking chromosomal regions. In tected at least 12 weeks after the last injections and dystrophin protein even our opinion, this is the first description of a nonsymptomatic carrier of three u Ip.E t.oC 2. V4e wrheaeakrst:. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or different X-linked pathologies, involving severe genetic rearrangements on consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; both long and short arms of the X chromosomes. The transmission of these Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds. C.L. Tanganyika-de Winter: B. Research Grant extremely defective chromosomes in the next generation involves genetic (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as events like gene conversion and recombination, as an attempt to escape se- grants already received); Modest; Duchenne Parents Project the Netherlands. v Ae.r Teo rdeoarroravna:g eNmoneen. tIs. Lanitvdi ntoe ntrkyo :t oN roenset.o Tr.e T goednoertoivc: i nNfoonrem. Rat.i Toinn.cheva: J.C.T. van Deutekom: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Prosensa None. D. Avdjieva: None. S. Tincheva: None. V. Mitev: None. Therapeutics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Prosensa Therapeutics. S.J. de Kimpe: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Prosensa Therapeutics. J.A. Sipkens: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Prosensa Therapeutics. J.E. Ridings:  P07
.16 A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GlaxoSmithKline. S.R. Hood: A. Recovery of Dysferlin Function after Exon-Skipping Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GlaxoSmithKline. A. Aartsma-Rus: E. M. Bartoli1, F. Barthélémy1, C. Blouin2, G. Butler-Browne3, C. Lamaze2, N. Lévy1, M. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Krahn1; Modest; Prosensa Therapeutics. 1AMU, Marseille, France, 2Curie Institute, Paris, France, 3Myology Institute, Paris, France.  P07
.14 Dysferlinopathies are disabling muscular dystrophies including LGMD2B The carrier frequency in the mothers of 158 Japanese cases with and Miyoshi myopathy as the main phenotypes. They are associated with Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy molecular defects in DYSF, encoding dysferlin, a key player of sarcolem- T. Lee1, N. Kusunoki1, M. Yagi1, Y. Takeshima1, M. Matsuo2, K. iijima1; mal homeostasis. Previous investigations suggest that exon-skipping is a 1Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan, promising therapy for a subset of patients with dysferlinopathies. Such an 2Department of Medical Rehabilitation, Kobegakuin University, Kobe, Japan. approach aims to rescue almost functional proteins, when targeting modu- lar proteins and specific tissues. This has been well documented in another myopathy, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, for which exon-skipping recently Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) is an X-linked recessive led to encouraging results in phase II/III clinical trials. muscular disease caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene. Theoretically, We intended to translate into clinics our pre-clinical proof of principle of two-thirds of the DMD patients are inherited through carrier mothers, ho- exon-skipping feasibility for dysferlinopathies, and evaluated the dysferlin wever the carrier frequency seems to be different with the type of mutati- function recovery following exon 32 skipping in muscle cells obtained from ons. The aim of this study was to clarify the carrier frequency in the mothers patients. Exon-skipping efficacy was characterized at the protein level, and of DMD patients based on the type of mutation, and to compare with that of by use of new in vitro myotubes formation assays and quantitative membra- BMD. 139 DMD cases and 19 BMD cases were included. Only one patient was ne repair and recovery tests. Data obtained confirm that dysferlin function included within a same family. Mutations in the dystrophin gene were detec- is rescued by a quasi-dysferlin expression in treated patients’ cells, paving ted in probands in Kobe University Hospital, and carrier status was deter- the way towards an antisense based trial in a subset of dysferlin deficient mined by molecular analysis in their mothers. 113 cases (99 DMD/14 BMD) p Ma.t iBeanrttso.li: None. F. Barthélémy: None. C. Blouin: None. G. Butler-Browne: and 13 cases (12/1) had deletions or duplications of one or more exons, None. C. Lamaze: None. N. Lévy: None. M. Krahn: None. respectively. Small mutations including nonsense mutation, small deletion/ insertion, and splice site mutation, were identified in 32 cases (28/4). In DMD cases, the carrier frequency was 53.5% in the cases with deletion mu- tations, which was lower than duplication cases (66.7%) or small mutation c2a0se6s (67.9%). This result suggests that the carrEieSr HfrGeq u2e0nc1y3 i s| dPiAffeRreISnt, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P07
.17 Clinical and genetic diversity of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy in Russia Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy is one of the most common here- T. Adyan1, G. Rudenskaya1, E. Dadali1, O. Ryzkova1, O. Groznova2, A. Polyakov1; ditary diseases of the nervous system. The thesis provides information on 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Scientific more than twenty years experience of clinical, electromyographic and mole- Research Institute of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. cular-genetic survey the disease in the Voronezh region. We included 436 patients from 210 unrelated families with CMT to the regi- ster for the last period. Prevalence of the disease was established it amoun- Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a rare genetically heteroge- ted to 17.4 per 100 000 population. To share CMT1 and CMT2 are 73% and neous muscular disease. In EDMD, 6 causative genes have been identified, 27%, respectively. Diagnoses of 323 patients from 129 families were veri- including EMD, LMNA, SYNE-1, SYNE-2, FH L1
, and TMEM43. Despite the fied by molecular-genetic tests. We studied PM P22
, CX32, MPZ, MFN2 and identification of mutations in these genes, no genetic mutation was con- HSPB1 genes. Mutations in this genes were found in 61% of all families. The firmed in >60% of patients with EDMD, indicating the existence of other most frequent CMT1 cause in is a duplication of the PM P22
 gene (71% of causative genes. all cases). The frequency of Cx32, MPZ and MFN2 mutation are 13%, 7% We herein present the results of EDMD diagnosing in patients from Russia. and 3% respectively. At CMT2 families mutations were detected in MFN2 We have confirmed the diagnosis in 30 families of the 89 examined. 13 mu- (3%) and HSPB1 (7%) genes. Frequent occurrence of the  S135
F mutation in tations identified in EMD gene, 16 mutations in LMNA gene, and one muta- HSPB1 gene is very interesting. For the first time CMT2F has been mapped tion in FH L1
 gene. by us in the Voronezh family (MIM 606595). We have proved the presence In probands with mutations in EMD and LMNA genes onset (1-45 years), of the founder effect for this mutation in the region. Moreover we identified severity, and progression of disease are highly variable. Some patients were mutations in GDA P1
 (two families) and NDRG1 (one family) in ARCMT. followed at the cardiomyopathy, and contractures and /or myopathy were Analysis of clinical, electromyographic and molecular genetic correlations in later, sometimes a random finding. Creatine kinase (CK) level ranged from CMT-disease allows optimize molecular diagnosis of this group and increase normal to 1800 U/L. Only in two probands skeletal myopathy was very hea- t Vh.eP .e Fffeedcotitvoevn: eNsosn oef. gOe.nAe. tSicc hcoaguinnsae:l Ninogn.e. T. Milovidova: None. S.A. vy, deeply debilitating. In most cases, the lead was cardiac disease. There is Kurbatov: None. A.V. Polyakov: None. no clear genotype-phenotype correlation for LMNA and EMD mutations. Mutation in FH L1
 gene was identified in family with five male patients in four generations. The clinical picture in the examined 35-year-old proband  P07
.20 included proximal myopathic syndrome, „rigidity“ of the cervical spine, mo- Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy in the Czech Republic derate contraction ankles, the high activity of CK (1550 U/L). Significant pa- K. Stehlikova1,2, D. Paclova1,2, Z. Hruba1, D. Kuncova1, L. Fajkusova1,2; thology of heart was not found. 1Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Our observations support the hypothesis of the existence of other causative Republic, 2The Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, g Te. nAedsy aannd: Neomnpeh. Gas.i Rzeu dtheen snkeaeyda f:o Nro fnuer.t hEe. rD saedaarlci:h N oofn cea. nOd.i dRaytzek ogevna:e Ns.one. O. Czech Republic. Groznova: None. A. Polyakov: None. Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is a group of disorders characte- rised by atrophy and weakness of proximal limb girdle.We perform ana-  P07
.18 lysis of the most common LGMD types (LGMD2A, LGMD2D, LGMD2I and FSHD 1 and 2 testing - a clinical diagnostic service perspective D. Smith1, R. Whittington1, J. Corfield1, S. O‘Shea1, E. Clements1, P. Lunt2, M. Williams1; LGMD2L) in a cohort of patients with preliminary diagnoses of LGMD at 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Dept of Clinical Genetics, St both the mRNA level using reverse transcription-PCR or at the DNA level Michaels Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom. uCAsiPnNg 3PCR and direct sequencing. LGMD2A is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the gene (15q15) that encodes the muscle specific protein, calSpGaiCnA-3 FSHD is the third most common muscular dystrophy, characterized by pro- (SpG9 C4
A). LGMD2A is the most frequent form of LGMD in many European coun- gressive wasting of upper body muscles. ~95% of cases are associated with tries.LGMD2D is caused by mutations in the α-sarcoglycan gene ( ). contraction of D4Z4 tandem repeat in the subtelomere region of 4q35 (FS- (17q2F1K)R iPs an integral membrane glycoprotein that forms part of the HD1, OMIM 158900). dystrophin associated glycoprotein complex.LGMD2I is caused by mutati- Bristol Genetics Laboratory offers a UKGTN specialist diagnostic FSHD ser- ons in the gene (19AqN1O35.3 )g ethnaet encodes a protein which participates vice. First level testing for FSHD1 by Southern blotting uses EcoRI/BlnI/ in the glycosylation of α-dystroglycan in the muscle fibre. LGMD2L is caused ApoI digests and the probe p13E-11 (to determine chromosome of origin by mutations in the by (11p14.3), which encodes a putative and size contraction); where appropriate the permissive haplotype is con- calcium-activated chloride channel possibly involved in membrane repair firmed. Patients with an extended deletion of the p13- E11
 region (~2%) are mechanism in muscular dystrophies. identified using the D4Z4 1kb probe. The remaining ~3% of patients have Using this conventional molecular diagnosis based on a gene-by-gene ap- clinically indistinguishable FSHD2 (OMIM 158901). proach the molecular causes remain unknown for approximately 65 % of A five year audit of 1190 diagnostic FSHD referrals indicated 37% showed patients. a contraction of the D4Z4 repeat at 4q35 including 6 individuals with two At present, we are introducing next-generation sequencing to accelerate pathogenic 4qA fragments, where further haplotyping was required. 87 pa- patient diagnosis. We designed capture library to target the coding and all tients were referred for extended testing and a deletion was confirmed in 4 exon-intron boundaries of genes responsible for all known types of LGMD patients. 91% of patients showed no deletion of the p13E-11 probe region; and genes responsible for muscular dystrophy with similar phenotype to for these peat taielnts (6.6% of diagnostic referrals) a diagnosis remains on cli- LGMD. nical grounds. SMCHD1 This work was supported by research grants CEITEC - CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068, Lemmers (2012) showed 80% of patients with a negative FSHD1 result S Ku.P SRteeMhliMkoev -a C: ZN.1on.0e7. /D2. . P3
a.0c0lo/v2a0:. 0N0o4n5e. Z. Hruba: None. D. Kuncova: None. L. Fajkusova: None. and D4Z4 hypomethylation have a mutation (18p11.23) indicating digenic mode of inheritance for FSHD2; giving a recurrence risk for FSHD2 between 25-50%. We present a pilot study of FSHD2 testing on 20 clinically typical FSHD1  P07
.21 negative patients (assessed by clinical proforma), a five year audit, and inte- Limb-girdle muscle dystrophies mutation analysis in Latvian resting cases highlighting the clinical utility and complexity of FSHD genetic and Lithuanian patients using Illumina’s VeraCode GoldenGate t Des. tSinmgi.th: None. R. Whittington: None. J. Corfield: None. S. O‘Shea: None. E. Genotyping Assay Clements: None. P. Lunt: None. M. Williams: None. I. Inashkina1, J. Stavusis1, I. Vasiljeva1, E. Jankevics1, I. Micule2, B. Lace1; 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Children‘s University Clinical Hospital, Riga, Latvia.  P07
.19 Genetic epidemiology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in the Voronezh Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) is a group of muscular dystro- region of Russia V. P. Fedotov1, O. A. Schagina2, T. Milovidova2, S. A. Kurbatov1, A. V. Polyakov2; phies characterized by a predominant involvement of the scapula, pelvic 1Genetic counseling, Regional Clinical Hospital, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Russian girdle and trunk muscles without affecting the facial muscles. Different au- Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. tosomal recessive LGMDs (>10) have been identified as distinct entities with a similar phenotype and clear clinical overlap that makes their differential ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEd |i aWgnWosWis d.EiffSicHulGt. .TOo RdaGte, several hundreds different mutations have2 b0ee7nABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index described with their biological relevance remaining unclear. (p.Leu724Pro) were novel. These mutations were found in 8 patients from We have developed genotyping microarray of 96 mutations - insertions/ four unrelated families of different ethnic groups. The family with с.2171T>C deletions and SNP, within different genes related to LGMD-2 (SGCA, SGCB, (p.Leu724Pro) mutation in the MFN2 gene demonstrated is an autosomal- SGCD, SGCG, CAPN3, DYSF), several polymorphism and gender controls dominant pattern of inheritance. Three patients had apparently sporadic using Illumina’s VeraCode GoldenGate Genotyping Assay. disease. In the families with novel mutations the disease began during the Here we report study analysing six patients from Latvia and 25 patients from first or the second decade of patient’s life. The initial symptoms were mu- Lithuania with clinical symptoms of LGMD, elevated creatine kinase values, scle weakness and wasting of distal extremities, gait disorder. The clinical EMG data of myopathy and suggestive/putative autosomal recessive inheri- picture was presented by progressive weakness and wasting of distal extre- tance. 204 healthy unrelated randomly selected individuals as control group mities, distal sensory loss, bilateral pes cavus deformity. The postural tre- from the Genome Database of Latvian Population were analysed. After data mor in the hands was the most common additional symptom. Scoliosis and cleaning was completed, the data analysis revealed mutation CAPN3 550de- vasomotor troubles were seen in three of the patients. One female patient lA in homozygous position in eight cases within Lithuanian group (32%). with (c.776G>A(p.Arg259His) mutation in the MFN2 gene had dysphagia Mutation was confirmed by direct sequencing in all cases. Controls showed and dysphonia. Neurophysiological data were available from three patients. no 550delA, but four other SNPs: DYSF_00178, CAPN3_00119, rs2287717 All of patients had median motor nerve conduction velocities greater than (one heterozygous allele each) and rs2306942 (four heterozygous indivi- 3 E8
. Sma/ifsu allninda r: eNdouncee.d R c. oMmapgozhuanndo mv:o Ntoorn ea.c It.i oSnk apcohtkeonvtiaa:l .None. I. Khidiyatova: duals). None. E. Khusnutdinova: None. Our data suggest that CAPN3 550delA, previously referred as Slavic origin, is the most frequent mutation in LGMD patients of Baltic populations as well. Thus, we suggest direct sequencing of 550delA as the first step of LGDM  P07
.24 molecular diagnostics before using other high throughput genotyping as- VRK1 mutations associated with complex motor and sensory axonal s Ia. yInsa.shkina: None. J. Stavusis: None. I. Vasiljeva: None. E. Jankevics: neuropathy plus microcephaly None. I. Micule: None. B. Lace: None. W. Wiszniewski1, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1, T. Lotze1, J. V. Hunter1, L. Jamal2, J. R. Lupski1, R. Gibbs1; 1Baylor College of Medicine, HOUSTON, TX, United States, 2Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States.  P07
.22 Identification and confirmation of homozygous RYR1 mutation status in Malignant hyperthermia individuals. I. Valášková1,2, E. Pindurova1, Z. Svestkova1, R. Spesna1, I. Shröderova3, R. Gaillyova1,2; Here we report three children from two unrelated families with a previously 1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dpt., Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk uncharacterized complex axonal motor and sensory neuropathy accompa- University, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 3St. Anne´s University Hospital, nied by severe non-progressive microcephaly and cerebral dysgnesis. The Anaesthetic/Resuscitation Clinic, Brno, Czech Republic. patients did not meet clinical criteria for any known hereditary neuro-de- velopmental disorder, and extensive molecular investigations that included sequencing of known hereditary peripheral neuropathy genes failed to deli- Background: neate the molecular cause of the disease. We performed whole-genome and Malignant hyperthermia (MH), linked to the ryanodine receptor 1 gene targeted whole-exome sequencing in these three affected subjects. Using (RYR1) on chromosome 19, is a potentially fatal autosomal dominant dis- genome-wide sequence analysis we identifiedV cRoKm1pound VhReKte1rozygous order which may lead to a disturbance of intracellular calcium homeostasis mutations in two affected siblings from one family and a homozygous non- when susceptible individuals are exposed to volatile anesthetics. sense mutation in the vaccinia-related kinase 1 ( ) gene. encodes Methods and results: a serine/threonine kinase that is crucial for cell cycle progression and cell Fourteen members of the large pedigree were investigated, with a clinical division and is proposed to be involved in nervous system development and examination, a caffeine halothane contracture test on the muscle biopsies, maintenance. and mutational analysis on the genomic DNA isolated from family blood It is an early response gene that directly phosphorylates and regulates p53 samples. Fifteen RYR1 amplicons covering major hotspots were screened and has crucial roles throughout the cell cycle. We hypothesise that the for mutations in the RYR1 by direct sequencing. Two siblings homozygous VRK1 mutations lead to abnormal neural apoptosis and secondary brain for the missense mutation R614C were observed. There was no evidence of dWy.s gWeinsezsniise wansdki :a xNoonnael. nCe. uGroonpzaatghay.-Jauregui: None. T. Lotze: None. J.V. consanguinity parents. The presence of only mutated allele and the absence Hunter: None. L. Jamal: None. J.R. Lupski: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Athena Diagnostics, 23andMe and Ion Torrent Systems, Inc.. Other; of wt allele were confirmed using melting point analysis on real-time PCR. Modest; The Medical Genetics Laboratories (MGL; http://www.bcm.edu/ Haplotype analysis using microsatellite markers linked to the RYR1 gene geneticlabs/) and Whole Genome Laboratory (WGL; http://www.bcm.edu/ and qHRM were performed to exclude the loss of heterozygosity. The loss of geneticlabs/index.cfm?PMID=21319) of the Department of Molecular and Human. a functional allele at any heterozygous locus can be due to multi locus chro- R. Gibbs: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; GE-Healthcare-Clarient and the mosomal events like deletions and mitotic recombinations or gene conversi- Allen Brain Institute. ons at a particular locus. We performed further analysis to exactly define the change in the genome of siblings homozygous for the affected RYR1 allele, e.g.MLPA and Amplicon-Based Ultra-Deep Next-Generation Sequencing.  P07
.25 Conclusion: In search of genetic modifiers for Emery-Dreifuss muscular We here demonstrate methodical assays and results of confirmation the dystrophies and related striated muscle laminopathies presence of two MHS RYR1 alleles in the homozygotes. I. P. Nelson1, B. Granger2, R. Ben Yaou1, S. Tézenas du Montcel2, G. Bonne1; Genetic characterization was necessary because the sensitivity of muscle 1INSERM U974-UM76, UPMC-Univ Paris 06-Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 2UPMC/ sample to caffeine halothane contracture test no clearly distinguished two Unité de Biostatistiques et Informatique Médicale-CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. h I.o Vmaolázšykgoovtáe: sN fornoem. Eo.t hPeinrd huertoevrao:z Nygoonue.s Z in. Sdviveisdtukaolvsa.: None. R. Spesna: None. I. Shröderova: None. R. Gaillyova: None. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is characteLriMseNdA b y early on- set joint contractures, humero-peroneal muscle wasting/weakness then  P07
.23 and cardiac disease within adulthood. Mutations in the gene, enco- Clinical and genetic study of hereditary motor-sensory neuropathy ding nuclear envelop proteins lamins A and C, are responsible for autoso- patients from Republic Bashkortostan with novel mutations in MFN2 mal dominant EDMD forms. Important intra-familial clinical variabilLiMtyN iAn gene terms of age at onset, severity and progression of skeletal muscle and car- E. Saifullina1, R. Magzhanov1, I. Skachkova2, I. Khidiyatova2, E. Khusnutdinova3; diac involvemenLtsM hNaAs been reported in several EDMD families with 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry mutations. Modifier genes have been suggested to explain such variability. and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 32Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, The p.Glu6Stop mutation was previously identified in a large French Russian Federation. family associated with a wide range of age at onset of myopathic symptoms (AOMS) (Becane et al. PACE, 2000). Two modifier loci that could contribute to that variability have been mapped on 2q36-q37 and 6q25-q27 (Granger Hereditary motor-sensory neuropathy 2A occurs in 3 % of all HMSN cases in et al. Hum Genetics, 2011).We have designed a sequence capture array that the Republic of Bashkortostan. We found four missense mutations in MFN2 includes the entire genes and intergenic LrMegNioAns of the 28Mb covering tho- gene, one of them was previously described: с.2113G>A (p.Val705Ile). se two loci (198 genes on chr2 and 61 genes on chr6). DNA samples from M2u0t8ations с.775С>T(p.Arg259Cys); с.776G>A(pE.ASrHg2G59 2H0is1); 3с |.2  P1
A71RTI>SC, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 19 members of the family carrying the mutation with various agesABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P07
.28 Next-generation sequencing identifies the causative gene for limb- at onset of myopathic symptoms (AOMS) have been sequenced using next girdle muscular dystrophy 1F generation sequencing (NGS). The mean coverage depth was 113x and only V. Nigro1,2, A. Torella1, M. Fanin3, M. Mutarelli2, E. Peterle3, F. Del Vecchio Blanco1, R. 3% regions was not covered. Three phenotypic subgroups were considered Rispoli4, M. Savarese1, G. Piluso1, C. Angelini3,5; including those with AOMS before 20 years, those with AOMS after 30 years 1Seconda Università di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, and finally those with isolated cardiac disease and without musculoskeletal Napoli, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy, 4Cancer s Iy.Pm. Npteolsmosn.: T Nhoen aen. Bal.y Gsirsa nogf seer:q Nuoennec.e Rd .v Baerina nYtaso wu:i lNl obnee p. rSe. sTeénzteenda.s du Research UK, London, United Kingdom, 5IRCSS S. Camillo, Venezia, Italy. Montcel: None. G. Bonne: None. Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are genetically heterogeneous disorders, characterized by a progressive weakness that begins from the  P07
.26 proximal limb muscles. In addition to the genetic heterogeneity, the diffe- Progressive muscular dystrophies with life-threatening arrhythmias O. Groznova1, G. Rudenskaya2, T. Adyan2, E. Dadali2, O. Ryzkova2, A. Polyakov2; rent forms are clinically heterogeneous, with different ages of onset and di- 1Moscow Scientific Research Institute of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian verse distribution of the muscle damage. The primary distinction is made Federation, 2Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. between the autosomal dominant (LGMD1) and the autosomal recessive forms (LGMD2). LGMD1F is very puzzling disease. It is characterized by muscle weakness affecting earlier the pelvic girdle. The critical interval was Cardiomyopathy (CMP) is typical for many muscular dystrophies (MD). A mapped to a 3.68-Mb interval on chromosome 7q32.1-7q32.2. We studied special place takes MD in which CMP characterized by impaired intracar- the same linked family with additional family members by exome sequen- diac conduction with arrhythmias, causing severe complications, including cing using two different NGS platforms. We sequenced four affected indi- sudden death. viduals and identified a number of new variations: only one of which was In our work we perfomed clinical and molecular-genetic diagnosis of X- completely new, shared by all affected subjects, and mapped to 7q32. They linked Emery-Dreifuss MD (EDMD), associated with EMD gene, autosomal all shared heterozygous frame-shift variant in the Transportin 3 (TNPO3) dominant EDMD and limb-girdle MD 1B, associated with LMNA gene, myo- gene, encoding a member of the importin-β super-family. In addition, we fibrillar myopathy 1, caused by mutations in DES gene, in MD patients with identified an isolated case of LGMD with a new missense mutation in the arrhythmic CMP. Mutations in studied genes were found in 30 families: 13 same gene. The TNPO3 gene encodes a 923-amino acid product that is also mutations in EMD gene (13 families), 14 mutations in LMNA gene (16 fami- expressed in skeletal muscle. We localized the mutant TNPO3 around the lies), one mutation in DES gene. It is revealed clinically interfamilial diver- nucleus, but not inside. Our present data indicate that TNPO3 is the gene sity and in 6 family cases intrafamilial diversity, especially in families with mutated in LGMD1F. The involvement of gene related to the nuclear trans- mutations in LMNA. There is no clear genotype-phenotype correlation for p Vo. rNt isgurog:g eNsotnse a. Ano. vTeolr edlilsae: aNsoen me.e Mch. aFnanisimn: lNeoandein. gM t. oM mutuasrecullil:a Nr odnyes.t rEo.p hy. Peterle: None. F. Del Vecchio Blanco: None. R. Rispoli: None. M. Savarese: LMNA and EMD mutations. Onset (1-45 years), severity, and progression of None. G. Piluso: None. C. Angelini: None. disease highly variable. Of the total sample, only one patient with EDMD had a very severe myopathy, in other cases the state is mainly determined by the severity of the CMP. Early, including pre-clinical detection of these MD with molecular genetics verification is important not only for the prevention  P07
.29 of new cases in families, but especially for the prevention of fatal cardiac Identified novel mutations in two families with limb girdle muscular events in patients. dystrophy using whole exome sequencing Given the clinical diversity of MD with life-threatening arrhythmias, the S. Abedini1, Z. Fattahi1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Akbari2, H. Najmabadi1,3; 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, indications for DNA-diagnosis should not limit the „classic“ phenotype of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Women’s College Research Institute, University of some forms. On pre-laboratory stage of examination of patients with MD Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Kariminejad – Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, s Oh.o Gulrdo zmnoakvea :g Nreoantee. rG u. sReu odfe dnasiklya yhao:l tNeorn me.o Tn. iAtodryianng:. None. E. Dadali: Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. None. O. Ryzkova: None. A. Polyakov: None. Introduction: Neuromuscular disorders are a progressive heterogeneous  P07
.27 group with considerable heterogeneity. The frequency of these diseases is Carrier frequency of the c.525delT mutation in gamma-sarcoglycan one in 3000 to 4000 live births. The most common form of these disorders gene and estimated prevalence of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy is muscular dystrophies of which Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) type 2C among the Moroccan population has a higher prevalence. F. El Kerch1, I. Ratbi1,2, A. Sbiti1, F. Laarabi1, A. Barkat3, A. Sefiani1,2; LGMDs are generally characterized by progressive muscle weakness and 1Département de génétique médicale, Institut National d‘Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, wasting which are restricted to the limb musculature and caused by auto- 2Centre de génomique humaine, Faculté de médecine et pharmacie, Université Mohammed V Souissi, Rabat, Morocco, 3Centre National de Référence en Néonatologie et somal dominant or recessive gene mutations. There are 25 known genetic en Nutrition, Rabat, Morocco. loci including 21 genes for LGMDs that makes genetic testing for this group of disorders somehow impractical using conventional Sanger sequencing method; however, the availability of next generation sequencing technology Autosomal recessive Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (AR-LGMD) are has provided an opportunity for identifying the causal mutations in these characterized by clinical and genetic heterogeneity. LGMD type 2C or patients with screening all the known genes together using disease specific γ-sarcoglycanopathy is the most frequent in North-African populations, as gene panel sequencing or whole exome sequencing (WES). a result of the founder c.525delT mutation in SGGC gene. Its epidemiology is Materials and methods: We ascertained two families with autosomal recessi- poorly known in Morocco and its prevalence among the Moroccan populati- ve LGMD with unknown genetic mutations. To identify the causal mutations on has never been evaluated. in these families, WES was performed on affected individuals using Agilent 26 patients with a LGMD2C and 45 patients with an AR-LGMD phenotype SureSelect V4 exome enrichment kit combined with Illumina Hiseq2000 se- were screened for the c.525delT mutation. DNA extracted from umbilical quencing. cord blood samples of 250 newborns was tested for the same mutation. We Results: We identified two novel recessive mutations in CAPN3 gene used molecular epidemiological methods to calculate the frequency of hete- (c.795_800delCATTGA/ p.266_267delIleAsp and c.1967G>A/p.Arg656Gln) rozygotes for this mutation in Moroccan newborns and estimate the preva- in the germline DNA of the two tested individuals. lence of LGMD2C in the Moroccan population. Discussion: By using WES for identifying mutations responsible for LGMD in The carrier frequency was estimated to be 1/250 which would imply that these families, we can obtain better understanding of the genotype-pheno- the prevalence of LGMD2C would be approximately 1⁄20 492 considering type correlation and provide more focused approach for molecular diagno- the effect of consanguinity. The homozygous c.525delT mutation was found s Sis. Aofb oedthineir: fNaomnieli. eZs. wFahtota shui:f fNeorende .f Kro. mKa thhriisz id: iNseoansee. .M. Akbari: None. H. Najmabadi: None. in 65% of all AR-LGMD. These findings suggest that AR-LGMD are prevalent in Moroccan population and LGMD2C is one of their most common forms. This might be useful for the development of diagnosis strategies in a large scale for a better manage- m F.e Enlt Koef rpcaht:i eNnotnse w. Ii.t Rh aAtbRi-:L NGoMnDe. aAn. dS gbeitni:e Ntiocn ceo. uFn. Lsealainragb oi:f Nfaomneil. iAes. .Barkat: None. A. Sefiani: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 209ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P07
.30 VAV1 and BAFF polymorphisms predispose to early-onset myasthenia gravis During the behavioural phenotyping of DMSXL mice, transgenic animals N. Avidan1, S. Berrih-Aknin2, R. LE PANS E2
, H. F. Harbo3,4, P. Bernasconi5, K. Poulas6, E. showed impaired motor coordination in the elevated runway test, as well as Ginzburg1, P. Cavalcante5, L. Colleoni5, C. Antozzi5, F. Truffault2, S. Horn-Saban7, S. Pöschel8,9, electrophysiological abnormalities in the cerebellum, suggestive of changes Z. Zagoriti6, M. Belimezi10, A. Maniaol4,3, I. Bernard11,12, A. Saoudi12,11, Z. Illes13, C. C. Pons14, A. in the firing rate and rhythmicity of Purkinje cells. In addition, we found Melms8,9, S. Tzartos10,6, N. Willcox15, A. Kostera-Pruszczyk16, C. Tallaksen3,4, R. Mantegazza5, signs of RNA toxicity in DMSXL cerebellum (nuclear foci, MBNL sequestrati- A. Miller1,17; on, missplicing of downstream genes). Interestingly, RNA toxicity appears to 1Pharmacogenetics & Translational Genetics Center, the Rappaport Faculty of Medicine be more pronounced in glial cell subpopulations of the cerebellum, sugge- & Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 2Research Unit (CNRS UMR7215/INSERM U974/UPMC UM76/AIM) – Institute of Myology – Therapies of sting cells-specific susceptibility. the disorders of striated muscle Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Department of Neurology, We have confirmed RNA toxicity in human DM1 cerebellum samples, which Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 5Department show abundant nuclear foci, missplicing events and deregulation of splicing of Neurology IV, Neuromuscular Diseases and Neuroimmunology, Fondazione Istituto regulators. Taken together, the mouse and human data open the possibility Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, 6University of Patras, Department of Pharmacy, of cerebellar dysfunction in DM1, which may contribute to the neurological Patras, Greece, 7Department of Biological Services, Weizmann Institute of Science, mGa. nSiifceostt:a Ntioonnes. oCf. tPhreig doigseinaes:e N. one. D. Gall: None. F. Medja: None. C. Chhuon: Rehovot, Israel, 8Department of Neurology, Tübingen University Medical Center, None. C. Guerrera: None. F. Fernandez-Gomez: None. D. Furling: None. A. Tubingen, Germany, 9Neurologische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Munnich: None. G. Cheron: None. N. Sergent: None. L. Servais: None. G. Germany, 10Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, Greece, 11INSERM, U1043, Toulouse, Gourdon: None. M. Gomes-Pereira: None. France, 12Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, U5282, Toulouse, France, 13Department of Neurology, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary, 14Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 15Clinical Neurology, Weatherall Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom,  P07
.32 16Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 17Division of Myotonic dystrophy type 2 - healthy range, premutation range and Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Center, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. mutation range alleles in the general population J. Radvanszky1, M. Surovy2, E. Polak2, L. Kadasi1,2; 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a heterogeneous autoimmune disease, but pa- Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius tients with early-onset MG (before age 50; EOMG) are a particularly well University, Bratislava, Slovakia. defined subgroup. Their MG is clearly mediated by autoantibodies against the acetylcholine receptor at the neuromuscular junction. With the goal to CNBP ZNF9 identify genetic loci that predispose to EOMG, a two stage genetic associati- Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is a multisystemic disorder caused by on study was performed on 384 SNPs in 35 candidate genes selected based expansion of the (CCTG)n repeat tract in the gene (also called ). on MG pathophysio-logy. Top hits were replicated in about 1200 EOMG pa- The CCTG tract is generally interrupted in heaCltNhBy Prange alleles and is unin- tients and 1000 matched controls collected from nine European centres. terrupted in pathologically expanded alleles. Our study reports the varia- First, significant frequency differences w, ere found for 11 SNPs in 6 genes: bility of the healthy range CCTG tracts of the gene in a population of HLA-DRA, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), CD86, AKA P12
, VAV1, and Slovakia. Using repeat-primed PCR, we identified wider range and higher B-cell activating factor (BAFF). Second haplotype analysis supported the frequency of healthy range alleles containing uninterrupted CCTG tracts, SNP association results identifying several haplotypes with a frequency si- than it was previously reported. Altogether, we identified 12 alleles with gnificantly different between MG patients and controls. Both HLA-DRA and uninterrupted tracts, in a range of 12 CCTG repeats up to 70 CCTG repeats TNFα have been previously associated with EOMG, but the association with and 2 additional alleles exceeding the sizing limit of our assay (>60 CCTG VAV1 and BAFF are novel. VAV1 is a key signal transducer that is essential repeats). As uninterrupted alleles were so far reported mainly on larger for the development and activation of T- and B-cells, and BAFF is a cytokine alleles, they have been considered as possible DM2 premutations. Our fin- that plays important roles in the proliferation and differentiation of B-cells. dings, however, suggest that uninterrupted CCTG parts are not restricted to TNF loci showed the largest and most consistent differences, with 20% dif- large alleles and can be found continuously throughout the whole range of ference in both allele and haplotype frequencies in each of 9 patient cohorts healthy range alleles. In 6 cases we were able to track the inheritance of genotyped. We identified a statistically significant interaction between VAV1 the alleles. The rs1871922 marker was also genotyped in all of the uninter- and BAFF, suggesting shared functional pathways, that, if perturbed, might rupted alleles. Our results suggest that uninterrupted alleles with less than c No.n Atrviibduatne: tNoo EnOe.M SG. B perrerdihis-Apkonsiitni:o Nn.one. R. Le panse: None. H.F. Harbo: approximately 30 CCTG repeats are likely stable during transmission, while None. P. Bernasconi: None. K. Poulas: None. E. Ginzburg: None. P. instability increases with increasing length of uninterrupted tracts above Cavalcante: None. L. Colleoni: None. C. Antozzi: None. F. Truffault: None. S. this approximate threshold. Unstable DM2 premutation alleles likely con- Horn-Saban: None. S. Pöschel: None. Z. Zagoriti: None. M. Belimezi: None. A. tain from approximately 30 to 55 CCTG repeats, as the smallest pathogenic Maniaol: None. I. Bernard: None. A. Saoudi: None. Z. Illes: None. C.C. Pons: aJl.l eRleasd vidaennstzikfiye:d N soon efa. rM h. aSdu 5ro5v ayn: dN o7n5e r. eEp. ePaotlsa.k: None. L. Kadasi: None. None. A. Melms: None. S. Tzartos: None. N. Willcox: None. A. Kostera- Pruszczyk: None. C. Tallaksen: None. R. Mantegazza: None. A. Miller: None.  P07
.33 Molecular, physiological and motor performance defects in DMSXL  P07
.31 mice carrying >1000 CTG repeats from the human DM1 locus Molecular, electrophysiological and behavioural evidence of A. Huguet1, F. Medja2, A. Nicole1, A. Vignaud3, C. Guiraud-Dogan4, A. Ferry5, V. Decostre5, cerebellar dysfunction in a mouse model of myotonic dystrophy type I J. Hogrel5, F. Metzer6, A. Hoeflich7, M. Baraibar8, M. Gomes-Pereira1, J. Puymirat9, G. G. Sicot1, C. Prigogine2, D. Gall2, F. Medja1, C. Chhuon3, C. Guerrera3, F. Fernandez-Gomez4, Bassez10, D. Furling2, A. Munnich1, G. Gourdon1; D. Furling5, A. Munnich1, G. Cheron2, N. Sergent4, L. Servais5, G. Gourdon1, M. Gomes- 1INSERM U781, Paris 75014, France, 2UMR  S974
, Paris 75013, France, 3Généthon, Evry, Pereira1; France, 4INSERM U955, Créteil, France, 5UMRS 974, Paris 75013, France, 6F. Hoffmann- 1Inserm U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Laboratory of La Roche Ltd,, Switzerland, Switzerland, 77 Leibniz-Institute for Farm Animal Biology Neurophysiology and Movement Biomechanics, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, (FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany, 8UPMC Paris 06, UR4, 75005 Paris, France, Paris75005, Belgium, 3Plateau Protéomes Necker, PPN, IFR94, Paris, France, 4Inserm UMR 837-1, France, 9Human Genetics Research Unit, Laval University, Laval, QC, Canada, 10Inserm, Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 5Inserm UMR 787, Institut de Myologie, U955, Créteil, France. Paris, France. Myotonic dystrophy type I (DM1) is an autosomal dominant multisystemic Myotonic dystrophy type I (DM1) is caused by a non-coding CTG trinucleoti- disease caused by the expansion of an unstable CTG repeat in the 3’ non-co- de repeat expansion in the DMPK gene. Disease pathogenesis is mainly ding region of the DMPK gene. DMPK transcripts carrying CUG expansions mediated by a trans-dominant role of toxic DMPK transcripts: CUG-con- form nuclear foci and affect splicing regulation of various RNA taining RNA accumulates in nuclear foci and perturbs important develop- transcripts. Furthermore, bidirectional transcription over the DMPK gene mental splicing regulators, resulting in missplicing of downstream genes. and non- conventional RNA translation of repeated transcripts have been The DMSXL transgenic mice generated in our laboratory express expanded described in DM1. It is clear now that this disease may involve multiple DMPK transcripts in multiple tissues, notably in the central nervous system pathogenic pathways including changes in gene expression, RNA stability (CNS), recreate important aspects of the disease and provide a useful tool to and splicing regulation, protein translation and micro-RNA metabolism. study DM1 molecular pathogenesis. We previously generated transgenic mice with 45-kb of the DM1 locus and Clinical, neuropsychological and imaging evidence have demonstrated the > 300 CTG repeats (DM300 mice). Recently, mice carrying over 1000 CTG involvement of the CNS in DM1, however, the molecular pathways, neuronal (DMSXL) were obtained due to CTG instability over successive generations. c2ir1cu0its and brain regions preferentially affected EreSmHaGin 2la0rg1el3y u| nPkAnoRwISn., FR InA tN heC pE | eW ntW stuW dy.E wS eH dG es. cO riR beG re s , d for the first time, the expression patternABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of the DMPK sense transcripts in DMSXL and human tissues. Interestingly, This study presents the mutation detection rate in NF1 found in our labora- we also demonstrate that DMPK antisense transcripts are expressed in va- tory, both for individuals fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of NF1, and in those rious DMSXL and human tissues. Molecular features of DM1-associated RNA with more diffuse symptoms (uncertain NF1 clinical diagnosis). The most toxicity in DMSXL mice (such as foci accumulation and mild missplicing) common mutations reported found in NF1 patients are nonsense mutations, were associated with high mortality and growth retardation. In addition, frameshift mutations and splice mutations. We will present an overview of significant changes in functional properties and morphology of the skeletal f Wre.q Bureencchiaens :o Nf odnifef.e Ere.Kn.t Styvpaeass aonf dm: uNtoanteio. nSs. fZoauhnl-dB irna tohuaru gp:o Npounlaet.i oWn. . muscle were measured in these mice. Sjursen: None. W. Sjursen: None. These data demonstrate that the human DM1 locus carrying very large expansions induced a variety of molecular and physiological defects in transgenic mice. As a result, DMSXL mice provide an animal tool to decipher  P07
.36 v Aa.r Hiouugsu aestp: eNcotnse o. fF D. MMe1d mja:e cNhoannei.s Am. sN aicnodl ef:o rN opnreec. lAin. iVciagln aasusda:y .None. C. NMD-Chips: a new tool meant to resolve diagnostic enigmas in the Guiraud-Dogan: None. A. Ferry: None. V. Decostre: None. J. Hogrel: None. F. post Sanger era Metzer: None. A. Hoeflich: None. M. Baraibar: None. M. Gomes-Pereira: F. LETURCQ1,2, J. NECTOUX1,3,4, I. NELSON2, R. BEN YAOU2, T. STOJKOVI C2
,5, A. None. J. Puymirat: None. G. Bassez: None. D. Furling: None. A. Munnich: URTIZBEREA6, I. RICHARD7, S. BAULAND E8
, J. CHELLY1,3,4, G. BONN E2
, N. LEVY9, M. None. G. Gourdon: None. COSSE E10
; 1Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléc, Paris, France, 2Institut de Myologie, UPMC UM76, Inserm U974, Cnrs UMR7215, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique des Maladies  P07
.34 Neurodéveloppementales, (UMR 8104), Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, Paris, New methods for nemaline myopathy diagnostics - NM-CGH France, 4Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm), U1016, microarray and exome sequencing Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Centre de Référence de pathologie neuromusculaire Paris-Est, K. Kiiski1, V. L. Lehtokari1, L. Laari1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson1, K. Pelin2; Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, 1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and the Department of Medical Genetics, University France, 6Centre de référence neuromusculaire GNMH, Hendaye, France, 7Généthon, Evry, of Helsinki, Haartman Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences, Division France, 8PartnerChip, Génopole Campus 2, Evry, France, 9Inserm UMR_ S910
, Université of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. de la Méditerranée, Génétique médicale & Génomique Fonctionnelle Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France, 10Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, Inserm U827, NEB) CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. Nemaline myopathy (NM) constitutes a heterogeneous group of disorders among the cNoEnBgenital myopathies. Mutations in the nebulin gene ( are a main cause of recessively inherited NM. We have identified comNpEoBu.n d he- Duchenne/Becker, limb-girdle and congenital muscular dystrophies repre- terozygous mutations in 91 families, and homozygous mutations in 14 sent a wide range of conditions caused by various types of mutations, inclu- NM families. The mutations are located all along the 183 exons of Novel ding point mutations, small indels, and large deletions/duplications. During mutation detection methods are needed as there still remain dozens of fami- the two past decades, diagnostic laboratories have been faced with an ever- lies in whom the causative mutations have not yet been identified. We have increasing range of disease genes that could be tested individually by Sanger approached this issue by designing a custom NM-CGH microarray to detect sequencing. However, since the advent of NGS technologies, it appears to copy number variations in the NcEurBrently known seven NM genes. To date represent a limited approach for those heterogeneous genetic disorders. we have studied 160 samples from 130 families and iNdEeBnt ified four novel The EU-funded NMD-Chip project was meant to design, develop and valida- disease-causing aberrations in in four different families. Two of these te new sensitive high throughput tools to efficiently diagnose patients car- aberrations are the largest deletions characterized in to date (53 and rying mutations in genes already known to be involved in neuromuscular 88 kb) encNoEmBpassing 24 and 68 exons, respectively. Copy number variation, disorders (NMDs), but also to identify new disease-causing mutations using both deletions and duplications, have also been identified in the triplicate a candidate-gene approach. A specific custom in-solution sequence-capture region of in 13 different families. Further study is ongoing to eluciNdEatBe DNA library including 820 genes was developed. Among them, 50 are known the potential pathogenicity of these variants. In addition to these, one po- to be involved in common NMDs, the others being candidate genes selected tential mutation is currently being verified in another NM gene besides . from experimental and published data. To validate this approach, we have We have recently launched an exome sequencing pilot study with the aim to selected 10 patients: 5 with one known mutation either at hemizygous or sequence 50 NM samples to find the causative mutations. We believe that heterozygous states, including point mutations and large rearrangements, the combination of exome sequencing and NM-CGH microarray analysis will and 5 with no molecular diagnosis. Sequencing of the captured sequences accelerate mutation analysis and improve the diagnostics of nemaline myo- was performed using THRiSIMeq32200R0Y.R1 GNE DMD p Ka.t Khyii saknid: N reolnaet.e Vd. Ld.i sLoerhdtoerksa.ri: None. L. Laari: None. C. Wallgren-Pettersson: Mutations in control DNAs were correctly detected, and we identified the None. K. Pelin: None. causal mutations in , , and genes in 4/5 patients without previous diagnosis. We show that this approach is technically ro- bust and accurate, and also that NGS is likely to represent a time and cost-  P07
.35 reducing alternative to the Sanger process, that will accelerate molecular Genetic findings and detection rate in patients tested for d Fi.a Lgentousrtciqc:s Noof nNeM. JD. sN.ectoux: None. I. Nelson: None. R. Ben yaou: None. T. Stojkovic: None. A. Urtizberea: None. I. Richard: None. S. Baulande: None. J. neurofibromatosis over a six years period. Chelly: None. G. Bonne: None. N. Levy: None. M. Cossee: None. W. Brechan1, E. K. Svaasand1, S. Zahl-Brathaug1, W. Sjursen1, W. Sjursen2; 1Department of Pathology and Medical Genetics, St.Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine Children‘s and Women‘s Health, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.  P07
.37 Molecular genetic analysis of eighty eight patients with leukodystrophy reveals eight new mutations in the PL P1
 gene Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal do- J. M. Molano1, P. Martinez-Montero1, M. Muñoz-Calero1, E. Vallespin1, J. Campistol2, L. minant disorders, with a worldwide incidence of 1 in 3000 individuals. The Martorell2, M. L. Ruiz-Falcó3, A. Santana4, R. Pons5, A. Dinopoulos5, J. Nevado1; diagnosis of NF1 show high variation in expressivity and is usually based 1INGEMM.Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de on clinical findings. The diagnostic criteria are met in a patient who has two Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 4Complejo or more of the following main characteristics: six or more café au lait spots, Universitario Insular Materno Infantil, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria., Spain, 5University of Athens. „Attiko“ University Hospital, Athens, Greece. neurofibromas, freckling, optic glioma, iris Lisch nodules, distinctive bone lesion and first-degree relative with NF1. NF1 is characterized by lack of neurofibromin, a GTPase activating protein encoded by the NF1-gene. Introduction. Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and its allelic disorder, spastic Department of Pathology and Medical Genetics, St. Olavs University Hospi- paraplegia type 2 are X-linked recessive dysmyelinatingP LdPis1orders affecting tal has performed genetic testing for NF1 over a six years period. Mutation the central nervous system. Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is caused in most detection in the NF1 gene is complex due to size of the gene (58 exons), exi- cases by either duplication or point mutations in the gene. Less fre- stence of several pseudogenes, lack of clustering of the mutations and great quently it has been reported the presence of large deletions of the gene. This variety of possible changes. disease has a wide clinical spectrum and its causing mutPaLtPio1ns act through We have performed mutation analysis of the entire NF1 gene in a total of different molecular mechanisms. Methods. Eighty-eight male patients from 287 patients since 2006, using different techniques such as high resoluti- non-related families with leukodystrophy were studied. gene analysis on melt (HRM) analysis, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was performed by the Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA), Sanger-sequencing and RNA-anaElySsHis.G 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE t | e cW hnW iquW e . (E MS LPH AG ) a.O ndR DG NA sequencing, and in duplicated cases of PL P21
 1d1o-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P07
.40 PL P1
 Spinal muscular atrophy associated with progressive myoclonic sage were completed by using a custom oligonucleotide (8x15K) array-CGH. epilepsy is caused by mutations in ASAH1 Results. We have identified 21 patients with mPLuPta1tions in the gene, J. Zhou1, M. Tawk1, F. Tiziano2, J. Veillet1, M. Bayes3, F. Nolent1, V. Garcia4, S. Servidei5, E. including duplications, short and large deletions and several point mutati- Bertini6, F. Castro-Giner3, Y. Renda7, S. Carpentier4, N. Andrieu-Abadie4, I. Gut3, T. Levade4, ons in our cohort. To address the extension ofP L P1
 duplications we used a H. Topaloglu7, J. Melki1; customized array-CGH within PL P1
 region at the Xq22.2 area, iPdLePn1tifying se- 1University of Paris XI and Inserm, UMR-788, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 2Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 3Centro Nacional veral duplications and triplications including gene, with sizes ranging de Análisis Genómico, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Institut National de from 181 Kb to 5,17 Mb. Conclusions. Mutations found in the gene are la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale UMR1037, Centre de Recherches sur le Cancer de the cause of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease in around 20% of the patients Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 5Istituto di Neurologia, Università in this series. Interestingly, we described eight new mutations. Array-CGH Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 6Unit of Molecular Medicine, Dept. Neurosciences, results demonstrate that there is not a correlation between the extension of Ospedale Bambino Gesù Research Institute, Roma, Italy, 7Child Neurology Unit, tJh.eM d. uMpolliacnaoti:o Nno anned. Pth. Me asertvineerizt-yM oofn ttheero i:l lNneosnse.. M. Muñoz-Calero: None. E. Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. Vallespin: None. J. Campistol: None. L. Martorell: None. M.L. Ruiz-Falcó: None. A. Santana: None. R. Pons: None. A. Dinopoulos: None. J. Nevado: None. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by degeneration of lower motor neurons. The most frequent form is linked to mutations of the SMN1. Childhood SMA associated  P07
.38 with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMA-PME) has been reported as a A nonsense mutation in the Acid α-Glucosidase gene causes Pompe rare autosomal recessive condition unlinked to SMN1 mutation. Through disease in both humans and dogs linkage analysis, homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing in three un- E. H. Seppälä1,2,3, A. J. J. Reuser4, H. Lohi1,2,3; related SMA-PME families, we identified a homozygous missense mutation 1Research Program for Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, (c.125C>T; p.Thr42Met) in the ASAH1 exon 2 in affected children of two fa- 2Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Department of Medical Genetics, University milies and the same mutation associated with a deletion of the whole gene of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 4Departments of Clinical Genetics and Paediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic in the third one. Expression studies of the c.125C>T mutant cDNA in Farber Diseases, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. fibroblasts showed AanSA aHci1d ceramidase activity deficiency of 32% of that ge- nerated by normal cDNA. More recently, two addi)t ional living patients w ere analyzed: identical mutation iwn avsi vfoo und leading to reduicnt ivointr of acid GAA Pompe disease is a recessively inherited and often fatal disorder caused by ceramidase activity (17-20 % of the control value in patient fibroblasts.Ce- the deficiency of acid α-glucosidase, an enzyme encoded by the gene ramide content was normal. These results confirmed o data. and needed to break down glycogen in lysosomes. This glycogen storage di- Morpholino knockdown of ASAH1 ortholog in zebrafish led to a marked loss sease type II has been reported also in Swedish Lapphund dogs. Here we of motor neuron axonal branching associated with increased apoptosis in describe the genetic defeGcAt Ain canine Pompe disease and show that three the spinal cord. Our results reveal a wide phenotypic spectrum associated related breeds from Scandinavia carry the same mutation. The affected dogs with ASAH1 mutations. An acid ceramidase activity below 10% results in are homozygous for the c.2237G>A mutation leading to a premature Farber disease, an early onset disease starting with subcutaneous lipogra- stop codon at amino acid position 746. The corresponding mutation has nulomata, joint pains and hoarseness of the voice whereas a higher residual previously been reported in humans and causes infantile Pompe disease activity may be responsible for SMA-PME, a later onset phenotype restricted in combination with a second fully deleterious mutation. The affected dogs t Jo. tZhheo CuN: NS oanned. sMt.a Trtaiwngk :w Niothne l.o Fw. eTriz miaontoo:r N noenuer. oJn. Vdeisileleats:e N.one. M. Bayes: None. F. Nolent: None. V. Garcia: None. S. Servidei: None. E. Bertini: None. F. from both the Finnish as well as the Swedish breed mimic infantile-onset Castro-Giner: None. Y. Renda: None. S. Carpentier: None. N. Andrieu-Abadie: Pompe disease genetically, but also clinico-pathologically. Therefore this None. I. Gut: None. T. Levade: None. H. Topaloglu: None. J. Melki: None. canine model provides a valuable tool for preclinical studies aimed at the d Ee.vHe. lSoeppmpeänlät: o Nf ogneen.e A t.hJe.Jr.a Rpeyu isne Pr:o Nmopnee .d His.e Laoshe.i: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Genoscoper Oy (Ltd).  P07
.41 Re-interpretation of mutations in the Tudor domain of SMN1 as splicing mutations K. Mahias1, P. Saugier-Veber1,2, S. Drunat3, T. Frébourg1,2, A. Martins1;  P07
.39 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in Twenty years of experience in the diagnosis of Spinal Muscular Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, Atrophy in Hungary France, 3Department of Genetics, Robert-Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France. L. Tímár1, H. Pikó2, Á. Herczegfalvi3, K. Hajdú4, V. Karcagi2; 1National Institute of Child Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 2National Institute of Environmental Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 3Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd Pediatric Clinic, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 4Istenhegyi Clinic, BUDAPEST, Hungary. Spinal muscular atrophy, an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disoSrMdeNr1, is a frequent cause of death in early childhood. In 95% of the cases, the diSsMeaNs1e is due to homozygous deletion of the survSiMvaNl 1motor neuron gene ( ). In rare cases (about 5%), patients are compound heterozygous with a Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) represents the second most common autosomal deletion in one chromosome and a subtle mutation in the SoMthNe1r. This recessive disorder, characterised by degeneration of spinal motoneurons. study focused on mutSaMtioNn1s identified in the highly conserved Tudor do- Since 1993 blood samples have been collected from 452Hungarian patients main of the SMN protein, a domain encoded by the exon 3 of the gene with all types of SMA. Clinical diagnosis of all probands were estabilished by and where numerous mutations have been detected (n=17). We hy- using the inclusion and exclusion criterias. Direct mutation analyses have been pothesized that, besides altering the coding seqeuxe vnicveo of the gene, a subset performed in the SMN 1 gene by using PCR-RFLP and real-time PCR techniques. of these mutations could also affect the splicing pattern of the SMN1 tran- Homozygous deletions of exon 7 (and 8) of the SMN1 gene were detected in 159 scripts. To address this question, we performed splicing assays using of SMA I patients, 82of SMA II patients and in 105 of SMA I II patients. In 106 representative minigenes. Our results showed that 5 out of the 17 mutations (23,5 %) of the patients no homozygouse deletion in the SMN1 gene has been altered the splicing pattern of exon 3: four by probably altering splicing re- found so we defined them as uncertain cases.Out of the 106, gulatory elements and one by creating an internal splice site leading to a de- 55 uncertain patients were analysed for the SMN1 exon 7 copy number by quan- letion of part of the exon. Because the effect of this latter mutation was very titative real-time PCR and 21 patients were detected as compound heterozy- drastic in the minigene assay and confirmed on the RNA from a patient, we gouse. The second mutation has to be established later on by direct sequen- propose that it should be classified not as a missense substitution but as a cing. For carrier screening, SMN1 copies were determined in 246 related family deleterious splicing mutation. This study brings clues into the splicing regu- members and 131 carriers were detected. Prenatal diagnosis for all families lation of exon 3 and contributes to a better understanding of the structure- with confirmed genetic diagnosis were offered during these twenty years. The fKun. Mctaiohnia fse:a Ntuornees. Po.f Sthaeu gTiuedr-oVre bdeorm: Naionn eo.f Sth. eD SruMnNat :p Nrootneein. T.. Frébourg: outcome of the prenatal testing resulted in 59 affected and 153 unaffected fetu- None. A. Martins: None. ses. Additionally, SMN2 copy number were estimated in 164 patients and good correlation was found between copy number and severity of the disease. SMA is a common and fatal disorder, therefore carrier detection and prenatal t Le.s tTiínmgá irs: eNsosneen.t Hia.l Pfoikró p: rNeovneen.t iÁo.n H aenrcdz pergofaplevri: g Neonneet.i cK c. oHuanjdseúl:l iNnogn.e. V. Karcagi: None. 212 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P07
.42 Functional prediction analysis of coding and non-coding regions of TTR gene: insights on phenotype expression of transthyretin-related rited white matter disorders. Additional clinical findings sometimes allow amyloidosis making a definitive diagnosis. The 4H syndrome has as characteristic fea- R. Polimanti1, M. Di Girolamo2, D. Manfellotto2, M. Fuciarelli1; tures, in addition to Hypomyelination, Hypodontia and Hypogonadotropic 1Department of Biology, University of Rome „Tor Vergata“, Rome, Italy, 2Clinical Hypogonadism (4H), but dental and hormonal anomalies are not obligatory. Pathophysiology Center, AFaR - “San Giovanni Calibita” Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Cerebral MRI shows hypomyelination, additionally cerebellar atrophy and Rome, Italy. relative T2-hypointensity of the lateral thalami, allowing a tentative diagno- sis of this disease also in the absence of all clinical features. Recessive mu- tations in two genes coding for subunits of the RNA polymerase III, POLR3A Pathogenesis of transthyretin-related amyloidosis (ATTR) is focused on mu- and POLR3B, were shown to cause this disease. tations of TTR protein. Significant heterogeneity in the genotype-phenotype We sequenced the entire coding region and splice junctions of POLR3A and correlation has been reported and other genetic and epigenetic factors may POLR3B in 28 patients (age 2 - 40 years) with hypomyelination and clinical interact on phenotype and penetrance of this autosomal dominant trait. In and/or MRI features suggesting 4H syndrome. All patients were found to particular, additional genetic variants in the TTR gene and its surrounding carry mutations in POLR3A (7 patients) or POLR3B (21 patients). Eleven regions may influence the phenotype of the disease. In order to explore this new mutations were identified in POLR3A: 10 missense and 1 nonsense mu- hypothesis, we provided a functional prediction analysis of coding and non- tation. In POLR3B, 17 new mutations were identified: 5 splice site, 3 frames- coding variants in TTR gene. hift, 2 nonsense and 7 missense mutations. Nineteen of the 21 patients with Using databases of 1,000 Genomes project and of Mutations in Hereditary POLR3B mutations shared the common exon 15 mutation (p.Val523Glu), Amyloidosis, we provided a deep analysis of TTR gene. Several bioinformatic but none was homozygous for this mutation. These results further support tools were used to identify the functional impact of the identified variants, POLR3A and POLR3B mutations as the major cause of 4H syndrome and analyzing their potential involvement in disease phenotypes. stress that if patients fulfill clinical and/or MRI criteria, the chance of confir- Our analysis highlighted the presence of different non-coding variants po- ming mutations in either of the 2 genes is high. It also makes 4H syndrome tentially associated with large impact in TTR gene function. In particular, the second most common entity after Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease among genetic variation in promoter region and in untranslated regions seems to hRy.pMo.Lm. yVeelrinveantinneg -w vhaint eS mpaaetntedro dniks:o Nrdoenres. .E.A. Sistermans: None. T.E.M. be involved in the regulation of gene expression. Furthermore, investigation Abbink: None. M.S. van der Knaap: None. N.I. Wolf: None. on coding variants (disease-causing mutations, and polymorphisms) sugge- sted that amyloid aggregation variability mong coding variants is present. Finally, combining functional effect of coding and non-coding, we predicted  P08
.03 the disease phenotypes associated with different haplotypes. Analysis of candidate genes with non-coding hexanucleotide GGGGCC- In conclusion, our data support the hypothesis that genetic variation in cis- repeats in French patients with Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis regulatory regions affects ATTR phenotypes. Confirmation of these in silico P. Vourc‘h1,2,3, F. Wurmser3, S. Kassem2, I. Daoudi2, T. Le Berre2, A. Dangoumau1, C. Veyrat- outcomes in ATTR patients may strongly improve the disease genetic te- Durebex1,2, H. Blasco1, P. Corcia1,4,5, C. R. Andres1,2; s Rti.n Pgo, leimnhaanntic: iNngo noeu. rM c.a Dpia Gciitryo ltaom aos:s iNsot nined. Div.i dMuaanlfse cllaortrtoie: sN oofn TeT. MR .m Fuuctaiatiroenlli.: 1INSERM U930, Université François-Rabelais, Tours, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie None. et Biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU de Tours, CHU de Tours, Tours, France, 3Département de Génomique, PPF ASB, Université François-Rabelais, Tours, France, 4Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU de Tours, Tours, France, 5For the French Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) Study Group, Tours, France.  P08
.01 Kohlschutter-Tonz Syndrome: Clinical and Genetic Insights gained from sixteen cases deriving from a close knit village in Northern Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease charac- Israel. terizCe9dO bRyF 7th2e loss of motor neurons in brain and spinal cord. Large expan- A. Mory1, E. Dagan2, R. Gershoni-Baruch3,1; sions of the non-coding hexanucleotide GGGGCC-repeat in the first intron of 1The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 2Department of Nursing, Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences, University of the gene have been demonstrated to be a major genetic cause of Haifa, HAIFA, Israel, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, ALS. Interestingly this GGGGCC-repeat could form RNA G-quadruplexes af- Israel. fecting transcription and splicing by sequestration of various proteins, and/ or could produce a pathogenic poly-(Gly-Ala) dipeptide-repeat protein. We hypothines sizileicdo that other genes expressed in brain and spinal cord, and car- Kohlschutter-Tonz rying GGGGCC-repeats may be involved in ALS. syndrome (KTZS) (MIM 22675) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, cha- Using analysis we identified 65 genes in the Human genome (ge- racterized by intellectual impairment, spasticity, epilepsy and amelogenesis nome browser UCSC) carrying 3 or more GGGGCC-repeats. The repeats imperfecta. Here we report on 16 cases of KTZS (8 females, 8 males), from 7 were located in the first intron for 28 of them. Some of these genes were families (5 kindreds), originating from the same Druze village in Northern expressedN iUnB b1rain and spinal cord (bioGPS.org) and participate in cellular Israel and show that the extent of the convulsive disorder, as regards age of or physiological pathways implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. For onset, frequency, severity and response to treatment predicts the magnitu- example, geneM eAncRoCdKeSsL a1n ubiquitin-related protein which accumula- de of mental and motor deficiencies and that amelogenesis imperfecta and tes in neuronal and glial inclusions in various neurodegenerative diseases. deficient speech occur in aRllO cGaDseIs. We have recently identified the causati- Another example is , a gene highly expressed in spinal cord and ve gene and mutation underlying KTZS in our cohort of patients, namely, encoding the myristoylated alanine-rich C kinase substrate implicated in cy- p.R157X corresponding to toskeletal plasticity during nerve degeneration. c.571C>T that creates a premature stop codon in ROGDI homolog (Drosophi- We next Cd9eOveRlFo7p2ed repeat-primed PCR and Genescan analyses to study the la), a gene of unknown function. A screen of the healthy Druze population hexanucleotide repeats in these genes in French patients with ALS. Our re- inhabiting the village, revealed a carrier frequency of 1:10. The unique KTZS sults on show a frequency of pathoNgUeBn1ic repeMatAsR (C>K3 S0
L)1 in 33% of phenotype that compiles mental and verbal deficiency, motor deterioration, familial ALS and 3% of sporadic ALS. Preliminary results indicated that no seizures and amelogenesis amplification of the repeat was present in and genes in imperfecta is common to all affected individuals. However, age at onset and A PL. SV opuartcie‘hn:t sN.one. F. Wurmser: None. S. Kassem: None. I. Daoudi: None. T. Le Berre: None. A. Dangoumau: None. C. Veyrat-Durebex: None. H. Blasco: severity of convulsions parallel the progression of mental and motor disabi- None. P. Corcia: None. C.R. Andres: None. lity and invariably vary among affected sibs. By late adolescence and early twenties KTZS individuals are bedridden, fed by gastrostomy, spastic, prac- t Aic.a Mllyo rwy:i tNho nnoe .c Eo.g Dnaitgivaen :a nNdo nlaen. Rgu. aGgeer spheorncei-pBtaiorunc. h: None.  P08
.04 Mutational analysis of the major Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis genes  P08
.02 in French ALS patients A. Dangoumau1, C. Veyrat-Durebex1,2, E. Hammouche2, H. Blasco1,2, J. Pouget3, A. POLR3A and POLR3B mutations in 4H syndrome. Verschueren3, J. Praline1,4, P. Corcia1,4,5, C. Andres1,2, P. Vourc‘h1,2; R. M. L. Vervenne - van Spaendonk, E. A. Sistermans, T. E. M. Abbink, M. S. van der 1UMR INSERM U930, Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 2CHU de Tours, Knaap, N. I. Wolf; Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie moléculaire, Tours, France, 3Centre de référence VU university medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. des maladies neuro musculaires et de la SLA CHU La TIMONE, Marseille, France, 4CHU de Tours, Service de Neurologie, Tours, France, 5for the French Amyotrophic Lateral Hypomyelinating leukoencephalopathiesE fSorHmG a 2m0aj1or3 g |r oPuApR aImSo, nFgR inAhNe-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 213ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Sclerosis (ALS) Study Group, Tours, France.  P08
.06 Association of ApoE polymorphisms in Bulgarian patients with Alzheimer disease and Frontotemporal dementia. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease charac- K. Mihova1, S. Mehrabian2, E. Boiadjieva1, O. Beltcheva1, R. Pavlova2, Y. Zhelev2, R. terized by the selective death of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord. Kaneva1, A. Jordanova1,3, V. Mitev1, L. Traykov2; 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Molecular Medicine Center, The aim of our study was to quantify the overall contribution of mutations Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital in the major ALS gCe9nOeRsF i7n2 a cohort of French ALS patients aSnOdD 1to TpAeRrfDoBrmP „Alexandrovska“, Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3VIB FfuUnSctional analysis on novel mutations. Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. We screened the hexanucleotide expansion, and , ,  C9
O RgFe7n2e,s in 118 familial ALS ScOaDse1s (FALS) and 602 sporadTiAcR ABLPS. cases (SALS). The frequency of mutations in FALS patients was 33C%9O (R1F77/25,2 ) for Background: Alzheimer disease (AD) is characterized by cognitive impair- 11. S9
O%D 1(14/118) for , TaAnRdB 1 P0
.5% (2/19) for FUInS the ment and is the most common form of dementia caused by degeneration of SALS group, the frequency of mutationsS OwDa1s 3% (4/115) for 3.3% the brain neurons resulting in memory and personality disorders. Apolipo- (20/602) for , 1.5% (3/195) for , and 0.9% (1/109) for . We protein E plays important role in cholesterol metabolism, immune regula- identified five novel mutations in the gene, three heterozygoVu3s1A non- tion, synaptic function, intracellular signaling and Aβ-trafficking. Apo E4
 is sensE 1m21Gutations and two heterozygous missense mutations, SOD311A and known risk factor for AD and other diseases. SOD . Motor neurons-like cells NSC-34 over-expressing SOD1 showed Materials and methods: In this study 197 patients with AD, 32 patients with cytoplasmic aggregates anddecreased cell viabCil9itOyR inF 7p2r esence of oxidative Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and 84 healthy control individuals (HC) stress (H2O2 1SmODM1 f or 3h). were included. ApoE alleles ( E2
,  E3
, and  E4
) and genotypes were determi- These results confirmed the major roles of the hexanucleotide ex- ned using restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP) after simul- pansioSnO aDn1d gene mutation in the etiology of FALS, and consequently taneous digestion of an amplified segment by AflIII and HaeII. Statistical have relevant implications in clinical practice. We described novel mutati- analysis was done using chi square test. ons in and performed functional analysis to support their implication Results and discussion: The Apo E4
 allele frequency showed significant in the disease. We are currently analyzing whether or not the groups of pa- difference between the AD group (22%) and HC group (12%). It was as- tAiecnktnso wwiltehd mgeumtaetinotns :have differences with regard to age and site of onset, sociated with increased risk of AD (P=0.0047, OR=2.11), compared to  E2
 clinical phenotypes, and survival. and  E3
 alleles. Apo E2
 allele was found in 4% of AD and in 9% of HC group A. Dangoumau: None. ACs. sVoecyiraatti-oDnu AreRbSeLxA: Nanonde t.h Ee. RHéagmiomno Cuecnhter:e N.one. H. and was associated with decreased risk of AD (P=0.012, OR=0.38). Apo E4
 Blasco: None. J. Pouget: None. A. Verschueren: None. J. Praline: None. P. Corcia: None. C. Andres: None. P. Vourc‘h: None. allele in FTD (16%) compared to HC group (12%) shows difference as well as Apo E2
 allele in FTD (3%) compared to HC group (9%) but did not reach significance due to the small sample size. Conclusions: Our findings confirm the role of Apo E4
 allele as risk factor for  P08
.05 AD in Bulgarian patients. The study adds to the understanding of the mole- Genetic interaction between the Grm1crv4 and the SOD1G93A mutations cular basis of neurodegenerative diseases and may have implications for protects from neurodegeneration, prolongs survival and ameliorates d Kia. gMnihoostviac: t Nesotnine.g S a.n Mde ghernaebtiaicn c: oNuonnsee. lEin. gB.oiadjieva: None. O. Beltcheva: disease progression in the SOD1G93A mouse model of amyotrophic None. R. Pavlova: None. Y. Zhelev: None. R. Kaneva: None. A. Jordanova: lateral sclerosis None. V. Mitev: None. L. Traykov: None. I. Musante1,2, M. Milanese3, T. Bonifacino3, F. Giribaldi3, P. I. A. Rossi1,2, F. Conti4, M. Melone4, L. Vergani5, A. Voci5, G. Bonanno3,6, A. Puliti1,2; 1Medical Genetics Unit, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 2Dept. of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI),  P08
.07 University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 3Dept. of Pharmacy, Pharmacology and Toxicology Genome-wide association study of CSF biomarkers for identifying Unit, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 4Dept. of Neuroscience, Università Politecnica quantitative trait loci influencing the progression from MCI to AD delle Marche, Ancona, Italy, 5Dept. of Biology, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 6Center Y. Sun, M. Nilsson, A. Bresell, H. Salter; of Excellence for Biomedical Research, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy. AstraZeneca, Stockholm, Sweden. ALS Background Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disea- : CSF biomarkers of t-tau and p-tau181p are predictive of futu- se affectAinLgS upper and lower motor-neurons. Different SgOeDn1es and cellular re conversion from mild cognitive impairment M(MetChI)o dto Alzheimer disease events, includingA LgSlutamate-mediated excitotoxicity, are though to coSnOtDri1- (AD). Other common genetic risk factors associated with CSF biomarkers bute to . Mutations in the sSuOpDe1roG9x3iAde dismutase-1 ( ) accounts for that influence progression are still unknown. : Quality controlled 20% of familial . Our recent studies with mice expressing human data from 51,4932 SNPs and 177 Caucasian subjects from the ADNI cohort carrying the G93A mutation ( ) indicate that glutamate release is was included in the analysis. The main effect of SNP and SNP/progression abnormally increased in the spinal cord neurons by mechanisms involving interaction was assessed on the CSF biomarkers of t-tau, p-tau181, and two presynaptic metabotropic glutamate type 1 (mGlu1R) and type 5 (mGlu5R) ratios t-tau/Aβ1-42 and p-tau181 /Aβ1-42, respectively. General linear re- autoreceptors activation and mGlu5R overexpression. gRreessusliotsn models were performed with adjustment for age, sex and APOε4 mGlu1R and mGlu5R are the only members of group I mGlu receptors, G status. protein-coupled receptors implicated in synaptic plasticity, feed-back con- : The two genetic ma2 rker rs1445093 and rs12327358 in high lin- trol of glutamate release and excitotoxicity mechanisms of neurodegenera- kage disequilibrium (LD) (r =0.9) reached genome-wide significance for tion. ALS association with both endophenotypes t-tau and t-tau/Aβ1-42. These two We thought to expSlOorDe1 wG9h3Aether the excessive mGlu1R acStOivDi1tyG9 p3Al ays a role in SNPs are located in the upstream of the gene Netrin receptor DCC for which the pGarmth1ocgrve4 nesis of . To this end, we generated mice carrying half dosage amyloid precursor protein (APP) functionally acts as a co-receptor to medi- of mGlu1R in the background by crossing the mouseA wLiSth ate axon guidance [1]. Further investigation is needed to see if these SNPs tShOeD 1G93AGrmm1orvu4/s+e, which lacks mGlu1R because of a spontaneous recessive belong to the promoter or regulatory elements of DCC. We also discovered mutation, thusc providing a genetic tool to evaluate the mGlu1R roleS iOnD 1G9.3A thpat SNP rs1983298, in the gene encoding the receptor-type tyrosine-pro- mice showed prolonged survival and amelioration in mo- tein phyhborsipdhizaattaisoen-likISeH N (PTPRN), differentially affected the CSF ptau levels tor skills. Histological studies revealed as mGlu1R half dosage in the ( = 6.73E-07) in the MCI to AD converter group and MCI stable group. In background protects motor neurons from degeneration, preserves integrity situ ( ) showed that PTPRN was specifically expressed in of mitochondria and reverts astroglia activation. Over-expression of mGlu5 the neurons but that severely degenerated neurons with aggregated ptau rAeLcSeptors and abnormal glutamate release were also normalized. are associated with low or no mRNA expression of PTPRN. These genetic TALhSese results demonstrate that mGlu1R deletion has a significant impact in markers might be potential prognostic biomarkers and biomarkers for pa- mice, thus providing the rationale for pharmacological approaches to t iYe.n St usne:g Am. eEnmtaptloioynm.ent (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. M. Nilsson: I. M ubsya bnltoec: kNinonge G. rMo.u Mp iIla mneestaeb: oNtornoep.i Tc. r Beocenpiftaocrisn.o: None. F. Giribaldi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. A. Bresell: A. None. P.I.A. Rossi: None. F. Conti: None. M. Melone: None. L. Vergani: Employment (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. H. Salter: A. Employment None. A. Voci: None. G. Bonanno: None. A. Puliti: None. (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. 214 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.08 Expression Profiling of Medial Temporal Gyrus in Alzheimer’s Disease Patients Reveals an Enrichment in Neurotransmission Signaling massive-parallel sequencing was done on an Ion Torrent PGM with a custom Pathways Rmeasduel tAsm apnldiS eDqi spcaunsesli oamn:p lifying 196 different targets in 17 known demen- J. Krate1, I. S. Piras2, E. R. Delvaux3, J. D. Nolz3, T. G. Beach4, P. D. Coleman3, A. M. Persico2, tia genes. M. J. Huentelman1; Sanger-sequencing of the patient DNA identified 1Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen), Phoenix, 134 genetic variations in subsets of the genes. Sequencing on PGM detected AZ, United States, 2Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry and Neurogenetics, University 775 variants in all of the genes. Further analysis will compare the correlati- Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy, 3L.J. Roberts Center for Alzheimer‘s Research Banner on between Sanger- and PGM-sequencing to validate the use of massive-par- Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, United States, 4Civin Laboratory of allel sequencing in a clinical setting. The analysis will also compare variants Neuropathology at Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, United States. detected by whole-exome sequencing and PGM. Data from the comparison wHi.l lT bheo npbreesrge:n Nteodn ea.n Ld. cLoilmiupsa: rNeodn aet. Cth. eF EorSsHeGll:, 2N0o1n3e. cCo.n Gferraeffn: cNeo.ne. We performed whole genome differential expression analysis on medial temporal gyrus (MTG) tissue from clinically characterized and neuropatho- logically verified Alzheimer’s disease (AD) cases and controls (ND, n=100  P08
.10 in each group). Quantile normalization followed by moderated t-statistic Positive association of  C677
T MTHFR polymorphism in Alzheimer for differential analysis on data from Illumina HumanHT-12 BeadChip was Disease performed. After P-value (FDR<0.05) and Fold Change (> |0
.8|) filtering, we F. Paula1, D. Camporez1, L. Belcavello1, R. L. Morelato2, I. D. Louro1, M. C. P. Batittuci1; 1Federal University of Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil, 2Santa Casa de Misericórdia identified 143 DEGs in the AD/ND comparison. The DEGs were enriched for Hospital, Vitória, Brazil. two groups of genes (both underexpressed in AD) belonging to pathways labeled “Synaptic Vesicle Trafficking” (SVT) and “Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptor Signaling” (MARS, Table 1). The AD/ND comparison when analy- Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurological disorder characte- zed by gender showed 45 and 328 DEGs for males and females, respectively. rized by loss of memory and cognition. In the last years, many genes were SVT was significantly enriched in both gender groups while MARS was only identified as a risk factor for AD thMroTuHgFhR Genome-Wide Association Studies. significant in the female group suggesting a potential gender difference in However, only few of them showed association in case controls studies. Alt- the pathways affected by AD. The major finding in the AD/ND group compa- hough a meta analysis for  C677
T polymorphism to suggest risk for rison was the decreased expression of several SNARE complex components AD, case control studies show discordants results in different populations. involved in synaptic vesicle docking at the presynaptic membrane. The confirmation of positive association of specific polymorphisms in dif- Our data replicates prior findings in AD that include a decreased expression ferent population can help us to identify the contribution of the particular of SVT genes in frontal cortex and a demonstrable SNARE complex protein genes in the etiology of the AD according to the ethnic background. The ob- expression loss in the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. In conclusion, in jective of this work was to analyze through case control study the contributi- the MTG of AD patients we demonstrate a decreased expression of SNARE on of  C677
T polymorphism as a risk factor for AD in population from Vitória cToamblpelsex members and highlight that MARS gene expression changes are (Southeast of Brazil). Eighty-two patients, selected by NINCDS-ADRDA clini- only found in females. Pathway and associated genes with Fold Total Males Females cal parameters and 182 controls matched by gender, age and ethnicity were change values Sample genotyped through PCR-RFLP. Positive association was found in CT genotype P = 1.43E- P = 1.87E- Synaptic_vesicle_trafficking P = 1.04E-04 (OR=1.852; 95% IC.: 1,084- 3,162; p=0.0243), but not in other genotypes or 05 08 alleles. The very small numberM oTf HTF aRllele observed in studied population can explain the absence of positive results for TT genotype. This research VAM P2
 - Vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 -0.982 -0.987 -0.974 suggests that carries of  C677
T polymorphism has 1,8 more chance SYT1 - Synaptotagmin-1 -1.418 -1.037 -1.810 SYN1 - Synapsin-1 -0.877 -0.872 -0.881 to develop AD than other in studied population. This work may improve our STX1A - Syntaxin-1A -0.850 -0.811 -0.887 knowledge about alleles of risk in AD and could help in future providing a STXB P1
 - Syntaxin-binding protein 1 -1.264 -1.091 -1.440 NMSuFs c- aVreisniiccle a-fcuestiynlcgh AoTliPnaes ereceptor 1 and 3 -1P.0 =7 5 -0P.8 =3 0 -1P.3 =2 7 profile of genetic susceptibility for AD in specific populations. Supported by SsiYgPn -a Sliynnga pptaotphhwyasyin 5-.002.9 E5
-043 -10..080500 2-.617.0 E5
-082 F FA. PPEaSu,l aF:A NCoITneE.C D, .a Cndam MpCoTreI/zC: NNPonQe/. ML.E BCe/lCcaapveesll.o: None. R.L. Morelato: None. I.D. Louro: None. M.C.P. Batittuci: None. PAK1 - Serine/threonine-protein kinase N1 -0.912 - -1.137 VAM P2
 - Vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 -0.982 -0.987 -0.974 PRKCB - Protein kinase C beta type -0.994 - -1.255  P08
.11 STX1A - Syntaxin-1A -0.850 -0.811 -0.947 GTaNbGl2e -1 G: Rueasnuilntes fnourc pleaothtiwdaey-b ainndaliynsgi sp froort ediinff eGr ent AD/ND comparisons. Results of Fold UBQLN-2 and PFN1 mutation screening in French FTLD and FTLD-ALS -0.874 - -1.128 sCuhbaunngiet >g a |0
m.8m| afo-2r associated genes in the pathways are shown. P values for pathway patients analysis are multiple-testing corrected. S. Lattante1, I. Le Ber1,2, A. Camuzat1, J. Pariente3, T. French research network on FTD J. Krate: None. I.S. Piras: None. E.R. Delvaux: None. J.D. Nolz: None. T.G. and FTD-AL S1
, A. Brice1,4, E. Kabashi1; Beach: None. P.D. Coleman: None. A.M. Persico: None. M.J. Huentelman: 1Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Paris, France, None. 2Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Centre de référence Démences Rares, Paris, France, 3Service de Neurologie; Pôle Neurosciences; CHU Purpan, Toulouse, France, 4Hôpital Pitié- Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Paris, France.  P08
.09 Comparison of amplicon sequencing on Ion Torrent PGM with Sanger- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Frontotemporal Lobar Degenera- and whole exome-sequencing tion (FTLD) are two adult onset neurological disorders with overlapping H. Thonberg1, L. Lilius2, C. Forsell2, C. Graff1,2; symptoms and clinical charCa9ctOeRriFs7ti2cs. It is well established that they share a 1Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institute-ADRC, common pathological and genetic background. The most common mutated Stockholm, Sweden. gene in both conditions is UBQLN but there are a number of other genes Background: responsible in different percentages of a limited number of sporadic and familial cases. Ubiquilin-2 ( -2) is at the moment the only ALS-related At the Department of Geriatric Medicine, patients with fami- gene mapping on the X-chromosome, with mutations in the PXX domain ly-history of dementia that indicates autosomal dominant inheritance are first described in ALS patientsP wFNit1h a mutational frequency of 2.6% in fa- referred to mutation screening to identify causative mutations. Generally, milial ALS cases with no evidence of male-to-male transmission. Recently, Alzheimer patients are screened by Sanger-sequencing for variations in APP, mutations in profilin 1 gene ( ) have beenU iBdQenLtNifi2e d in PpFaNti1ents with PSEN1 and PSEN2, and patients with frontotemporal dementia are screened familial ALS, suggesting a role for this gene in the pathogenesis of the di- for variations in MAPT, GRN, and  C9
orf72. A less discriminative and a more sease. To determineP FthNe1 genetic contribution of - and in FTLD Atimime:- efficient strategy of mutational screening, is to employ massive paral- and FTLD-ALS, we screenUeBdQ LaN co2hort of 136 French patients. We did not lel-sequencing on all possible dementia causing genes in a single analysis. find any variant in gene, while we identified a novel missense variant To compare the detection of genetic variations between different me- (c.1006A>G, p.T336A) in - gene in one FTLD patient (0.7%). The va- tMhaotde/rpilaalt:f orms of sequencing and to validate the usefulness of custom Am- riant is not present in dbSN P137
, 1000 Genomes database and Exome Vari- pliSeq panel for screening of dementia causing genes. aUnBtQ SLeNrv-2er. Its PpFatNh1ogenicity is suggested by the high conservation of Thr336 Method: DNA was collected from 10 patients at the Memory Clinic, Karo- residue through the evolution but its role is still unclear. We conclude that linska University Hospital, Stockholm Sweden, with an informed consent. and mutations are extremely rare in a French cohort of FTLD Sanger sequencing was performESedH oGn 2AB0I1 331 0 |0
 P-iAnsRtrIuSm, eFnRt AanNd CEa |n Wd FWTLWD-.AELSS HpaGtie.OntRs aGnd should not be analyzed systematically. 215ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index S. Lattante: None. I. Le Ber: None. A. Camuzat: None. J. Pariente: None. T.  P08
.14 French research network on FTD and FTD-ALS: None. A. Brice: None. E. Genetic and functional studies of autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Kabashi: None. Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) J. Pilliod1, J. Lavie1, I. Courpy1, E. Maurat1, M. Anheim2, M. Barth3, A. Guichet3, C. Rooryck- Thambo1, B. Arveiler1, S. Forlani2, F. Lesne2, F. Mochel2, K. N’Guyen4, A. Durr2, A. Brice2, D. Lacombe1, G. Stevanin2, R. Rossignol1, G. Benard1, C. Goizet1;  P08
.12 1Univ. Bordeaux, Maladies Rares : Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM), EA 4576, Mutations in the 3′ Untranslated Region of FUS causing FUS Bordeaux, France, 2Pitie-Salpêtrière Hospital, INSERM/UPMC UMR_ S975
, Paris, France, overexpression in primary fibroblast coltures are associated with 3CHU Angers, Service of Genetics, Angers, France, 4Timone Hospital, Department of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Medical Genetic, Marseille, France. M. Sabatelli, A. Moncada, A. Conte, S. Lattante, G. Marangi, M. Lucchini, M. Luigetti, M. Mrabella, M. Zollino; Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy. Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is the second most frequent form of spastic ataxia and is caused by mutations in the SACS gene encoding sacsin. Previous subcellular localization study de- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a severe neurodegenerative disorder monstrated that 30% of sacsin is localized to the mitochondria but its speci- involving upper and lower motor neurons. Mutations in the genes encoding fic function is still unknown. FFUUSS have been identified in a subset of sporadic and familial ALS patientFsU.S We have searched for mutations by direct sequencing and customized CGH We studied whether mutations in the 3’ Untranslated region (3’UTR) of array in SACS in a series of 310 patients affected by progressive spastic ata- are associated with ALS. Sequencing the whole 3’ UTR region of xia with age at onset < 45 years. We identified 21 mutations (5 missenses in 555 ALS patients revealed 4 variants (c.*48 G>A, c.*59 G>A, c.*108 C>T and 16 truncating) that correspond to 6% of mutated patients definitely and c.*110 G>T) in 4 sporadic ALS patients. Identified mutations were not diagnosed with ARSACS. A search for phenotype-genotype correlations is detected in 400 ethnically matched controls. Primary fibroblast coltures in progress. were studied in pFaUtSients harbouring, the c.*59 G>A, c.*108 C>T and c.*110 We obtained primary cultures of patients’ fibroblasts in order to perform G>T variants, and results were compared with those of four controls, of one functional analyses of sacsin. One patient carries two heterozygous nonsen- patient wFitUhS the R521C variant and of two sporadic ALS patients wit- se mutations (p. L1180
LfsX8 and p.K3747X) and the other is homozygous hout mutations in ALS genes. By immunostaining, patients with mutation in for a missense mutation (p.R272H). The mitochondrial network appeared 3’UTR of showed huge FUS deposits in the cytoplasm. The patient with quantitatively altered (with a decrease of 50% of the global mitochondrial the R521C mutation showed a slight increase of cytoplasmic FUS associated mass) and we observed an abnormal mitochondrial shape with the presence with a loss of detection in nuclei. Compartmental fractionation of fibroblasts of bubbles in both patients. We also began to study potential interactions of and immunoblotting of these fractions disclosed a large amount of FUS in sacsin with partners, particularly with proteins involved in the control of the cytosol of cells from patients with mutated 3’UFTURS and, in a lesser extent, m J.i tPoicllhioodn:d Nroianle d. yJn. aLmaviices: sNuocnhe a. sI. DCRouPr1p ayn: dN oMnFeN.  E1
./ M2.aurat: None. M. Anheim: from the R521C patient. None. M. Barth: None. A. Guichet: None. C. Rooryck-Thambo: None. B. Our findings indicate that mutations in 3’UTR of lead to translation de- Arveiler: None. S. Forlani: None. F. Lesne: None. F. Mochel: None. K. N’Guyen: regulation and suggest that FUS deposits in the wild type configuration is None. A. Durr: None. A. Brice: None. D. Lacombe: None. G. Stevanin: None. R. tMhe. Suanbdaetrellylii:n Ngo cnaeu. sAe. oMf othnec addisae: aNsoen ien. tAh.e Csoe nctaes:e Nso.ne. S. Lattante: None. G. Rossignol: None. G. Benard: None. C. Goizet: None. Marangi: None. M. Lucchini: None. M. Luigetti: None. M. Mrabella: None. M. Zollino: None.  P08
.15 De novo TITF1 gene mutation causing Benign Hereditary Chorea with  P08
.13 Hypothyroidism and Pituitary Mass Somatic instability in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ? L. Veneziano1, M. Frontali1, E. Mantuano1, M. Parkinson2, K. P. Bhatia2, P. Giunti2; C. S. Leblond1,2, M. J. Strong3,4, K. Volkening3,4, P. Hince1, J. Robertson5, L. Zinman6, P. A. 1Institute of Translational Pharmacology. National Research Council of Italy, Rome, Italy, Dion1,7, G. A. Rouleau1,8; 2Institute of Neurology. National hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery. UCL, London, 1CHUM Research Center, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Molecular Biology department of United Kingdom. Montreal University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Molecular Brain Research Group, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 4Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Benign hereditary chorea (BHC) is an autosomal dominant disorder of ear- Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 5Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative ly onset characterised by non progressive choreic movements with normal Diseases, and Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON, cognitive function occasionally associated with hypothyroidism and respi- Canada, 7Pathology and Cellular Biology department of Montreal University, Montréal, ratory problems. This condition is caused by mutations in TITF-1 gene (also QC, Canada, 8Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, Mc Gill University, Montréal, known as NKX2.1), encoding the Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 QC, Canada. The proband of the described family, affected with BHC, presented in infancy with delayed walking and ataxic features, then chorea and developed hy- pothyroidism at the age of 33. She never experienced any respiratory sym- Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurological disease ptoms, and on imaging she was found to have a large cystic pituitary mass. characterized by motor neuron degeneration of motor cortex, brainstem and Genetic testing showed that the proband carries a novel TITF-1 nonsense spinal cord. The majority of ALS cases are sporadic (sALS) and only 5-10% mutation. This mutation was transmitted to her affected child, which pre- have a family history (fALS). Whereas 60-80% of fALS cases are explained by sented in infancy with delayed walking and mild non-progressive chorea. germinal mutations, the genetic etiology of sALS remains unclear. Nonethe- The genetic analysis of the whole family confirmed that the mutation arose less, it’s important to keep in mind that current genetic evidences for sALS de-novo in the proband. come from genetic examinations mainly made using blood DNA. Here, we We discuss the effect of this new mutation and the phenotype heterogeneity hypothesize that somatic mutations appear early during the development o Lf. tVheen deizsieaansoe: None. M. Frontali: None. E. Mantuano: None. M. Parkinson: of embryonic spinal cord and could later trigger the development of sALS. None. K.P. Bhatia: None. P. Giunti: None. Given ALS is a motor neuron disease affecting the corticospinal tract, we are in the process of preparing 1000 sections using flash frozen spinal cords obtained from sALS patients. These sections will be individually screened  P08
.16 for the presence of mutations in the most commonly observed ALS genes. Association of leukocyte telomere length and MRI correlates of brain At first, we will look for repeat expansion in  C9
ORF72 by repeat-primed pcr aging: Results of the Austrian Stroke Prevention Study (RP-PCR), since repeat mutations have been shown to be unstable during A. Sen1, P. Freudenberger1, M. Schallert2, C. Nagl1, S. Seiler2, K. Petrovic2, R. Schmidt2, H. replication and DNA repair. Following this, we will look for point mutations Schmidt1,2; in SOD1, TARDBP and FUS using a targeted deep sequencing method speci- 1Research Unit for Genetic Epidemiology,Institute of Molecular Biology and fically designed to identify rare somatic events. To date, we have examined Biochemistry, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Neurology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria. 251 spinal cord sections derived from 10 sALS patients for the presence of expanded  C9
ORF72 alleles, but none was thus far detected. This nonethe- less enabled us to establish RP-PCR conditions that are sensitive enough to d Ce.tSe.c Lt eebxlpoannds:i Nonosn ea.t Ma .lJo. wS tlreovnegl :o Nf omnoes. aKi.c iVsomlk (e2n0in%g:) .None. P. Hince: Background: Telomeres shortening is a consequence of cell division and is None. J. Robertson: None. L. Zinman: None. P.A. Dion: None. G.A. Rouleau: biological factor related to cellular aging. Shorter leukocyte telomere length None. (LTL) is linked to age-related diseases. The objective of the present study 216 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRwAasN tCo Eex |p WlorWe thWe .rEeSlaHtioGn .bOetRwGeen LTL and magnetic resonance imagingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (MRI) detected structural and morphological changes in the normal elderly Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is an emerging individuals. class of hereditary neurodegenerative diseases resulting in extrapyramidal Hypothesis: We hypothesize that shorter LTL is related to loss of MRI detec- movement disorders, intellectual deterioration and characteristic deposi- ted total brain volume and increase in white matter lesions (WML). tion of iron in the basal ganglia. The best MRI sequence to visualize iron Methods: Relative LTL was measured by quantitative RT PCR in 909 parti- accumulation is T2*. cipants (mean age=66years, 57%female) of the Austrian Stroke Prevention While a number of NBIA causes have recently been reported, we propose a Study, a community-based cohort study. All subjects underwent brain MRI diagnostic-algorithm based on neuroimaging features to direct molecular with automated assessment of brain parenchymal fraction (BPF,%) 3by use genetic analyses. This algorithm relies on 5 very simple MRI criteria name- of SIENAX and semi-automated measurement of WML volume (cm). The ly: effect of LTL on MRI correlates was tested using multiple linear regressions 1/“Eye of the tiger” in the globi pallidi on T2 by adjusting for age and sex (Model1) and by additionally adjusting for va- 2/ Hypointensity of globi pallidi, either isolated or associated with caudate/ scular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, putamen hypointensity onT2 smoking, apoϵ4 cparrier status, BMI (Model2). 3/ Hyperintensity of substantia nigra on T1 Results: We observed significant association between LTL and BPF 4/ White matter anomalies on T2 (Model1:β=0.01,p<.001) when adjusted for age and sex. The association 5/ Cerebellar and/or brainstem atrophy remained significant whenp additionally adjustedp for vascular risk factors Combining these 5 criteria in a paediatric series of 23 NBIA cases referred (Model2:β=0.01, <.001). A trend for association was observed between LTL to our paediatric-genetic department, led to molecular diagnosis in 16/23 and WML (Model1:β=0.11, =0.10;Model2:β=.14, =0.05). patients. The diagnoses comprised: Pantothenate kinase (PKAN) deficien- Conclusion: Our results suggest that LTL attrition independently of vascular cy: 3 cases); Mitochondrial membrane protein (MPAN) deficiency: 1 case; risk factors may be involved in the development of brain atrophy or risk of Neuroaxonal Dystrophy (NAD): 9 cases; Fatty-Acid-Hydroxylase-associated dementia. Further longitudinal studies are needed to investigate if LTL may Neurodegeneration (FAHN): 2 cases; Beta-propeller-protein associated- rAe.p Sreesne:n Nto an be.i oPm. Farrekuedre fnobr ebrrgaeirn: aNgoinneg.. M. Schallert: None. C. Nagl: None. S. neurodegeneration (BPAN): 1 case. Seiler: None. K. Petrovic: None. R. Schmidt: None. H. Schmidt: None. The remaining 7 cases are still undiagnosed. Among them, 4/7 fulfilled cli- nical and brain MRI criteria of slowly progressive NAD. We have launched a systematic trio-exome screening of undiagnosed cases and eventually iden-  P08
.17 tified a novel disease gene delineating a novel physiopathological mecha- A rearrangement in OCLN causes brain calcification and renal nism of NBIA. dysfunction In conclusion, we suggest giving consideration to brain MRI to direct mole- M. A. LeBlanc1, L. S. Penney1, D. Gaston1, Y. Shi2, E. Aberg3, M. Nightingale1, H. Jiang4, R. cular genetic testing in NBIA. This approach is a prerequisite for future stu- M. Gillett1, S. Fahiminiya2, C. Macgillivray5, E. P. Wood1, P. D. Acott1, M. N. Khan1, M. E. dies aimed at identifying novel diseases genes in this increasingly recogni- Samuels6, J. Majewski2, A. Orr1, C. R. McMaster1, K. Bedard1; z Ne.d B gordoduape ortf: dNisoonred. eI.r Ds.esguerre: None. A. Rotig: None. M. Rio: None. F. 1Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, Brunelle: None. A. Munnich: None. 3Maritime Medical Genetics, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada, 4Princess Margaret Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Capital Health, Halifax, NS, Canada, 6University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.  P08
.19 MiRNA expression profiling in cortical neurons under conditions of Pediatric intracranial calcification may be caused by inherited or acquired transient focal ischemia factors. An autosomal recessive form also referred to as pseudo-TORCH V. A. Gusar1, A. V. Timofeeva1, I. S. Zhanin1, A. Y. Asanov2, S. I. Shram3, N. Myasoedov3, V. G. Pinelis1; syndrome is characterized by calcium accumulation in the brain, congeni- 1Scientific center for children‘s health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. tal microcephaly and severe developmental impairment. Mutations in the Sechenov First Moscow State medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute gene encoding the tight junction protein occludin (OCLN) at exon 3 or at the of molecular genetics, RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. 5-6 intron splice site result in brain calcification and polymicrogyria with no evidence of extra-cranial phenotypes. We ascertained a consanguineous family with two cases of brain calcification coupled with significant renal Background. One of the important problems of modern medicine is to pro- dysfunction, and identified a previously unknown rearrangement of the tect neurons against ischemia, traumatic brain injury and some neurodege- OCLN gene. A combination of molecular techniques was used to characte- nerative diseases. To understand the nature of these pathological processes rize the underlying genetic cause for the disease. SNP genotyping defined at the molecular level it is reasonable to analyze the expression of genes a genomic region shared between affected individuals, while whole exome and their post-transcriptional regulators, microRNAs (miRs), involved in the data revealed a deletion at exon 9 of the OCLN gene. MLPA, PCR and Sanger pathogenesis of these diseases. sequencing confirmed this deletion and further identified a rearrangement Materials & Methods. Unilateral focal ischemia was performed by photoche- of the genetic region. Detection of the rearrangement was complicated by mically induced thrombosis in adult male rats. Total RNA and miRs were the presence of a replication within the genome of a section that extends extracted from ischemic penumbra of rat cortex sensorimotor area and from from exon 5 to beyond the OCLN gene. Of the seven OCLN splice variants control ipsilateral cortical region after 24 hours reperfusion by miRNeasy described by UniprotKB, all make use of exon 9 while the OCLN variants Miro Kit and RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kit (Qiagen), respectively. that use exons 3, 5, and 6 are tissue specific. The mutation in exon 9, as was MiRs expression profiling of ischemic and control samples were carried out observed in our patients, would lead to the loss of OCLN in all tissues and by quantitative real time RT-PCR using Custom miScript Primer Assay and likely explains the observed phenotypes in our cohort that extends beyond miScript SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen). t Mhe.A b. rLaeinB.lanc: None. L.S. Penney: None. D. Gaston: None. Y. Shi: None. E. Results. Selection of 45 specific miRs was carried out following two Aberg: None. M. Nightingale: None. H. Jiang: None. R.M. Gillett: None. S. Fahiminiya: None. C. Macgillivray: None. E.P. Wood: None. P.D. Acott: criteria: cortical-specific miRs expression and target-specific regulation None. M.N. Khan: None. M.E. Samuels: None. J. Majewski: None. A. Orr: of genes potentially involved in ischemia using database miRanda, PicTar, None. C.R. McMaster: None. K. Bedard: None. TargetScan and Pubmed. Ischemic and control samples from the same rat were analyzed simultaneously on the same Custom plate. Of these 45 miRs, 3 miRs (rno-miR-30a-5p, -30a-3p, -21-5p) were upregulated and 8 miRs (rno-miR- 186-5p, -29a-3p, -223-3p, -23a-3p, -29a-5p, -497-5p, -551b-3p  P08
.18 and rno-let- Neuroimaging algorithm of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron 7f-5p) were down regulated significantly. Accumulation (NBIA) directs molecular genetic analyses and prompts Conclusions. We have obtained preliminary data on miRNAs expression pro- gene identification filing during transient focal ischemia. Further studies are needed to evaluate N. Boddaert1,2, I. Desguerre1,3, A. Rotig1,4, M. Rio1,4, F. Brunelle1,2, A. Munnich1,4; 1Hopital Necker, paris, France, 2Department of Peadiatric Radiology, Hôpital Necker- the possible use of miRNAs as biomarkers in stroke and related patholo- Enfants Malades and University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, g Vi.eAs.. Gusar: None. A.V. Timofeeva: None. I.S. Zhanin: None. A.Y. Asanov: Paris, France, 3Department of Peadiatric Neurology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades None. S.I. Shram: None. N. Myasoedov: None. V.G. Pinelis: None. and University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Department of Genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades and University Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 217ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.20  P08
.23 Candidate Cacna1a modifier genes in a C. elegans large scale West syndrome, general psychomotor retardation and dysmorphic functional RNAi screen features in a female patient due to a 2.92 Mb microdeletion leading M. C. Pereira1,2, S. Morais1,2, J. Sequeiros1,2,3, I. Alonso1,2,3; to a haploinsufficiency of the CDK L5
 gene and several additional 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 3CGPP, Porto, Portugal. flanking genes. CACNA1A P. M. Kroisel1, U. Pichler2, D. Kuchernig2, M. Mach1, C. Pischler1, T. Schwarzbraun1, K. B. Wagner1, M. R. Speicher1; Mutations in the gene that encode2+s the pore-forming α1-subunit of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of human voltage-gated Cav2.1 (P/Q-type) Ca channels cause several autoso- Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, General Hospital of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria. mal-dominant neurologic disorders, including familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 (FHM1), episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2), and spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6). C. elegans By array CGH-analysis we identified a X-chromosomal microdeletion that In order to identify modifiers of uncoordination inu mnco-v2ement disorders, we occurred de novo in a now 14.5 month old girl, the second child of a Austri- performed a large scaClAe CfNunAc1tAional RNAi screen using the strain an couple, according our result: arr Xp22.2p22.13(15,767,378-18,684,139) CB55, which carries a truncating mutation in the gene, the worm or- x1. This microdeletion causing the loss of less than 20 genes was confirmed tholog for the human . by Q-PCR. The first born child of this couple, a boy, is healthy. The female The screen was carried out by the feeding method in 96-well liquid cultu- patient was able to sit with 8 month however still cannot walk or speak. re format using the ORFeome v1.1 feeding library as previously described. With 7 month she showed first myoclonic seizures. Up to that age her gene- We used time-lapse imaging of worms in liquid culture to assess changes ral development was within the normal range. Since seizures became more in thrashing behaviour. Raw imaging data was analysed with open source frequent and severe, with12 month antiepileptic drugs like Keppra were Image J, and the thrashing analysis results were loaded on CellHT S2
 for applied. Several female and at least one male patient with similar but ap- further exploration. parently not identical chromosomal breakpoints were thus far reported or We looked for genes that when silenced either ameliorated the slow and un- communicated in databases like DECIPHER or ISCA. The apparent lack of coordinated phenotype of unc-2 or interacted to produce a more severe phe- obvious recurrent chromosomal breakpoints could suggest that for these notype. Raw data was collected for the full library and 95% of the primary microdeletions no common molecular mechanism might be involved. But screen has beenu annc-a2lysed by CellHT S2
. During the primary scCraeecnna w1ea found there is a considerable overlap of the described microdeletions and because 142 candidate genes improving CB55 motor function, and 148 candidate ge- loss of the CDK L5
 gene is causing a severe form of a variant of Rett syndro- nes increasing impairment, through interaction with . Gene me, this disorder is certainly a main clinical feature of a potential contiguous ontology revealed an overrepresentation of genes involved in development, gene syndrome from that genomic region. Since differences in X-inactivation growth, locomotion, signal transduction and vesicle mediated transport. may modify onset and severity of this and linked disorders, like PDHC, as We are now following with more detail the genes that already scored in the reported recently, it is clearly important to determine precisely the deletion first screen by expanding the panel of behavioural and neurodegeneration size with number of affected genes and X-inactivation (79% in our patient) a Mss.Cay. sP.ereira: None. S. Morais: None. J. Sequeiros: None. I. Alonso: None. t Po. Mal.l oKwro ais beel:t Nteorn ceo. mU.p Paircihsolenr :a Nnodn per. oDg.n Kousctihce cronnigs:i dNeornaet.i oMn.s M.ach: None. C. Pischler: None. T. Schwarzbraun: None. K.B. Wagner: None. M.R. Speicher: None.  P08
.21 NOTCH3 unclassified variants leading to CADASIL. Importance of skin  P08
.24 biopsy to establish causality and CADASIL diagnosis. Genome-wide analysis of genotype-dependent CTCF DNA binding C. Debout1, M. Amador2, C. Prieto Morin2, M. Mine2, M. Coquemont3, F. Chapon4, E. W. M. C. van Roon-Mom, B. A. Pepers, A. Mastrokolias, J. T. den Dunnen, P. A. C. ‚t Hoen; Tournier-Lasserve2; LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. 1Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Laboratoire d’Histologie, Caen, 14032, France, CAEN, France, 2AP-HP, Service de Génétique Neurovasculaire, Hôpital Lariboisière, PARIS, France, 3Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Laboratoire d’Histologie, CAEN, France, 4Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Laboratoire d’Histologie- INSERM, U The aim of the current study was to assess the effect of genetic variation 1075 COMETE, CAEN, France. in the DNA binding protein recognition sequence of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and its potential involvement in Huntington’s disease. CTCF is an ubiquitously expressed, highly conserved protein containing an 11 zinc fin- CADASIL (Cerebral autosomal dominant NarOtTeCriHo3pathy with subcortical in- ger DNA binding domain. It is essential for viability and considered to play farcts and leukoencephalopathy), the most common familial vascular de- an important role in local and long-range inter- and intra-chromosomal in- mentia, is characterized by stereotyped mutations leading to an teractions and transcriptional regulation. CTCF is also known to act as insu- odd number of cysteine residues in the EGF like motifs of this receptor and lator (as chromatin barrier or enhancer blocker), regulate nuclear localiza- the presence of typical GOM (Granular Osmiophilic Material) in the basal tion, or participate in imprinting control. The DNA binding site of CTCF has membrane of vascular smooth muscle cells as shown by electronic micro- a well-characterized and highly conserved binding motif. 95% of the CTCF scopy (EM) study of skin biopsy. binding sites identified by ChIPseq experiments contain the consensus mo- Some patients referred for molecular diagnostic of CADASIL harbor mis- tif. Single nucleotide variants within DNA binding sites are known to have sense variants which do not affect the number of cysteine residues and are a major impact on protein binding and consequently its function. Genome absent from databases, raising the question of their causality. Our current wide statistical analysis was performed in ChIPseq data from two fibroblast hypothesis is that some of these “missense” variants might behave as splice cell lines from control subjects and two from subjects with Huntington’s di- variants leading to an odd of number of cysteine residues and therefore be sease. We detected 21 sites that differed significantly in CTCF binding. Twel- true CADASIL mutations. ve of these sites contained a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the 18 Patients showing NOTCH3 missense variants absent from EVS, 1000ge- binding site thereby explaining differential CTCF binding. We confirmed this nomes and dbSN P137
 were included. All 23 exons known to be mutated in SNP specific binding with an Electro Mobility Shift Assay. Examination of the CADASIL were sequenced and EM analysis of skin biopsy was performed in SNPs in 14 more brain samples (7 for each group) showed no segregation all patients. w Wi.tMh .tCh.e v naenu Rrooolong-iMcaolm c:o Nndoniteio. Bn..A. Pepers: None. A. Mastrokolias: None. J.T. Only one patient ( P18
) showed typical GOM. This patient has a G73R muta- den Dunnen: None. P.A.C. ‚t Hoen: None. tion (c. 295G>C, exon 3). cDNA analysis is on going to analyze the putative splicing effect of this mutated allele, using mRNA extracted from skin biopsy and cultured fibroblasts.  P08
.25 In summary, some patients with missense variants which do not affect the Genetic testing in hereditary neuropathies: our 10 years experience number ofN cOyTsCteHin3e residues are true CADASIL patients showing typical A. Gal1, B. Bereznai1, E. T. Varga1, P. Balicza1, G. M. Milley1, Z. Aranyi2, J. Boczan3, P. GOM on EM skin biopsy. This study emphasizes the need to conduct a skin Dioszeghy4, L. Kalaydiyeva5, M. J. Molnar1; b Cio. pDseyb ofourt : None. M .u Anmclaadssoirf:i eNdo vnaer. iCa.n Ptsr.ieto Morin: None. M. Mine: None. M. 1Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Budapest, Coquemont: None. F. Chapon: None. E. Tournier-Lasserve: None. Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Department of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Neurology, Medical and Health Science Center of the University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 4Department of Neurology, Andras Josa Hospital, Nyiregyhaza, Hungary, 5Centre for Human Genetics, Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia. 218 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG Objectives: Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathies (CMT) are a clinically and ge-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Pôle B2P, GH Saint-Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand-Widal, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire de Psychologie Clinique et Psychopathologie (EA 4056), Université Paris Descartes, netically heterogeneous group of rare inherited neuropathies. Their preva- Sorbonne Paris cité, Institut de Psychologie, Paris, France, 5INSERM, UMR_ S975
 - Institut lence is 1:2,500. Until now more than 50 CMT genes have been identified. du cerveau et la moelle épinière, Paris, France, 6UPMC University Paris 06, UMR_ S975
, Paris, France. Aims: In this study we analysed the mutation frequencies of the most com- mon genes (PM P22
 duplication, deletion, MPZ, MFN2, Connexin 32 and EGR2 mutations) in an electrophysiologically well-characterized group of patients. In patients with gypsy origin two founder mutations (NDRG1- This study aims to describe motivations and attitudes of persons at risk for R148X; CCFDN-IV S6
+389C>T) were also tested. hereditary Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) and to compare with those at Patients and methods: risk for Huntington‘s Disease (HD). Two features distinguished being at risk 450 Caucasian (256 male and 194 female) and 15 Roma (4 male and 11 fe- for CJD from HD: incomplete penetrance and the reduced time to risk disco- male) clinically and electrophysiologically characterized patients with neu- very. In most instances, it was during the illness/death of the index case that ropathy have been investigated (196 were familial cases from 85 families). descendants discover there at risk status whereas in HD, risk awareness The mutation analysis was performed by MLPA, real-time PCR, PCR-RFLP might be years. Since 1992, there were 1930 requests for presymptomatic and bidirectional sequencing. testing for late-onset neurological diseases. Most were at risk for HD (HTT, Results: The quantitative analysis of the PM P22
 gene found 84 duplications n= 1624; 85%), and CJD (PRNP, n= 20; 1%). There were 15 women and 5 and 65 deletions. Pathogenic mutations in the MPZ gene were detected in men, mean age at request was 40.2 ± 9.5 years (versus 35.1 ±12.1 in HD 11, in the EGR2 gene in 2, in the MFN2 gene in 5 and in the Connexin32 gene n=1612, p=.054). The reasons to take the test was to inform descendants of in 17 cases. In the Roma patients LOM type of neuropathy was present in 8, their risk (n=8), “ to know” (n=8) and parental choice (n=3). Only 6/20 did CCFDN mutation in 4 cases. In 1 family the PM P22
 deletion and a pathogenic choose not to take the test (comparable to 33% in HD p=.78) and 13 obtai- EGR2 mutation coexisted. ned a test result (6 carriers). Parents at risk for CJD reported difficulties to Conclusion: Pathogenic mutation has been identified in 41,5% of the investi- inform their descendants after an unfavourable result and, as in HD, it was gated patients. In our presentation we would like to emphasize that muta- difficult to distinguish between being a carrier and being affected after an tion analysis of clinically and electrophysiologically well-characterized neu- unfavourable test result. In conclusion, despite incomplete penetrance and ropathic patients reveals the genetic etiology in a relatively large percent the reduced time to risk discovery in CJD the outcome of presymptomatic o Af .c Gasael:s N. one. B. Bereznai: None. E.T. Varga: None. P. Balicza: None. G.M. t Ees. tSinchg afeorre Cr:J DN oisn es.i mMi.l aBra tboo HnnDe.au: None. A. Herson: None. C. Boucher: Milley: None. Z. Aranyi: None. J. Boczan: None. P. Dioszeghy: None. L. None. J. Laplanche: None. J. Brandel: None. J. Feingold: None. M. Gargiulo: Kalaydiyeva: None. M.J. Molnar: None. None. A. Durr: None.  P08
.26  P08
.28 Second case of COFS Syndrome type 2 confirmed by compound Investigation of SOR L1
 variants in a Turkish cohort of dementia heterozygous mutations in ERC C2
 patients S. Krüger1, A. Bier1, J. Plaschke1, S. Reif1, M. Jatzwauk1, F. R. Kreuz1, A. Storcks2, S. G. Guven1, R. Guerreiro2,3, E. Lohmann4, J. Brás2, J. R. Gibbs2,3, A. Singleton3, M. Emre4, H. Spranger3; Hanagasi4, H. Gurvit4, B. Bilgic4, J. Hardy2, N. Erginel-Unaltuna1; 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2St. Marien-Hospital, Klinik 1Istanbul University Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department für Kinder-und Jugendmedizin, Vechta, Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, UCL, Queen Square, London, United Germany. Kingdom, 3Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Department of Neurology, Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey. Cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome (COFS, Peña-Shokeir syndrome type II) is a very rare progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterised by Background: SOR L1
 (Sortilin related receptor 1) is involved in intracellu- microcephaly, severe intellectual disability, congenital cataErRaCcCts6, facial dys- lar trafficking and localization of Amyloid precursor protein (APP). It binds morphism, and arthrogryposis. By far, the most common subtype is COFS APP and regulates its sorting into endocytic or recycling pathways. Seve- type 1 (COF S1
), which is caused by biallelic mutations in , the major ral studies showed that genetic variations in this gene increased the risk gene underlying Cockayne syndrome (CSB). Most COF S1
 patients originate of Alzheimer‘s disease (AD) and down regulation of SOR L1
 was associated from the Manitoba aboriginal population, in which the condition was ori- with increased amyloid beta production in cells. ginally described. Furthermore, a founder mutation has been identified to Materials and Methods: We used allelic discrimination to investigate the cause COF S1
 in six individuals from a large consanguineous pedigree from association of rs2282649 C/T polymorphism in 116 LOAD patients and northern Finland. ERC C2
 120 controls. We also performed exome and Sanger sequencing to analyze In contrast, until now only one patient has been described with COFS type SOR L1
 rare genetic variants in a cohort of 62 Alzheimer disease, 13 demen- 2 (COF S2
), which is caused by biallelic mutations in , the gene un- tia and 16 FTD cases. derlying Xeroderma pigmentosum, group D (XPD), and trichothiodystro- Results: Exome sequencing identified 7 non-synonymous variants in 10 phy (TTD). This patient was the child of nonconsanguineous Ashkenazi patients. Five of these variants are known (N371T, R330W,  E270
K, A172V, Jewish parents. He showed typical COFS symptoms and died at the age of T1788I) and other two are new variants. No significant differences in the 3.5 years. ERC C2
 genotypic distribution for SOR L1
 rs2282649 polymorphism in case-control, Here we report on the second COF S2
 case carrying compound heterozy- female-male, APOEe4 carrier-non carrier groups were found. As expected, gous mutations in . This 6 month old male infant was born to non- the frequency of APOEe4 allele was significantly higher in the patients group consanguineous Kosovo Albanian parents who previously had two healthy (patients %39.8, controls % 19.2 p: 0.001). children and one induced abortion due to prenatal diagnosed arthrogrypo- Conclusions: Our results suggest that rare variants in SOR L1
 may be asso- sis. The patient presented with intrauterine growth rEeRtaCrCd6ation, microce- ciated with Alzheimer disease while the common intronic rs2282649 C/T phaly, developmental delay, congenital cataractEs,R fCaCci2al dysmorphism, and polymorphism is not associated with the risk of developing Alzheimer’s congenital arthrogryposis. While complete analysis of did not reveal disease in our study group. However, this study was performed in a small any mutation, two heterozygous mutations in could be identified: c Go.h Gorutv aennd: Nreopneli.c Rat.i Gonu einrr eai lraor:g Neorn neu. mE.b Leorh omf saanmn:p Nleosn eis. nJ.e Bedráesd:. None. J.R. c.1703_1704delTT, p.Phe568Tyrfs*2 in exon 18 and c.1843G>A, p.Gly615Arg Gibbs: None. A. Singleton: None. M. Emre: None. H. Hanagasi: None. H. in exon 20. Analysis of parents indicated the compound heterozygous state Gurvit: None. B. Bilgic: None. J. Hardy: None. N. Erginel-Unaltuna: None. o Sf. t Kherü pgaetri:e Nnot.ne. A. Bier: None. J. Plaschke: None. S. Reif: None. M. Jatzwauk: None. F.R. Kreuz: None. A. Storcks: None. S. Spranger: None.  P08
.29 Myoclonus-dystonia (DYT11) - first experience in genetic testing in  P08
.27 Serbia Presymptomatic testing in hereditary Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease M. Z. Jankovic1,2, V. S. Dobricic2, G. Vlahovic3, V. Ralic1, N. Kresojevic2, A. Tomic2, M. E. Schaerer1, M. Babonneau1,2, A. Herson1, C. Boucher1, J. Laplanche3, J. Brandel2, J. Svetel1,2, I. Novakovic1,2, V. Kostic1,2; Feingold1, M. Gargiulo1,4, A. Durr1,5,6; 1Faculty of medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Neurology Clinic, Clinical 1APHP, Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié- center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Mother and Child Health Care Institute, Belgrade, Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2APHP, Cellule Nationale de référence des maladies de Serbia. Creutzfeldt-Jakob, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3APHP, UF de Génétique Moléculaire Biochimie-Hémostase, Laboratoire associé au CNR ATNC, ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEM | yWocWlonWus.-EdSysHtoGni.aO (RDYGT11) is an autosomal dominant disorder ch2ar1a9c-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index terized by dystonia and myoclonic jerks; the onset is most commonly du- IGEs. We performed mutation screening in 102 patients with JME and 33 ring childhood and adolescence. DYT11 is caused by mutations in the gene with other IGEs. Missense mutations were inveEsFtHigCa1ted in 100 control indi- coding for epsilon sarcoglycan (SGCE). More than 80 distinct mutations of viduals. Eight algorithms were used to estimate the impact of mutations. We SGCE have been described to date; most of them are localized in exons 3 to7, identified three novel missense mutations in (c.896A>G, c.887G>A, and in exon 9. Mutations detected in patients include nonsense, missense, c.1766G>A) and seven previously described (c.475C> T, c.475C>G, c.545G> splice site, insertions, partial and complete exon deletions. We have esta- A, 685T> C, c.1343T> C, c.1821A> G and c.1855A> C). Only one patient with blished molecular genetic testing of all coding exons, promoter and 3’UTR alterations did not have JME. Deleterious prediction was controversial, with region of SGCE gene. The analysis comprised DNA samples of 45 Serbian pa- most substitutions considered pathological by at least two algorithGmABs.R HAo1- tients with clinical diagnosis of myoclonus-dystonia. Detection of substituti- wever, only four mutations, corresponding to the second DM10 domain and ons and small in/del mutations was performed by direct sequencing, on ABI the EF-Hand motif, were not EidFeHnCt1ified in control individuals. In , 310 Genetic Analyzer. Also, large duplication/deletion analysis was perfor- three silent SNPs were identified. In conclusion, the absence of consensus in med using MLPA method. Three different mutations were detected in total the algorithm prEeFdHicCt1ions for mutations highlights the genetic com- number of 4 samples (4/45, 8.9 %). One patient harbored (nonsense) muta- plexity of JME. In addition, most mutations were also identified in controls, tion in exon 6 (c.709C>; p.Arg237Ter). Small deletion in exon 7 (c.966delT; suggesting that is not acting as a singlEe FmHaCj1or geneG AcaBuRsAin1g JME, alt- p.Val323Cysfs*11) was found in one patient. In two patients another small hough it could be a predisposition factor of known significance. Therefore, deletion was detected (c.835_839delACAAA; p.Thr279Alafs*16) in exon our results suggest that genetic testing for and does not 7. The latter two patients are non consanguineous, but originate from the s Mee.Cm. Gtoo bnesa clleins:i cNaollnye r. eCle.Vv.a Snot.ler: None. F.A. Oliveira: None. D.L. Gitaí: same geographical region. No large duplications/deletions were detected None. F. Cendes: None. I. Lopes-Cendes: None. using MLPA method. These results indicate that introduction of mutation detection in SGCE gene should be considered as routine diagnostic tool in c Mli.nZi.c Jaal npkraocvtiicc:e N.one. V.S. Dobricic: None. G. Vlahovic: None. V. Ralic:  P08
.32 None. N. Kresojevic: None. A. Tomic: None. M. Svetel: None. I. Novakovic: Mutation analysis of SL C2
A1 gene in Bulgarian patients with IGE None. V. Kostic: None. featured with absence seizures N. I. Ivanova1, D. Kancheva1, D. Todorova2, G. Sarailieva2, I. Alexandrova2, G. Maximov2, P. Dimova2, V. Tomov2, D. Hristova3, V. Bozhinova2, V. Mitev1,4, R. Kaneva1,4, A. Jordanova1,5,6;  P08
.30 1Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Child Neurology, St. Naum University Hospital of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sofia, Bulgaria, SL C2
A1 gene mutation in Serbian exercise-induced paroxysmal 3Children Neurology Unit, Pediatrics Clinic, Tokuda Hospital-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, dyskinesia (DYT18) patient: Nonsense-mediated decay as possible 4Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, pathogenesis mechanism Bulgaria, 5Neurogenetics Group, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University of V. S. Dobricic1, M. Z. Jankovic2, N. Kresojevic1, M. Zarkovic2, A. Tomic1, M. Svetel1,2, I. V. Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 6Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, Novakovic1,2, V. S. Kostic2,1; University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Bulgaria. 1Neurology Clinic, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. SL C2
A1 Mutations in the gene are the major cause for idiopathic generali- SL C2
A1 zed epilepsy (IGE) featured with absence seizures and an age at onset being Exercise induced paroxysmal dyskinesia (DYT18) is an autosomal dominant dated from the early childhood to the eaSrLlyC 2aAd1u lt life. To define the mutati- disorder caused by mutations in the gene coding for a glucose trans- on spectrum and related clinical characteristics in Bulgarian patients, we porter type 1 (GLUT1), the main glucose transporter across the blood-brain performed a mutation screening of the gene in 29 patients from 3 barrier. DYT18 is just a part of phenotypic spectrum associated with GLUT1 different ethnicS LgCro2uAp1s (25 Bulgarians, 2 Roma gypsies and 2 Turks). All deficiency. This conditSiLoCn2 iAs 1characterized by sudden attacks of movement of them were displaying IGE featured by absence seizures.Sequencing data disorders of various types triggered by proloSnLgCe2dA 1exercise. More than 150 analysis of the gene revealed 3 different sequence variations - 2 of distinct mutations in have been described so far. In this study, we them located in the coding region (c.1078C>T, p. 360 Q>X and с.480С>A, performed genomic sequencing of the entired e novo coding region in 10 pa- p.160H>Q) and 1 sequence variation affecting the consensus splice-site tients with clinical signs of DYT18. Novel mutation (c.516delG) was revealed (c.1075-14deG >nAov).o in one proband. Detected mutation occured and disrupts consensus Segregation analysis revealed that in one family the disease-causing mutati- sequence of intron 4 donor splice site. Using the splice sites analysis tool it on arises and in the other two families the molecular defects came was predicted that alternative donor splice site exists at position c.389_390 from a parent who had reported a single febrile seizure during the first year in exon 4; this splice site would create mRNA encoding truncated protein of life and latter in life. 192ak long. The cDNA sequencing of region encompassing exon 3-5 in pro- In all three cases, the clinical picture was present with diverse forms of ab- band showed a strong wild-type signal and a much weaker signal that cor- sence epilepsy - MAE with developmental problems, EOAE and CAE. In one responds to truncated allele. Real time PCR quantification by SYBR Green family, the epileptic syndrome had begun with SCN1A chemistry (ΔΔCT method) revealed that proband has 60% SL C2
A1 mRNA febrile seizures and after that the absence and GTCS had been SaLdCd2eAd1 t o the expression compared with his unaffected father. The result indicates that clinical picture. This patient had been sent initially for analysis. described mutation exerts a major effect at the mRNA level, most likely via In summary,our results broaden the mutation spectrum of the gene nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. According to our knowledge, this is the aNn.dI. eIvnarnicohv at:h Ne ocnlien.i cDa. lK daantcah oefv IaG:E N woniteh. Dab. sTeondcoer osveaiz: uNroense.. G. Sarailieva: first time that nonsense mediated decay is described as pathogenesis me- None. I. Alexandrova: None. G. Maximov: None. P. Dimova: None. V. Tomov: c Vh.San. iDsomb rinic iecx:e Nrcoinsee. iMnd.Zu. cJeadn kpoavroicx:y Nsmonael. dNy.s Kkrienseosijeav.ic: None. M. Zarkovic: None. D. Hristova: None. V. Bozhinova: None. V. Mitev: None. R. Kaneva: None. A. Tomic: None. M. Svetel: None. I.V. Novakovic: None. V.S. Kostic: None. A. Jordanova: None. None.  P08
.33  P08
.31 Search of the genetic bases of a dog epilepsy: a model for the human Evaluating clinical validity and utility of EFH C1
 and GABRA1 epilepsies molecular testing in patients with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy and P. Quignon1,2, A. Grall1,2, A. Vaysse1,2, C. Escriou3, P. Margaritte-Jeannin4,5, C. Hitte1,2, C. other idiopathic generalized epilepsies André1,2; M. C. Gonsales1, C. V. Soler1, F. A. Oliveira1, D. L. Gitaí2, F. Cendes3, I. Lopes-Cendes1; 1Université de Rennes1, Rennes, France, 2Institut de Génétique et Développement, 1Department of Medical Genetics - University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, 2Federal UMR6290 CNRS, Rennes, France, 3Unité de Médecine, Neurologie et troubles du University of Alagoas, Maceio, Brazil, 3Department of Neurology - University of comportement, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire de Lyon, Marcy l‘Etoile, France, 4INSERM Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. U946, Paris, France, 5Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Universitaire d’Hématologie, Paris, France. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) comprises 5-10% of all epilepsies. To date, several genes have been associated with JME and other idiopathic geEnFerHaCli1- The dog, by its numerous distinct breeds considered as genetic isolates, re- zed epilepsies (IGEs), although only a few pGrAeBseRnAt1ed mutations segregating presents a powerful model to identify genes and alleles implicated in gene- with affected members in family studies. The most relevant genes are tic diseases. In addition, dog diseases are spontaneous, breed specific and and the GABA receptor α1-subunit gene ( ). The aim of this study homologous to human diseases. In dogs, epilepsy is the most widespread w2a2s0 to search for mutations in both genes in patEieSnHts Gw i2th0 J1M3E |a nPdA oRthIeSr, FRnAeuNroCloEg i|c aWl dWisoWrd.eErS, wHiGth .O5%R Gof affected dogs, spread over 100 breeds.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The high prevalence in some breeds (>20%) supposes a genetic origin. Each festation of pathological phenotype, but with normal previous conventional affected breed is affected by a specific form of epilepsy and genetic studies karyotype and negative genetic tests (FRAX, RETT, FISH tests or metabolic in these breeds are expected to identify the responsible genes, thus consti- screens). High resolution 4x180K and 1x244K Agilent arrays (>170.000 and tuting good candidate genes for human epilepsies. About 10% of Greater >236.000 probes respectively, average resolution 8.9Kb) were used in this Swiss Mountain dogs are affected by a generalized epilepsy with tonic-clonic study. Submicroscopic genomic imbalances were detected in 55/82 patients seizures, and we hypothesize that it is an autosomal recessive disease. A featuring epilepsy among other phenotypic anomalies, ranging in size from linkage study on a 95 dogs pedigree performed by the genotyping of 340 0.037 to 17Mb and involving well-known and new susceptibility chromoso- microsatellite markers evenly spaced on the whole dog genome, allowed the mal loci as; 1q44, 2q24.2-q31.1, 3p25.3, 4q34.1-q35.2, 6q21-q22.1, 7p23.2, identification of a 20 Mb locus on the dog chromosome 16. The orthologous 7q11.23, 8q24.3, 10q26.3, 12p13.31, 22q11.21, Xp22.31. Genes, implicated human region of this locus correspond in part to a locus previously impli- in syndromes which are associated with epilepsy, were identified in 36/55 cated in human GEFS+ epilepsies but the genes have not been identified to cases (65.4%) as; APOD, OCLN, GABA, FLNA, LIMK1, STX1A, GTF2I, FAM36A, date. In order to reduce this locus in dogs, we genotyped 101 dogs on the MBD5,  C1
orf199, HNRNPU, KIF26B, OGG1, IRAK2, SL C6
A11, ATG7, CDK L5
, canine HD array (170 000 SNPs, Illumina). Both genetic association and ge- NIPA1/NIPA2, IGH, CHRM5, GABRB3, SCN1A/SCN2A/SCN3A/SCN7A/SC- netic linkage studies are ongoing. The identification of the genetic bases of N9A, SST, MBD5, GLRA3, RALB P1
, JRK, BNI P3
, KND C1
, COMT, RTN4R, GHRL, epilepsies in dog can bring novel candidate genes for human epilepsies and RA C1
, ACTB, TUBA8, LGI3, LBX1, CLCN2, TPPP, MARCKS, HDA C2
. Array-CGH w P.i lQl aulilgonwo nth: eN odneev.e Alo.p Gmraelnl:t Noof nnee.w A .t hVearyaspsiee:s N foonr eh. uCm. Eansc arniodu d: oNgo npea.t iPe. nts. offers a high yield for the identification of so far undefined or underdia- Margaritte-Jeannin: None. C. Hitte: None. C. André: None. gnosed epilepsy cases, elucidating plausible novel syndromes and enabling iKm.p Grioavnendik doeul:in Neoanteio. nM o. fT gzeentiso:t yNpoen-ep.h He.n Fortyyspseir cao: rNroenlaet.i oKn. sK.osma: None. V. Oikonomakis: None. A. Syrmou: None. A. Xaidara: None. S. Kitsiou-Tzeli: None. E. Kanavakis: None.  P08
.34 Genome-wide Copy number variations in Rolandic Epilepsy A. Labalme1, G. Lesca1, N. Bruneau2, S. Dimassi1, A. de Saint Martin3, C. Boulay3, M. Valenti3, J. de Bellescize1, J. Motte4, N. Boutry-Kryza1, A. Arzimanoglou1, E. Hirsch3, G.  P08
.36 Rudolf3, P. Szepetowski2, D. Sanlaville1; Novel mutations in FA2H in three Arab families with a clinical 1Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France, 2INMED, Marseille, France, 3Strasbourg spectrum of neurodegeneration and complex features of hereditary University Hospital, Strasbourg, France, 4American Memorial Hospital, Reims, France. spastic paraplegia M. S. Zaki1, L. A. Selim2, L. Mansour2, A. Fenstermaker3, J. L. Silhavy3, S. Gabriel4, J. G. Gleeson3; Benign Rolandic epilepsy (RE), or benign childhood epilepsy with centro- 1Clinical Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Dokki,, Egypt, 2Pediatric temporal spikes (BECTS), the most common type of epilepsy in children, is a Neurology Department, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, 3Neurogenetics Laboratory, neurodevelopmental disorder with common neurocognitive impairment in Department of Neurosciences, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of speech, language, attention and executive skills. It is considered the benign California, San Diego, CA, United States, 4Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States. end of a spectrum, including the most severe continuous spike and waves during slow-wave sleep syndrome (CSWSS) and the Landau-Kleffner (LKS) FA2H syndrome that are rare epileptic encephalopathies. An impairment of brain Fatty acid 2-hydroxylase gene ( ) is involveFdA i2nH the alpha-hydroxylation development with complex interplay between genetic and non-genetic fac- of the N-acyl ceramide moiety of sphingolipids fatty acids, essential compo- tors has been suspected for RE but its pathophysiology is still elusive. We nents of myelin (15337768). Mutations in the were first identified in have recently reported genomic variations in patients with LKS and CSWSS, nine patients with recessive childhood onset spasticity, dystonia, cognitive suggesting potential candidate genes. dysfunction, and periventricular white matter disease (19068277). Muta- In the present study, the involvement of rare CNVs was questioned in 50 tions were also identified in a novel form of neurodegeneration with brain patients with RE using aCGH (4x180K, Agilent microarrays). iron accumulation (NBIA) (20853438) as well as in a recessive complicated We found 19 CNVs in 50 patients. Sixteen are potentially pathogenic (not form of hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG35, MIM#612319) (20104589). reported in the database of genomic variant) and are still under investiga- Together these genotype-phenotype correlations have defined a condition tions. Whereas highly heterogeneous CNV were found in the RE cohort, the known as the fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neurodegeneration (FAHN). same 16p11.2 microduplication was found in two patients. This microdu- To date, few individuals with mutations iFnA t2hHe FA2H gene have been descri- plication has been associated with different neurocognitive disorders and bed. Herein we report seven patients from three unrelated consanguineous included the PRRT2 gene, recently reported in infantile seizures. We also Arab families with novel homozygous gene mutations. They were detected a deletion disrupting a potential major gene responsible for LKS/ presented with progressive spastic paraparesis beginning after the age of 4 CSWSS, hence providing a possible biological basis for this clinical continu- years associated with mild intellectual disabilities. Cerebellar manifestations um. Of note, the frequent involvement of various cell adhesion molecules as predominated in all families including ataxia, nystagmus, intention tremors detected previously in LKS/CSWSS, was not found here, suggesting that the and dysarthia while infrequent limb dystonic movements were obvious with two ends of this spectrum may be, at least partially, influenced by different g Ae.n Leatibca flamceto: rNso.ne. G. Lesca: None. N. Bruneau: None. S. Dimassi: None. A. disease progression. Spastic quadriparesis and bulbar manifestations were de Saint Martin: None. C. Boulay: None. M. Valenti: None. J. de Bellescize: highly evident in the oldest affecteds. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed None. J. Motte: None. N. Boutry-Kryza: None. A. Arzimanoglou: None. E. cerebellar atrophy, high signal of white matter especially around occipital Hirsch: None. G. Rudolf: None. P. Szepetowski: None. D. Sanlaville: None. horn and low signal of basal ganglia that was also more pronounced with progression of the disease. Interestingly, nerve conduction velocity revealed sensory neuropathy of axonal nature in all affecteds; a finding recently assi-  P08
.35 gned with FAHN. We suggest that FAH2 mutations result in clinical spectrum oMf .aS c. oZmakbi:i nNeodn ep.r Les.Ae.n Staetliiomn: oNfo tnhee. Lab. Movaen smoeunrt: iNononeed. tAh.r Feee ndsitseorrmdaekrse.r: Clinical application of high resolution array Comparative Genomic None. J.L. Silhavy: None. S. Gabriel: None. J.G. Gleeson: None. Hybridization (array-CGH) in epileptic disorders K. Giannikou1,2, M. Tzetis1, H. Fryssira1, K. Kosma1, V. Oikonomakis1,3, A. Syrmou1, A. Xaidara1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, E. Kanavakis1,3; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece,  P08
.37 2Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation, Athens, Greece, 3Research Institute for Phosphatidylserine increases IKBKAP levels in a humanized knock-in the Study of Genetic and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, “Aghia Sophia, Children’s IKBKAP mouse model Hospital, Athens, Greece. R. Bochner; Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel. Epileptic disorders, often co-existing with other neuropathological mani- festations and/or multiple congenital anomalies/peculiar facies, compose a clinically and genetically heterogeneous entity, with a variety of unspe- Familial dysautonomia (FD) is a severe neurodegenerative genetic dIiKsoBrKdAePr cific and diffuse phenotypes, thus raising difficulties on genetic evaluation restricted to the Ashkenazi Jewish population. The most common mutation and diagnosis. The array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) in FD patients is a T-to-C transition at position 6 of intron 20 of the technique has proved reliable and valid, allowing the detection of submi- gene. This mutation causes aberrant skipping of exon 20 in a tissue-specific croscopic imbalances (CNVs) in the diagnostic settting. From a total of 436 manner, leading to reduction of the IKAP protein in the nervous system. We unrelated patients investigated in our de Ep Sa Hrtm Ge 2nt 0, 8 12 3 p |r e Ps Aen Rte ISd ,e Fpi Rle Apt Nic CEe |s WtabWlishWed.E aS hHomGo.OzyRgoGus humanized mouse strain carrying human 2e 2xo 1n disorders of unknown etiology accompanied by at least one additional mani-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index IKBKAP 20 and its two flanking introns; the 3’ intron has the transition observed in consistently these two different conditions and to identify the variables ex- the IKBKAP gene of FD patients. Although our FD humanized mouse does pressing the maximal amount of relevant information to the condition of not display FD symptoms, the unique, tissue-specific splicing pattern of being affected by dementia of Alzheimer’s type. Moreover, we constructed the in these mice allowed us to evaluate the effect of therapies on a semantic connectivity map to offer some insight regarding the complex gene expression and exon 20 splicing. The FD mice were supplemented with biological connections among the studied variables and the two conditions phoIKsBphKaAtPidylserine (PS), an FDA-approved food supplement that slows co- (being AD or control). gnitive degeneration in humaInK BanAdK Pthat increases mRNA and protein levels TWIST system selected 16 variables that allowed to discriminate between of in cell lines generated from FD patients. Here we demonstrated AD and control subjects with over 90% accuracy. The semantic connectivity that PS treatment increases mRNA and IKAP protein levels in va- map provided important information on the complex biological connections rious tissues of FD mice without affecting exon 20 inclusion levels. We also between the studied variables highlighting the importance of folate metabo- observed that genes associated with transcription regulation and develop- lLis.m M iignl iAoDre p: aNtohnoeg. eEn. eGsriso.ssi: None. M. Buscema: None. F. Coppedè: None. mental processes were up-regulated in the cerebrum of PS-treated mice. T Rh. uBso, cPhSn heor:ld Nso pnreo.mise for treatment of FD.  P08
.40 A whole genome sequencing strategy to identify novel genes for  P08
.38 frontotemporal lobar degeneration Mutations in PRRT2 result in familial infantile convulsions with S. Philtjens1,2, I. Gijselinck1,2, T. Van Langenhove1,2, J. van der Zee1,2, S. Engelborghs2,3, R. marked variability in clinical expression and SUDEP Vandenberghe4, M. Vandenbulcke5, P. Santens6, P. De Deyn2,3, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2, M. P. Tarantino1, G. Palamara1, A. Labate2,3, M. Gagliardi1,4, L. Mumoli2, E. Ferlazzo2, G. Cruts1,2,2; Iannello1, U. Aguglia2, G. Incorpora5, A. Gambardella1,2, G. Annesi1; 1VIB-Department Molecular Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge - 1Institute of Neurological Sciences - National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology and Memory 2Institute of Neurology University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy, Clinic, Hospital Network Antwerp, Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Neuroimaging Research Unit, National Research Council, Germaneto, Catanzaro, Italy, 4Laboratory for Cognitive Neurology, Department of Neurology, University of Leuven Catanzaro, Italy, 4University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy, 5Unit and University Hospitals Leuven Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 5Brain and Emotion of Paediatrics, University Hospital “Arezzo-Trifiletti”, Ragusa, Italy, Ragusa, Italy. Laboratory Leuven, Department of Psychiatry, University of Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ghent and University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. Benign familial infantile seizures (BFIS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by afebrile seizures that begin at age 3-12 months with a fa- Family history has been reported in up to 50% of patients with frontotem- vorable outcome. A recent discovery has identified heterozygous mutations poral lobar degeneration (FTLD), a major neurodegenerative disease of the in PRRT2, which encodes proline-rich transmembrane protein 2, in most brain. In most families the pattern of inheritance is consistent with a Men- families affected by BFIS. PRRT2 is also the major causative gene for fami- delian segregation of a dominant mutation. Mutations in seven known genes lial paroxysmal kinesigenic dystonia (PKD), a rare disorder characterized by explain the disease in approximately 40% of FTLD families. We use whole episodic attacks of choreoathetosis or dystonia. These results have corro- genome sequencing (WGS) to identify rare, highly penetrant genes in gene- borated the existence of familial infantile convulsions with paroxysmal cho- tically unexplained FTLD families. The genome sequences of three affected reoathetosis that shares overlapping clinical features with BFIS and PKD. In sib pairs were obtained with an average coverage of 81-fold capturing both this study, we performed mutation screening of PRRT2 in our families with alleles of 96.5% of the genome, and revealing about four million variations BFIS, ICCA or PKD phenotypes. The whole genomic region of PRRT2 was per genome. Annotation and analysis of the genome sequences was perfor- sequenced in seven Italian families, of which six with BFIS or ICCA pheno- med using GenomeComb. Variations were filtered and prioritized using mul- type, and one family with PKD phenotype. The previously reported mutati- tiple strategies based on genetic and functional criteria. About 380 selected on, p.R217Pfs*7, was found in two families with BFIS phenotype, and in one missense or splice site variations were further prioritized using mutation family with ICCA. In an additional BFIS family, a missense mutation, R240X, prediction programs, resulting in about 80 predicted harmful mutations per was identified. All these mutations co-segregated with the disease in these sib pair. The frequency of the variations was determined in neurologically families and were not observed in 300 control subjects. In the ICCA family, healthy control individuals. About 25 variations were absent or present in two affected members displayed a more complex phenotype with episodic less than 1% of control individuals. We tested the frequency of these rare ataxia, mental retardation and migraine attacks. In one family that also car- variations in a series of 370 unrelated FTLD patients and identified around ried the c.649dupC mutation, one affected member died at age of 13 years 12 variations that were present in additional patients. The genes harboring of SUDEP. This study confirms the major role of PPRT2 mutations in fami- these variations are being sequenced in patients and control individuals to lies with BFIS phenotypes and underscore the complexity of the phenotypic c Po. nTsaerqanuteinnoce: sN oofn me. uGt.a Ptiaolnasm ianr ath: iNs ogneen. eA.. Labate: None. M. Gagliardi: define their mutation profile. The identification of novel FLTD genes will None. L. Mumoli: None. E. Ferlazzo: None. G. Iannello: None. U. Aguglia: provide valuable insights into the pathogenesis of FTLD and might provide None. G. Incorpora: None. A. Gambardella: None. G. Annesi: None. i Sn.s iPghhitlt ijnen pso: tNenontiea.l In. Govijesle tlhinecrka:p Neuontiec. tTa. rVgaents L.angenhove: None. J. van der Zee: None. S. Engelborghs: None. R. Vandenberghe: None. M. Vandenbulcke: None. P. Santens: None. P. De Deyn: None. C. Van Broeckhoven: None. M. Cruts: None.  P08
.39 Application of Artificial Neural Networks to link one-carbon metabolism to Alzheimer’s disease risk  P08
.41 L. Migliore1, E. Grossi2, M. Buscema3, F. Coppedè1; PGRN exon 6 deletion G.101349_101355delCTGCTGT associated with 1Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, Medical Genetics Unit, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 2Bracco Medical Department, San Nonfluent primary progressive aphasia in a familial form of FTLD Donato Milanese, Italy, 3Semeion Research Centre, Rome, Italy. E. Vitale1, A. Iuliano1,2, A. Polverino3,2, A. Postiglione4, P. Sorrentino5, S. Rappatà6, G. Milan5, G. Sorrentino2,7; 1CNR Cybernetics, Pozzuoli, Italy, 2Department of Institutional Studies Parthenope University Naples, Naples, Italy, 3CNR, Pozzuoli, Italy, 4Department of Clinical and Folate metabolism, also known as one-carbon metabolism, plays a fun- Experimental Medicine, University of Naples „Federico II“, Naples, Italy, 5Geriatric Center damental role in DNA synthesis and integrity, in chromosome stability, in „Frullone“ ASL Napoli 1, Naples, Italy, 6CNR Bioimaging and Biostructures, Naples, Italy, antioxidant defence mechanisms, as well as in epigenetic processes, and 7Neurological Institute for Diagnosis and Treatment Hermitage Capodimonte, Naples, Italy. impairments of this pathway have been often linked to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) risk. In addition, increasing evidence from large scale case-control stu- dies, genome-wide association studies, and meta-analyses of the literature The Fronto-Temporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD) is a genetically and patho- suggest that polymorphisms of genes involved in one-carbon metabolism logically heterogeneous degenerative disorder characterized by progressive influence the levels of folate, homocysteine and vitamin B12, and might be decline in behavior or language associated with frontal and temporal lobe among AD risk factors. degeneration. The phenotypic heterogeneity consistently revealed the pres- We aimed to analyze a dataset of genetic and biochemical data (folate, ho- ence of at least two clinical manifestations such as behavioral variant FTLD mocysteine, vitamin B12, and the genotypes generated by 9 common bial- (bvFTLD) and Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA). lelic polymorphisms of genes involved in folate metabolism) obtained from Several mutations either in the same gene or in different genes show a great 40 AD patients and 40 matched controls to assess the predictive capacity degree of heterogeneity associated with FTLD, up to 40% of familiar cases o 2f 2a 2rtificial neural networks assembled in TWIESTS HsyGste 2m0 i1n3 d |is PtiAngRuIisSh, FRhAavNe bCeEen | dWesWcriWbe.dE aSs HcaGrr.yOinRg Gmutation/s in GRN and/or MAPT genes.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Here we describe a four-generation Southern Italian family segregating FMR1 mRNA and we observed that one them, miR-221, is down-regulated FTLD. The family consists of five siblings, three of which affected by FTLD. at the synapse of young FXTAS mice and in the full brain of the older ones. The three phenotypes are clinically heterogeneous with behavioral variant Interestingly, many of those deregulated mRNAs at the synapse, as well as in (bvFTLD) apathetic or disinhibited behavioral syndrome in the males and whole brain, are target of miR-221. These findings suggest a network regula- Primary Progressive Aphasia (PPA) in the female. We collected 2 of the affec- tSio. nZ o- ningcalruod: iNngo nme.i RRN. HAus kaenmd am: NRoNnAes. -R fo. Wr FilMleRm1s emnR: NNoAn.e. B. Mari: None. B. ted individuals (one of the male and the female), and one of the non affected Bardoni: None. sibs and analyzed these for GRN and MAPT gene in search for a mutation. Specifically, we analyzed the sequence of all exons, exon-intron boundaries and 5‘ and 3‘ regulatory regions. We found g.101349_101355delCTGCTGT  P08
.44 mutation on exon 6 of GRN, only in the affected siblings. This deletion we Evaluation of NTF4 gene mutations in Brazilian patients with primary know causing a premature stop codon with frameshift induction and mRNA open angle glaucoma (POAG) in a case-control study non-sense mediated decay involving GRN protein haploinsufficiency. Up to H. F. Nunes1, V. P. Costa1, N. I. T. Zanchin2, J. P. C. de Vasconcellos1, M. B. de Melo1; now only two sporadic cases have been described carrying these deletion, 1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2FIOCRUZ, Curitiba, Brazil. further investigation are in progress to better describe the molecular defect c Ea.u Vsiitnagle t:h Niso FneT.L AD.. Iuliano: None. A. Polverino: None. A. Postiglione: None. P. Sorrentino: None. S. Rappatà: None. G. Milan: None. G. Sorrentino: None. Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that leads to progressive damage to retinal ganglion cells (RGC) resulting in visual field loss. Although the pathophysiology of glaucoma is not well un-  P08
.42 derstood, members of the neurotrophin family are known to support the sur- Comparative RNA-Seq profiling from FUS mutations found in vival of neuronal populations, including RGCs. The goal of this study was to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and essential tremor cases. investigate the contribution of Neurotrophin-4 (NTF4) gene mutations in the M. Therrien1, J. Parker1,2, G. A. Rouleau3, P. A. Dion1,2; etiology of glaucoma in a sample of Brazilian POAG patients. A case-control 1The Centre of Excellence in Neurosciences, CHUM Research Center, Montréal, QC, study involving 130 POAG patients and 90 control subjects was performed Canada, 2Pathology and cell biology department, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, through direct sequencing of the coding region of the NTF4. Here, we report Canada, 3Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, Montréal, QC, Canada. four different heterozygous mutations in the NTF4 gene, accounting for about 3% of POAG patients; no mutations were observed in the control group. Two of the mutations were in the 3’ untranslated region and the other two Fused in sarcoma (FUS) is a protein involved in DNA and RNA processing led to amino acid changes in the protein. The mutations D196Y and R164M and tumorigenesis. The presence of nonsense mutations affecting FUS has imply in changes of an Aspartic acid for a Tyrosine and an Arginine for a Me- been observed in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) (p.Q519X) and Es- thionine, respectively. Both changes correspond to amino acids with different sential Tremor (ET) (p.Q290X) patients. While the two mutant proteins are side chain polarity and charge that may affect NTF4 either the monomer or sequestered to the cytoplasm, only the FUS(p.Q519X) still contains its RNA dimer structure. To confirm this hypothesis investigation about the functional binding domain which could lead the FUS aggregates to act as cytoplasmic consequences and phenotypic implications must be performed. RNA trap that would prevent the normal re-entry into the nucleus of some NTF4 is functionally related to POAG but the mutation frequency in Brazilian of the RNA. Massively parallel RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) experiments are POAG patients is low, although higher than in Caucasians and Asians POAG now easily feasible and we propose to delineate the transcriptome of N2a cases. Therefore, NTF4 does not have a major contribution in the genetics of cells expressing either FUS(WT), FUS(p.Q519X) or FUS(p.Q290X). For each P HO.FA.G N iunn tehse: NBoranzei.l iVa.nP. pCoopsutala: tNioonn.e. N.I.T. Zanchin: None. J.P.C. de of these, we would make a total, nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA preparation, Vasconcellos: None. M.B. de Melo: None. converted these to cDNA and assemble them into a library compatible with a Illumina MiSeq apparatus. Cufflink will be used to align sequencing reads and evaluate the abundance of each transcript. Relative expression changes  P08
.45 between FUS(WT), FUS(p.Q519X) and FUS(p.Q290X) will be evaluated on Founder SPG7 mutation causing hereditary spastic paraplegia in a transcriptome wide basis. In addition, the datasets will also be assessed Gypsies - clinical and genetic considerations for splicing defect between FUS(WT) and the two mutated FUS. Interesting D. Kancheva1,2, A. Andreeva3, T. Chamova3, B. Morar4, N. Ivanova1, D. Azmanov4, V. Mitev1, variations will be confirmed by quantitative PCR and Taqman probes in the L. Kalaydjieva4, I. Tournev3, A. Jordanova2; readily available ALS and ET patient’s lymphoblastoid cell lines. With the 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry,Molecular Medicine Center, implication of TDP-43, FUS, and  C9
ORF72 in ALS, the clues point towards Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University of disrupted RNA metabolism as a pathogenic mechanism for the disease. Thus Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 3Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital „Alexandrovska“, Department of Neurology, Medical University,Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Laboratory for our findings may be applicable to ALS in general and other neurological dis- o Mrd. Terhse rarsiesonc: iNatoende .w Ji.t Pha FrUkeSr.: None. G.A. Rouleau: None. P.A. Dion: None. Molecular Genetics, Centre for Medical Research and Western Australian Institute for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.  P08
.43 Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a group of clinically and genetical- Genomics of FXTAS (Fragile X associated Tremor Ataxia) mouse ly heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive brains reveals hallmarks of altered neurodevelopmement and spasticity and weakness of lower limbs, due to retrograde degeneration of neurodegeneration. corticospinal axons. Mutations in the SPG7 gene cause autosomal recessive S. Zongaro1, R. Hukema2, R. Willemsen2, B. Mari3, B. Bardoni1; HSP, characterized by both pure and complicated forms of spastic paraplegia. 1Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Valbonne, France, 2Erasmus Recently, several heterozygous SPG7 mutations were reported in affected in- University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Instutut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, dividuals, although the evidences for their dominant disease-causing effect Valbonne, France. are vague and contradictory. Here, we describe 6 Gypsy HSP pedigrees from Bulgaria harboring the p. L78
X mutation in the SPG7 gene. The same mutati- on was reported in Gypsy patients with spastic paraplegia from Spain and in While FMR1 is silenced in Fragile X syndrome (FXS) patients carrying the full 2 Italian HSP pedigrees. We identified a common haplotype shared between mutation, its expression is elevated (2-8 fold) in premutated individuals. The- all families, suggesting a founder effect. Importantly, the p. L78
X mutation se subjects may develop the Fragile X-associated Tremor/Ataxia syndrome caused the HSP phenotype in both homo- and heterozygous state. Sanger (FXTAS), a late onset neurodegenerative disorder characterized by ataxia and sequencing excluded SPG7 compound heterozygosity in the symptomatic parkinsonism. In addition, people carrying the premutation can be affected carriers. Genotype-phenotype correlation study of over 20 homozygous and by a set of neurological and behavioural disorders during young age. Memory 45 heterozygous Gypsy individuals with a homogeneous genetic background problems have been detected in these patients as well as in the mouse mo- allowed characterizing the p. L78
X penetrance and phenotype expressivity. del for FXTAS. In those animals, by transcriptome analysis we have shown a Our findings broaden the clinical spectrum of SPG7 mutations, provide strong profound deregulation of the expression levels of genes involved in learning, evidences favoring the dual nature of molecular defects in this gene, and al- memory and autistic behavior, Parkinson disease and neurodegeneration. low establishing diagnostic and counseling guidelines for HSP patients from These findings suggest the presence of a synapthopathy (Zongaro et al., HMG, G Dy.p Ksayn ocrhigeivna.: None. A. Andreeva: None. T. Chamova: None. B. Morar: None. N. 2013). Furthermore, we studied gene expression profiles of whole brain ob- Ivanova: None. D. Azmanov: None. V. Mitev: None. L. Kalaydjieva: None. I. tained from both young and old FXTAS mice. We observed that in this context Tournev: None. A. Jordanova: None. different neurodegenerative pathways are involved at different ages. In FXTAS mice, we also studied the expression leveEl SofH sGev e2ra0l 1m3ic r|o PRANARsI Sth,a Ft RtaArgNet CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 223ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.46 Alteration of Fatty-Acid-Metabolizing Enzymes Affects Mitochondrial Form and Function in Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia degeneration, motor impairment, and reduced life span in the insect. An un- C. Tesson1,2, R. Rossignol3, M. A. M. Salih4, M. Zaki5, F. Fellman6, R. Schule7, C. Mignot8, M. derstanding of sws role in axon formation, growth and deneration will help Nawara1, E. Obre3, C. Durand3, A. Bouhouche9, F. Santorelli10, A. Caballero Oteyza7, K. H. to gain insight into NTE’s role in similar processes in the human nervous El-Hachimi1,2, F. Lamari11, T. Esteves1, M. Gaussen1, M. Monin1, G. Gyapay12, D. Lechner13, system. To study sws functions we use the system of the 3rd instar larval M. A. Gonzalez14, C. Depienne1,8, F. Mochel1,8, J. Lavie3, L. Schols7, D. Lacombe3, S. Zuchner14, neuromuscular junctions (NMJ) of Drosophila melanogaster. In this study A. Yamashita15, A. Benomar9, J. G. Gleeson16, C. Goizet3, A. Brice1,8, A. Dürr1,8, F. Darios1, G. we show that mutations in sws (sws1, sws4, sws7615, swsolfE) alter NMJ Stevanin1,8,2; morphology, cause abnormal distribution of synaptic proteins, disruption of 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (INSERM / UPMC UMR_ S975
, CNRS 7225, NEB), Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 2Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, axonal transport and tubulin network in NMJ of Dr. melanogaster. We pro- France, 3Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 4King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi pose that sws plays an important role in synaptogenesis processes as well as Arabia, 5National Research Institute in Cairo Egypt, Cairo, Egypt, 6Dpt de Génétique aGx.o Kn ifsolirkm: Natoinoen. aSn. dS afuranncttsioenvain: gN ionn De.r Nos. oTpkhacilhae mnkeola: nNoognaes.ter. Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research and Center for Neurology, Tuebingen, Germany, 8APHP, Fédération de Génétique, Pitié- Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 9Hôpital des Spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, 10IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone, Piso, Italy, 11Service de Biochimie, Pitié-Salpêtrière  P08
.48 Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 12Genoscope, Evry, Huntington Disease: two case reports of pregnancies continued after France, 13Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 14Department of Human Genetics a positive prenatal diagnosis and Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine, University of S. Creighton1, S. Kieffer1, P. Goldberg1, M. Hayden2; Miami, Miami, FL, United States, 15Department of Life and Health Sciences, Faculty of 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Teikyo University, Kaga 2-11-1, Itabashi-Ku, Tokyo, Japan, 2Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, 16University of California, San Diego, CA, United States. Vancouver, BC, Canada. Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is considered one of the most hetero- Prenatal diagnosis for Huntington Disease (HD) is uncommon. Rarer still is geneous group of neurological disorders, both clinically and genetically. It deciding to continue a pregnancy when the fetus has a CAG expansion in the comprises pure and complex forms that clinically include slowly progressive HD range. We report two cases of continued pregnancies following a posi- lower-limb spasticity resulting from degeneration of the corticospinal tract. tive prenatal test. In both cases the mothers were known carriers of a CAG At least 50 loci accounting for these diseases have been mapped to date, and expansion following HD predictive testing. mutations have been identified in 29 genes, most of which playing a role in Case 1: The patient was referred at 6 weeks’ gestation for predictive testing intracellular trafficking. Here, we identified mutations in two functionally Following a positive predictive test, she had amniocentesis, with the intent related genes (DDHD1 and CY P2
U1) in individuals with autosomal recessi- of ending the pregnancy if the test were positive. Testing was performed ve forms of HSP by using either the classical positional cloning or a combi- which revealed that the fetus also carried a CAG expansion. She altered her nation of whole-genome linkage mapping and next-generation sequencing. original plans, electing to continue the pregnancy. She subsequently under- Interestingly, three subjects with CY P2
U1 mutations presented witChY aP t2hUin1 went preimplanation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for her second child. corpus callosum, white-matter abnormalities, and/or calcification of the ba- Case 2: The patient had a normal prenatal diagnosis in her first pregnancy. sal ganglia. Furthermore, we recently identified a new mutation of Subsequently, following unsuccessful PGD attempts, she had four natural in a Switzerland family: c.1A>C/ p.M1L. This mutation is also present in an conceptions which were all found to have a CAG expansion and were discon- asymptomatic sister aged of 50 years; suggesting an incomplete penetrance tinued. When the fetus again was affected in the next pregnancy, the couple or a metabolic compensation in this individual. These genes code for two en- elected to continue the pregnancy. zymes involved in fatty-acid metabolism, and we have demonstrated in hu- We are not aware of any reports in the literature regarding the long term man cells that the HSP pathophysiology includes alteration of mitochondrial outcome for families when the presence of a gene mutation for HD is known architecture and bioenergetics with increased oxidative stress. Our combi- before the birth of their child. We will discuss the follow up and general ned results focus attention on lipid metabolism as a critical HSP pathway wellbeing of the current case families, including ethical and psychosocial wCi.t The as sdoenle: tNeroinoeu. sR i.m Rpoascsti gonno ml: iNtoocnheo. nMd.Ari.aMl .b Sioaelinhe: rNgoenteic. Mfu.n Zcatikoi:n N.one. F. issues raised by the circumstances. We anticipate they will help inform our Fellman: None. R. Schule: None. C. Mignot: None. M. Nawara: None. E. practice regarding prenatal diagnosis for HD and other adult onset disor- Obre: None. C. Durand: None. A. Bouhouche: None. F. Santorelli: None. A. d Se.r Cs.reighton: None. S. Kieffer: None. P. Goldberg: None. M. Hayden: None. Caballero Oteyza: None. K.H. El-Hachimi: None. F. Lamari: None. T. Esteves: None. M. Gaussen: None. M. Monin: None. G. Gyapay: None. D. Lechner: None. M.A. Gonzalez: None. C. Depienne: None. F. Mochel: None. J. Lavie: None. L. Schols: None. D. Lacombe: None. S. Zuchner: None. A. Yamashita:  P08
.49 None. A. Benomar: None. J.G. Gleeson: None. C. Goizet: B. Research Grant Modulation of age at onset in Tunisian Huntington disease patients: (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Implication of 5 new modifier genes: DRPLA, ATXN1, TBP, DMPK and grants already received); Modest; AFM. A. Brice: B. Research Grant (principal JPH3 investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; 7th PCRD ( European Union), Erare (European M. Chourabi1, D. H’mida-Ben Brahim1, S. Ben Amor2, I. Harrabi3, S. Trabelsi1, M. Mastouri Union and ANR). A. Dürr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator Haddaji1, S. Sassi1, M. Gribaa1, S. Ben Ammou2, A. Saad1; or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; 1Laboratory of cytogenetics, molecular genetics and reproductive biology, Farhat Agence Nationale de la Recherche. F. Darios: None. G. Stevanin: B. Research HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of neurology, Sahloul Hospital, Sousse, Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well Tunisia, 3Department of epidemiology and medical statistics, Farhat HACHED Hospital, as grants already received); Modest; Agence Nationale de la Recherche. Sousse, Tunisia. Our study aims to investigate the implication of CAG repeat expansion and  P08
.47 9 modifiers genes in age at onset (AO) of 10 Huntington’s disease (HD) Tu- Functional study of swiss cheese, ortholog of the Hereditary Spastic nisian patients. Paraplegia gene The diagnosis of HD is already confirmed in our laboratory in 10 patients. G. Kislik, S. Sarantseva, N. Tkachenko; Disease onset was noticed between 24 and 72 years. The number of CAG National Research Centre, Gatchina, Russian Federation. repeat varied between 40 and 49 CAG. Our patients were screened for 9 mo- difiers genes: JPH3, DRPLA, ATXN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B, IT15, TCERG1, DMPK and TBP. For this we used triplet primed PCR and direct sequencing. Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a clinically and genetically hetero- CAG repeat expansion varies between 40 and 49 repeats. Using SPSS 17.0 geneous group of neurodegenerative diseases characterized by degenerati- we established an inverse correlation between CAG repeat and the AO (R = on of corticospinal tract axons and progressive lower-limb spastic paralysis. -0.809, p=0.005). This CAG expansion was found to be implicated in 65.5% Neuropathy target esterase (NTE) is one of the HSP genes and responsible of the AO variance. We also established the implication of DRPLA CAG re- for the development of the early-onset peat at 66.3% (R square= 0.884; p=0.003) and the implication of DMPK CTG autosomal-recessive HSP form. NTE is also involved in the pathogenesis of repeat at 22.02% (R square= 0.731; p=0.004) of the unexplained variance. organophosphorous compound-induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN). Both DRPLA CAG repeat and DMPK CTG repeat were inversely correlated to the HSP and OPIDN are characterized by the distal axonopathy. The molecular AO at respectively (R=-0.823, p=0.003) and (R=-0.641; p=0.046). mechanisms underlying the axonopathy involved in HSP and OPIDN as well TBP, ATXN1, JPH3, GRIN2B (rs 890) and TCERG1 genes were also implica- as in many other neurodegenerative human disorders are poorly under- ted in the AO unexplained variance at respectively 1.44%, 4.34%, 8.69%, stood. NTE is a highly conservative gene with orthologs in many species. 224 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FR1A3.N04C%E a |n dW 2W5.5W%., EwShHerGea.sO GRRIGN2A (rs1969060) did not show any impli- Mutation of NTE’s Drosophila ortholog swiss cheese (sws) leads to neuro-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index cation in our population. cystatin ß dodecamer repeat expansion in JME. It remains to be clarified if We report here the first North African study on HD. We investigated 5 new the so-called minor EPM1 mutations might account for a proportion of the p Mo.l yCmhoourprahbisi:m Nso lnoec.a Dte. dH ’amt iDdaR-PBLenA ,B TraBhPi,m A:T NXoNn1e,. DSM. BPeKn aAnmdo JrP:H N3o ngee.n Ie. s. gMe.n Getaigc lsiaursdcie: pNtoibniel.i tPy. tToa rJaMnEti.no: None. G. Annesi: None. G. Iannello: None. R. Harrabi: None. S. Trabelsi: None. M. Mastouri Haddaji: None. S. Sassi: Michelucci: None. A. Bianchi: None. A. Gambardella: None. O. n behalf of None. M. Gribaa: None. S. Ben Ammou: None. A. Saad: None. Italian League against Epilepsy: None.  P08
.50  P08
.52 Dog as an animal model for idiopathic epilepsy: the Schipperke breed Whole exome sequencing in a cohort of 70 undetermined as an example leukodytrophic families L. L. E. Koskinen1,2,3, E. H. Seppälä1,2,3, M. Virta1,2,3, P. Pilve1,2,3, T. Jokinen4, P. Jokinen1,2,3, R. I. DORBOZ1, F. Renaldo2,3,1, J. Masliah-Planchon4, D. Tonduti1,5, E. Eymard-Pierre6, S. Viitmaa4, H. Lohi1; Guerroui1, M. Elmaleh7, P. Labauge8, D. Rodriguez1,3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,2; 1Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 1INSERM U676,Physiopathologie, conséquences fonctionnelles et neuroprotection des 2Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Department of Medical Genetics, University atteintes au cerveau en développement ; Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 2Centre of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, de Référence des Leucodystrophies,Service de Neuropédiatrie et Maladies Métaboliques 4Department of Clinical Veterinary Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. ; Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, Paris, France, 3Centre de Référence des maladies Neurogénétiques de l’enfant à l’adulte, Service de Neuropédiatrie , Hôpital Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, Paris, France, 4UF de Génétique Moléculaire ; Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, Paris, France, 5Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, Unit Idiopathic epilepsy (IE) is a common neurological disease in human and of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Génétique Médicale, dog. Relatively few risk genes have been identified for common IE to date. Univ Clermont1, UFR Médecine, CHU Clermont-Ferrand, CHU Estaing, Paris, France, We have used the Schipperke dog breed as an animal model for human IE to 7Service d’Imagerie pédiatrique ; Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, Paris, France, identify disease risk genes. The seizure characteristics are similar between 8Service de neurologie, hôpital Gui de Chauliac, CHU de Montpellier, Paris, France. the two species and reduced genetic heterogeneity of purebred dogs is ad- vantageous for genetic studies. 62 epilepsy patients were analysed through detailed owner-filled epilepsy Leukodystrophies are a group of orphan genetic diseases that affect the questionnaires. 12 cases and 8 controls were clinically studied. 56 cases and white matter (WM) and its main component, the myelin. Diversity of the 66 healthy controls were genotyped for genome-wide association (GWAS) genes involved in the development and homeostasis of the WM explains the with Illumina 170K SNP arrays. The data was analysed with the GenABEL large heterogeneity of this group of disorders. During this last decade, we Grammas test. collected through the LeukoFrance netwok a total of 1182 leukodystrophic The age of onset varied between 6 months and 5.5years (mean 3years). The families. Despite advances made in gene identification of UL, 68% of our median seizure frequency was 5/year and the typical seizure duration was families remain without genetic marker. We selected for whole exome se- 7min (range 0.5min-30min). One-third of the owners were able to identify quencing a cohort of 70 families with reliable clinical and neuroradiological phenomenology preceding convulsions as a sign of focal seizure activity. The data. We used homozygosity as an effective filter in consanguineous families clinical examinations confirmed IE in the studied cases. In the GWAS, two loci (27 families). The preliminary Exome results of 11 families revealed (i) one showed tentative association on CFAs 10 (p(raw)=1.76e-05, p(gwas)=0.30) patient mutated for a gene already involved in a leukodystrophy (POLR3) and 37 (p(raw)=5.97e-06, p(gwas)=0.12). with isolated ataxia. This patient born of consanguineous union was found Based on the epilepsy questionnaires and clinical examinations, we descri- to be compound heterozygous, therefore genetic diagnosis have been bed focal and generalised IE with variable expression in Schipperkes. The missed by homozygosity mapping only.; (ii) for two patients mutations were associated locus on CFA37 is also a risk locus for IE in Belgian Shepherds. found in genes known to cause other type of neurodegenerative diseases This indicates that these two breeds related with each other also share com- with therapeutic approaches (BOLA3 and FOLR1). The two reported pati- mon risk factors for epilepsy. We currently aim to replicate our findings in ents exhibited unusual phenotypes; (iii) in 5 patients, variants have been l Lar.Lg.eEr. mKoastekriniaelns :a Nnodn ien.v Ee.sHt.i gSaetpe ptähleä :a Nssooncei.a Mte.d V liortcai: i nN omnoe.r eP .d Peitlaviel:. None. T. found as possible causative mutations in 5 genes not previously reported Jokinen: None. P. Jokinen: None. R. Viitmaa: None. H. Lohi: E. Ownership in neurodegenerative disorders. However, the biological role of these genes Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Genoscoper Oy (Ltd). and the type of mutations found highly suggested their deleterious effects. This study underlines the particular interested of Exome sequencing in leu- kodystrophies, in which the molecular strategy for diagnosis is up to now b I.a Dseodrb oonz :W NMon “eM. FR. IR reencaolgdnoi:t iNoonn pea. tJt.e Mrna”s.liah-Planchon: None. D. Tonduti:  P08
.51 None. E. Eymard-Pierre: None. S. Guerroui: None. M. Elmaleh: None. P. No evidence for a role of Cystatin ß dodecamer repeat expansion in Labauge: None. D. Rodriguez: None. O. Boespflug-Tanguy: None. Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy M. GAGLIARDI1,2, P. Tarantino1, G. Annesi1, G. Iannello1, R. Michelucci3, A. Bianchi4, A. Gambardella1,5, O. n behalf of Italian League against Epilepsy6;  P08
.53 1Institute of Neurological Sciences,National Research Council, MANGONE (CS), Italy, 2University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Division of Neurology, A severe form of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease caused by PL P1
 “Bellaria” Hospital, Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Division of Neurology, Ospedale “S. triplication. Donato” Arezzo, Arezzo, Arezzo, Italy, 5Institute of Neurology, University of Magna M. Hully1, J. Masliah-Planchon2, C. Grisel1, C. Vignal2, N. Boddaert3, M. Eisermann4, H. Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy, 6c/o PTS Congressi srl - Roma, Roma, Italy. Cavé2, S. Drunat2, I. Desguerre1; 1Neuropédiatrie_Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 2Genetic department_Robert-Debré hospital, Paris, France, 3Radiologie pédiatrique_Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 4Explorations fonctionnelles neurologiques_Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) is a common form of idiopathic generali- zed epilepsy (IGE) that has a relevant genetic contribution, but so far genes PL P1
 related to JME families remain largely unknown. JME shares electro-features INTRODUCTION: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a rare X-linked with Unverricht-Lundborg disease (EPM1) that is a form of the progressive myelination disorder caused by genomic alterations of the PLP g1ene. Typi- myoclonic epilepsy characterized by myoclonus, epilepsy and progressive cal forms of PMD are characterized by early nystagmus and hypotonia that neurologic deterioration. EPM1 is caused by mutations in the gene that later evolves into spastic tetraparesis, dystonia, and ataxia. gene du- codes for cystatin ß, an inhibitor of cysteine protease. The most common plications are responsible for 60% of the cases. In addition to duplication, mutation in EPM1 is an expansion of a dodecamer repeat located in a non other rearrangements, including deletions, translocations, and triplications, coding region upstream of the transcription start site of the cystatin ß gene. have been described underlying a complex genomic architecture. Since JME and EPM1 are both myoclonic epilepsies, we investigated the role CLINICAL REPORT: We report the case of a 5-month-old boy, second child of dodecamer repeat expansion in patients with JME. Thirty-five patients of unrelated parents. Pregnancy was uneventful but nystagmus was noticed (26 women; mean age: 22.4, + 6,3; mean age at onset: 15,7 + 3,5) with JME at birth and subsequent psychomotor development was severely delayed. were enrolled. Twenty-four had a positive family for JME or IGE. DNA was At the age of 2 months the patient exhibited opisthotonic postures. On ex- extracted by standard methods. Dodecamer repeat expansion was amplified amination at 5 months of age, we report absent visual fixation, nystagmus, by expand long template PCR system and detected by electrophoresis ana- constant choreoathetoid movements, and severe hypotonia. The brainstem lysis. All subjects provided written informed consent, as required by ethics auditory evoked potentials (BAEP) results were seriously altered showing committees in each epilepsy centre of all the participating investigator. The only wave I. His brain maPgLnPe1tic resonance imaging (MRI) displays a typical analysis of the dodecamer repeat expansion did not evidence any expan- profound diffuse hypomyelination. ded alleles in all 35 patients with JME. OuErS sHtuGdy 2 d0id1 n3o t| sPuAppRoIrSt a, FroRleA foNr CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 225 MOLECULAR ANALYSIS: gene dosage analysis using multiplex ligation-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PL P1
 dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and custom CGH array (Agilent) re- cDhiescr uDsissieoans:e . Finally, for 4 patients, we concluded on VOUS (Variation Of vealed a triplication of a 110 Kb genomic segment containing the gene Unknown Signification). embedded PinL Pa 1la rger duplicated segment of 510 Kb. Because of their clinical and genetic heterogeneity, array CGH, CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, only 7P LPPM1D patients with more than 2 co- high resolutive and pangenomic technique, has its entire place in the etiolo- pies of the gene were reported in the literature so far. Our case brings gic diagnostic strategy of undetermined leukodystrophy. Indeed, this study additional evidence that patients with triplications exhibit a more se- shows that array CGH allows both to highlight rearrangements implicating v Mer. eH pulhlye:n Notoynpee. Jt.h Mana splaiathie-nPtlasn wcihtohn d: uNpolnicea. tCio. nGsr.isel: None. C. Vignal: genes already involved in these pathologies and to identify new candidate None. N. Boddaert: None. M. Eisermann: None. H. Cavé: None. S. Drunat: genes. However, because of the difficulty to conclude in some cases about None. I. Desguerre: None. the pathogenic or polymorphism status, additional analyses are still in pro- gMre. sGsa (ye-xbperlleilses:i oNno nsetu. Edy. ,E mymutaartdio-Pnise rsrcer:e Nenonineg. …C.) .Pebrel-Richard: None. P. Combes: None. S. Kemeny: None. L. Gouas: None. C. Goumy: None. C. Sarret: None. O. Boespflug-Tanguy: None. P. Vago: None.  P08
.54 Molecular characterization of PL P1
 duplication in a large cohort of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease patients J. Masliah-Planchon1,2, I. Dorboz2, E. Eymard-Pierre3, C. Vignal1, C. Chambion1, F.  P08
.56 Renaldo4,5,2, D. Tonduti4,2, H. Cavé1, M. Elmaleh6, S. Drunat1, O. Boespflug-Tanguy4,2; Protective effects of epigallocatechin-3-gallate against hydrogen 1Genetic department_Robert-Debré hospital, Paris, France, 2INSERM U676, Paris, France, peroxide-induced apoptosis in transformed lymphoblastoid cells 3Cytogénétique médicale_CHU Clermont Ferrand, Clermont Ferrand, France, 4Neurologie from patients with Machado-Joseph disease et maladie métabolique_Hopital Robert-Debré, Paris, France, 5Neurologie pédiatrique_ H. TSAI1, J. Huang1, T. Chen2; Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 6Imagerie pédiatrique_Robert-Debré hospital, 1CHUNG SHAN MEDICAL UNIVERSITY, Taichung, Taiwan, 2Graduate School of Computer Paris, France. Science and Information Technology,, Taichung, Taiwan. INTRODUCTION: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-linked dys- Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) or spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 S(SCCAA33/M), JtDh1e myelinating disorder characterized by nystagmus, hypotonia, spasticity, autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder, is caused by an increased ataxia and psychomotor developmental delay. ThPeL m P1
ost freqPuLePn1t molecular number of CAG trinuclear expansion repeats in coding regain of aberration responsible for about 60% of cases is a duplication oPf La Pg1enomic and resulted in a disease protein with a higher polyQ domain. The study. segment of variable length containing the entire gene. encodes a of rare, inherited mutations underlying familial forms of MJD‘s disease has major protein component of central nervMouAsT sEyRstIeAmLS m AyNelDin M anEdT HODS d:upli- provided insight into the molecular mechanisms of disease pathogenesis cation-subsequent overexpression in oligodendrocytes results in cellular to- Neurodegenerative disorders are a class of disease in which elevated levels xicity and subsequent hypomyelination. This of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and apoptosis lead to tissue damage. Epigal- sPtLuPd1y has been performed in a large cohort of 48 duplicated patients with locatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is a major component of green tea polyphenols reliable and long term clinical data (leukofrance database). We analyzed which displays potential properties of neuroprotection. We investigated the gene dosageP LaPn1d size of the duplicated segments with high-resolution protective effects of EGCG extract against hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a toxin custom array-based CGH including 30,032 probes spanning a 20Mb region created by oxidative stress and implicated in neurodegenerative disease, in surrounding thReE SULT Sg:e ne. Precise brPeLakPp1oint mapping has subsequently mutant ataxin-3 cells. Our results demonstrated that EGCG against H2O2-in- been performed using breakpoint junctions sequencing and genome wal- duced cytotoxicity in a dose-dependent manner (p<0.05). We examined the king strategy. This custom array-based CGH analysis in a effect EGCG against H2O2-induced apoptosis through reciprocal regulating large cohort of patient confirmed a great diversity of duplication size and pro-apoptotic protein Bax and anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Interestingly, bPrLePa1kpointsC. OSeNqCuLeUnSciInOgN :of the successfully amplified duplication break- EGCG against H2O2-induced apoptosis in mutant ataxin-3 cells was accompa- pPLoPin1t junction reports complex rearrangement mechanisms involving the nied by the up-regulation of heat shock protein (Hsp) 70 expression. These gene. The complex local genomic architecture of the results show that EGCG may be a potential therapeutic candidate for neuro- locus likely drives the DNA susceptibility to complex rearrangements. dHe.g Tesnaei:r aNtoivnee .d Jis. eHausaensg in: vNoolnvein. Tg. gCluhteanm: Natoen eex.citotoxicity such as MJD. More investigation is required to fully understand the mechanisms involved in those genomic rearrangements and their correlation with the variability oJb. sMearvselidah i-nP tlahnec dhiosena: sNeo sneev. eI.r iDtyo.rboz: None. E. Eymard-Pierre: None. C. Vignal: None. C. Chambion: None. F. Renaldo: None. D. Tonduti: None. H.  P08
.57 Cavé: None. M. Elmaleh: None. S. Drunat: None. O. Boespflug-Tanguy: None. Autosomal Dominant Microcephaly: Identification of a Novel Locus R. Kadir1, T. Harel1, S. Shalev2, J. Zlotogora3, O. S. Birk1; 1Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Haemek Genetic Institute, Haemek Medical Center,  P08
.55 Haemek, Israel, 3The hebrew university of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Array CGH and undetermined leukodystrophy M. Gay-bellile1,2, E. Eymard-Pierre1,2, C. Pebrel-Richard1,2, P. Combes1,2, S. Kemeny1,2, L. Gouas1,2, C. Goumy1,2, C. Sarret3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy4,5, P. Vago1,2; 1Cytogénétique Médicale - CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2ERTICa, Univ Autosomal dominant microcephaly with mild to moderate mental retarda- Clermont 1, UFR Médecine, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3Pédiatrie - CHU Estaing, tion with no dysmorphism or other anomalies was diagnosed in eleven in- Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4Neurologie Pédiatrique et Maladies Métaboliques - Hôpital dividuals of an Arab Israeli family. Craniosynostosis and environmental fac- Robert Debré AP-HP, Paris, France, 5INSERM UMR 676, Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne, tors were ruled out per history as possible contributors to the disease, thus Paris, France. verifying the diagnosis of primary microcephaly. Brain CT scan of affected Objective: individuals showed no architectural anomalies. Nine living affected indivi- duals were available for clinical and genetic evaluation. Association with all Methods: Research of small-size chromosomal rearrangements in patients known microcephaly-associated loci was ruled out using polymorphic mar- with undetermined leukodystrophy. kers and genome wide linkage analysis data. Genome-wide linkage analysis Thirty patients with undetermined hypo or demyelinating leu- revealed association of the disease to a region on chromosome 4 which was kodystrophy were analysed by array CGH (Agilent 4x180K). Rearrange- fine mapped with polymorphic markers to an area of approximately 20Mbp ments not found in databases as polymorphism variants were confirmed between markers D4 S1558
 and D4 S2460
, with a maximal LOD score of Z = by Quantitative Multiplex Fluorescent PCR (QMF-PCR). To determine their 3.44, at marker D4 S1534
 (θ=0). Whole exome sequencing has yielded seve- inherited or de novo status we realised familial cytogenetic investigations r Ra.l KSNadPi rm: Nutoanteio. nT.s H wahreicl:h N aornee b. eSi.n Sgh eaxlpevlo: rNeodn ien. tJh. eZ laoftfoegctoerda :f aNmoniley.. O.S. by QMF-PCR. Finally, in order to evaluate the deleterious status and clinical Birk: None. iRmepsulicltastion, expression study and X-inactivation analysis were performed to argument in favour of pathogenic or polymorphic rearrangements. : Thirteen among the 30 explored patients present 1 or 2 rearran- gements not described as polymorphismM vCaTr8iants. Array CGH alloweMd BuPs to identify 2 pathogenic deletions already described in leukodystrophies and taking out known causative genes: CNTN (AXPq213.2 – 31kb) and (18q22.3q23 – 7,88Mb). Two pPoLsPsi1ble pathogenic rearrangements were identified, one deletion taking out part of gene (Xq22.2 – 26kb) a2n2d 6one duplication upstream gene involvEeSdH inG P 2el0iz1ae3u s| -PMAerRzbISa-, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.58  P08
.60 Six Novel mutations in ML C1
 from 15 Iranian patients with A CIITA gene polymorphism (rs4774*C) in conjunction with the HLA- Megalencephalic Leukoencephalopathy with Subcortical Cysts. DRB1*15:01 allele increases susceptibility to multiple sclerosis in A. Rajaee1, A. Kariminejad1, B. Bozorgmehr1, M. Afshari2, S. H. Tonekaboni3, M. Brazilian females. Mirzazadeh1, H. Alizadeh2, G. A. B. Shooshtari4, M. H. Kariminejad1, T. Abbink5, M. Van E. R. Paradela1, A. L. S. Figueiredo1, F. R. Malfetano2, I. Meira2, V. C. S. R. Pereira2, L. Fêzer3, Der Knaap5; L. A. Agostinho1, C. F. Rocha1, C. L. A. Paiva1, S. V. Alves-Leon1; 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 1Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Markaz Tebi Hospital, TUMS, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pediatric Neurology 2Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Universidade Research Center, SBMU, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ahwaz Behzisti Genetic Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Counseling Center, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Pediatrics,Child Neurology, Amsterdam, Netherlands. We investigated the association of 83 alleles of polymorphic HLA-Class II genes with multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility, as well as the association Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) (MIM of two CIITA alleles. Blood samples were taken from 52 patients (35 female) #604004) is a rare autosomal recessive neurological disorder characterized and from 126 healthy control subjects matched for ancestry, sex and age. by macrocephaly, motor and cognitive decline, ataxia, spasticity and occasio- Patients were classified according to the criteria laid out by McDonalds et nal seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) shows diffusely abnormal al. (2001). After DNA extraction, the alleles of HLA-DRB1, DQB1 and DQA1 and swollen white matter of the cerebral hemispheres, presence of subcor- were identified by PCR-SSP. Sequencing of single nucleotide polymorphis- tical cysts in the anterior temporal and frontoparietal region. Mutations in ms +1614G/C (rs4774*C; G500A) and -168A/G (rs3087456) on CIITA was ML C1
(22q13.33) and GLIALCAM have been identified in patients with MLC. performed by PCR, followed by capillary electrophoresis in the platform ABI Mutations in ML C1
 account for 75% of mutations. PRISM® 3500 Genetic Analyzer. All data were subjected to Bonferroni´s cor- MLC was suspected in fifteen Iranian patients from thirteen families based rection. The RR for MS associated with the HLA-DRB1*15:01 allele was 2.79 on positive clinical findings including macrocephaly beginning in the first (OR=3.52; p value=0.001) and the RR associated with the DQB1*06:02 alle- year, neurocognitive deterioration, seizure or loss of consciousness after le was 2.42 (OR=2.72, p value=0.020). Mantel Haenszel-corrected p values minor head trauma. All except one were born to consanguineous parents. were 0.001 and 0.020 for the OR and RR, respectively. After Bonferroni’s Brain MRI images were compatible with MLC and confirmed the diagnosis. correction, only DRB1*15:01 data within our set of polymorphic alleles Sequencing of entire coding region of ML C1
 was performed for 12 patients were statistically significant. In addition, MS association with DRB1*15:01 and six novel mutations and six previously reported mutations were identi- seemed to be conspicuous only in female patients: 31.43% of female patients fied. This report shows that MLC is relatively common in Iranian population, (RR=4.78; OR=3.59; p value=0.001) and 23.53% of male patients (RR=2.05; as expected for rare diseases with high inbreeding, with surprisingly high OR=1.80; p value=0.159) had the allele. The CIITA polymorphism rs4774 f Are. qRuaejanecey: oNf onnoev. eAl .m Kuatraimtiionnesja.d: None. B. Bozorgmehr: None. M. Afshari: None. S.H. Tonekaboni: None. M. Mirzazadeh: None. H. Alizadeh: None. G.A.B. (+1614G/C) together with HLA-DRB1*15:01 increased the RR to 3.63 (OR Shooshtari: None. M.H. Kariminejad: None. T. Abbink: None. M. Van Der = 2.65, p value = 0.005) and this finding was especially female-related (RR Knaap: None. = 4.05; OR= 4.55; p= 0.016).These results reinforced the multifactorial and p Eo.Rly.g Peanriac dteralait: oNfo tnhee. Adi.Lse.Sa.s Fe.igueiredo: None. F.R. Malfetano: None. I. Meira: None. V.C.S.R. Pereira: None. L. Fêzer: None. L.A. Agostinho: None. C.F. Rocha: None. C.L.A. Paiva: None. S.V. Alves-Leon: None.  P08
.59 Cell model for Sanfilippo C syndrome using iPS cells I. Canals1,2,3, Y. Richaud3,4, S. Jiménez3,4, R. Torrent3,4, L. Vilageliu1,2, Á. Raya3,4,5, D. Grinberg1,2;  P08
.61 1Universitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 2Center for Networked Biomedical Exome sequencing in multiplex families reveals novel genetic variants Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 3Control of Stem Cell Potency related to multiple sclerosis Group, Institute of Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain, 4Center for A. Maver, B. Peterlin; Networked Biomedical Research on Bioengineering, Biomaterials and Nanomedicine Clinical institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. (CIBER-BBN), Barcelona, Spain, 5InstitucióCatalana de RecercaiEstudisAvançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory neurological disorder belonging to a group of genetically complex disorders. It is known that MS Mucopolysaccharidosis III (MPS III), or Sanfilippo syndrome, includes four accumulates in the families and it has been proposed that burden of genetic autosomal recessive diseases characterized by deficient heparan sulfate de- variants contributing to disease development might be particularly high in gradation. Clinical symptoms similar for all the types, include progressive such families. Deep sequencing in subjects from families with a large num- and severe deterioration of the central nervous system during childhood. ber of affected individuals may thus present a promising opportunity for HGSNAT, the gene responsible for MPS IIIC, encodes the acetyl CoA:α- delineation of key genes conferring susceptibility to MS. glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase, a lysosomal membrane protein. No the- With this aim, we performed whole exome re-sequencing in 12 individuals rapies are available for Sanfilippo syndrome. originating from distinct multiplex families and 10 control subjects from the Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSc) offer a unique opportunity to same background population. In familial MS patients, we observed an excess model human neurodegenerative diseases. Several models have been obtai- of rare and damaging mutations in immunoregulatory genes associated with ned using that technology. MS in a recent large-scale GWAS by the WTCC C2
 consortium (p=0.015). In We developed a neuronal cell model for Sanfilippo C syndrome from pati- 10 of 12 patients investigated, at least one predicted pathogenic rare variant ents’ fibroblasts. Patient 1 was heterozygous for a missense (p. L445
P) and in MS-associated genes was detected. We have also detected a novel patho- a splicing (c.633+1G>A) mutation, while patient 2 was homozygous for a genic mutation in the TYK2 gene, which was previously reported to contain splicing mutation (c.372-2A>G) prevalent in Spanish patients. mutations segregating with familial MS. Literature-based relatedness analy- Retroviral vectors encoding KLF4, OCT4, and SOX2, were used to obtain dif- ses revealed that genes carrying detected mutations in familial disease were ferent clones of iPSc from each patient and a control healthy individual. One 10.7 times more directly or indirectly related to MS in comparison to those clone of each line was validated. Cells were positive for alkaline phosphata- found in background control population. se, showed normal karyotypes, expressed markers of pluripotency (SSEA3, In the present study, we demonstrate how exome sequencing in families SSEA4, NANOG and TRA-1-81) and the genes encoding for the different with MS may assist in pinpointing specific genetic variants potentially con- factors were integrated in their genome. Quantitative PCR to establish the tributing to disease susceptibility and thus provide novel insight into gene- efficient repression of the exogenously introduced genes was carried out, t Aic. aMracvheitre: cNtuonree .a Bn.d P peatethrloing:e Nnoensies. of MS. and the ability of the cells to differentiate to the 3 germ layers was assayed in vitro and in vivo. OCT-4 and NANOG promoters were demethylated. After the validation, the cells were differentiated to neurons and astrocytes in or- d I.e Cr aton asltsu:d Nyo tnhee. mY. oRliecchualuard :b Nasoinse o. fS t.h Jei mdiésneeazs:e N inontoe .t hRe. sTeo rcreelnlut:l aNro tnyep.e Ls.. Vilageliu: None. Á. Raya: None. D. Grinberg: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 227ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.62  P08
.64 Signal transducers and activators of transcription genes (STAT genes)  C19
ORF12 Mutations in Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron and Multiple sclerosis (MS) Accumulation (NBIA) P. Lavtar1, A. Maver1, G. Rudolf1, N. Starčević Čizmarević2, M. Živković3, S. Šega Jazbec4, G. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, G. Lesca2,3, E. Broussolle4,5, M. Gagliardi1,6, G. Iannello1, A. Z. Klemenc Ketiš5,6, M. Kapović2, E. Dinčić7, R. Raičević7, J. Sepčić8, A. Stanković3, S. Ristić2, Gambardella1, A. Quattrone7; B. Peterlin1; 1Institute Of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Mangone, Cosenza, 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Italy, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Hospice Civiles de Lyon and ClaudeBernard Slovenia, 2Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, University Lyon, University Lyon France, Lyon, France, 3CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 3Laboratory of Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute Lyon, France, Lyon, France, 4Université Lyon I; Centre de Neurosciences Cognitives, of Nuclear Sciences “Vinča”, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Department of Neurology, University CNRS UMR5229, Lyon, France, 5Service de Neurologie C, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Medical Center (UMC), Ljubljana, Slovenia, 5Department of Family Medicine, Medical Wertheimer, Lyon, France, Lyon, France, 6University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, School, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 6Department of Family Medicine, Catanzaro, Italy, 7Neuroimaging Research Unit, National Research Council, Catanzaro, Medical School, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 7Department of Neurology, Italy, Catanzaro, Italy. Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia, 8Postgraduate Study, School of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. Background: Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) comprise hete- rogeneous group of progressive neurodegenerative disorders that present Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex inflammatory disease of with a progressive extrapyramidal syndrome and excessive iron deposition the central nervous system. Both environmental and genetic factors contri- in the brain, particularly affecting the basal ganglia, mainly the globus pal- bute to the development of the disease. We used an integratomic approach lidus. Genetic defects in PANK2 gene are the most common cause of NBIA, for discovery of putative regions and genes related to MS, using a compre- followed by mutations in PLA2G6, few reported NBIA families are known hensive and unique set of data sources (GWAS, linkage studies, expression to carry mutations in FA2H, a gene previously associated with familial leu- sOtbujdeicetsi vaensd: proteomic studies). Among 381 genomic regions and 409 genes kodystrophy and spastic paraparesis. Mutations within  C19
orf12 have re- we selected STAT3 and STAT5A for association and expression studies. cently been identified in patients with NBIA.This gene  C19
orf12, codes for The aim of study was to investigate the association and expres- a mitochondrial membrane protein and the acronym MPAN (mitochondrial sMioenth oof dSsT:AT3 and STAT5A genes in patients with MS from the Central South membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration). In this study we report East Europe. the clinical description of five patients from five families with NBIA and the A total of 1045 Caucasian patients and 986 healthy unrelated eth- subsequent molecular genetic investigation. Sequencing of PANK2, PLA2G6 nically matched controls without family history of MS, were included in the and FA2H was normal; whereas the molecular analysis of  C19
orf12 gene study. For gene expression in blood we analyzed 50 patients and 40 controls. revealed a novel homozygous and heterozygous  C19
orf12 mutations in our Diagnosis of MS was established according to McDonald’s criteria. Altogether, patients with NBIA. 5R eSsNuPlt ws:ere included in our study, 3 in STAT3 gene: rs7211777, rs963987 Further studies are needed to explore the function of  C19
orf12 in NBIA, and and rs1053005; and 2 in STAT5A gene: rs6503695 and rs12601982. extended genetic analysis of larger patients cohorts will provide more infor- We found a statistically significant difference-4 in the allelic distribu- m Ga. tAionnn easbio: uNto tnhee. Pfr. eTqauraenntcinyo o:f N thonise d. Gis.e Laeses.ca: None. E. Broussolle: None. M. tion of STAT5A gene (rs6503696 with P value 7,5∙10 )-5, which was suppor- Gagliardi: None. G. Iannello: None. A. Gambardella: None. A. Quattrone: tCeodn bclyu hsiaopnlo:type distributions (haplotype CA P=3∙10 ). We haven‘t found None. any diffrences in gene expression in blood in STAT5A. We provide evidence for association between genetic variation in STAT5A gene and multiple sclerosis. Further studies are required to sub-  P08
.65 sPt.a Lnativattaer :t hNeo nseig. nAi.f iMcaanvceer: o Nf othnee.s eG .g Renuedtoiclf :v aNroinaeti.o Nn.s S.tarčević Čizmarević: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, type 4 (NBIA4) in None. M. Živković: None. S. Šega Jazbec: None. Z. Klemenc Ketiš: None. M. Russian families Kapović: None. E. Dinčić: None. R. Raičević: None. J. Sepčić: None. A. Stanković: None. S. Ristić: None. B. Peterlin: None. E. Y. Zakharova, G. E. Rudenskaya; Medical Genetics Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation.  C19
orf12  P08
.63 NBIA4 is autosomal rePcAeNssKi2v e disease produced PbLyA 2G6 mutaFtTioLn1s High resolution genotyping analysis of Multiple sclerosis in Saudi [Hartig et al, 2011]. NBFIAA2 gHroup also includes most cAoTmPm13oAn2 NBIA1/Haller- patients. vorden-SpaatCzP disease ( gene), NBIA2A/2B ( ), NBIA3 ( ) Y. Alhaidan, I. Alabdulkareem, M. Albalwi, M. Aljumah; and adjoining SPG35 ( ), Parkinson disease 9 ( ), aceruloplas- King Abdullah internationla medical Research Center; NGHA, Riayddh, Saudi Arabia. minemia ( ). Common features are neurological signs, mainly dystonia and spasticity, and MRI picture of iron accumulation in globus pallidum. Though recently recognized, NBIA4 was found in several populations and Multiple sclerosis (MS) has been clearly associated with human leukocyte seems not very rare. Its clinical distinctions from NBIA1 are later onset, antigen (HLA) complex that reported in several studies; nevertheless; this slower course, less pronounced dementia and subtle MRI differences. We association is poorly examined in Saudi MS patients. This disease is sprea- diagnosed NBIA4 in two Russian and one mixed Ukrainian/German (Patient ding widely through Saudi population; apart from parental consanguinity; 3) non-consanguineous families. Patient 1, 19-year-old female, had slowly no clear understanding of environmental and/or genetics factors responsib- progressing leg spasticity since 12 yrs, moderate dystonia in neck, hands le. However; recent population studies reflect that the consanguinity mar- and feet since 17-18 yrs, optic atrophy detected in 18 yrs and borderline riages presented in 37.6% of the familial MS (FMS); 16% were first degree intelligence. Her MRI was normal in 14 yrs, but in 17 yrs showed NBIA signs. relatives. Patient 2, 16-year-old male, had slowly progressing spasticity, dystonia, ata- This project is focus on the investigation of HLA-A, HLA-B, DRB1, and DQB1 xia and mild dementia since 11-12 yrs; MRI was normalC u1p9 otor f1162 yrs when alleles in 150 FMS and non FMS affected, 100 healthy controls were recrui- NBIA signs appeared; optic atrophy was seen at the same age. In both pa- ted. The high-resolution genotype sequencing using Roche 454 FLX+ Titani- tients other NBIA were excluded and homozygosity for mutation um chemistry was carried out. c.204_214del11 was detected. Patient 3, 36-year-old female of whom we MHC class I (A, B) and class II (DQ) were indicated with an odds ratio (OR) have no clinical information, was found heterozygous for c.204_214del11 = 2.96 (95% confidence interval Cl 1.46-6.02 p=0.004) for HLA-A*01:01, (allelic mutation is in search). The mutation was most common in the first and for HLA-B*41:01 the OR 3.77 (95% Cl 1.64-8.63, p=0.0025), while for NBIA4 cohort of 20 Polish families with founder effect [Hartig et al, 2011]. DQB1*03:02 the OR 2.20 (95% Cl 1.29-3.75, p=0.0051). No differences bet- Our preliminary results point to c.204_214del11 spread in other Slavic po- ween FMS and non FMS were observed. These findings representing the p Eu.Yla. tZioankhs.arova: None. G.E. Rudenskaya: None. Saudi MS population and HLA complex association that may be unique when compare with other populations. A further investigation should be carried out to confirm the above finding  P08
.66 and attempting to understand more on the involvement of environmental/ gYe. nAelthiacisd oafn M: NSo inne S. aI.u Adlia abnddu lGkaurlef eremg:i oNno.ne. M. Albalwi: None. M. Aljumah: Altered brain development and neurodegeneration in Clp1 knockout None. zebrafish V. R. C. Eggens, J. L. Cazemier, P. R. Kasher, M. A. J. Weterman, F. Baas; Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Clp1 228 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRCAleNavCagEe |a nWd WpolWya.dEeSnyHlaGtio.On RfaGctor I subunit ( ) is an important kina- se in RNA metabolism. It is involved in processes as tRNA maturation andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Clp1 Clp1 mRNA 3’processing. We have created an ENU induced zebrafish mutant, with the lymphedema phenotype, unrelated to the neuropathy phenotype. harbouring a p.R44X nonsense mutation inC tlhpe1 gene. knockout fish The whole-exome analysis revealed a missense mutation in the SPG7 gene do not survive beyond 4 days post fertilisation (dpf), have a reduced head (causing autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia) in the tested individual, size and show Canlp  S1
-curved body. At 2dpf, knockout fish show reduced but it did not segregate well within the family. A 300K SNP array narrowed expression of midbrain marker otx2, and increased cell death in the brain. the candidate areas to ten essentials. Areas with highest LOD scores or con- We show that is an essential gene in brain developCmLePn1t. In humans, taining candidate genes were excluded using microsatellite markers. We are various RNA processing genSeMsN h1ave been associated with neurological di- currently evaluating additional mutations identified via exome sequencing, seases, such as the TSEN complex - which associates with - in pontoce- in parallel to the linkage analysis described above. rebellar hypoplasia and the gene in spinal muscular atrophy. Our data Conclusion: While peripheral lymphedema in affected individuals was supports the hypothesis that RNA processing plays a crucial role in neuronal caused by a mutation in FLT4 gene, the gene causing peripheral neuropathy development. The exact mechanism how disturbed RNA metabolism leads remains to be pinned down. Our findings reinforce the separation between t Vo. Rn.eCu.r Eogloggeincasl: dNiosneea.s Je.sL i.s C satizlel muniekrn: oNwonne.. P.R. Kasher: None. M.A.J. bAo.t Kh udriosloarpd:e Nros nwei. tEh.i nD athgea ne:x tNeonndee. dR f. aGmeirlsyh.oni-Baruch: None. Weterman: None. F. Baas: None.  P08
.69  P08
.67 Niemann-Pick type C disease: Characterization of NP C1
 mutations on A novel FTL mutation responsible for neuroferritinopathy with mRNA and protein level asymmetry of clinical features and brain anomalies L. Dvorakova, F. Majer, H. Vlaskova, G. Storkanova, L. Stolnaya, A. Louzecka, D. S. Moutton1, N. Houcinat1, V. Planté-Bordeneuve2, J. Trocello3, V. Larue1, D. Lacombe1,4, B. Musalkova, H. Jahnova, K. Peskova, M. Elleder, M. Hrebicek; Arveiler1,4, C. Goizet1,4, P. Fergelot1,4; Instit. of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General University Hospital in Prague and First 1Service de génétique médicale - CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2Service de Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. Neurologie, APHP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 3Centre National de Référence de la Maladie de Wilson, service de Neurologie, APHP, hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire „Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme“, Université Bordeaux Segalen, Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC, OMIM #257220, #607625) is a severe Bordeaux, France. autosomal recessive neuro-visceral disorder characterized by progressive neurological deterioration and hepatosplenomegaly. It is associated with FTL complex lysosomal storage of lipids, mainly of free cholesterol and glycoli- Neuroferritinopathy is a rare autosomal dominant neurodegenerative di- pids, and with mutations in one of two genes (NP C1
, NP C2
). We have found sease caused by mutations in gene and which belongs to the group of disease causing mutations in 38 NP C1
 families and characterized molecular Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA). Progressive iron consequences of a subset of NP C1
 mutations on mRNA and protein levels. and ferritin deposition in basal ganglia, substantia nigra, red nuclei and den- Six genotypes (p.R1186H/ S954
L; p.R1186H/ P1007
A; p.R1186H/Y276H; tate nuclei is responsible for abnFoTrLmal movements including chfroarmeae,s hdiyfsts- p. P1007
A/V950G; p.  S954
L/ L176
R; p.V664M/Arg404Glyfs*45) identified tonia and parkinsonism which represent the most common features of this in 10 patients were inspected. We used PCR/RFLP followed by fragmenta- FdTisLo rder. To date, 7 mutations in gene have been reported, 6 tion analysis to determine the allelic expression ratio of the mutated alleles in exon 4 and a missense in exon 3. Here we report a patient carrying a novel in cultured skin fibroblasts. NP C1
 protein levels were assessed semi-quan- mutation with original clinical and imaging features. titatively by Western blotting. Interestingly, the amount of immunoreactive First manifestations occurred by 29 years by focal dystonia limited to right NP C1
 in p.V664M/Arg404Glyfs*45 cell line was comparable to the controls foot for 10 years. At 40, dystonia extended to left upper limb, neck and was and RNA allelic transcript ratio was 50/50. In other samples RNA transcript associated with dysarthria. Ferritinemia was below the normal range (49 ratios ranged from 22/78 to 30/70 and the amount of immunoreactive µg/L, norm within 80-250). Brain MRI revealed hypointensities on T2* NP C1
 protein was diminished but detectable. We have also analyzed NP C1
 weighted images, asymmetric in basal ganglia with left predominance and promoter region (up to 2 kb upstream from the start codon). We have found symmetric in motor rolandic codret enxo, vsoubstantia nigra, red and dentate nu- six common polymorphisms forming four probable haplotypes. We did not clei. The previously unknown c.468dup mutation (p.Gly157TrpfsX24) was identify any rare variants, which could potentially affect regulation of NP C1
 identified and appeared to be . The mutation leads to C-terminus transcription. modification of the protein similar tof rraemcuersrheinftt c.460dup mutation, and al- In summary, the results show that the analyzed missense mutations allow ters E-helix struFcTtLure affecting ferritin folding, assembly and stability. residual protein synthesis and that the fibroblast cultures may be useful for Our report confirms involvement of mutations located in 3’ co- testing of compounds stabilizing mutant NP C1
 protein. ding region of in pathophysiology of neuroferritinopathy. This obser- Support: IGA MZ CR NT12239-5/2011, RVO-VFN64165/2012, PRVOUK- vation highlights that this disorder can manifest with asymmetric clinical P  L2
. 4D/vLoFr1ak/o3va: None. F. Majer: None. H. Vlaskova: None. G. Storkanova: features and brain anomalies. Neuroimaging and especially T2* sequences None. L. Stolnaya: None. A. Louzecka: None. D. Musalkova: None. H. i Ss .t hMeo mutotosnt :s Nenosniet.i vNe. iHnoveusctiingaatt:i oNno nfoe.r VN. BPIlAan dtéia-Bgnoordseisn.euve: None. J. Jahnova: None. K. Peskova: None. M. Elleder: None. M. Hrebicek: None. Trocello: None. V. Larue: None. D. Lacombe: None. B. Arveiler: None. C. Goizet: None. P. Fergelot: None.  P08
.70 Recessive truncating NOTCH3 mutation in a case of severe, early-  P08
.68 onset, progressive vascular leukoencephalopathy Peripheral Neuropathy and Lymphedema Associated with Mental T. Pippucci1, A. Maresca2, G. Cenacchi2, C. Tonon2, V. Donadio2, P. Magini1, F. Palombo1, V. Deficiency - Homozygosity Mapping and Gene Indentification Papa2, R. Lodi2, A. Parmeggiani2, V. Carelli2, M. Seri1; A. Kurolap1, E. Dagan2, R. Gershoni-Baruch3,1; 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico Sant‘Orsola-Malpighi, Università di Bologna, Bologna, 1The Bruce and Ruth Rappaport School of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 2Dept of Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, Università di Bologna, Nursing, Faculty of Welfare and Health Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, Bologna, Italy. 3Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. We report on a 24 years-old male patient, born to consanguineous parents, Background: We present an extended consanguineous Muslim Israeli-Arab presenting with infantile-onset, progressive neurodegeneration, small ves- family, comprising of individuals exhibiting peripheral neuropathy, periphe- sel disease and leukoencephalopathy. Brain MRI showed marked hyperin- ral lymphedema or both. The neuropathic phenotype varies between family tensity on T2-sequences of cerebral white matter (WM) with enlarged ven- members in age of onset, spasticity and the existence of mental retardation. tricles and diffuse cavitations, subcortical lacunar infarcts and disseminated Both peripheral lymphedema and peripheral neuropathy segregate inde- microbleeds. Focal hyperintensities on T2-sequences were present in the pendently in affected family members as autosomal recessive traits. This asymptomatic parents, especially in the father. study aimed to investigate the molecular basis for both disorders. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) identified a homozygous c. C2742
A Methods: Homozygosity mapping using Illumina CytoSN P6000
 and CytoS- NOTCH3 mutation, inherited from heterozygous parents. No other obvious N P300
K arrays was employed, followed by whole-exome sequencing in one mutation emerged from WES/mtDNA sequencing. The c. C2742
A mutation patient. introduced a p. C914
X stop-codon leading to a prematurely truncated pro- Results:A 6K SNP array linkage analysis and whole-exome sequencing of a tein. Testing cDNA from muscle biopsies, we observed drastically reduced sibling affected with both disorders lead to the discovery of a missense mu- NOTCH3 expression in the proband and parents vs.controls (p<.001), and tation in the FLT4 gene (known to highly associate with lymphatic disrupti- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEi n| WtheW prWob.aEnSdH vsG.p.aOreRntGs (p<.05). Alterations of smooth muscle cells (2SM2 C9
) on). The mutation segregates as a homozygous trait within the family in lineABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P surrounding small arteries were visible in skin biopsies of the proband and were novel alterations. There was no significant correlation between having parents, showing a multilayered basal lamina. An abnormal pattern of col- PARK loci gePnae raklitne,r aPtIiNoKn1s and fDamJ1ily story ( = 0,452). lagen staining, characterised by unpacked collagen wall, was evident in skin Despite current data is preliminary findings, we identified three novel al- vessels of proband and parents, although it was less pronounced in the mo- terations in and genes in PD patients of our population. ther. Although, increasing the number of cases is required to clarify clinical signi- Heterozygous missense NOTCH3 mutations are known to underlie CADA- ficancy, we suggest that these informations may be helpful in predicting the SIL (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts p Ur.o Eggneolsi:i sN oofn Teu. Srk. iOshzb PeDk :p Naotineen. tGs.. Tezcan: None. G. Cecener: None. B. and Leukoencephalopathy), the most common heritable cause of cerebral Tunca: None. E. Demirdogen: None. S. Ak: None. arteriopathy. Notably, no granular osmiophilic material (GOM) deposition (a hallmark of CADASIL arterioles) was detected. Molecular mechanisms by which NOTCH3 mutations predispose to ischemic stroke are poorly under-  P08
.73 stood. Here, we described a novel recessive NOTCH3-related leukoencepha- Analysis of SNCA (alpha-synuclein) mutations in Slovak Parkinson lopathy, linking reduced NOTCH3 expression and signaling to arterial SMC disease patients d Te. gPeipnpeuractcioi:n N aonnde. uAlt. iMmaarteeslyc at:o N somnael.l Gve. sCseenl alecuchkio: eNnocneep.h Ca.l oTpoantohny:. None. V. C. Bognar1, M. Baldovic1, A. Zatkova2, L. Kadasi1,2; Donadio: None. P. Magini: None. F. Palombo: None. V. Papa: None. R. Lodi: 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, None. A. Parmeggiani: None. V. Carelli: None. M. Seri: None. Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics,Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.  P08
.71 Identification of a novel splice site mutation of STXB P1
 in Ohtahara Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic neurodegenerative movement disorder syndrome characterized by selective loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons and L. Ortega-Moreno1, R. Guerrero-López1, A. Verdú2, G. Sánchez-Martín1, O. García- formation of Lewy bodies. Clinical manifestations include motor impair- Campos2, B. G. Giráldez1, J. M. Serratosa1; ments involving tremor, bradykinesia, postural instability and rigidity. PD 1Neurology Laboratory-Epilepsy Unit, Neurology Department, IIS- Fundación Jiménez is generally considered to be the repsaurlkt ino f PthAeR Kin2terDaJc-t1io nP AbReKtw7een gPeTnEetNic- Díaz and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), iannddu ceendv ikrionnamsee 1n taPlI NfaKc1tors. Mutations responsiblLee fuocri nteh-er icrhec reespseivaet keianralsye- Madrid, Spain, 2Neuropediatric Unit, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain. 2o nsLeRtR PKD2 (EOPDα)- wyenruec liedienn tSifNieCdA in ( ), ( ) and ( ), while mutations within ( ) and s (SNCA) are associated with autosomal dominant, Ohtahara syndrome (OS, OMIM#308350, ORPHA1934) is early infantile late onset form of PD. To detect the most common mutations (A30P,  E46
K, epileptic encephalopathy characterized by tonic spasms and a continuos A53T) in exons 2, 3 of the gene, we sequenced in both direction 160 burst-suppression pattern resulting in intractable seizures and severe men- unrelated Slovakian patients with familial or sporadic PD, including early tal retardatioAnR. BXraCiDnK m L5
alfSoLrCm2a5tAio2n2s or mSTetXaBbPo1li c disorders are often asso- and late onset patients. However, none of these mutations was identified ciated with this syndrome but some cases remain etiologically unexplained. in our cohort. We have found three novel exonic poSlyNmCoArphisms (SNCA- Mutations in , , and have been identified. 23T>C; c.467T>C, p.V15V; c.518C>A, p.K32K), one intronic polymorphism We report the case of a 19-months old infant which presented with tonic, (c.121+11C>T, IV S3
+11C>T, rs35135226) in exon 2 of gene. But in the focal clonic and oculogyric seizures in the first 15 days of life. An EEG perfor- exon 3 we did not observe any variation after sequencing. med at the age of 45 days showed a burst-suppression pattern suggestive of However, we could not completely exclude the possibility StNhaCtA the paPtAieRnKt2s Otahara syndrome. Physical examination did not reveal any specific dysmor- carry other mutations or rearrangements within SNCA gene. In the follow phic features. Neuroimaging and extensive screening for inborn metabolic up of this study also a gene dosage studies, especially of and errors and congenital infections were uninformative. At 5 months spasms genes have to be considered, in order to uncover possible larger genomic appeared. Treatment with vigabatrin and corticosteroids was effective but deletions/duplications. refractory complex partial seizures appeared. The infant has a severe psy- T Ch. iBs ostgundayr: w Naosn seu. pMp. oBratleddo bviyc :G NUoKn/e4. 9A4. /Z2a0tk1o3v.a: None. L. Kadasi: None. chomotor delayS.TXB P1
 We found a novel inherited heterozygous mutation (c.1249+2T>C, G417AfsX7) in , agene that codes for syntaxin binding protein 1 in-  P08
.74 volved in synaptic vesicle exocytosis. This mutation is localized in a donor A rapid and simple PCR-RFLP test for the diagnosis of PARK8 form of splice site and eliminates exon 14 producing a truncated protein. Parkinson disease in the Algerian population Loss of domain III-b and part of domain II due to this mutation could affect T. Hamadouche1, S. Belarbi2, N. Hecham2, S. Lesage3, A. Brice3, M. Tazir2, T. Benhassine4; R La. bO brtiengdain-Mgo arnedn oc:o Nnosenne.q Ru.e Gntulye rerxeoroc-yLtóopsiesz p: rNoocnees.s A.. Verdú: None. G. 1Molecular Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Sciences, UMBB, Boumerdes, Algeria, Sánchez-Martín: None. O. García-Campos: None. B.G. Giráldez: None. J.M. 2Department of Neurology, CHU Mustapha Bacha, Algiers, Algeria, 3INSERM UMR_ S975
, Serratosa: None. CRICM, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4Cellular and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Biological Sciences, USTHB, Algiers, Algeria.  P08
.72 Evaluation of variants in Parkin, PINK1, DJ1 and SCNA genes in early- PARK8 form of Parkinson’s disease is a common disorder in Algeria (40% of onset Parkinson’s disease patients of Turkish population familial or sporadic cases) because of the high prevalence of the c.6055G>A U. Egeli1, S. Ozbek2, G. Tezcan1, G. Cecener1, B. Tunca1, E. Demirdogen1, S. Ak1; (p.Gly2019Ser) mutation in the LRRK2 gene. The aim of our work was to 1Department of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, highlight the occurrence of this alteration by a simple, fast and accurate test, 2Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, Bursa, thus signing a diagnosis of PARK8 Parkinson’s disease. Our screening strat- Turkey. egy consisted of a targeted amplification of exon 41 of LRRK2 by a PCR-RSI approach, followed by an enzymatic digestion using restriction endonuclea- se AluI, with the goal of individualizing precisely and unambiguously all pos- PPaarkrkinins,o PnI‘sN Kdi1s,e DasJ-e1 (PD) ScNauCsAes by the interaction of genetic and environ- sible genotypic statuses: healthy homozygous and affected heterozygous/ mental factors. Recent reports showed that, variations in PARK loci genes homozygous. The choice of primers allowing amplification and introducing ( and ) cause inherited forms of typical PD in dif- a mismatch site downstream of the coding nucleotide c.6055 was conducted ferent populations. However, the knowledge about the frequency of these by bioinformatic analysis. Optimization of PCR conditions helped ensure the alterations in Turkish population is very limited. In current study, we aimed success of the amplification and the subsequent AluI digestion. Genotypes to evaluate the phenotype and frequencies of variationPsa irnk itnh, ePsIeN gKe1n, eDs J-in1 of individual controls (healthy c.6055G/G, affected c.6055G/A and affected TurkSiNshC Aearly-onset PD patients. c.6055A/A) were clearly individualized on the basis of restriction profiles All coding regions and exon-intron boundaries of the obtained. The availability of this test, also avoiding the use of sequencing, and genes were screened by Heteroduplex analysis (HDA) followed by provides a powerful approach for the diagnosis of the common form of direct sequencing of detected variants in 2 P7
a erkairnly-onset PD patients. Parkinson‘s disease PARK8, allowing to recognize the status of individuals Alterations were determinPeINdK in1 12 (44,4%) patients; 1 patient hadD J21 diffe- and offering the opportunity to make a differential diagnosis among the rent alteration. Alterations were found in (n=6; IVS-35G>A and n=1; great genetic heterogeneity that characterizes this disease. The power of V379L) for 7 patients, iPna rkin, (IV S1
-7A>G) PfoINr K51 patients and in (nD=J11; our diagnostic test of PARK8 allows us to screen at first instance this form IV S3
+40T>G and n=1; R98E) for 2 patients. According to Ensemble Genome of the disease and suggests that it may be used for routine screening of the B 2r 3ow 0ser, IVS-35G>A in IV S1
-7A>G in ES aHndG IV 2 S30
+1430T |> PGA inR IS, FRdAiseNaCseE in | tWhe WAlgWer.iEanS pHoGpu.OlatRioGn.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index T. Hamadouche: None. S. Belarbi: None. N. Hecham: None. S. Lesage:  P08
.77 None. A. Brice: None. M. Tazir: None. T. Benhassine: None. The study of a role of monoamine metabolizing enzyme genes in Parkinson’s disease development and neuropsychological abnormalities in Parkinson’s disease patients  P08
.75 G. Akhmadeeva1, I. Кhidiyatova2, I. Gilyzova3, A. Baytimerov1, R. Magzhanov1, E. Khusnutdinova3; Analysis of Parkinson‘s disease brain DNA reveals the novel H50Q 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 21Institute of Biochemistry alpha-synuclein (SNCA) mutation which affects copper co-ordination and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, C. Proukakis1, C. Dudzik2, C. Pegasiou1, M. Katsianou1, M. Shoaee1, T. Brier1, A. Hummel1, Russian Federation. G. Millhauser2, J. M. Cooper1, H. Houlden1, A. H. V. Schapira1; 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 2University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, United States. The purpose of this investigation was to search for genetic factors in the development of Parkinson‘s disease (PD) as a whole and neuropsychological impairment in Parkinson‘s disease patients. The analysis of association of Misfolding and aggregation of alpha-synuclein (SNCA) is crucial to the pa- PD with polymorphic variants of monoamine metabolism genes - TH, DAT1, thogenesis of Parkinson‘s disease (PD), yet mutations in the gene are very COMT, MAO-B, TPH1,DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4 , 5-HTT, HTR2A, - was per- rare, with only three missense mutations and occasional copy number vari- formed using DNA collection of PD patients (560) and controls (670). DNA ants described. The possibility of sporadic cases being due to somatic muta- samples included three ethnic groups living in Bashkortostan Republic (BR) tions leading tSoN mCoAs aicism, which might be undetectable in peripheral lym- - Russians, Tatars and Bashkirs. In all three ethnic groups PD was associated phocyte DNA which is usually analysed, has not been formally investigated. with the polymorphic variants of the DRD4 gene: allele * 7 of the polymor- We screened coding exons in DNA from at least one brain region phic variant 48 bp in VNTR-locus (in exon 3) was revealed to be the risk from 457 cases. Sanger sequencing in five samples revealed a novel change marker for PD development (p = 0,02; OR = 2,0). In Tatars the genotype (c.150T>G, p.H50Q) in the cerebellum and substantia nigra of one apparent- *H/*H (p = 0,0006; OR = 2,3) and allele *H of polymorphic locus Val108Met ly sporadic, late onset, typical PD case. As no relatives or other DNA sources of the COMT gene, genotype * C/* C (p = 0,002; OR = 1,7) and allele *C (p = were available, indirect evidence of mosaicism by analysis of phase in rela- 0,02; OR = 1,34) of rs1800532 of the TPH1gene and allele *12 of the poly- tion to a nearby polymorphism was sought, but none was found. Subcloning morphic locus STin2 (p = 0,04; OR = 1,3) of the gene 5-HTT were markers of PCR products revealed 14/30 colonies with the mutation. Further samp- of the increased risk for PD development. In Bashkirs allele *C of rs6280 of les were analysed using High Resolution Melting (HRM) analysis, which has DRD3 gene (p = 0,02; OR = 1,85) was the risk marker for PD. Study of neuro- higher sensitivity than sequencing for low level mosaicism. psychological impairments found influence of polymorphic locus Val108Met Serial dilution confirmed HRM could detect 1-5% level of H50Q/ A53T. No o Gf .t Ahek hCmOaMdTe egvean:e N oonn eth. Ie. Кdhevideilyoaptomvean: tN oofn dee. mI. Geniltyizao ivna P: DN opnaet.i eAn. ts. evidence of somatic mutations was seen, although rare synonymous SNPs Baytimerov: None. R. Magzhanov: None. E. Khusnutdinova: None. were detected. The conservation of H50, the absence of the mutation in controls, and bioinformatic predictions, suggested pathogenicity. As H50 participates in SNCA binding of Cu(II), recombinant wild-type and H50Q proteins were compared using electron paramagnetic resonance, and alte-  P08
.78 red copper co-ordination was observed. Stably transfected neuroblastoma Molecular genetic background of PEHO syndrome A. Laari1,2, A. Anttonen1,3, M. Somer4, J. Palvimo5, Y. J. Yang6, M. Lehtinen7, O. Kopra1,2, A. cell lines were established for further studies. H50Q appears to be a likely p Cat. hPorgoeunkiack risa:r eB .g Reremselainrceh v Garraiannt t(.principal investigator, collaborator or Lehesjoki1,2; consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; 1Folkhälsan Research Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience Parkinson‘s UK. C. Dudzik: None. C. Pegasiou: None. M. Katsianou: None. M. Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Shoaee: None. T. Brier: None. A. Hummel: None. G. Millhauser: B. Research Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Vaestoliitto, The Family Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 5University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, as grants already received); Significant; NIH. J.M. Cooper: None. H. Houlden: 6Division of Genetics, Boston Children‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 7Department B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending Department of Pathology, Boston Children‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, grants as well as grants already received); Significant; MRC. A.H.V. Schapira: MA, United States. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; MRC / Wellcome trus. PEHO syndrome (Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhyth- mia and Optic atrophy; MIM 260565) is an autosomal recessive inherited progressive infantile encephalopathy. The main features include hypotonia,  P08
.76 infantile spasms and/or hypsarrhythmia, psychomotor retardation, absence Analysis of SNCA mRNA splicing variants in human post-mortem or early loss of visual fixation, edema of the face and limbs, and typical dys- tissue through Real Time PCR morphic features. Brain atrophy is progressive and most prominent in the L. F. Cardo, L. d. Mena, E. Coto, M. Díaz, V. Álvarez; Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. cerebellum. Imaging findings suggest the presence of two subtypes of the PEHO syndrome, cortical atrophy and loss of myelin being more pronoun- ced in type 2. In a heterogenous group of PEHO-like patients some but not Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the seconSdN mCAost common neurodegenerative all of PEHO features exist. Our aim is to characterize the molecular basis of disorder affecting 1-2% of people oSvNerC A60 years-old. Abnormal expression PEHO. and post-translational modification of gene have been associated with Using SNP genotyping and homozygosity mapping we identified in Finnish both familial and sporadic PD. The gene has four mRNA transcripts: patients with PEHO type 1 a missense mutation in a gene not previously SNCA-140 (fuSlNl-CleAngth isoform), SNCA-126 (lacking exon 3), SNCA-112 (lak- associated with human disease. The encoded protein is strongly expressed king exon 5) and SNCA-98 (lacking exons 3 and 5). Recently, it has been pro- in neural progenitor and migrating premature granular cells and its tissue posed that a polymorphism in the 3’UTR (rs356165) could play a role expression pattern is compatible with the neuropathological findings in in the risk of PD through its association with differential mRNA expression. PEHO type 1 patients. The detected mutation affects stability and coregu- Our aim was to determine the level of the four α-syn isoforms through Real latory abilities of “PEHO1”. Moreover, knocking down “PEHO1” expression time PCR in human post-mortem brains from 9 PD patients and 6 controls. by RNAi in ex vivo cerebellar cultures resulted in disturbed granule cell mi- We obtained tissue samples from affected asunsdt annotnia-a fnfiegcrtaed brain areas, and gration consistent with previous observations of ectopic granule neurons in compared the α-syn levels between rs356165 genotypes (5AA, 7AG, 3GG). PEHO patient cerebellum. To identify the gene underlying PEHO type 2 we We analySzNeCdA a total of 43 samples from (SN), cerebellum are currently analyzing exome data on two siblings and two clinically similar (CB) and occipital cortex (OC). We did not find significant differences in the u An.r Lealaatrei:d N Foinnen.i sAh. Apnatttioenntesn.: None. M. Somer: None. J. Palvimo: None. Y.J. Yang: None. M. Lehtinen: None. O. Kopra: None. A. Lehesjoki: None. levels of transcripts; patients vs. controls in the three regions. The mi- nor transcripts (SNCA-112 and 98) were increased in the SN in PD-affected brains, without difference between the rs356165 genotypeSs.N TChAe level of the SNCA-140 transcript was increased in OC. In conclusion, we found different expression levels of the transcripts in different bSNraCinA regions, but without difference between patients and controls. However with our sample we could not support the influence of rLs.3F5.  C61
a6rd5o i:n N one. L m.DR. NMAe nleav: eNlos.ne. E. Coto: None. M. Díaz: None. V. Álvarez: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 231ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.79  P08
.81 Spectrum of cerebellar and anterior horn cell degeneration caused by A new case of spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic EXOS C3
 mutations epilepsy associated with a homozygous mutation in ASAH1 L. Burglen1,2,3, S. Nguyen4, C. Cances5, J. M. Cuisset6, S. Julia7, A. Legall1,2, D. Amsallem8, T. R. Guerrero-López1, B. G. Giráldez1, A. Verdú2, M. C. Carrascosa-Romero3, L. Ortega- Billette de Villemeur9,2,3, A. Gelot10,2, D. Rodriguez9,2; Moreno1, G. Sánchez-Martín1, S. García-Muñoz Guren3, J. M. Pardal-Fernández3, J. M. 1Department of Genetics, APHP – Trousseau University Hospital, Paris, France, Serratosa1; 2Reference center for cerebellar malformations and congenital diseases, AP-HP, Hôpital 1Neurology Laboratory-Epilepsy Unit, Neurology Department, IIS- Fundación Jiménez Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Inserm, U676, 75019 Paris, France, 4Department of Pediatric Díaz and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Neurology, CHU, Angers, France, 5Department of Pediatrics, CHU, Toulouse, France, Madrid, Spain, 2Neuropediatric Unit, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo, Spain, 6Department of Pediatric Neurology, CHRU, Lille, France, 7Department of Genetics, CHU, 3Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. Toulouse, France, 8Department of Pediatrics, CHRU, Besançon, France, 9Department of Pediatric Neurology, APHP – Trousseau University Hospital, Paris, France, 10Unit of Neuropathology, APHP – Trousseau University Hospital, Paris, France. Spinal muscular atrophy with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (SMAPME, OMIM#159950) is aA rSaArHe -1childhood syndrome characterized by progres- sive myoclonic epilepsy and proximal weakness. A homozygous mutation Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) associated with spinal cord anterior horn (c.125C>T, T42M) in , a gene encoding acid ceramidase, has been re- cell loss has been named PCH type 1 by Barth in 1993. PCH1 is an autoso- cently indentified in three families with SMAPME and a homogeneous clinical mal recessive disease characterized by an early- often antenatal -onset, with picture. However, previous reports depicted a heterogeneous syndrome with arthrogryposis and limited survival. Recently mutations of the EXOS C3
 gene respect to age at onset, associated neurological symptoms and prognosis. were reported in classical as well as in mildly affected PCH1 patients. Here we describe a new case of SMAPME harboring the homozygous c.125C>T We report 4 patients affected with cerebellar and anterior horn cell dege- mutation and compare it with those previously reported. neration and EXOS C3
 mutations. Two sibs were affected from birth and The patient is a 12-years-old girl born to unrelated healthy Spanish parents. presented with hypotonia, proximal muscular deficiency, respiratory and Despite her early developmental milestones she walked with an unsteady gait. swallowing difficulties. Electromyogram showed neurogenic changes. PCH Progressive, predominantly proximal, muscle weakness was evident from the was evident on the MRI performed at 4 months in the older child but no age of 5 years. Muscle biopsy and EMG showed evidence of a chronic denerva- change was noted at day 4 in the younger. Death occurred at, respectively, 11 tion process. At age 7 years she began presenting frequent absences and myo- months and 15 days. Neuropathology showed a severe atrophy of the pons, clonic jerks of the upper limbs. An EEG showed frequent 3-4 Hz generalized cerebellum and anterior horn. discharges of polyspikes-slow waves. Mild cognitive declineA, SaAndH -d1istal tremor Patient 3 presented with a progressive disease which began at 3 months. appeared later. Other diagnostic procedures ruled out common lysosomal sto- He had severe progressive hypotonia, proximal limb weakness and amyo- rage disorders and mitochondrial disease. Sequencing of revealed a trophy, nystagmus, spasticity, and increased tendon reflexes. He developed homozygous mutation (c.125C>T, T42M) due to paternal uniparental disomy. respiratory failure and died at 3 years. Our patient shows a clinical picture that is almost identical to that described Patient 4 had a non progressive psychomotor retardation with PCH on MRI in other patients harboring this mutation. Thus SMAPME associated to the ho- and he was able to sit in the first years of life. At age 10, he started to decline mozygous c.125C>T mutation represents an apparently clinically homogenous and presented with spastic paraplegia and proximal weakness, nystagmus disorder. and respiratory and swallowing difficulties. Further cases are needed to confirm this clear apparently straight phenotype- The gene EXOS C3
 is a major PCH1 gene but is responsible for others, milder, gRe.n Goutyeprree croo-rLróelpaetzio: nN.one. B.G. Giráldez: None. A. Verdú: None. M.C. phenotypes of cerebellar and anterior horn cell degeneration with cerebel- Carrascosa-Romero: None. L. Ortega-Moreno: None. G. Sánchez-Martín: lLar. Baturrogplehny: wNoitnheo.u St. bNrgauinysetne:m N ionnveo. lCve. mCaenncte.s: None. J.M. Cuisset: None. S. None. S. García-Muñoz Guren: None. J.M. Pardal-Fernández: None. J.M. Julia: None. A. Legall: None. D. Amsallem: None. T. Billette de Villemeur: Serratosa: None. None. A. Gelot: None. D. Rodriguez: None.  P08
.82  P08
.80 Paradoxical somatic genetics of neurodegeneration: spotlight on post- Selective alteration of glutamate and GABA homeostasis in the zygotic chromosome instability in the ataxia telangiectasia brain and cerebellum of SCA5 patients implications for neurodegenerative diseases I. M. Adanyeguh1, R. Valabregue2, E. A. Struys3, M. Marjanska4, C. Jakobs3, M. Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, A. D. Kolotii1,2, I. A. Demidova1,2,3, T. Liehr4, I. Y. Iourov1,2; Tchikviladze1, S. Lehericy2, A. Brice1, A. Durr1, F. Mochel1; 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 1INSERM UMR  S975
, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France, 2Center for 2Institute of Paediatrics and Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian NeuroImaging Research, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France, 3Department Federation, 3Moscow State University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Federation, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. 4Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, Minneapolis, MN, United States. Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a chromosome instability (CIN) disease caused Background: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 is a very rare form of autosomal by ATM mutations. Probably, the most striking AT feature is a progressive dominant cerebellar ataxia that is caused by mutations in SPTBN2. Mutati- neurodegeneration limited to the cerebellum. To explain this, we hypo- ons in SPTBN2 affect the stability of EAAT4, a glutamate transporter specifi- thesized that progressive neuronal death is driven by post-zygotic chro- cally expressed in Purkinje cells, which also negatively regulates the inhibiti- mosomal (genomic) instability in the AT cerebellum. Experimental testing on of GABA release. We investigated the functional consequences of SPTBN2 of this hypothesis using brain autopsy specimens showed dramatically mutations on glutamate and GABA metabolism in 3 SCA5 patients. Methods: increased level of CIN in the cerebellum. However, molecular cytogenetic The levels of glutamate, glutamine and free versus total GABA were measu- analysis revealed a paradoxical feature of neurodegeneration in AT. First- red in patients’ CSF by LC-MS/MS. In vivo 1H-NMR spectroscopy (MRS) was ly, global aneuploidization affecting 20-50% of brain cells (20% - neurons; performed at 3T using a dedicated sequence to obtain GABA-edited spec- 80% - non-neuronal cells) in the brain unaffects basic cognitive and mental tra. The regional concentrations of N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), GABA and functions. Secondly, the role of CIN affecting chromosomes 7 and 14 in the glutamate-glutamine (Glx) were determined in the primary sensory-motor degenerating cerebellum is unclear. Thirdly, pathological CIN rates have not cortex, the striatum and the cerebellum of SCA5 patients. We also assess pe- accelerated neurodegeneration, but have been associated with increased ripheral glutamate metabolism by measuring glutamate uptake in patients’ lifespan. To explain the paradox, we hypothesized that neurodegeneration fibroblasts. Results: The CSF levels of glutamate, glutamine and GABA in in the cerebellum can be associated with (i) activation of adult neurogene- SCA5 patients were comparable to diseased controls. MRS showed normal sis, (ii) migration of undifferentiated blood stem cells into the affected brain metabolic profile in the basal ganglia and motor cortex of SCA5 patients. In areas, and (iii) activation and proliferation of microglia (phagocyte system the cerebellum, the levels of GABA and Glx were markedly reduced compa- of the brain). Thus, the increase of numbers of glial and neuronal cells with red to controls, even when correcting for neuronal loss using NAA. The ratio CIN in the AT cerebellum is, probably, a result of endogenous neuroprotec- of GABA/Glx was also decreased in patients’ cerebellum, indicating altered tive processes. Finally and paradoxicaly, propagation of CIN in the brain is GABA release. Glutamate uptake in patients’ fibroblasts was normal empha- a sign of natural neuroprotection applicable to neurodegenerative diseases, sizing that glutamate metabolism is only impaired in the brain. Conclusion: as a whole. Supported by in part by BMBF/DLR (RU S09
/006), the Grant of We have identified a selective alteration of glutamate and GABA homeosta- the President of the Russian Federation MD-4401.2013.7 and RFBR 12-04- MsIi.s aM ri. jn aA ntdh sae kn acy :e e Nrge oub nhe e:l . l N Cuom . n J e ao. kf R oS. bC V sAa :5 l Na pb oa nret eig .e u Mnet .s: T .N co hn ike v. iE la.A dz. eS :t r Nu oy ns e: . N So . n Le e. h M e. r icy: 0 Y0.B2.1 Y5u-аro.v: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. A.D. Kolotii: None. I.A. Demidova: None. T. Liehr: None. I.Y. Iourov: None. None. A. Brice: None. A. Durr: None. F. Mochel: None. 232 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.83 Genetics, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum (SPG11) share clinical Norway, 5Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. and histological similarities with juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. K. H. El Hachimi1, P. S. Denora1, C. Casali2, F. Zolfanelli3, E. Mundviller1, E. Bertini4, F. Introduction Darios1, A. Brice1, G. Stevanin1; Spastic paraplegia 7 (SPG7) is an autosomal recessive form of Hereditary 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (unit UMR_ S975
 INSERM / UPMC-Univ Paris Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) caused by mutations in the SPG7 gene, which en- 6, unit 7225 CNRS ; EPHE, Paris, France, 2Neuroloy, La Sapienza University, Roma, Italy, codes paraplegin, a member of the AAA family of ATPases, located at the 3Laboratory of Anatomia pathologica, Firenze, Italy, 4Molecular medicine, Bombino Gesu inner mitochondrial membrane. Paraplegin is involved in the processing of Hospital, Roma, Italy. mitochondrial proteins. Respiratory chain dysfunction has been reported in muscle in SPG7 patients, but its molecular aetiology and pathogenic role remains unknown. We report a novel SPG7 mutation in two Norwegian fa- Spastic paraplegia 11 (SPG11), the most frequent (21%) clinico-genetic milies presenting with a phenotype consistent with mitochondrial disease, entity of autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia, is essentially characteri- and study the disorder`s molecular pathogenesis. zed by the degeneration of the pyramidal tract, thinning of the corpus cal- Material and methods losum (TCC) and white matter abnormalities (WMA) at brain MRI, leading Four patients from two Norwegian families with a phenotype of progressi- to spasticity in lowSPeGr1 li1mbs, mental impairment and peripheral neuropathy ve external ophthalmoplegia (PEO) and spastic paraplegia were examined in patients. The disease is predominantly associated with loss of function clinically. Muscle histology and molecular mitochondrial DNA studies were mutations in the gene, coding for Spatacsin. We report the first neu- performed in one of the index patients, an additional SPG7 patient from an ropathological analysis of a 27 years-old woman presenting with a severe unrelated family and ten controls. progressive disability and mental deterioration, TCC, periventricular WMA, Results marked frontal and parietal cortical, cerebellar and medullar atrophy. Mu- We found a novel SPG7 missense mutation, c.2102A>C, p.H701P, which was tational analysis revealed two heterozygous stop mutations in SPG11 gene. homozygous in the first family and compound heterozygous in trans with The mutations in the Spatacsin gene cause a wide spectrum of clinical and the known pathogenic mutation c.1454_1462del in the second family. Mole- pathological features. We show that the neuropathological profile overlaps w Ki.tHh. aEml Hyaoctrhoimphi:i cN loantee.r aPl. Ss.c Dleernoosirsa :( ANLoSn)e.. C. Casali: None. F. Zolfanelli: cular studies showed multiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions and None. E. Mundviller: None. E. Bertini: None. F. Darios: None. A. Brice: deficiency of respiratory complexes I, III and IV in skeletal muscle. None. G. Stevanin: None. Discussion We report a novel SPG7 mutation causing a complex HSP phenotype with PEO, a common mitochondrial disease phenotype. Moreover, our findings reveal novel aspects of the molecular pathogenesis of SPG7. We show that  P08
.84 SPG7 mutations lead to respiratory dysfunction by causing secondary mtD- Autosomal recessive spastic quadriplegia caused by A P4
M1 and NA damage and therefore link paraplegin to the homeostasis of the mito- A P4
B1 gene mutations: expansion of the facial and cranial MRI c Ih.Mo.n Wdreidadl ginegn:o Nmoen.e. J.A. Koht: None. D. Misceo: None. G.T. Tran: None. L. features Bindoff: None. A. Holmgren: None. E. Frengen: None. C.M.E. Tallaksen: B. Tüysüz1, K. Bilguvar2, N. Koçer3, C. Yalçınkaya4, O. Çağlayan2, E. Gül1, S. Şahin1, S. None. C. Tzoulis: None. Çomu5, M. Günel2; 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Neurosurgery, Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa  P08
.86 Medical Faculty, Department of Neuroradiology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Microrearrangements in recessive type of hereditary spastic Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, paraplegia - SPG 11 in a group of Polish patients. Molecular findings 5Private Practice, Pediatric Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. and clinical presentation. W. Krysa1, M. Rajkiewicz1, E. Elert-Dobkowska1, I. Stepniak1, W. Lojkowska2, M. Rakowicz3, J. Antczak3, J. Zaremba1, M. Schinwelski4, A. Sulek1; Adaptor protein complex-4 (A P4
) is a componenAt oPf4 iMnt1raAcePl4luEl1ar AtrPa4nSs1porta- 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, AtiPo4nB o1f proteins, which is thought to have a unique role in neurons. Recently, 2Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, mutations affecting all four subunits of A P4
 ( , , , and 3Department of Neurophysiology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, ) have been found to cause similar autosomal recessive phenotype Poland, 4Department of Neurology, St Adalbert Hospital, Gdansk, Poland. consisting of tetraplegic cerebral palsy and mental retardation, which was namedA aPs4 AM P14
 deficiency syndrome. Using hoAm P4
oBzy1gosity mapping followed by whole-exome sequencing, we identified two novel homozygous mutati- There are about 27 types of autosomal recessive spastic paraplegias (AR- ons in and a homozygous deletion in in three pairs of siblings HSP), with the SPG11 appearing the most frequent in the European popu- from Turkey. Spastic quadriplegia, microcephaly, severe mental retardation, lation. It is caused by mutations in the SPG11 gene, coding the spatacsin. limited or absent speech, and stereotypic laughter were common findings Clinically SPG11 is characterized by early age at onset and manifests mainly in our patients. All patients also had similar facial features consAisPti4nMg 1of bi- as complicated HSP with mental retardation including also neuroradiologi- AtePm4pBo1r al narrowing, bulbous nose with broad nasal ridge, short philtrum, cal hallmark - thin corpus callosum. and hAyPp4oMto1n,i cA Pfa4cBe1 w, hich A wPe4rEe1 not described in patients with and The group of 116 patients, 39 familial cases with excluded autosomal do- mutations previously. The patients presented here and previously minant inheritance pattern and 77 isolated cases, were screened for SPG11 with and mutations shared brain abnormalities in- mutations by MLPA analysis. cluding asymmetrical ventriculomegaly, thin splenium of the corpus callo- The results of MLPA screening revealed 6 different microrearrangements in sum, and reduced white matter v olume. The patients presented here also 5 families, two of them have unequivocal molecular verification of SPG11 so had hippocampal globoid formation and thin hippocampus. In conclusion, far. In the first family homozygotic deletion ranging from 31 to 34 exon was disorders due to mutations in A P4
complex have similar neurological, facial, identified, and in the second one heterozygous variant of 31 to 34 and single and cranial imaging findings. There is no genotype-phenotype correlation. 37 exon deletion were detected. Furthermore in three probands intragenic Thus, these four genes encoding A P4
 subunits should be screened in pa- deletions in only one allele of SPG11 gene were found: ranging from 9 to tients with autosomal recessive spastic quadriplegic cerebral palsy, severe 11 and single exon deletions involving exon 2 and 29. To provide molecular mental retardation, and stereotypic laughter, especially with the described verification of spastic paraplegia type 11 in above mentioned three cases, f Bac. iTaül yasnüdz c: rNaonniael. MK.R BI iflegautvuarre: sN.one. N. Koçer: None. C. Yalçınkaya: None. O. direct sequencing is planned. Çağlayan: None. E. Gül: None. S. Şahin: None. S. Çomu: None. M. Günel: The phenotype of affected subjects from studied families corresponds to None. the complicated form of spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum, white matter abnormalities and polyneuropahy as well as mild to moderate cogni- tive impairment.  P08
.85 Although MLPA technique is reliable screening tool for recessive SPG11 the Paraplegin mutations cause progressive external ophthalmoplegia future analysis of SPG11 point mutations will permit more efficiently deter- with multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions in skeletal muscle m Wi.n Ker mysoal:e Ncuolnaer. sMta. tRuasj kinie owuicr zg:r Noounpe o. fE p. aEtlieernt-tDs.obkowska: None. I. Stepniak: None. W. Lojkowska: None. M. Rakowicz: None. J. Antczak: None. J. Zaremba: I. M. Wedding1,2, J. A. Koht2, D. Misceo3,2, G. T. Tran4, L. Bindoff4,5, A. Holmgren3,2, E. None. M. Schinwelski: None. A. Sulek: None. Frengen3,2, C. M. E. Tallaksen1,2, C. Tzoulis4,5; 1Oslo University Hospital, Department of Neurology, Oslo, Norway, 2University of Oslo, Faculty of Medicine, Oslo, Norway, 3Oslo University Hospital, Department of Medical ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 233ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.87  P08
.89 Molecular mechanism of microrearrangements in the most prevalent Multiple genetic testing of 10 types of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) - SPG4. spinocerebellar ataxias by multiplex PCR and repeat-primed PCR E. Elert-Dobkowska1, C. Beetz2, W. Krysa1, M. Rajkiewicz1, I. Stepniak1, W. Lojkowska3, M. S. Sawai1,2, T. Ishige1,2, S. Itoga1,2, K. Sato1,2, E. Utsuno2, M. Beppu1,2, M. Nishimura1,2, K. Rakowicz4, J. Zaremba1, A. Sulek1; Matsushita1,2, S. Kuwabara3, F. Nomura1,2; 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 1Department of Molecular Diagnosis, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 2Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Jena University Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 2Division of Laboratory Medicine and Clinical Genetics, Chiba University Jena, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 3Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Neurophysiology, Institute of Psychiatry and University, Chiba, Japan. Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. The autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (ADCAs) are clinically and Spastic paraplegia type 4 (SPG4) is the most frequent HSP genetic type and genetically heterogeneous, and over 30 types of causative mutations have accounts for up to 40% of families with pure or complicated hereditary spa- been reported. Although some clinical and radiological features may help stic paraplegia. Mutations in the SPG4 corresponding gene SPAST are scat- in their differential diagnosis, genetic testing is required for a definitive dia- tered along its coding region and include all types of DNA modifications: gnosis and adequate genetic counseling. Since genetic testing of ADCAs is missense, nonsense, splice site as well as microrearrangements - deletions widely conducted in medical genetic laboratories around the world, simple or duplications. procedures are warranted. Also, the different types of ADCAs have a consi- To detect the deletion/duplication in the SPAST gene, the autosomal domi- derable ethnic variation in prevalence. In this study, we established simp- nant spastic paraplegia MLPA (Kit P-165-B1) containing probes for all SPAST le and multiple genetic testing for the causative mutations in 10 types of gene exons was performed for 196 patients. MLPA data were analyzed using ADCAs whose prevalences are higher than the other types in Japan; they the GeneMarker Software v.1.90 (SoftGenetics) after electrophoresis of the include SCA1-3, SCA6-8, SCA12, SCA17, SCA31 and DRPLA. To evaluate the PCR products on ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer with ROX500 internal size stan- mutations in a concurrent manner, we designed and optimized the proce- dard. dures by using multiplex PCR, repeat-primed PCR methods and DNA frag- To define the breakpoints and the range of identified in MLPA analysis mi- ment analysis. The amplifications of 10 loci were performed with the same crorearrangements (7 deletions and 1 duplication) long-range PCR was per- thermal cycle protocol. The sizes of the nucleotide repeats were determined formed. The used sets of primers were specific to the breakpoints regions of by DNA fragment analyses, the results of which were confirmed by DNA di- deletions and duplication. Selected LR-PCR products were directly sequen- rect sequencing. A total of 168 DNA samples obtained from patients with ced with BigDye Terminator v.3.1. clinically suspected ADCAs were analyzed. Written informed consent with Among 8 studied SPG4 families, 6 fusion sequences in breakpoints regions appropriate genetic counseling was obtained from each patient. Genetic for deletions of exons: 1-9, 4-7, 5-7, 8, and 10-12 and exons 14-15 dupli- tests were positive in 84 cases (50%). SCA3 was most common (29% of the cation were detected. Sequencing analysis revealed the microhomologic positive cases), followed by SCA6 (26%), SCA31 (19%) and DRPLA (12%). sequences flanking the microrearrangements. The presence of various, di- This multiple genetic testing of ADCAs may be valuable as a routine method rectly orientated short consensus regions, identified in 6 studied families i Sn. m Seadwiacia: lN goennee.t Tic. Ilsahbiogrea: tNoroinees.. S. Itoga: None. K. Sato: None. E. Utsuno: affected with SPG4, may suggest the possible mechanism of the mutation None. M. Beppu: None. M. Nishimura: None. K. Matsushita: None. S. occurrence known as non allelic homologous recombination-NAHR. Kuwabara: None. F. Nomura: None. The SPAST gene architecture including distribution and frequency of repe- titive elements may facilitate genomic rearrangements as a causative mole- c Eu.l aErle dret-fDeoctbsk oofw SsPkGa4: .None. C. Beetz: None. W. Krysa: None. M. Rajkiewicz:  P08
.90 None. I. Stepniak: None. W. Lojkowska: None. M. Rakowicz: None. J. Genome-wide expression profiling and functional characterization of Zaremba: None. A. Sulek: None. SCA28 lymphoblastoid cell lines reveal impairment in cell growth and activation of apoptotic pathways. C. MANCINI1, P. Roncaglia2,3, A. Brussino1, G. Stevanin4,5,6, N. Lo Buono1, H. Krmac3,  P08
.88 F. Maltecca7, E. Gazzano8, A. Bartoletti Stella9, M. A. Calvaruso9,10, L. Iommarini10, C. SCA36 molecular analysis in patients with spinocerebellar ataxia Cagnoli1, S. Forlani4, I. Le Ber4, A. Durr4,5, A. Brice4,5, D. Ghigo8, G. Casari7, A. M. Porcelli10, D. Di Bella, E. Sarto, C. Mariotti, L. Nanetti, C. Gellera, S. Magri, F. Taroni; A. Funaro1, G. Gasparre9, S. Gustincich3, A. Brusco1,11; Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2European Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy. Bioinformatics Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Neurobiology Sector, SISSA/ ISAS, Trieste, Italy, 4Centre de Recherche de l’Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (INSERM / UPMC Univ. Paris 6, UMR_ S975
 ; CNRS 7225), Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 5APHP, Fédération de génétique, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, Autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) are a heterogeneous France, 6Neurogenetics team, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Institut du Cerveau group of neurological disorders characterized by cerebellar dysfunction et de la Moelle épinière, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7San Raffaele Scientific mostly due to Purkinje cell degeneration. Recently, a novel form of spino- Institute, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University and Center for Translational Genomics cerebellar ataxia (SCA36) with motor neuron involvement was described in and Bioinformatics, Milano, Italy, 8Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Japanese and Galician patients. It is caused by a GGCCTG repeat expansion in Torino, Italy, 9Department Medical and Surgical Sciences, Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 10Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnologies (FABIT), intron 1 of NO P56
 gene. This gene encodes a component of the ribonucleo- University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 11Medical Genetics Unit, “Città della Salute e della protein complex and plays a role in transcription and splicing. We screened Scienza” Hospital, Torino, Italy. a large cohort of Italian unrelated patients with familiar (n=142) or spo- radic/unknown (n=254) spinocerebellar ataxia for GGCCTG repeat expan- sion in NO P56
 intron 1. All patients were negative for the common SCA1 SCA28 is an autosomal dominant ataxia associated with AFG3 L2
 gene muta- and SCA2 mutations. The NO P56
 repeat was analysed by fluorescent triplet tions. We performed a whole genome expression profiling using lymphobla- repeat-primed PCR analysis. NO P56
 expansion was detected in 5 probands stoid cell lines (LCLs) from four SCA28 patients, and six unrelated healthy from 4 different unrelated Italian families with dominant ataxia and also in controls matched for sex and age. We found 66 genes whose expression was one sporadic patient and, subsequently, in his affected brother. Interestingly, statistically different, 35 of which were up-regulated (Fold Change - FC = all probands originated from a relatively small area in central Italy, sugge- 2.5-10) and 31 down-regulated (FC = 0.1-0.3). The differentially expressed sting a common ancestor and a founder effect for this mutation. In conclu- genes were clustered in five functional categories: (1) regulation of cell pro- sion, SCA36 accounts for approximately 3% of Italian autosomal dominant liferation; (2) regulation of programmed cell death; (3) response to oxidati- SCA families negative for the common SCA mutations. Clinically, mutated ve stress; (4) cell adhesion, and (5) chemical homeostasis. To validate these patients presented with slow progressive gait ataxia with late onset (40-60 data, we performed functional experiments that proved an impaired SCA28 yrs) with pyramidal signs, eye movement abnormalities and, in some cases, LCLs growth compared to controls (p < 0.005), an increased number of cells motor neuron involvement (tongue atrophy). Neuroimaging revealed pro- in the G0/G1 phase (p < 0.001), and an increased mortality of patients cells minent cerebellar atrophy affecting the vermis, with minor involvement of due to apoptosis (p < 0.05). We also showed that respiratory chain activity cerebellar hemispheres and brainstem in later stages [Supported in part by and reactive oxygen species levels were not altered, although lipid peroxi- T De.l eDtih Boenl-lIat:a Nlioan ger.a En.t SGaGrtPo0: 9N3o0n1e]. .C. Mariotti: None. L. Nanetti: None. C. Gellera: None. S. Magri: None. F. Taroni: None. dation in SCA28 LCLs was increased in basal conditions (p < 0.05). We did not detect mitochondrial DNA large deletions. An increase of TFAM, a crucial protein for mtDNA maintenance, and a decrease of DR P1
, a key regulator of mitochondrial fission, suggested an alteration of the mitochondrial network remodeling system. 234 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRInA cNonCcElu s| iWon,W wWho.leE SgeHnGom.Oe eRxGpression profiling in SCA28 LCLs allowedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index the identification of several altered pathways that may be related to the di- of known ataxia genes; unpublished data) Finally, all selected variants were s Ce.a Msea.ncini: None. P. Roncaglia: None. A. Brussino: None. G. Stevanin: validated by Sanger sequencing and cosegregation analysis. None. N. Lo Buono: None. H. Krmac: None. F. Maltecca: None. E. Gazzano: This strategic analysis leads to relatively short lists of unique variants per None. A. Bartoletti Stella: None. M.A. Calvaruso: None. L. Iommarini: None. C. family. Although the validation process is not completely finished for all Cagnoli: None. S. Forlani: None. I. Le Ber: None. A. Durr: None. A. Brice: None. D. Ghigo: None. G. Casari: None. A.M. Porcelli: None. A. Funaro: families, our preliminary data strongly suggest we indeed identified novel None. G. Gasparre: None. S. Gustincich: None. A. Brusco: None. candidate ataxia genes and that the majority of these are involved in modu- lEat. iNngib sbyenlianpgt:i cN tornaen. sCm. iVsesrisocnh.uuren-Bemelmans: None. B. van de Warrenburg: None. B. Kremer: None. A. van der Hout: None. C. van Diemen: None. D. Dooijes: None. M. Dijkstra: None. L. Franke: None. M. Swertz:  P08
.91 None. R. Sinke: None. D. Verbeek: None. Identification of robust biomarkers of neuronal and glial metabolic changes in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1,2,3 and 7 F. Mochel1, I. M. Adanyeguh1, T. Nguyen1, D. Rinaldi1, C. Jauffret1, R. Valabregue2, S.  P08
.93 Lehericy2, P. Henry3, A. Brice1, A. Durr1; Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia 7 (SCAR7) is caused by 1INSERM UMR  S975
, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France, 2Center for NeuroImaging Research, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France, 3Center for variants in TP P1
, the gene involved in classic late-infantile neuronal Magnetic Resonance Research, Minneapolis, MN, United States. ceroid lipofuscinosis 2 disease (CLN2 disease) Y. Sun1, R. Almomani1, G. Breedveld2, G. Santen1, E. Aten1, D. Lafeber3, J. Hoff4, E. Brusse5, F. Verheijen2, R. Verdijk6, M. Kriek1, B. Oostra2, M. Breuning1, M. Losekoot1, J. den Dunnen1, B. van de Warrenburg7, A. Maat-Kievit2; Background: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) belong to the group of polyglut- 1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, amine repeat disorders and lead primarily to neurodegeneration in the cere- Netherlands, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, bellum and the pons. We recently demonstrated that even the most sensitive Netherlands, 3Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical clinical scores would require large number of patients to assess any thera- Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Neurology, St Antonius Hospital, Nieuwegein, peutic benefit. Therefore, the identification of robust biomarkers is critical Netherlands, 5Dept. of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, to assess disease progression for therapeutic development. Methods: 1H- Netherlands, 6Dept. of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Dept. of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, NMR spectroscopy was performed at 3T to determine the neurochemical Nijmegen, Netherlands. profile of 24 metabolite concentrations in the vermis and pons of a unique cohort of SCA1 (N=8), SCA2 (N=11), SCA3 (N=17) and SCA7 (N=10), as well as in healthy controls with similar median age (N=24). Results/Interpreta- Spinocerebellar ataxias are phenotypically, neuropathologically and gene- tion: Compared to controls, SCAs patients displayed a significant decrease tically heterogeneous. We reported a unique family with a childhood onset, of neuronal metabolites, N-acetylaspartate and glutamate, but increased slowly progressive autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia, referred to glia-related metabolites, glutamine and myoinositol. The neuronal loss in as SCAR7. A genome-wide linkage study mapped the causative gene on a 5.9 both affected regions was associated with a significant increase in creati- cM region on chromosoTmPeP b1and 11p15. No obvious candidate gene could be ne and phosphocreatine suggesting compensatory energetic mechanisms. assigned. Here w. e report the results of exome sequencinTgP, rPe1vealing disease- Of note, there was a strong negative correlation between the ataxia rating causing variants in the gene, encoding the lysosomal enzyme tripepti- scores (SARA) and N-acetylaspartate levels in the pons of SCA2-3-7 pati- dyl peptidase 1 A missense and a splice site variant in , cosegregating ents. In the vermis, myoinositol and creatine levels were also significantly wTPitPh1 the disease, were found in the SCAR7 family and also in another patient correlated with the SARA scores of SCA2 and SCA3 patients. Principal com- with a SCAR7 phenotype. ponent analyses showed that the metabolic profile of SCA1-2-3 tend to differ , is the causative gene for late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis from SCA7, which is consistent with previous observation of slower disease disease 2 (CLN2 disease). CLN2 disease is characterized by epilepsy, loss progression in SCA7. The correlation matrix also confirmed that the most of vision, ataxia and a rapidly progressive course, leading to early death. robust biomarkers of SCAs are N-acetylaspartate, glutamate, myoinositol SCAR7 patients showed ataxia and low activity of tripeptidyl peptidase 1, and total creatine, which supports preliminary data from a pilot study con- d Fu. cMteodch inel :S CNAon1e.. I.M. Adanyeguh: None. T. Nguyen: None. D. Rinaldi: but no ophthalmologic abnormalities or epilepsy. Also, the slowly progres- None. C. Jauffret: None. R. Valabregue: None. S. Lehericy: None. P. Henry: sive evolution of the disease until old age and TaPbPse1n-ce of ultra structural None. A. Brice: None. A. Durr: None. curvilinear profiles is different from the known CLN2 phenotypes. Our findings expand the phenotypes related to variants to SCAR7. In spite of the limited sample size and measurements a putative genotype- phenotype correlation may be drawn: loss of function variants abolishing  P08
.92 TP P1
 enzyme activity lead to CLN2 disease, while variants that diminish Identification of novel spinocerebellar ataxia disease genes using a TP P1
 enzyme activity lead to SCAR7. This finding illustrates the sometimes combination of shared haplotype analysis and exome sequencing unexpected clinical spectrum of variants in known genes. We will encounter E. Nibbeling1, C. Verschuuren-Bemelmans1, B. van de Warrenburg2, B. Kremer3, A. van der Hout1, C. van Diemen1, D. Dooijes4, M. Dijkstra5, L. Franke1, M. Swertz5, R. Sinke1, D. t Yh.i sS upnh:e Nnoomnee. nRo. nA wlmiothm ianncir:e Naosinneg. Gfr.e Bqrueeendcvye ulds:i nNgo nnee.w G t. eScahnntieqnu: eNso.ne. E. Aten: None. D. Lafeber: None. J. Hoff: None. E. Brusse: None. F. Verheijen: Verbeek1; None. R. Verdijk: None. M. Kriek: None. B. Oostra: None. M. Breuning: 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, None. M. Losekoot: None. J. den Dunnen: None. B. van de Warrenburg: 2Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, None. A. Maat-Kievit: None. 3Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Genomics Coordination Center, Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.  P08
.94 GSN, a new candidate gene in autosomal dominant spastic cerebellar ataxia To date, 37 different dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxia types are M. Coutelier1,2, M. L. Monin1, C. Gautier1, C. Tesson1,3, T. Esteves1, S. Koskelainen4, F. known. Currently, genetic testing of the most frequent mutations via routine Charbonnier-Beaupel1, M. Labussière1, E. Mundwiller1, S. Valleix5, K. Tahiri1, D. Langui1, J. DNA diagnostic screening leaves 30% of the cases genetically undiagnosed. C. Corvol1, S. Kiuru-Enari4, K. El Hachimi1,3, A. Brice1,6, F. Darios1, A. Durr1,6, G. Stevanin1,3,6; Here, we used a combination of shared haplotype analysis with exome se- 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, NEB, Paris, France, 2Institut de Duve, quencing to identify the disease-causing variants in 10 small Dutch families Brussels, Belgium, 3Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, France, 4Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland, 5APHP, Groupe Hospitalier Cochin, Paris, France, 6APHP, CHU Pitié- with hereditary cerebellar ataxia. We set out to pinpoint regions that have Salpêtrière, Fédération de Génétique, Paris, France. the highest probability to contain disease-causing variants by searching for shared haplotypes following genotyping affected family members on Illumi- na 320k cytoSNP-12-arrays. In parallel, exome sequencing was performed Autosomal dominant (AD) cerebellar ataxias (CA) are severe neurodegene- in 2 most distantly related affected individuals of each family. Next, we used rative disorders, characterized by movement incoordination, variably asso- Ingenuity software for the data-analysis and filtered subsequently for: 1. ciated with other neurological signs. As of today, 35 loci and 20 genes have variants shared by both affected individuals, 2. novel variants, i.e. absent been described in ADCA, but the causative gene is still unknown in half of the in dbSNP, the Exome Variant Database and GoNL, a Dutch control databa- patients. We report a large French family with adult-onset rapidly progres- se containing 500 exomes, 3. variants present in genes that are located in sive ataxia, associated with pyramidal signs, spasticity, decreased pallaes- shared haplotype regions of at least 10 Mb, 4. variants in genes that are part thesia and ophthalmoplegia. After exclusion of polyglutamine expansions or of an in silico generated ataxia gene-netwEoSrkH (Gba s2e0d 1o3n c|o P-eAxpRrIeSss,i oFnR-dAaNta CEm | uWtaWtioWns .iEnS thHeG co.OmRmGonest causative genes, susceptibility loci inclu2d3in5gABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index about 450 genes were identified through linkage analysis. Analysis of va- FRDA pathology using a humanised mouse model containing an interrupted riants obtained from exome sequencing in two patients, filtered with data GAA repeat expansion. from 2 healthy cGoSnNtrols and 6 patients with other neurodegendeera ntoivveo disor- An interrupted GAA repeat expansion was introduced into the first intron of ders, and cosegregation verification, lead to the identification of a missense the human FXN gene present on a BAC clone by recombineering. The geno- mutation in the (gelsolin) gene thGatS Nwas shown to appear in the mic insert was used to generate humanised transgenic/KO mice. affected grandfather. The variant was not found in 380 healthy controls or in The presence of the introduced interrupted GAA repeat expansion resulted online databases. A point mutation in is already responsible for Finnish in markedly decreased levels of human FXN transcript and frataxin protein amyloidosis. However, the mutation described here differs, and the pheno- in humanised mouse tissues. The region immediately upstream of the in- type was excluded in our family through immunohistochemistry of patient terrupted GAA repeat expansion region was found to be almost completely skin sample. Mutation screening in 39 patients with AD spastic ataxia re- methylated. The assessment of phenotypic symptoms of FRDA by a series of vealed two new potential variants. Further screening is ongoing for another behavioural, neurological, biochemical and histological tests did not reveal 95 patients, with a broader clinical picture. Functional studies aiming at the any significant phenotypic differences between humanised and wild type cytoskeleton function of fibroblasts, including immunofluorescent staining mice. Somatic instability of the interrupted GAA repeat expansion was not and migration tests are ongoing to validate and understand the causative detected using the small pool PCR technique. n Ma.t uCroeu otef ltiehre: mNountea.t iMon.Ls.. Monin: None. C. Gautier: None. C. Tesson: None. T. The interruption of the GAA sequence contributes to the somatic stability of Esteves: None. S. Koskelainen: None. F. Charbonnier-Beaupel: None. M. the repetitive element, which in turn results in the mice lacking an obvious Labussière: None. E. Mundwiller: None. S. Valleix: None. K. Tahiri: None. D. phenotype despite the low levels of FXN mRNA and frataxin protein and re- Langui: None. J.C. Corvol: None. S. Kiuru-Enari: None. K. El Hachimi: None. A. Brice: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pJr.e Ssasrivsee reop: iNgeonnee.tic changes. pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; 7th PCRD (European Union). F. Darios: None. A. Durr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received);  P08
.97 Modest; Agence Nationale de la Recherche. G. Stevanin: B. Research Grant Uncommon phenotypes associated with mutations in the WF S1
 gene (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as M. Plutino1, A. Chaussenot1, S. Saadi1,2, C. Rouzier1, S. Bannwarth1,2, M. Barth3, H. Dollfus4, grants already received); Modest; Agence Nationale de la Recherche, Association P. Charles5, B. Vialettes6, V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2; CSC, GIS Rare Diseases Institute. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Archet 2 Hospital, Nice, France, 2IRCAN, UMR 7284 / INSERM U1081 / UNS, Nice, France, 3Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 4Department of medical genetics, EA Inserm 3949, Strasbourg, France, 5Department of Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital, Pierre and  P08
.95 Marie Curie University, Paris, France, 6Nutrition, Metabolic Diseases and Endocrinology Dizygotic twins with ataxia telangiectasia Department, Timone Hospital, Marseille, France. M. Podralska1, A. Jakiel2, B. Basiewicz-Worsztynowicz3, A. Lewandowicz-Uszyńska3, M. Sąsiadek2, R. Słomski1, A. Stembalska2; WF S1
 1Institute of Human Genetic, Poznań, Poland, 2Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 3Department of Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, Background. gene mutations were mainly described in Wolfram syn- Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. drome (WS). The minimal diagnostic criteria for the autosomal recessive WS are juvenile-onset diabetes mellWituFsS 1(DM) and optic atrophy (OA), fre- quently associated with diabetes insipidus, deafness, renal tract abnormali- We present the case of dizygotic twins (girl and boy) with ataxia telangiec- ties and neuropsychiatric disorders. has also been involved in two au- tasia. They both were diagnosed with strabismus, dysarthria, an ataxic gait. tosomal dominant syndromes: Low FreqWueFn S1
cy Sensorineural Hearing Loss The girl presented dysmorphic features and muscular hypotonia, while (LFSNHL) and OA associated with Sensorineural Hearing Loss (SNHL). only in the boy choreoathetotic movements and positive Romberg test was Patients and methods.We analysed the gene in a cohort of 13 fami- observed. The girl’s electroencephalogram presented paroxysmal changes lies including patients presentingW LFFS S1
NHL or a clinical phenotype different in median, central and parietal region (however, without seizures), while from typical WS with at least two symptoms including diabetes mellitus, OA, electromyogram showed no changes. The girl also was diagnosed with au- SNHL or neurological disorders. W FwSa1s sequenced in the Department of toimmunohaemolytic anaemia, leucopenia with lymphopenia and suffered Medical Genetics, CHU of Nice (France). from recurrent infections. In both cases elevated level of serum AFP was Results.In this cohort, we identified mutations in one LFSNHL family, observed. The concentrations of IgA and IgG were low in a girl as well as 3 families with autosomal dominant OA and SNHL, 5 families with late-onset a boy. The percentage of T-cells positive with CD4 and CD19 were reduced WWFS S(1DM and OA occurring after 15 years of age), 1 family with recessive OA but percentages of CD3 and NK-cell were at the normal levels in girl. The and neurological disorders and 3 sporadic cases with only one mutation in boy presented reduced percentages of T-cells positive with CD3 and CD4. associated with an atypical phenotype (including isolated deafness, However, the levels of CD8, NK-cells, B-cells, CEA, IgM, IgE (global), CRP, CPK late-onset diabetes associated withW heFaSr1ing impairment, and infancy-onset were within the normal limits. Cytogenetic studies confirmed increased fre- DM and deafness). WF S1
 quency of spontaneous chromosomal aberrations in both children. Additio- Conclusion.Our data show that the gene is involved in a clinical spec- nalA aTnMalysis performed using PowerPlex®16 led to the observation of loss of trum wider than the commonly described WS. should be also tested in maternal allele at locus 8q24.13. Molecular studies revealed two mutations LFSNHL, late-onset WS and phenotypes, transmitted either in dominant or in gene. First mutation involves a G>A substitution of the last nucleoti- recessive fashion, presenting at least OA or SNHL associated with additional de of exon 43 (c.6095G>A), and it results in the deletion of exon 43. Second f Mea. tPulruetsin ion:c Nluodnien.g A D. MCh oaru nsesuenroolto: gNiocanle s. iSg.n Ssa.adi: None. C. Rouzier: None. S. mutation detected in twins was deletion at position c.6754_6754delA, Bannwarth: None. M. Barth: None. H. Dollfus: None. P. Charles: None. B. Vialettes: None. V. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. p.T2252PfsX5. Supported by grant NN401098240 from the Ministry of Sci- eMn.c Pe oadnrda lHskigah: eNro Ende.u Aca. tJiaokni einl: PNoolnaen.d B. Basiewicz-Worsztynowicz: None. A. Lewandowicz-Uszyńska: None. M. Sąsiadek: None. R. Słomski: None. A. Stembalska: None.  P08
.98 The mutation p.G1341D in Wilson’s disease patients: how to explain clinical polymorphism?  P08
.96 N. Mocanu1, S. Groppa1, T. Todorov2, A. Zibert2, V. Sacara1, H. Schmidt2; Analysis of the role of GAA repeat expansion instability in Friedreich 1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 2Klinik fürTransplantationsmedizin, Universitätsklinikum, Münster, Germany. ataxia pathology in a humanised mouse model J. Sarsero1,2; 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Background: Wilson’s disease (WD) is a progressive and genetically determi- ned disease with deterioration of copper metabolism and it’s accumulation in different organs and tissues due to their functional and structural changes. There is evidence that age-dependent and tissue-specific somatic instability The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinical forms of WD in correlation of the GAA repeat expansion may be a determinant of the progressive pa- with type of AT P7
B gene mutations. Material and methods: The diagnosis thology of Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), and is evident in FRDA patients and a was based on clinical survey, biochemical and genetic tests (Germany). YAC-based GAA repeat expansion mouse model. Interruptions in GAA repeat Results: The missence mutation p.G1341D was the second prevalent mu- sequences can alleviate transcription inhibition and reduce genetic insta- tation and has been revealed in 10 of 37 patients (27 %), from who 8 was b 2il 3it 6ies. We explored the role of instability of the EGSAAH rGep 2ea0t 1e3xp |a nPsAioRn IoSn, FRhAetNerCozEyg |o Wus W(21W,6. %ES) HanGd .2O hRomGozygous (5, 4 %). The most common cha-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index racteristics of this mutation was the early age of onset, mixed clinical mani- due to allopurinol treatment although the PCR-SBT HLA-B genotyping takes festations with severe hepatic deterioration and neurological changes what long time. Therefore a simple diagnostic genotyping technology needs to be lead to disability with difficulty in treatment. In a family with 2 homozygous dEe.v Keilmop: eNdo nfoer. using in practice. (p.G1341D) siblings the girl had severe neurological damage and cirrhosis. In contrast, the boy didn’t have neurological changes, and the liver damage was less aggressive. In the other family also with 2 heterozygous (p.G1341D)  P09
.02 siblings the younger boy had severe clinical manifestations but his older si- A 1p36 polymorphism in the cannabinoid receptor 2 gene region ster had no clinical manifestations. Analysis of heterozygous and homozy- is associated with CNR2 gene expression, atopic childhood asthma gous patients revealed discrepancy in neurological signs progression and onset, severity, and treatment outcome with inhaled corticosteroids efficiency of treatment being more severe in heterozygous ones. Conclusion: C. E. P. Kozmus1,2, V. Berce3, U. Potocnik4,5; Discordance in clinical manifestation and age at onset in patients with si- 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, University of Maribor, milar mutations may indicate that not only genetic factors play a role in the Maribor, Slovenia, 2Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Porto, Porto, d Ne.v Meloocpamnue:n Nt oonf eth. eS .d Gisreoapspea b: uNto anles.o T g. eTnoedtoicro ovr: eNnovnier.o An.m Zeibnetartl: mNoondeif.i eVr. s. Portugal, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Sacara: None. H. Schmidt: None. Slovenia, 4Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Maribor, Slovenia, 54Laboratory for Biochemistry Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.  P08
.99 Serious neurologic entity in two unrelated patients with Xq13.1 Asthma pathogenesis is currently understood through the interaction of se- duplication veral genes and environmental influences. It is believed that endocannabi- K. Kosma1, M. Tzetis1, K. Giannikou1,2, V. Oikonomakis1, A. Xaidara3, A. Dinopoulos4, S. noids act as native modulators of immune system, probably through canna- Youroukos5, A. Syrmou1, S. Ktsiou-Tzeli1, E. Kanavakis1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, binoid receptors activation. Recent expression quantitative trait loci studies 2Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation, Athens, Greece, 31st Department of linked single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on chromosome 1p36 with Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 43rd Department of cannabinoid receptor 2 (CNR2) gene expression. We analyzed rs4237 as- Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 51 st Department of sociation with childhood asthma, and the effect of rs4237 on the response Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) treatment and CNR2 gene expression. We studied a case-control cohort of 229 children with newly detected mild/ moderate persistent asthma (150 atopic, 79 non-atopic, 13 undetermined The use of array-CGH substantially improves the diagnosis of chromosomal atopy), and 271 controls. Blood samples were collected before treatment abnormalities that are not evident by conventional karyotype. Recently in and 72 matching samples 4-6 weeks after treatment with ICS. According an exteTnAdFe1d, GfaJmB1il y with. global developmentalG dJBe1la y and autistic features, to recessive model of genetic association the frequency of CC genotype in a novel Xq12-q13.3 duplication was identified which contained TaAmFo1ngst atopic asthmatics was lower (13.2%) than in controls (21.0%, p=0.0284). others genes(Kaya et al.2012).The gene is associated with Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was higher in atopic asth- morphology of myelin sheath and peripheral neuropathy, while has matics with CC genotype (98%±11%) compared to those with CT or TT been linked with torsion dystonia -3. (90%±15%, p=0.0155). Median relative expression of CNR2 in asthmatics We present the clinical and molecular findings in two unrelated patients with TT genotype was higher (0.79±0.81) compared to those with CT or CC with Xq13.1 duplication. The first one is a 5 year old boy with truncal hy- (0.28±0.81, p=0.0041). FEV1 increased significantly by 10.6%±11.6% of potonia, low deep tendon reflexes and proximal weakness. The other pati- predicted value after ICS treatment in atopic asthmatics with TT genotype, ent is a 16 year old boy with progressive difficulties in walking, tremor and compared to 6.4%±10.5% in those with CT or CC homozygotes (p=0.034). learning disorder, while his mother has an identical positive family history Our results suggest rs4237 is associated with asthma onset, with asthma in three deceased males. High resolution T4AXF118 0K A GgiJlBe1n t arrays used in the severity, CNR2 gene expression and with inhaled corticosteroids treatment study (> 236.000 probes, average resolution of 8.9 Kb) revealed a duplicati- response in children with atopic asthma, and suggest the involvement of the on on Xq13.1 (0.K4A2N3 SM L1
b) containing the and genes in both pati- e Cn.dEo.Pc.a Knonzambiunso:i Nd osnyes.t eVm. B ienr caest: hNmonae.. U. Potocnik: None. ents, while the second patient had an additional deletion on 17q21.31 (0.63 Mb) containing gene. To our knowledge this is the second report oTAf Fth1e Xq 1G3JB.11 duplication extending the previously described phenotypic  P09
.03 spectrum in that a more serious neurologic entity could be attributed to the Genetic basis of primary immunodeficiencies in Croatian patients K. Koasnmda: Nonge.e Mne. sT.zetis: None. K. Giannikou: None. V. Oikonomakis: A. Merkler, D. Richter, J. Kelecic, H. Ljubic, D. Caban, J. Sertic; None. A. Xaidara: None. A. Dinopoulos: None. S. Youroukos: None. A. University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. Syrmou: None. S. Ktsiou-Tzeli: None. E. Kanavakis: None. Introduction: Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PID) are a heterogenic  P09
.01 group of rare inherited conditions that occur in individuals born with mal- Three HLA-B*5801 positive allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous functioned immune system. hypersensitivity reaction cases Objective: The objective was to confirm clinical diagnosis at molecular gene- E. Kim; tic level in patients with PID and to define carrier status by analyzing DNA Inje University Busanpaik Hospital, Busan, Korea, Republic of. samples of individuals with PID in family history. Methods: We analyzed 24 samples of genomic DNA: 11 samples of patients with suspicion on one of the PID and 13 samples of their family members. Allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous hypersensitivity reaction such as For identification of mutations in the coding region of analyzed genes, we Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) used the sequencing method on Applied Biosystems 3130xl Genetic analy- has been reported on the genetic association with HLA-B*5801. Clinicians zer and BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit. occasionally request HLA genotyping for evaluating the causality of drug Results: In 2 patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia, mutations in the hypersensitivity based on the evidence between HLA genotype and drug BTK gene were found. In the first patient, mutation occurred de novo in hypersensitivity. Three patients with serious cutaneous hypersensitivity mother‘s egg cells and, in the other, mutation was inherited from the mo- reaction after allopurinol administration were tested for HLA-B genoty- ther. 3 patients with XLA suspicion didn‘t have mutation in the BTK gene. In ping. One (72-yr old woman) showed drug reaction with eosinophilia and 4 patients with cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia, 4 mutations occur- systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome and the others (63-yr old and 22-yr red de novo in mother‘s egg cells were found. In 2 patients with suspicion old men) turned out to be SJS. All patients were treated with allopurinol on Shwachmann-Diamond syndrome mutation in SBDS gene inherited from due to gout. The onset of the symptoms was 2-4 weeks after the drug ex- the parents were found. posure. HLA-B genotyping was performed using PCR-SBT (sequence-based Conclusions: Understanding the genetic basis of PID is the final step in typing) method. All patients have one HLA-B*5801 allele. While a patient confirmation of the PID diagnosis as it provides comprehension of disease with DRESS syndrome has HLA-B*4801/*5801, two SJS patients showed mechanisms at the molecular level and correlation between genotype and HLA-B*1302/*5801 and HLA-B*4403/*5801 genotypes, respectively. The p Ah.e Mneortkylpeer: oNf oPnIeD. .D. Richter: None. J. Kelecic: None. H. Ljubic: None. D. results implied that patients with HLA-B*5801 may suffer from severe cuta- Caban: None. J. Sertic: None. neous hypersensitivity reaction with allopurinol administration. Thus PCR- SBT HLA-B genotyping could be helpful fEorS pHreGve 2nt0in1g3 th |e P sAerRioIuSs, p FroRbAleNm CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 237ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.04  P09
.07 EQTLs and allele specific expression of HLA haplotypes and amino Homozygous deletion of IL-17RA and ADA2 in siblings with severe acids associated to autoimmune diseases. recurrent infections A. Zhernakova1, M. R. vd Sijde1, J. Gutierrez-Achury1, P. J. McLaren2, D. V. Zhernakova1, P. M. Belfiore1, F. Fellmann1, J. Wassenberg2, M. Perreau3, S. Christen-Zaech4, P. Bochud5, M. I. W. de Bakker3,4, H. Westra1, L. Franke1, C. Wijmenga1, J. Fu1; Beck Popovic6, P. Bart3, J. Beckmann1, M. Hofer2, D. Martinet1; 1University medical centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2School of Life Sciences, 1Service of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University medical 2Immunoallergology and Rheumatology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Divisions of Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Department of Pediatrics and division of Dermatology, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Service of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Hematology Oncology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Lausanne, HLA is the strongest associated locus in autoimmune diseases. Recent stu- Switzerland. dies in celiac disease (CelD) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) indicated the major role of DR3-DQ2 and DR4-DQ8 in both diseases, and identified addi- tional independently associated variants both in the DR-DQ locus and in the Chronic systemic and mucocutaneous infections can be associated with hu- extended HLA locus. man inborn errors of immunity but theC agnedniedtaic a blbaicckagnrsound Srteamphayinlosc pooccours- We hypothesized that the mechanism of downstream effect of associated layu urenudse, rstood. Here we report two siblings suffering since childhood from variants and haplotypes is due to an impact on the expression level of HLA chronic severe infections mediated by and genes We investigated this hypothesis in a dataset of 60 unrelated CEU in- refractory to classical treatments. DNA analysis by Array-based Com- dividuals, for whom RNAseq data, dense HLA genotyping and imputation pILa-r1a7tRivAe GenAomDAic2 Hybridization (array-CGH) shows that both sibs are ho- of HLA alleles was available. We selected CelD and RA associated amino mozygous carriers of a 22q11.1 deletion of about 770 Kb encompassing the acids, HLA-haplotypes and SNPs, and assessed allele specific expression and and genes. IL-17RA isI Lo-n1e7 RreAceptor for the pro-inflammatory eQTLs in the HLA locus. eQTL analysis allowed us to assess the dosage ef- IL-17 cytokines involved in protection against extra cellular pathogens. A fect of HLA variants on gene expression, whereas the allele-specific analysis, homozygous nonsense mutation in has been recently reported in a performed in heterozygous individuals for each variant, indicated if one or patient suffering from isolated chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. ADA2, another allele of a SNP or amino acid was preferentially expressed. adenosine deaminase 2, is secreted by monocytes undergoing differentia- In both analyses we observed that an amino acid at position 52 of the DQB1 tion into macrophages or dendritic cells and by dendritic cells themselves, gene (DQB1_AA52) was significantly associated with expression of DQB1 and mighCt .b ael binicvaonlvsed in Simtamphuynloec roecscpuosnses. By genetic and functional ana- gene both in eQTL and in allele-specific analysis. DQB1_AA52 is associated lyses, we confirmed the relationship between chronic mucocutaneous infec- to CelD independently from the most associated DQB1 variant (AA55). We tions by and species and the lack of expression therefore confirmed that imbalanced allelic expression is the downstream of IL-17RA. Severity of the symptoms might be further exacerbated by the effect of some HLA variants associated with autoimmune diseases. The ana- l Ays. iZs hiner enxatkeonvdae:d N nounem. bMe.rR o. fv din Sdiijvdied:u Naolsn ies. cJu. rGruetnietlryr einz- Aprcohgurreys: sN.one. P.J. absence of ADA2. McLaren: None. D.V. Zhernakova: None. P.I.W. de Bakker: None. H. Westra: This study underscores the usefulness of whole genetic analyses, allowing None. L. Franke: None. C. Wijmenga: None. J. Fu: None. for precise diagnosis and genetic counselling, thereby improving the ma- nMa.g Bemelfienorte o:f N cohnreo.n Fi.c Finelflemctainonu:s Ndoisneea. sJe. sW.assenberg: None. M. Perreau: None. S. Christen-Zaech: None. P. Bochud: None. M. Beck Popovic: None. P. Bart: None. J. Beckmann: None. M. Hofer: None. D. Martinet: None.  P09
.05 The IL-10 promoter genotype AA at -592 is correlated with increased susceptibility to hepatitis B but not HIV infection in Caucasian  P09
.08 intravenous drug users. Whether SNP rs12979860(C/T)of I L28
B predicts virological response E. Kallas1, K. Huik1, R. Avi1, M. Pauskar1, E. Jõgeda1, T. Karki1, K. Marsh2, D. Des Jarlais3, A. Uusküla2, I. Lutsar1; during peg IFN and ribavirin treatment in chronic hepatitis C 1Tartu University Institute of Microbiology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Institute of patients? Public Health, Tartu, Estonia, 3Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, NY, United States. B. Swiatek1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska1,2,3, J. Wysocki2, I. Mozer-Lisewska2, A. Kowala-Piaskowska2, I. Bereszynska2, J. Rembowska1, J. Nowak1; BACKGROUND: 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Medical Diagnostics, Poznan, Poland. Interleukin (IL)-10 -592A has been associated with rapid HIV disease progression. Whether and how the IL-10 polymorphisms at the pMoEsTitHioOnDs S-5: 92 and -1082 are associated with susceptibility to HIV and its Identification of molecular markers playing role in predicting anti-HCV co-infections in IDUs population is largely unknown. treatment outcome would facilitate therapy optimizing. I L28
B rs12979860 A total of 345 IDUs were recruited and of them 50% were HIV-. polymorphism has been identified as strong predictor of Sustained Virologi- A control group was formed by HIV-, HCV-, HBV- 496 healthy volunteer cal Response (SVR) in chronic hepatitis C (CHC) patients. The aim of this stu- blood donors. The IL-10 C-592A and A-1082G were determined using Ta- dy was to examine association between I L28
B rs12979860 polymorphism qRMESaUn LaTlSle: lic discrimination assay. The statistical analysis was performed and VR in 35 CHC patients treated with pegIFN+RBV. Serum HCV-RNA was using Fisher‘s exact test. measured on first day and then at 4 and 12 week of treatment by quantita- Of IDUs 88.7% were HCV+, 67.2% HBV+ and 40.6% with triple tive RT-PCR. DNA, isolated from PBL, was used for I L28
B rs12979860 geno- infection. IL-10 -592C allele (allelic frequencies 0.78 in IDU and 0.79 in do- typing by High Resolution Melting method.13 patients (37.1%) became HCV nors) and -1082 A allele (allelic frequencies 0.57 in IDUs and 0.55 in donors) RNA negative at week 4 (RVR-Rapid Virological Response) and 10 (28.6%) at were the most common in all groups. Both polymorphisms were under Har- week 12 (cEVR-complete Early Virological Response). 12 patients (34.3%) dy-Weinberg equilibrium and the allelic frequencies did not differ between did not achieve virological response until 12 weeks (PNR-Primary Non-Re- the three groups. The -592 CC/-1082 AG was the most common haplotype sponse). The mean baseline viral load was comparable - 6.69x10000 IU/ml (29.3% in IDUs and 30.4% in donor group). No associations were found in vs 7.32x10000 IU/ml vs 3.51x10000 IU/ml in RVR, cEVR and PNR group, distribution of IL-10 -592 and -1082 genotypes and HIV or HCV infections. respectively. The rs12979860 CC, CT and TT genotypes found in 8 (22.9%), However, persons possessing IL-10 AA had increased odds for acquiring 23 (65.7%), 4 (11.4%) patients, respectively. Among patients with CC geno- HBV infection (OR=4.37; 95% CI = 1.01-39.63; p=0.042). After adjustment type, 75% achieved RVR and 25% achieved cEVR. Among CT genotype RVR, fCoOr NHCIVL,U HSCIOVN aSn:d duration of intravenous drug use, the association was not cEVR and PNR were observed in 30.5%, 30.5% and 39% of patients, respec- significant tively. 25% of patients with genotype TT achieved cEVR and 75% achieved IL-10 genotypes are not associated with HIV acquisition in PNR. The initial results confirm that I L28
B rs12979860 C/T polymorphism Caucasian IDUs. However, I L10
 -592AA genotype predisposes of being HBV p Eo. sKitaivllea sa:n Ndo tnhee. rKe.f oHruei km: iNgohnt ep.l Ray. Aanvi :i mNponoer.t aMn.t P raoules kina rH: BNVon seu. sEc.e Jpõtigbeidliaty: . may identify those CHC patients, who achieve RVR during early phase of None. T. Karki: None. K. Marsh: None. D. Des Jarlais: None. A. Uusküla: treatment and thereby who are more likely to achieve SVR. None. I. Lutsar: None. This research was supported by National Science Centre grant no 2 B0.1  S1
w/i0a1te/kB: /NNo2n6e/. 0D4. 2Ja5n8u.szkiewicz-Lewandowska: None. J. Wysocki: None. I. Mozer-Lisewska: None. A. Kowala-Piaskowska: None. I. Bereszynska: None. J. Rembowska: None. J. Nowak: None. 238 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.09  P09
.11 Effects of aging and sex difference on immune-related phenotypes. Five new cases of Nijmegen breakage syndrome in Chile G. Sole1, V. Orrù1, E. Fiorillo1, M. Steri1, M. Dei1, S. Lai1, F. Virdis1, D. Schlessinger2, F. M. I. Aracena1, C. Cares2, S. Arredondo3, J. Pincheira4, K. Marcelain4, P. González- Cucca1, S. Sanna1; Hormazábal4; 1Istituto di ricerca genetica e biomedica - CNR, Monserrato - Cagliari, Italy, 2Laboratory 1Hospital Dr. Luis Calvo Mackenna and División de Pediatría Pontificia Universidad of Genetics, NIA, Baltimore, MD, United States. Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2Hospital Dr. Luis Calvo Mackenna, Santiago, Chile, 3Hospital Regional de Talca, Talca, Chile, 4Programa de Genética Humana, ICBM Facultad de Medicina Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. The complexity of the healthy human immune system and the immunolo- Introduction: gical changes that occur during life have been only partially described. Fur- thermore several autoimmune diseases have been associated with phenoty- Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal re- pic changes that can be interpreted as accelerated immune aging, and others cessive disease. It is characterized by congenital microcephaly, intrauterine show different incidence or severity in males and females. To investigate growth retardation and short stature, immunodeficiency, chromosome in- the impact of age and sex in specific immune cell types, we measured 266 stability and cancer proneness. The disease seems to occur worldwide, but immune-related traits, representing the majority of leukocyte cell populati- has a much higher prevalence among Central and Eastern European Slavic ons (monocytes, T and B cells, Natural Killer cells, regulatory T cells, dendri- pPoaptiuelnattiso: ns. Over 90% of identified patients bear a common deletion. We tic cells, and their subsets) as well as T cell maturation, in 1921 volunteers report five new patients from Chile, South America. (aged 14-99 years) of the SardiNIA project by polychromatic flow cytometry. Results: Since June 2000, five patients were referred to our genetic clinic, We then evaluated the impact of age and sex using linear regression mo- because of Microcephaly. Their diagnosis workup established NBS. dels. We observed statistically significant (p<0.0005) differences for 17 Three probands are female, referred from 10mo to 14y. Strikingly traits between younger and older subjects (<= or >60 years), including the they came from one region of Chile; four had no history of consanguinity. already described decrease of naïve CD8+ T cells in elderly. We also confir- Only one patient was referred with diagnosis of NBS. Two patients have al- med previous observations reporting stable granulocytes and monocytes, ready developed non-Hodgkin lymphNoBm S1
a, one dead. DNA analysis was car- but a light increase of NK cell counts, with aging. Differences between males rDieisdc uousst iionn f:o ur p atients; tested individuals were homozygous for the com- and females were not significant, but moderate changes were observed for mon Slavic mutation 657del5 in the gene. dendritic cells and subtypes, as well as B cells (p<0.005). While this study NBScan be suspected in clinical grounds, although there is con- sample already represents the largest and deepest characterized set ever siderably clinical overlap with other inherited conditions. Its confirmation described, we are currently performing immune-phenotyping in additio- is useful for an appropriate surveillance and for genetic counseling. The fact nal 2000 volunteers, including 200 healthy centenarians (aged >90 years). that all our patients came from the same region let us to propose a founder Our results will improve our knowledge on the immune system in health, effect. Although historical records tell us that the Chilean population was dGis. eSaoslees: , Naonnde a. gVi.n Ogr.rù: None. E. Fiorillo: None. M. Steri: None. M. Dei: founded by the admixture of local Amerindian populations and colonizing None. S. Lai: None. F. Virdis: None. D. Schlessinger: None. F. Cucca: None. S. Spaniards, it is probable that the genomic make up of current Chileans is Sanna: None. much more complex, with multiple ethnic groups contributing at different tMim.Ie. As rsaincceen ath: eN oinniet.i aCl .c Coanrteasc:t Nboentwe.e Se.n A Arrmederoincdaon:s Nanonde E. uJ.r oPpinecahnesi.ra: None. K. Marcelain: None. P. González-Hormazábal: None.  P09
.10 Methylation status of immune response genes promoters in cell-free DNA differ in hemodialyzed patients treated with low and high doses  P09
.12 of erythropoietin therapy Identification of the gene responsible for an autosomal dominant M. Korabecna1, E. Pazourkova1, A. Horinek1, M. Mokrejsova2, V. Tesar1; form of Common Variable Immunodeficiency 11st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 23rd V. Di Pierro1, P. Lyons2, R. Zuntini1, A. Schaffer3, I. Quinti4, S. Ferrari1; Faculty of Medicine of Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. 1S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3NCBI, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Dept. of Immunology, University of Roma „La Sapienza“, Roma, Italy. Anemia is a major complication of end-stage renal disease, occurring as a result of reduced erythropoietin production from the peritubular cells of kidney. Recombinat human erythropoietin therapy is successfully applied to CVID is the most common symptomatic antibody deficiency in adults, inclu- correct the anemia but significant number of dialysis patients remain hypo- ding a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by markedly redu- responsive to this therapy. As specific interleukins are generated during he- ced immunoglobulin serum levels, poor response to vaccines and increased modialysis and monocytes are activated, the process of hemodialysis may be susceptibility to bacterial infections. The majority of CVID cases are spora- regarded as a stimulus activating mechanisms of inflammation. It is known dic. Approximately 20% are familial: rare autosomal recessive mutations in that pro-inflammatory cytokines are able to suppress erythropoiesis. There- ICOS, BAFF-R, CD19, CD20, CD81 and CD21 coding genes have been recently fore we decided to study the changes in methylation status of promoters of reported and mutations in the TACI gene have been found in about 15% of immune response genes in the cell-free DNA which is thought to fulfill re- cases. gulation function in intercellular communication. We focused on hemodia- We report a large family with autosomal dominant inheritance of CVID, dia- lyzed subjects affected with diabetic nephropathy (n=18). In our pilot study gnosed according to the ESID/PAGID criteria for CVID based on at least 2 the patients were divided according to the recombinant erythropoietin the- SD below the mean for age in serum IgG and IgA, onset age >2 years, poor rapy into two groups - with low (n=8) and with higher doses (n=18). response to vaccines. In this five-generation family, nine affected and eight unaffected individu- als were available for the study. Based on the genomewide linkage scan, Cell free DNA from plasma of all patients was isolated before and after the the CVID locus has been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 3 on band hemodialysis procedure. The extent of promoter methylation of 24 genes q27.2-q29. The CVID locus is localized in a region of 9.2 Mb spanning from involved in immune response was examined using the EpiTect Methyl qPCR marker D3 S3570
 to marker D3 S1265
, with a maximum LOD score of 3.90 at Array Inflammatory Response and Autoimmunity and cluster analysis (SA- θ=0.00 for marker D3 S2747
. Biosciences, Qiagen). Using cluster analysis we demonstrate the complex In collaboration with the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, we performed changes in the methylation profiles of selected immune response genes and exome sequencing in four affected and four unaffected individuals, in order the significant differences between the profiles of patients with low and hig- to identify shared rare variants within the linkage region. After the filtering her doses of recombinant erythropoietin. procedure to extract heterozygous variants with a low frequency (<0.01) in the general population, we found a candidate disease-causing allele shared Supported by grants no. I/328 of Ministry of Industry and Trade and no. a Vm. Doni Pg itehrreo f:o Nuor naef.f ePc. tLeydo snusb: jNecotnse a. nRa. lZyuzendti.ni: None. A. Schaffer: None. I. PRVOUK- P25
/LF1/2 of Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic Quinti: None. S. Ferrari: None. M. Korabecna: None. E. Pazourkova: None. A. Horinek: None. M. Mokrejsova: None. V. Tesar: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 239ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.13 NLR P1
 mutation in a novel autosomal recessive autoinflammatory disease with dyskeratosis and arthritis functional studies to determine the involvement of the associated MS risk E. Sanchez1,2, S. Grandemange2,3, D. Bessis4, C. Coubes1, P. Plence2, E. Jeziorski5, A. variants in gene expression. Carbasse5, M. Rodière5, C. Jorgensen2, I. Touitou2,3, D. Geneviève1,2; rs6581155, which tagged 18 variants within a region where 9 genes map, 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Montpellier, France, 2Unité, INSERM U844, was sufficient to model the association. This SNP was in total linkage dise- Institut des Neuroscience Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3Unité médicale des maladies quilibrium with other polymorphisms that associate with expression quan- Auto-inflammatoires, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 4Service de titative trait loci (eQTLs) for FAM119B, AVIL, TSFM, TSPAN31 and CY P27
B1 dermatologie, Hôpital Saint Eloi, CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Pédiatrie, genes . Functional annotations from ENCODE project showed that six out of Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. these rs6581155-tagged-SNPs were located in regions with regulatory po- tential and only one of them, rs10877013, exhibited allele-dependent (ratio A/G=9.5-fold) and orientation-dependent (forward/reverse=2.7-fold) en- The inflammasomes correspond to multiprotein complexes that sense hancer activity as determined by luciferase reporter assays. This enhancer pathogens and trigger biological mechanisms in an attempt to control in- is located in a region where a long-range chromatin interaction among the fection. The NLRP family (Nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat promoters and promoter-enhancer of several genes has been described, containing a PYRIN domain) plays a key role in this innate immune system possibly affecting their expression simultaneously. by regulating inflammation via caspase recruNiLtmRPe3nt. Sequence variants in This study determines a functional variant which alters the enhancer acti- genes encoding NLRPs, have been associated withN LaRuPto1inflammatory and vity of a regulatory element in the locus affecting the expression of several autoimmune diseases. Indeed, mutations in are linked to heredita- gMe.n Fees daentdz: e Nxopnlaei.n As. tAhlec iansas:o Ncioanteio. nO .o Ff ethrneá 1n2dqe1z:3 N.3o-n1e2.q A1.4 S.1a irze: gNioonne w. Gith. MS. ry cryopyrinopathieNs,L wRPhe1reas polymorphisms in are associated to Izquierdo: None. M. Lucas: None. L. Leyva: None. J. García-León: None. M. autoimmune disorders such as vitiligo and rheumatoid arthritis. Recently, Abad-Grau: None. I. Alloza: None. A. Antigüedad: None. M. Garcia-Barcina: a non-synonymous mutation in the pyrin domain (M77T) was ob- None. K. Vandenbroeck: None. J. Varadé: None. B. de la Hera: None. R. served in an autosomal dominant hereditary benign intraepithelial dyske- Arroyo: None. M. Comabella: None. X. Montalban: None. N. Petit-Marty: ratosis. NLR P1
 None. A. Navarro: None. D. Otaegui: None. J. Olascoaga: None. M. Torrecillas: None. M. Karaky: None. Y. Blanco: None. E. Urcelay: None. F. Matesanz: None. Using an exome sequencing strategy, we have identified a non-synonymous homozygote mutation in the gene in two cousins born from consan- guineous parents originating from Algeria. The patients present with diffuse skin dyskeratosis (2/2), biological inflammation (2/2) and arthritis (1/2).  P09
.15 The mutation (c.2733C>T; p.R726W) is localised near the leucine-rich re- Expression of Mx1, OA S1
, PKR (EIF2AK2) and T P53
 genes during peat and is neither observed in 192 chromosomes from healthy Algerian treatment of chronic HCV patients. volunteers nor web databases. B. Swiatek1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska1,2,3, I. Bereszynska2, J. Rembowska1, I. Mozer- An immun+e phenotype in 1/2 patient revealed high numbNeLrRsP o1f gran+ulocy-- Lisewska2, A. Kowala-Piaskowska2, J. Wysocki2, J. Nowak1; tes, ChDig6h4 nehuigthrophils, NK cells and immature blood B cells (CD20CD27 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Medical Diagnostics, Poznan, Poland. CD38 CD24 ).We demonstrate for the first time NthLaRt  P1
 is involved in an autosomal recessive autoinflammatory disorder. These data, combined to the literature, highlights the pleiomorphic roles of in inflammation aEn.d S iamncmhuenz:it Ny.one. S. Grandemange: None. D. Bessis: None. C. Coubes: InterfeMrox1n, OstAim S1
u, lPaKteRd genTePs5 (3I SGs) play key role in antiviral responses None. P. Plence: None. E. Jeziorski: None. A. Carbasse: None. M. Rodière: against HCV. Aim of this prospective study was to examine association bet- None. C. Jorgensen: None. I. Touitou: None. D. Geneviève: None. ween and expression and response to pegIFN+RBV in 35 chronic hepatitis C (CHC) patients. Rapid Virological Response (RVR) and complete Early Virological Response (cEVR) was achieved by 13 (37.1%) and 10 (28.6%) patients, respectively. 12 (34.3%) did not respons1e0 to thera-  P09
.14 py during 12 weeks (Primary Non-Response, PNR; less than 2 log decrease Functional variant in the KIF5A-CY P27
B1-METT L1
-FAM119B locus associated with multiple sclerosis in viralM tixt1e,r O aAftSe1r,  P1
K2R weeks). MTePa5n3 baseline 4viral load was comparable in M. Fedetz1,2, A. Alcina1, O. Fernández3, A. Saiz4, G. Izquierdo2, M. Lucas5, L. Leyva6, RVR, cEVR and PNR group (6.7, 7.3 and 3.5x10 IU/ml, respectively). Expres- J. García-León6, M. Abad-Grau7, I. Alloza8, A. Antigüedad9, M. Garcia-Barcina10, K. sion of , but not was low in RVR and higher in cEVR and Vandenbroeck8,11, J. Varadé12, B. de la Hera12, R. Arroyo13, M. Comabella14, X. Montalban14, PNR patients before therapy, but increased noticeable in cEVR and PNR and N. Petit-Marty15, A. Navarro15,16,17, D. Otaegui18, J. Olascoaga19, M. Torrecillas20, M. poorly in RVR patients at week 4. Between weeks 4 and 12 of therapy, ex- Karaky1, Y. Blanco4, E. Urcelay12, F. Matesanz1; pression of ISGs was stable or poorly decreased in RVR, wMaxs1 s,t OabAlSe1 o, rP KpRoo rly 1Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina ‘López Neyra’, Granada, Spain, 2Unidad de incr TeaPs5e3d in cEVR and noticeable decreased in PNR group. These results in- Esclerosis Múltiple, Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, 3Servicio de Neurología, dicate that exogenous IFN can stimulate transcription of but Instituto de Neurociencias Clínicas, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya, Málaga, Spain, 4Neurology Service, Hospital Clinic and I. d´Investigació Biomèdica Pi not in PBL in CHC patients. Pre-activation of endogenous interferon sy- iSunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 5Servicio de Biología Molecular, Hospital Virgen stem (higher ISGs expression) is associated with RVR and thereby with high Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, 6Laboratorio de Investigación, Instituto de Neurociencias likelihood of achieving SVR. Treatment failure may be related to decrease in Clínicas, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya, Málaga, Spain, 7Departamento ISGs expression between week 4 and 12 of anti-HCV therapy. So, we conclu- de Lenguajes y Sistemas Informáticos, CITIC, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain, ded that expression of ISGs may predict the outcome of CHC. 8Neurogenomiks Group, Universidad del País Vasco (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain, 9Servicio This research was supported by National Science Centre grant no de Neurología, Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 10Servicio de Genética, Hospital de 2 B0.1  S1
w/i0a1te/kB: /NNo2n6e/. 0D4. 2Ja5n8u.szkiewicz-Lewandowska: None. I. Bereszynska: Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, 11IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain, None. J. Rembowska: None. I. Mozer-Lisewska: None. A. Kowala-Piaskowska: 12Immunology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Instituto de Investigación None. J. Wysocki: None. J. Nowak: None. Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain, 13Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Instituto de Investigation Sanitaria del Hospital Clinico San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain, 14Centre d‘Esclerosi Múltiple de Catalunya, CEM-Cat, Unitat de Neuroimmunologia Clínica, Hospital  P09
.16 Universitari Vall d´Hebron (HUVH), Barcelona, Spain, 15Institute of Evolutionary Biology Association of Perforin codon His222 missense mutations (UPF-CSIC), PRBB, Barcelona, Spain, 16National Institute for Bioinformatics, Universitat with non-immune hydrops fetalis in familial hemophagocytic Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 17Institució Catalana de Recerca i EstudisAvançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain, 18Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Neuroscience Area, Biodonostia lymphohistiocytosis Health Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain, 19Servicio de Neurología, Unidad de G. Balta1, S. Topcuoglu2, T. Gursoy2, A. Gurgey1, F. Ovali2; Esclerosis Múltiple, Hospital Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain, 20Centro de Salud, Armilla, 1Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section of Granada, Spain. Hematology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Zeynep Kamil Maternity and Children‘s Education and Training Hospital, Neonatology Intensive Care Unit, Istanbul, Turkey. Multiple sclerosis is (MS) a complex inflammatory disease that is characteri- Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a rare, if untreated, zed by lesions in the central nervous system. Several studies have highligh- fatal autosomal recessive immune dysregulation disorder of early child- ted the association of the 12q13.3-12q14.1 region with MS, coeliac disease, hood. FHL may scarcely display presenting symptoms in the intrauterine type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and; however, the causal variants un- life. The etiology of non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF), on the other hand, derlying diseases are still unclear. remains unknown in most cases and their association is of great importance To identify the polymorphism determining the association with MS we per- to the scientists in the related fields. This is the first study demonstrating formed a fine mapping of the associated region encoding 15 genes by a Tag- that NIHF in identical twin neonates is associated with biallelic gene defect S 2N 4P 0 approach (2876 MS patients and 2910 healthEy SCaHuGca s2ia0n1 c3on |t rPoAls)R aInSd, FR inA oN neC oE f t| h W e gW enW es . cE aS usH inG g F.O HLR . G Preterm male twins (31 wk), products of aABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.18 Polymorphisms and expression of PTPN22, CTLA4 and TNF-alpha consanguineous family, with NIHF and hepatosplenomegaly gradually deve- genes are associated with clinical data and disease susceptibility in loped pancytopenia, hyperferritinemia, hyponatremia, hypoalbuminemia, Rheumatoid arthritis and elevated ALT, AST, bilirubin, LDH levels but fever and hypertriglyceride- L. Zemljic1, B. Kolarič2, U. Potočnik1,3; mia of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis diagnostic criteria were absent. 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, Suspected sepsis led to antibiotic therapy. Upon detection of hemophago- University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2University Clinical Center Maribor, cytosis in bothne marrothw, multiorgan failure and pulmonary bleeding led to Department of Pharmacy, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Faculty of Chemistry, Laboratory for Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Genomics, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. death on 15 and 18 days of life. Mutation analysis in Perforin, UN C13
D, Syntaxin 11 and STXB P2
 genes causing FHL revealed homozygous c665A>G substitution leading to His222Arg missense mutation in Perforin. Parents were heterozygous for this known disease causing mutation. Same muta- Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, autoimmune disorder affecting tion in heterozygous state was reported in a case with fetal acides and ho- about 1% of the population. Genetic factors account for 50-60% of disease mozygous another missense mutation in the same codon (His222Gln) was susceptibility. We designed a study to test whether SNPs from selected loci described in a stillborn case with NIHF in the literature previously. There- and gene expression of two candidate genes are associated with the deve- fore, it is plausible to suggest that biallelic missense mutations of Perforin lopment of the disease and with clinical parameters obtained from RA pa- codon His222 may be associated with intrauterine presentation of FHL, tients. 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 32 bp deletion were hence with hydrops fetalis. This study was supported by TUBITAK (Grant genotyped. Expression levels of 2 candidate genes were determined. Clinical NGu. mBabletar::1 N0o5nSe3. 8 S6
. -TSoBpAcGu-o3g1lu9:3 N).one. T. Gursoy: None. A. Gurgey: None. F. data was tested for association with genotype and gene expression. Ovali: None. RA patients had lower frequency of GG genotype (p<0.0001, OR=4.877) in rs1800896 (I L10
), higher frequency of A allele and AA genotype (p=0.008, OR=0.529; p=0.033, OR=0.130, respectively) in rs2476601 (PTPN22) and higher frequency of A allele and AA genotype (p=0.019, OR=0.711; p<0.0001,  P09
.17 OR=0.397, respectively) in rs3087243 (CTLA4). Exome sequencing to identify disease causing variants in 87 families CTLA4 gene expression was reduced in RA patients (p<0.0001), patients with Primary Immunodeficiency Disease H. S. Sorte1, A. Stray-Pedersen1,2,3, P. S. Samarakoon1, O. K. Rødningen1, C. I. Hanson4,3, with negative family history (p=0.027), patients positive for rheumatoid L. M. Noroski3, L. Forbes4,3, S. K. Nicholas3, J. W. Caldwell5, H. C. Erichsen6, T. G. factor (RF) (p=0.022) and patients with biological treatment (p<0.0001). Abrahamsen6,7, B. Flato8, V. Lilleby8, V. Skogen9, C. G. Gonzaga-Jauregui2, L. T. Osnes10, CTLA4 gene expression was significantly associated with rs3087243 geno- K. R. Heimdal1, D. E. Undlien1,7, W. T. Shearer4,3, R. A. Gibbs11, J. S. Orange4,3, R. Lyle1, J. R. type (p<0.0001). Lupski2; TNF gene expression was reduced in RA patients (p<0.0001), male patients 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Molecular and (p=0.049), patients positive for RF (p=0.011) and patients with biological Human Genetic, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Immunology, treatment (p<0.0001). Allergy, and Rheumatology, Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 4Center for Human Immunobiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United Our results show that genotypes in rs1800896 (I L10
), rs2476601 (PTPN22) States, 5Section Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergic and Immunological Diseases, Wake and rs3087243 (CTLA4) are associated with development of RA and that Forest Baptist Medical Center, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, Oslo, NC, rs3087243 (CTLA4) is a cis-eQTL, regulating CTLA4 gene expression. Re- United States, 6Department of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital,, Oslo, Norway, sults also show, that TNF and CTLA4 gene expressions are affected by gen- 7University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 8University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, d Le. rZ, RemF lpjirce: sNeonncee., Bpr. eKsoclrairbiečd: N boionleo. gUic. aPlo tthoečrnaipk:y Naonnde f.amily history. Norway, 9Department of Rheumatology, 10.Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 10Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 11Human Genome Sequencing Center HGSC, Houston, TX, United States.  P09
.19 Identification of the Cia27 quantitative trait gene L. Mellado Ranea1, A. de Castro Marques1, X. Yu2, S. Moeller1, S. M. Ibrahim1; Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDDs) constitute a heterogenous group of 1Dep. of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 2Priority Area Asthma & genetic diseases affecting the immune system. Dependent on the genetic Allergy, Research Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany. aetiology, symptoms range from mild to severe and life-threatening. Know- ledge of the molecular genetic cause and disease mechanism is important and can direct targeted and curative therapy. However, categorization of Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic chronic autoimmune inflammato- the subtypes is difficult as patients with different immunodeficiencies may ry disease that primarily impairs joints. RA affects between 0.5-1% of the have overlapping immunological and clinical phenotypes. In addition, more adult population in developed countries and the genetic contribution to than 200 causal genes have been reported, and few are offered for genetic disease is estimated to be 60%. The knowledge of the genetic factors con- testing. trolling complex disorders as RA is of great importance to understand pa- We examined the utility of exome sequencing in the diagnostic workup and thogenic mechanism and to improve diagnosis and therapy. Human genome research of PIDDs. As of February 2013, totally 110 patients with extensi- heterogeneity and gene-environment interactions are great challenges for ve immunological and genetic testing from 87 families have been recruited the identification of RA susceptibility genes in human studies. In contrast, from Texas Children Hospital (Houston, USA) and from Oslo University Hos- mouse models allow to work in homogeneous genetic background and un- pital in Norway. Based on the clinical and immunophenotypical data, family der controlled environment. Our group has Cuisae2d7 the collagen-induced ar- history and knowledge from similar PIDD cases, the strategies for variant thritis (CIA) mouse model to identify a new potential genetic factor involved evaluation have involved both candidate gene testing with known PIDD ge- in arthritis. In this study, we fine mapped the QTL, which is associated nes, trio testing, or focused on potential novel genes in regions where LOH/ with antibody production in a F2 cross between the arthritis-susceptible deletions had been identified. DBA/1J strain and the arthritis-resistaTnht rFaVpB2/N. By haplotype block analy- Preliminary analysis has proven exome sequencing as an efficient method to sis, 6 candidate genes were pointed out. Next, based on exon sequencing and detect disease-causing variants in a large set of candidate genes. Combining differential gene expression analysis, was pinpointed as the main data from exome sequencing and array CGH with exonI cLo7vRerage of all known candidate. This gene was confirmed to be involved in CIA by using a con- PIDD genes has proven useful, exemplified by a patient with a heterozygous genic strain approach. Knockdown assays in mouse primary B cells culture deletion and frameshift mutation in the same exon of . Additional bene- resulted in decrease of specific cell death, suggesting a role of this gene in fits are expected from an in-house developed high-resolution array, in ave- B cell survival. rHa.gSe. tSiloinrtge :a Nll oenxeo.n As. bSyt r5a yp-rPoebdeesr.sen: None. P.S. Samarakoon: None. O.K. Rødningen: None. C.I. Hanson: None. L.M. Noroski: None. L. Forbes: In summary, we have identified a putative gene involved in disease develop- None. S.K. Nicholas: None. J.W. Caldwell: None. H.C. Erichsen: None. T.G. ment, presumably by acting on B cells, in a murine arthritis model. Further- Abrahamsen: None. B. Flato: None. V. Lilleby: None. V. Skogen: None. C.G. m L.o Mree, lwlaed oh aRvaen geean: eNroantee.d A a. tdiess Cuaes-strpoe cMifaircq kuneosc: kN-oonuet. mX.o Yuuse: .None. S. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. L.T. Osnes: None. K.R. Heimdal: None. D.E. Moeller: None. S.M. Ibrahim: None. Undlien: None. W.T. Shearer: None. R.A. Gibbs: None. J.S. Orange: None. R. Lyle: None. J.R. Lupski: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 241ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.20  P09
.22 Phenotypic analysis of Peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 knock-out MTNR1B polymorphism rs10830962 in healthy women and patients mice with Systemic lupus erythematosus A. Suzuki1, Y. Kochi1, H. Shoda2, K. Fujio2, E. Kanno1, R. Yamada3,1, K. Yamamoto2,1; R. Robeva1, S. Andonova2, D. Tanev3, V. Decheva2, A. Savov2, P. Kumanov1, R. Rashkov3, Z. 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School Kolarov3; of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto 1Clinical Center of Endocrinology and Gerontology, Medical University, Sofia, University, Kyoto, Japan. Bulgaria, 2National Genetic Laboratory, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Rheumatology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is well-known as an autoimmune disease and is a chronic inflammatory disorder characterized by the destruction of multiple Background: Тhe pineal hormone melatonin is an important modulator of joints. Many genome wide association studies were performed and multiple the immune system in animals and humans. However, the role of the me- RA-susceptibility loci and autoimmune-susceptibility loci have been iden- latonin receptors for the development of autoimmune diseases in humans tified. These studies suggested that multiple ge(nes and its functions were remains obscure. The present study aimed to investigate whether the MT- related with disease causing and development. NR1B rs10830962 gene polymorphism could influence on the clinical cha- Previouly, peptidylariginine deiminase type 4 PADI4) was identified as a racteristics of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in women. susceptibility gene for RA in a Japanese population by case-control associa- Methods: The MTNR1B rs10830962C/G gene polymorphism was determi- tion study (Ref 1). PADI4 is a member of the PADI gene family and converts ned by RFLP analysis in 95 healthy women and 101 patients with SLE. The arginine residue (peptidylarginine) to citrulline residue (peptidylcitrulline). differences between genotype distribution in patients and controls and the PADI4 is highly expressed in bone marrow, macrophages, neutrophils and interrelations between the C/G alleles and clinical features (ACR criteria) of monocyte. Peptidylcitrulline is an interesting molecule in RA, because it is the disease were studied. an antigen of ACPA and only PADs (translated protein from PADI genes) can Results: No differences in the allele distribution between patients with SLE provide peptidylcitrullines, via modification of protein substrates. To eva- and healthy controls were found (p=0.295). CC-homozygous patients had luate the importance of PADI4 gene in the progression of RA, we generated significantly more lupus ACR criteria in comparison to heterozygous GC and Padi4 -/- DBA1J mice by speed congenic method. We used Padi4-/- mice GG-homozygous patients (5.79±1.47 vs. 5.07±1.09, p=0.017) and a tendency to show that PAD4 is affected to development and progression of collagen for development of the disease at younger age (31.53±12.63 vs. 35.91±11.93, induced arthritis (CIA), well known as an RA model animal. Padi4-/- DBA1- p=0.090). 76.5% of CC-patients had hematological disturbances in compari- Jand WT mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen (CII) for CIA. son to 58.2% of patients with other genotypes (p=0.082), probably because Clinical disease score was significantly reduced. In Padi4-/- mice sera, the of the increased prevalence of leucopenia (38.2% vs. 17.9%, p=0.031). No concentrations of serum anti-CII IgM, IgG, and TNF-a also decreased signi- significant interrelations between CC genotype and other ACR criteria were ficantly rather than in WT mice. Resulting from these studies, we suggested found. that Padi4 enhanced collagen-initiated inflammatory responses. Conclusions: Our preliminary results in SLE patients showed that MTNR1B 1 A). SSuuzzuukkii,: A N. oent ea.l YN. aKto. cGhein: eNto.3n4e,. 3H9. 5S-h4o0d2a (: 2N0o0n3e). K. Fujio: None. E. Kanno: rs10830962C/G polymorphism is not crucial for the development of SLE None. R. Yamada: None. K. Yamamoto: None. but it could modulate some clinical characteristics of lupus patients and es- pecially the development of some haematological disturbances. The study was financially supported by research grants 26/2010 and  P09
.21 5 R9./ R2o0b1e1v, aM: UNo -n Seo. fSia. ,A Bnudlognaroivaa: None. D. Tanev: None. V. Decheva: None. A. Savov: None. P. Kumanov: None. R. Rashkov: None. Z. Kolarov: None. Is a functional variant of ANXA11 R230C associated with impaired apoptosis? R. Fillerova1, M. Ordeltova1, F. Mrazek1, M. Zurkova2, V. Kolek2, E. Kriegova1; 1Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech  P09
.23 Republic, 2Department of Respiratory medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Palacky University, Genome-wide association study in a French familial T1D cohort using Olomouc, Czech Republic. the Illumina Immunochip beadarray W. Luscap1,2, N. Bendelac3, E. Pecorella1, W. Carpentier4, A. Boland5, M. Nicolino3, C. Julier1,2, C. Vandiedonck1,2; Sarcoidosis is a granulomatous disorder of an unknown aetiology, where the 1Inserm UMRS-958, Paris, France, 2Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, graAnNuXloAm11a formation has been associated with impaired apoptosis of acti- 3Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hôpital Femme-Mère-Enfant, vated inflammatory cells. There is no information concerning the influence Lyon, France, 4 P3
S Platform, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Centre National de Génotypage, Institut de Génomique, Commissariat à l‘Energie Atomique, Evry, France. of R230C, a functional annexin A11 variant associated with pro- tection/disease modification of sarcoidosis, on the sensitivity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) to apoptosis yet. Our objective was to characterize susceptibility alleles in a French cohort of We therefore compared the sensitivity to apoptosis of PBMC obtained from T1D families, using a recently developed genotyping microarray, the „immu- 92 sarcoid patients and 14 healthy controls. Tributyltin was used as apopto- nochip“. Resulting from a collaborative effort, this array includes ~200,000 sis stimulus; annexin V positive cells were detected by flow cytometry. Ad- SNPs including some 200 loci of interest to immune phenotypes. We per- ditionally, sarcoid patients were subgrouped according to ANXA11 R230C formed a family-based association study in 236 trios. We replicated t-h8e (rs1049550) genotype (TT, n=13; CC, n=45) and clinical phenotype (CXR- well-known association of HLA class II alleles DR3 and DR4 (p < -158x10 ). stages, organ involvement). The most associated SNP in this regBioAnC,H r2s9273363 (p = 2.21x10 , OR = When compared to healthy controls, lower number of annexin V positive 9.36), is in linkage disequilibrium with both DR3 and DR4. Outside the MHC, cells was detected in stimulated PBMC from sarcoid patients (mean 82.0%; we replicated the association in the gene, with two n-e6w SNPs sho- range 43.9–97.4%) than in cells from controls (88.9%; 71.3–96.5%; p=0.01). wing stronger effects than previously des-4cribed (p = 7.5x10 , OR = 3.42). After subdivision according to genotypes, the number of annexin V positive Suggestive evidencINe SofP aTsPsNoc2i2ation (IPL<21R0A) was found in four new regions cells differ between patients carrying TT genotype (71.0%; 43.9–94.2%) (1p21, 3q25, 6q21 and 21q22). In contrast, other previously reported loci, and those with CC genotype (82.6%; 53.4–97.4%; p=0.01). There was no notably including , , and , did not reach this threshold. We difference in apoptosis between patients with particular CXR-stages or or- are currently validating these findings in 796 additional trios. Altogether, gan involvement, respectively. this work constitutes the first whole genome association study of a French In conclusion, PBMC obtained fromA sNaXrAco1i1dosis patients showed more apo- TW1.D L cuoshcaoprt:. None. N. Bendelac: None. E. Pecorella: None. W. Carpentier: ptosis resistant phenotype than cells from control subjects. PBMC obtained None. A. Boland: None. M. Nicolino: None. C. Julier: None. C. Vandiedonck: from sarcoidosis patients with TT genotype showed more apopto- None. sis resistant phenotype than cells from CT and CC patients. Further studies in a larger patient cohort are under progress. G Rr.a Fnitll seuropvpao:r Nt:o InGeA. MM. ZO CrdRe NltoTv/a1:1 N1o1n7e, .I FG.A M_PraUz_eLkF: _N2o0n1e3. _M1.3 Z.urkova: None. V. Kolek: None. E. Kriegova: None. 242 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.24 Defective autophagy in TNFR associated periodic synfrom (TRAPS) accounts for mutant TNFR1 accumulation and enhanced sociated markers were also associated with T1D in families due to LD with inflammation T1D-associated haplotypes. T. Bachetti1, S. Chiesa1, P. Castagnola2, D. Bani3, E. Di Zanni1, A. Omenetti1, A. D’Osualdo4, Evidence from four independent data sets strongly suggests that 3q21-regi- A. Fraldi5, A. Ballabio5,6,7, R. Ravazzolo1,8, A. Martini1,8, M. Gattorno1, I. Ceccherini1; on is harboring T1D locus/loci. More comprehensive association studies are 1Giannina Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 2IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria required to identify the functional polymorphisms affecting beta-cell auto- San Martino, Genoa, Italy, 3University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 4Sanford-Burnham iAm.mP. uLnaiitnye :a nNdo nTe1. DJ. sLuesmceppatiinbeinli:t yN aotn eth. iRs. rVeegiijoonla.: None. O. Simell: None. M. Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States, 5Telethon Institute of Genetics and Knip: None. J. Ilonen: None. F.D.R. The Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register: Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy, 6Baylor College of Medicine, Huston, TX, United States, None. 7Texas Children Hospital, Huston, TX, United States, 8University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.  P10
.01 Down-regulation of autophagy has been observed to enhance the inflamm- Asian-specific mitochondrial genom polymorphism (9 bp deletion) in atory response, thus representing a possibly common pathToNgFeRniScF e1vAent un- the Hungarian population derlying a number of autoinflammatory syndromes. So far, Tumor necrosis K. Pentelenyi1, V. Reményi1, G. Tömöry2, B. Csányi2, A. Gal1, I. Rasko2, M. Molnar1; factor receptor associated syndrome (TRAPS) associated muta- 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis University, Budapest, tions have been reported to induce cytoplasmic retention of the receptor, Hungary, 2Institute of Genetics, Biological Research Centre, Hungarian Academy of defective TNFalpha-inducTeNdF aRpSoFp1tAosis and production of reactive oxygen Sciences, Szeged, Hungary. species. Objectives: To search a link between mutations and inflammation in TRAPS, by means of both in vitro and ex vivo systems, represented by HEK293T Several polymorphisms in the mitochondrial genome have po- cells transfected with expression constructs for WT and mutant TNFR pro- pMueltahtoiodns:- genetically and anthropologically interest. The 9 bp deletion is an- teins and by monocytes, derived by TRAPS patients, respectively, we have thropological marker for people of East-Asian origin. investigated the cellular response to mutant TNFR1 proteins. The mitochondrial A8344G mutation was investigated by PCR- We have found that autophagy is the main mechanism involved in mutant RFLP, performed on DNA samples isolated from bloodL yasnd postmitotic mu- TNFR1 elimination and that it is impaired in the presence of TNFR1 misfol- sRcelseu lbtiso:psy specimens. The mitochondrial COII/tRNS and hypervariable ded proteins, thus likely accounting for their accumulation, for associated regions were sequenced bidirectionally. induction of NF-kappaB activity and excessive IL-1beta secretion. From 890 patients we found 13 cases with 9 bp deletion (CCCCCTC- We also show that autophagy inhibition due to TNFR1 mutant proteins can TA) in the mitochondrial hipervariable non-coding region. Among them in be reverted by geldanamycin, found to rescue membrane localization of 11 cases the 9 bp deletion was present with homoplasmic  C8270
T substi- mutant TNFR proteins, to reduce their accumulation, and to counteract the tution. Their coexistence determines the M haplogroup. In one family (3 enhanced inflammation by decreasing IL-1beta secretion. pCoanticelnutssio) nb:eside thesLey salterations we found a new heteroplasmic A8332G Overall, these observations provide a rationale to the apparent paradox that mutation in the tRNA gene, wich was absent in 150 normal controls. so far the most effective therapy in TRAPS is represented by inhibition of M haplogroup is in European populations very rare. It is main- the cascade signaling induced by IL-1beta rather than by the use of drugs ly present in Asia, America and Australia, because of the human migration counteracting the TNFR-mediated pathway; as a consequence, we propose directions, these populations migrated eastwards. The frequency of 9 bp autophagy as a novel therapeutic target for TRAPS and other inflammatory deletion in the Hungarian population is 1,5%. This polymorphism can be dTi.s Beaascehse.tti: None. S. Chiesa: None. P. Castagnola: None. D. Bani: None. E. explained by the Westward migration of Hungarians from Siberia (in the Di Zanni: None. A. Omenetti: None. A. D’Osualdo: None. A. Fraldi: None. A. matriarchal lineage). The deletion induce instability of this mitochondrial Ballabio: None. R. Ravazzolo: None. A. Martini: None. M. Gattorno: None. I. Ceccherini: None. DNA-region like enough, and provoke the conformation other pathogen mu- tKat. iPoenns.telenyi: None. V. Reményi: None. G. Tömöry: None. B. Csányi: None. A. Gal: None. I. Rasko: None. M. Molnar: None.  P09
.25 SNPs at the 3q21 -region are associated with type 1 diabetes and the  P10
.02 appearance of beta-cell autoimmunity in Finland ABC C5
 as a candidate gene for Type 2 diabetes A. P. Laine1, J. Lempainen1,2, R. Veijola3, O. Simell2, M. Knip4,5,6, J. Ilonen1,7, F. D. R. The K. Direk1, W. Lau2, C. Araiz2, K. Small1, L. Foukas2, N. Maniatis2, T. Andrew3; Finnish Pediatric Diabetes Register8; 1Kings‘ College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College London, London, 1Immunogenetics Laboratory, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Department of United Kingdom, 3Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. Pediatrics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Children’s Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 7Department Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a common, multi-factorial disorderP cAaRuLsed byA BenCvCi5- of Clinical Microbiology, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, 8The Finnish ronmental and genetic risk factors. We have conducted a candidate gene stu- Pediatric Diabetes Register, Finland, Finland. dy of a linkage disequilibria (LD) genomic region including and for European and African American samples, in relation to the phenotypes of healthy fastin gP pAlRaLsma insulin and glucose levels, visceral fat accumulati- IDDM9-region on chromosome 3q21 has previously shown evidence for on and T2D disease. Previous functional studies and animal models of T2D linkage to (LOD=3.4) and association with (TDT p=0.0002) type 1 diabe- have implicated , but human association studiePsA hRaLve yielded contra- tes (T1D) in Finnish families. As an extension to previous findings, we are dictory results. analyzing genes at 3q21 region for association with T1D using tag-SNPs in We found no evidence of phenotypic associaAtBioCnC 5with using commercial an independent set of Finnish trio families. Currently two genes have been and fine map genomic and expression data. By contrast, weA oBbCsCe5r ved strong analyzed. Furthermore, two markers were examined by survival analysis evidence of phenotypic association with for European and African for genotypic association with the appearance of beta-cell autoantibodies American samples. The genomic location estimate for the functional (AABs) and T1D and also for progression from autoimmunity appearance to variant associated wAiBthC CT52D (p=1E-06) and expression data (p=1E-11) was clinical disease in a follow-up cohort of children at increased HLA associated identical for all samples (A1B8 C5
C,1536Kb), suggesting the identified genomic va- risk for T1D. riant is an eQTL for . We will also present preliminarPyA hReLpatocyte cell Datasets included 977 Finnish T1D trio families and a follow-up cohort culture results testing ifA BC C5
 influAeBnCcCes5 glucose uptake. of 520 children with AABs (with or without T1D) and 992 AAB negative Previous observations of human genomic association wAitBhC  C5
 may be due children. PLINK v1.07 and UNPHASED v3.0.13 were applied for TDT and to LD confounding with . The variant is asAsBocCiCa5te d with expres- haplotype-TDT and SPSS 19.0 for AAB appearance and progression analyses sion, fasting insulin and glucose levels and T2D, while expression is (Cox-regression). itself an intermediate phenotype for T2D. Given the risk variant is Markers rs12485336 and rs777236 were significantly associated with T1D cosmopolitan, common and observed in populations of disparate ancestry, (p=0.034, p=0.009) and appearance of beta-cell autoimmunity (p=0.015, this suggests the polymorphism is likely to be old and that the transporter p=0.001) but not with progression to clinical disease from AAB positivity. g Ke.n Dei rpelkay: sN aonne a. eWti.o Lloagui:c Nalo rnoel.e C i.n A trhaeiz o: nNsoente o. fK T. 2SDm.all: None. L. Foukas: In TDT, only haplotype analysis revealed significant association with T1D None. N. Maniatis: None. T. Andrew: None. (rs9860012-rs777216, p=0.0014 and rs6796916-rs1345187, p=0.0022). Haplotypes showed independent association with T1D (rs6796916- rs1345187 conditioned by rs9860012-rEs7 S7
H72G1 62, 0p=103.0  |1
 8P)A. BRoItSh, AFARBA-aNs-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 243ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.03  P10
.05 Severe Form of Niemann-pick Type B Disease in The Iranian POLG-related Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome in four Polish children. Population D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, J. Trubicka1, M. Tesarova2, K. Strawa3, M. Kaliszewska4, F. Hadipour1, Y. Shafeghati1, Z. Hadipour1, M. Banikazemi2; J. Sykut-Cegielska5, I. Jankowska6, K. Kotulska7, M. Pronicki8, D. Jurkiewicz1, E. Ciara1, R. 1Sarem Cell Research Center & Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Westchester Płoski3, J. Zeman2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; Medical Center, New York, NY, United States. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty The non-neuronopatic type of acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) deficiency also of Biology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Metabolic Diseases, designated as Niemann-Pick disease type B [NPD-B] is regarded as mild, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Liver Diseases and late-onset and non-neurological form of acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) defi- Transplantation, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 7Department ciency that presents with visceromegaly, and interstitial lung disease. of Neurology and Epileptology, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Here we report data on ten Iranian patients (5males, 5 females, under 18 8Department of Pathology, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. years of age) with confirmed diagnosis of NPD-B. Longitudinal data were available for all patients in this study. Most patients presented with thrombocytopenia, while anemia and leuco- A wide spectrum of POLG-related diseases, including the most severe Alpers- penia were less common. HDL cholesterol was reduced in most patients. HuPttOeLnGlocher syndrome (AHS) is caused by dysfunction of the polymerase γ, Viseromegaly and Pulmonary disease were extremely severe in 50% of the the only mammalian enzyme able to replicate and repair mtDNA. Mutations cases. in account for ~25% of all mitochondrial defects. The diagnostic triad A unique feature of this population was the observance of facial coarseness of AHS includes: drug-resistant epilepsy, hepatic impairment triggered by and severe growth retardation, which were present in more than 50% of sodium valproate and mitochondrial DNA depletion. Here we describe four cases. There was no evidence of skeletal abnormalities. In these cases motor Polish children born in a good condition, development was also significantly delayed, perhaps secondary to cachexia and severe organomegaly. However in all cases, mental developments as- with infantile development delay due to muscle hypotonia, who died with sessed by language and communication skills were progressive. Consangui- severe liver failure at the age of 10-34 months. Intractable seizures followed nity of parents were documented in all the cases and various homozygot by hemiplegia, and failure to thrive dominated at disease onset in all cases. missense mutation in exon 6 of SMPD1 gene showed a high prevalence. Hepatic injury features were associated with valproic acid administration. This is the first report of severe form of NPD-B with high morbidity and Abnormalities characteristic for liver damage (hypertransaminasemia, co- mortality seen among the Iranian population. In these cases pulmonary di- agulopathy, significant INR increase, decrease in fibrinogen concentration, sease and viseromegaly are the most debilitating features. As enzyme re- hyperbilirubinemia, hipoalbuminemia, hipocholesterolemia), lactic acide- placement therapy (ERT) with recombinant sphingomyelinase is being de- mia, and OXPHOS dysfunction were found in most of the patients. v Fe. lHopadedip sopuer:c iNaol naett. eYn. tSiohna foeng hthatiis: gNroonuep. Zo.f Hpaadtiiepnotusr i:s N wonaerr. aMn.t Beda.nikazemi: None. Severe mtDNA depletion confirmed in authopsied liver specimens ranged from <1% to 18% of control values in all cases. POLG  P10
.04 Molecular analysis showed the presence of c.2243G>C(p.W748S) mu- A de novo novel POLG mutation associated with Alpers syndrome tation associated with c.3428A>G(p. E1143
G) variant in all children. One A. Löfgren1,2,3, T. Van Laer1,2,3, K. Jansen4, G. Buyse4, L. Lagae4, P. De Jonghe2,3,5, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2,3, G. Van Goethem2,3,5; homozygote and three compound heterozygotes with c.2419C>T(p.R807C), 1Diagnostic Service Facility, Dept of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Dept c.3630C>G(p.Y1210X), and c.26 P0
O5LCG>T(p.R869X) were identified. This study of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerpen, Belgium, 3Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute shows similarity of genotypes identified in Polish and Nordic patients, with Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 4Pediatric Neurology, Dept of dominant p.W748S mutation. mutation searching and mtDNA deple- Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven Gasthuisberg and University of Leuven, Leuven, tion assessment should be included in differential diagnosis of intractable Belgium, 5Neuromuscular Reference Center, Dept of Neurology, Antwerp University epilepsy associated with hepatopathy. The study was supported by NCN Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. grants: 2857/B/ P01
/2010/39, 01627/B/NZ2/2012/05, VENTURES 2011- 8/3 FPS, MSH E0751
/B/ P01
/2009/37, CMHI  S126
/12. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. J. Trubicka: None. M. Tesarova: None. K. A 16-month old boy was admitted to pediatric neurology with a status epi- Strawa: None. M. Kaliszewska: None. J. Sykut-Cegielska: None. I. Jankowska: lepticus and subsequent epilepsia partialis continua, elevated liver enzymes None. K. Kotulska: None. M. Pronicki: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. E. Ciara: and increased blood and CSF lactate. EEG showed epileptic discharges on None. R. Płoski: None. J. Zeman: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. both occipital regions, brain MRI showed edema of the right hippocampus and muscle biopsy revealed decreased enzyme activities of respiratory chain complexes II+III and IV. The symptoms correspond with AlperPsO sLyGndrome,  P10
.06 a recessive disease in children characterized by progressive degeneration Mutations in mitochondrial aminoacyl tRNA synthetases identified by of the central nervous systPeOmL Gdue to mutations in the gene coding exome-sequencing for the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma. We sequenced DNA of the D. Diodato1, L. Melchionda1, T. B. Haack2, E. Baruffini3, C. DallaBona3, C. Lamperti1, H. proband for mutations in and identified 2 heterozygous mutations: Prokisch2, I. Ferrero3, M. Zeviani4, D. Ghezzi1; a single base mutation in exon 7 leading to the known recessive mutation 1The Foundation “Carlo Besta” Institute of Neurology, Milan, Italy, 2Institute of Human p.Ala467Thr and a frameshift insertion of 1-bp in exon 17 p.Ala880Glyfs*11, Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 3University of Parma, Parma, Italy, leading to protein truncation deleting the polymPeOraLsGe domain and activity. 4MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Analysis of the parents’ DNA indicated that the mother carried p.Ala467Thr while the father did not carry any mutation in . Non-paternity could be excluded by genetic fingerprinting. Both father and son carried the com- Mitochondrial disorders include a group of heterogeneous clinical syndro- mdeo nno v4o-bp insertion polymorphism in intron 17 which dwea ns oavbosent in the mes, frequently presenting as encephalo- and/or cardiomyopathy, with a mother. Therefore, we predicted that p.Ala880Glyfs*11 might have arisen broad range of associated causative genes. In the last years, several muta- on the father’s allele. We were able to proof the appearan- tions in genes associated with defects of mitochondrial protein synthesis, ce by using a primer witPh OitLsG 3 ’ end matching the insertion sequence and affecting either the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear genes, have amplifying only the mutant allele. In conclusion, the patient is a compound been reported: an increasing group consists of mutations in mitochondrial heterozygote carrier of 2 loss-of-functionmutations, p.Ala467Thr and aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (aARSs) genes, that are associated with diverse p A.A. Llaö8f8g0reGnl:y Nfso*n1e1., Tle. aVdainn Lg ateor r: eNcoenses.i vKe. AJalpnesresn s:y Nnodnreo.m Ge. .Buyse: None. L. clinical presentations, usually with an early-onset and transmitted as au- Lagae: None. P. De Jonghe: None. C. Van Broeckhoven: None. G. Van tosomal recessive traits. A strict genotype-phenotype correlation has been Goethem: None. reported for most of these genes, albeit it is not clear the reason for specific and different cellular or tissue damages, being all aAR S2
 ubiquitous enzy- mes working in the same pathway. Whole-exome analyVsAisR iSn2 p,atients with clinical presentations suggestive of mitAoAchRoSn2,d rial disorder, and OXPHOS deficiency, allowed the TiAdRen S2
ti,f ication of mutations in: 1) in one subject with microcephalia and epilepsy; ii) in one subject presenting cerebellar atrophy; iii) in two 244 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRsAiblNinCgsE p |r eWseWntiWng. EwSitHh Gax.iOal RhyGpotonia and severe psicomotor delay. AllABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.09  P30
L and V281L mutations distribution in Macedonian and Serbian identified variants are not presVeAnRt Sin2 SNPsA dAaRtaSb2ases, are predicted to be de- patients with nonclassic 21-hydroxylase deficiency leterious by bioinformatic analysis, and segregate within the families; mo- V. Anastasovska1, T. Milenkovic2, M. Kocova1; reover the pathogenic role of and variants was proven using 1Genetic Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, Skopje, Macedonia, The yeast models. Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Institute for Mother and Child Health, Belgrade, Serbia. This study reports two neAwAR m S2
itochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase Background: (VAR S2
 and TAR S2
) as cause of mitochondrial diseases, and presents a new phenotype associated with mutations; moreover, we confirm the va- The mildnonclassic form of steroid 21-hydroxylase deficien- lue of exome sequencing for the identification of disease genes in mitochon- cy is one of the most common autosomal recessive disorders, occurring in dDr.i aDli dodisaotrod: eNrosn.e. L. Melchionda: None. T.B. Haack: None. E. Baruffini: almost 1% of Caucasians and 3% of Ashkenazi Jews. Although rarely reco- None. C. DallaBona: None. C. Lamperti: None. H. Prokisch: None. I. Ferrero: gnized in infants, it may cause premature adrenarche and pubarche, virili- None. M. Zeviani: None. D. Ghezzi: None. zation in young women and variable symptoms in young men. The missense  P30
L and V281L mutations in CY P21
A2 gene for 21-hydroxylase are com- mMoenthlyo das: sociated with nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia (NCAH)  P10
.07 that produce enzymes retaining 20-60% of normal activity. Autosomal dominant vitamin B12 deficiency: a new form of We have performed direct molecular  P30
L and V281L detection hereditary juvenile megaloblastic anemia in 20 Macedonian and 13 Serbian NCAH patients diagnosed according to B. Isidor1, S. Küry1, A. Kuster1, M. Couec1, E. Blouin2, S. Bezieau1; standard clinical criteria at the Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, 1CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Laboratoire LABCATAL, Paris, France. URensivuelrtssi:t y Ch ildren’s Clinic, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia and Institute for Mother and Child Health, Belgrade, Serbia, using PCR/ACRS method. The P30
L mutation was detected in 40% (8/20) Macedonian NCAH Familial selective vitamin B12 (cobalamin, Cbl) malabsorption (Imerslund- patients on the 27.5% (11/40) alleles and 46.2% (6/13) Serbian patients on Gra¨sbeck syndrome, IGS, OMIM 261100) is a group of autosomal recessive the 34.6% (9/26) alleles. Three homozygotes for  P30
L in each population dAisMoNrders characCtUerBiNzed by selective malabsorption oGfI FC)bl from the termi- and 5 heterozygotes in Macedonian and 3 heterozygotes in the Serbian pati- nal ileum in the presence of normal histology. Mutations in the amnionless eCnotnsc wluesrieo dne: tected. The V281L mutation was observed only in 3/20 (15%) ( ), cubilin ( ) and Gastric Intrinsic Factor ( genes are known Macedonian NCAH patients on 3/40 (7.5%) of the alleles. to be causes of IGS. AMN, CUBN GIF. The  P30
L distribution in Macedonian and Serbian NCAH pati- Here we report, a family affected by vitamin B12 malabsorption for whom ents was higher compared with other European populations. On the other molecular analysis failed to identify any mutation for and hand, lower V281L distribution in Macedonian patients than other Euro- Clinically, these patients resembled those with typical IGS; cobalamin ab- pKeeayn w poorpdusl:ations was observed while it was undetected in the Serbian sorption tests had been inconclusive regarding NCAH patients. the nature of the defect. The transmission of the disease from the mother to Nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia (NCAH), CY P21
A2 her children supports an autosomal mode of inheritance. g Ve.n Aen, aPs3t0asLo mvsuktaa:t iNonon, eV.2 T8. 1MLi lmenuktoavtiioc:n N. one. M. Kocova: None. Therefore, we propose that this family shows a new form of hereditary juve- n Bil.e I smideogra: lNoobnlaes. tSic. aKnüerym: iNa odnuee. Ato. Kviutasmterin: NBo1n2e .( cMo.b Caolaumecin: )N doneefi.c Eie.n Bclyo.uin: None. S. Bezieau: None.  P10
.10 Structural Elucidation of the Calcium-Sensing Receptor Extracellular Domain: 3D mapping of mutations observed in hyper- and  P10
.08 hypocalcemic patients Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease revisited: Clinical, radiologic, F. Di Meo1, P. Trouillas1, C. Magdelaine2, A. Nizou3, B. Funalot3,2, F. Sturtz3,2, A. Lienhardt- and genetic findings Roussie4, A. Lia-Baldini3; A. m. alhashem, S. Al Shahwan, B. Tabarki; 1LCSN-EA 1069, Faculté de Pharmacie, Limoges, France, 2Service de Biochimie et de Prince sultan military and medical city, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Génétique Moléculaire, CHU de Limoges, Limoges, France, 3EA6309: Neuropathies périphériques et Maintenance Myélinique, Université de Limoges, Limoges, France, Background 4Service de Pédiatrie, CHU de Limoges, Limoges, France. Biotin responsive basal ganglia disease (BBGD) also .called OThbijaemctiinvee transporter-2 deficiency, is a treatable autosomal recessive neu- rometabolic condition resulting from mutations in the SL C19
A3 gene The Calcium-Sensing-Receptor (CASR) is a model for G-Coupled-Protein- Methods To investigate the clinical, genetic, and neuroradiologic data of Receptors (GPCR) more generally. The dimeric CASR protein plays a central BBGD and clarify the disease spectrum. role in regulating extracellular Ca2+ concentrations. Gain-of-function mu- We investigated all Patients with a genetically proven diagnosis of tations of the CASR gene have been identified in patients with sporadic or BBGD between 2009 and 2012. All patients underwent a detailed medical familial-autosomal-dominant-hypocalcemia (ADH). Inactivating mutations history and clinical examination, extensive laboratory investigations inclu- of the CASR gene cause familial-hypocalciuric-hypercalcemia (FHH). More dRirnegs gueltnse tic tests, and brain MRI. Finally, we conducted a systematic review than 63% of these CASR mutations are located in the extracellular-domain of the literature. (ECD). Despite more than a decade of effort, crystals of neither whole CASR We enrolled 15 with BBGD, and analyzed the data on 14 patients nor CASR-ECD have been obtained. We developed by homology modeling from 4 previous reports. The BBGD occurred predominantly in preschool/ and molecular dynamic (MD) simulations a complete 3D model of CASR- school-aged patients in the Saudi population, but it was also observed in ECD, based on the rat mGluR1 structure. This new model allowed five re- other countries. The typical clinical picture consisted of recurrent subacute gions in CASR-ECD to be precisely defined: the Membrane-Anchor-Domain encephalopathy leading to coma, seizures, and extrapyramidal manifestati- (MAD), the Internal-Domain (ID), the Crown-Domain (CD), the Extended- ons. The brain MRI typically showed symmetric and bilateral lesions in the Dimerization-Domain (EDD) and Calcium-Binding-Sites (CBS). The known caudate nucleus and putamen, infra- and supratentorial brain cortex, and in amino acid substitutions associated with FHH and ADH were mapped onto the brainstem. Early treatment with a combination of biotin and thiamine this 3D model. The CD was the only domain in which all known mutations resulted in clinical and neuroradiologic improvement. Death and neurolo- were activating. We further studied this region by functional and structural gCiocn scelquuseiolanes w ere observed in those who were not treated or were treated analyses of a new mutation. We showed that this mutation is an activating late. mutation and that it results in the loss of a disulphide bond, such that there BBGD is an underdiagnosed pan-ethnic treatable condition. is no covalent bonding in the CD. This new model thus provided evidence of Clinicians caring for patients with unexplained encephalopathy and neuro- the importance of the CD in CASR regulation activity. More generally, it will imaging showing vasogenic edema in the bilateral putamen and caudate nu- help to clarify the role of each region of this protein by allowing the effects of clei, and brainstem should consider this disorder early because a therapeu- k Fn. oDwi Mn eaon:d N noenwe. mP.u Ttraotuioilnlass t:o N boen ec.o Crr. eMlaatgedde tloa itnhee: iNr o3nDe .l oAc.a Ntiioznou.: None. B. Funalot: None. F. Sturtz: None. A. Lienhardt-Roussie: None. A. Lia-Baldini: tic trial with biotin and thiamine can be lifesaving. Our study also showed None. t Ah.aMt .t halihamasihneem is: mNoanine. tSre. aAtlm Sehnath owfa tnh:i sN donisee. aBs.e T.abarki: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 245ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.11  P10
.13 Nitrosylation regulates Carnosinase activity substrate-specific The association of common SNPs with HDL cholesterol levels in B. Lanthaler1, A. Amberger1, J. Zschocke1, C. P. Schmitt1, V. Peters2; Latvian population 1Divison of Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Division of Metabolic Diseases, Centre I. Radovica, D. Fridmanis, I. Vaivade, L. Nikitina-Zake, J. Klovins; for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany. Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia. Objectives : Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is the final stage in 40% of long term Low level of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) is one of the diabetic patients. A common variant in carnosinase (CND P1
, “Mannheim-Al- main risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CAD) and the heritability of lele”) is associated with lower activity and a reduced probability of develo- HDL-C level is estimated at approximately 50%. Earlier association studies ping a DN. Carnosinase catalyzes the degradation of histidine-containing of HDL-C have found numerous genes and their respective proteins influ- dipeptides such as carnosine and anserine, compounds with cytoprotective encing lipid phenotype. The precise genetic profile determining heritability functions. Several factors were identified regulating carnosinase activity. of HDL-C however are far from complete and there is substantial room for Since nitric oxide concentrations are altered under diabetic conditions, we further characterization of genetic profiles influencing blood lipid levels. iMnevtehsotidgsated the role of both cysteine residues in the carnosinase as possible Here we report an association study of 139 SNPs from more than 30 loci targets for nitrosylation and its effect on carnosinase activity. with HDL-C level. We genotyped 1273 individuals selected from Genome : We cloned three different CND P1
 variants: TCh10e2S wild type eCn22z9yS- Database of Latvian Population. me as well as two variants where each cysteine (Mut 1 and Mut 2 ) 58 SNPs from 13 loci were nominally associated (p<0.05) with HDL-C levels. residue has been substituted by a serine, respectively. Recombinant FLAG- 10 SNPs from CETP gene and two from MLXIPL retained significant associa- tagged proteins were purified from CHO supernatant. The high-purified tion with low HDL-C levels (rs1800775, rs3764261, rs173539, rs9939224, pRreosuteltisns have been studied for altered enzyme activity after nitrosylation rs711752, rs708272, rs7203984, rs7205804, rs11076175, rs9929488, with a NO donor (e.g. 3-Morpholinosydnonimine). rs17145738 and rs2286276) after Bonferoni correction. We have also pre- : Carnosine degradation was about 20-fold higher for the wildtype pared case-control haplotype association analysis of extreme ends of HDL-C compared to anserine deCg10r2aSdation. Enzyme activity wCa2s29 Scompletely dimi- level distribution and identified haplotypes from CETP with distinct effects nished for Mut 1 (Mut 1 ), whereas Mut 2 (Mut 2 ) showed activi- on determination of HDL-C levels. Moreover we performed case-control al- ties in the same range as measured for the wildtype. Nitrosylation reduced lele dosage test of extreme tails of DHL-C level for 20 nominally associated enzyme activity of wild-type and Mut 2 carnosinase in a concentration-de- SNPs and found that more than 25 risk alleles significantly decreases HDL-C pCoenncdleunsito mnanner. Contrary to these findings, nitrosylation had no effect on level. anserine degradation. Our conclusion: CETP gene is the strongest genetic factor influencing HDL-C : Nitrosylation regulates carnosinase activity in a substrate-speci- l Ie. vRealsd oinv itchae: LNaotnveia. nD .p Forpidumlaatinoisn:. None. I. Vaivade: None. L. Nikitina-Zake: fic manner. These findings suggest an important role of NO in the regulation None. J. Klovins: None. of carnosinase activity. Therefore, modulation of NO-production can be of iBm.p Loarnttahnatl ethr:e Nraopneeu. tAic. Avmalbueer.ger: None. J. Zschocke: None. C.P. Schmitt: None. V. Peters: None.  P10
.14 Functional studies of novel mutations in the CY P21
A2 gene of Norwegian patients with 21-hydroxylase deficiency  P10
.12 I. Brønstad1, P. Methlie1, A. S. B. Wolff1, E. Bratland1, I. Nermoen2, K. Løvås1, E. S. Cerebellar ataxia and atrophy due to mutations in CAB C1
/ADCK3, a Husebye1; diverse clinical presentation in two sisters and potentially treatable. 1University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 2University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. D. Lev1,2, L. Blumkin1, K. Yosovich1, A. Zerem1, C. Vinkler1, M. Michelson1, T. Lerman- Background: Sagie1,3, E. Leshinsky-Silver1,4; CY P21
A2 1Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) with 21- hydroxylase Tel- Aviv, Israel, 3Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Tel Aviv University, Tel- Aviv, deficiency is caused by mutations in . Recently we reported 4 novel Austria. mutations in the Norwegian population of patients with CAH. Objective: CY P21
A2 in silico in vitro To characterise the novel mutations by analyses, Abstract develop an assay for determination of the enzyme activity of each We describe two sisters with cerebellar ataxia and atrophy. The younger mutations, and compare the results with the patient phenotypes. sister demonstrates early onset rapidly progressive cerebellar ataxia ac- Methods: In silico companied by motor and non-motor cerebellar features, as well as cognitive decline and psychiatric problems. Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme analysis was performed by Clustal Omega multiple se- analysis in muscle showed a decrease in complex I+III. Progressive cerebel- quence alignment tool, Polyphen, and Pymol. The QuickChange II Site Di- lar atrophy was demonstrated on serial brain MRI imagings. CoQ supple- rected Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) was used to generate point mutations. mentation was started at the age of 5 years with significant improvement TNT® Quick Coupled Transcription/Translation system (Promega) was in motor and cognitive abilitiesand partial lessening of the cerebellar signs. used for protein expression. 21-hydroxylase activity was assayed by LCMS- Discontinuation of the treatment with CoQ resulted in worsening of the M ReS s u(c lto sn :version of 17-hydroxyprogesterone to 11-deoxycortisol). ataxia, cognitive decline and severe depression associated with significant progression in the cerebellar atrophy. The older sister, who is 32 years old, The mutation p.iLn3 s8il8icRo revealed no activity, while the p. E140
K sho- has non progressive dysarthria and clumsiness from the age of 10 years and wed an activity of less thinan v i1tr0o% compared to the wild type, which were cerebellar atrophy shown on MRI. Both were found to be compound hetero- in accordance with the analysis. The mutation p. P45
L gave slightly zygote for 2 mutations in the CAB C1
/ADCK3 CgAenBeC,1 o/nAeD oCfK t3he mutations was impaired activity by the assay, but was expected to interfere with not previously described. the protein activity by Polphen. The mutation p.V211M showed an activi- Patients with primary CoQ deficiency due to mutations show ty of 30-60% compared to the wild type, but were predicated as benign by wide spectrum of clinical presentations even in the same family. Polyphen. Conclusion in vitro The remarkable clinical response of some of these patients to CoQ CsuApBpCl1e/- AmDeCnKta3tion highlights the importance of treatment trials with CoQ10 in pa- : The results from itnh es ilico study of the novel mutations were tients with cerebellar ataxia and atrophy even before analyzing the in accordance with the severity of the phenotype of the patients, but only D. Lev: g Neonnee. .H Le.n Bcleu mit kminig: hNto inme.p Kro. vYeo sthoev iocuht: cNoomnee .f oAr. Ztheeresem p: aNtoienne.t sC. Vinkler: None. M. Michelson: None. T. Lerman-Sagie: None. E. Leshinsky- partly in agreement with the results. Silver: None. I. Brønstad: None. P. Methlie: None. A.S.B. Wolff: None. E. Bratland: None. I. Nermoen: None. K. Løvås: None. E.S. Husebye: None. 246 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.15  P10
.17 Single heterozygous mutations in ABC C8
 are a common cause of COQ6 mutations in patients with nephrotic syndrom, sensorineural diazoxide-unresponsive diffuse form of congenital hyperinisulinism deafness and optical atrophy C. Saint-Martin1, Q. Zhou2, C. Vaury1, J. Arnoux3, P. De Lonlay3, S. Shyng2, C. Bellanné- C. Rousset-Rouvière1,2, M. Caillez1,2, F. Garaix1,2, A. Cano1,2, O. Gribouval3, O. Boyer4,3,5, C. Chantelot1; Antignac6,3,5, M. Tsimaratos1,2; 1AP-HP Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Department of Biochemistry 1Néphrologie pédiatrique - Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, France, 2CHU de Marseille, and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, United States, Marseille, France, 3Inserm U983 - Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 4Néphrologie 3Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, AP-HP Hôpital Necker-Enfants pédiatrique et MARHEA - Hôpital Necker - Enfants malades, Paris, France, 5Université Malades, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 6Génétique médicale - Hôpital Necker - Enfants malades, Paris, France. BackgroundABC C8
 encodes the SUR1 subunit of the β-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel whose loss of function is responsible for congenital Primary Q10 coenzyme (COQ10) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive hyperinsulinism (CHI). Diffuse forms of diazoxide-unresponsive CHI are mitochondrial disease accessible to a substitutive treatment. Clinical pre- classically associated with the presence of two mutations with a recessive sentation is heterogeneous depending upon the gene involved. Mutations iMnehtehroitdasnce. However several dominant missense mutations were recently in COQ2, COQ6 and PDS S2
 genes are responsible for steroid-resistant ne- reported. ABC C8
 phrotic syndrome associated to various extra-renal features. COQ6 gene Clinical and molecular characterizaAtiBoCnC o8f 27 probands with a dia- mutations have been reported in 13 individuals belonging to 5 unrelated gnosis of diazoxide-unresponsive diffuse CHI and carrying a unique families who presented steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and sensori- mutation were performed. - Nine missense mutations were subjec- neural deafness. ted to in vitro studies testing 1) processing efficiency of mutant channels We report on two brothers of Turkish decent with COQ10 deficiency with re- bRye sWuletsstern blots and surface imABmCuCn8ofluorescence staining and 2) channel nal involvement, sensorineural deafness and optical atrophy. Patient 1 (the function using inside-out patch-clamp recording. older brother) was diagnosed at the age of 5 years with end-stage kidney Twenty-three distinct heterozygous mutations were identi- disease and bilateral sensorineural deafness. He received a kidney trans- fied in these 27 patients: 15 missense mutations (62%), 4 truncating muta- plant at the age of 6. Patient 2 (the younger brother) developed nephrotic tions (17%), 3 splice mutations (13%) and 1 in frame indel mutation. None range proteinuria and bilateral sensorineural deafness at the age of 5 years. of the missense mutations altered the processing of the SUR1 protein. All Kidney histology revealed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis not otherwi- mCountcalnutssi obnut two had dramatically reduced response to MgADP or to di- se specified. ACE inhibitors and diuretics led to a sustained remission. At azoxide (<10% of WT current). the age of 17 years, Patient 1 presented sudden and severe bilateral blind- This analysis confirms that mutated channels with preserved ness with flat electroretinogram secondary to optical atrophy that did not trafficking to the membrane are associated with a dominant inheritance. It improve with methylprednisolone pulses. Direct Sanger sequencing of the also raises the question of the truncating mutations identified as sole event COQ6 gene revealed a previously published homozygous missense mutati- and generally associated with defective trafficking. Consequently, diffuse on (pA353D) in the two brothers. Subsequently, both patients were treated forms of CHI may be associated with either recessive or dominant inheri- with oral COQ10 (Idebenone) which allowed a progressive improvement in tance. These findings are of major importance in terms of differential dia- visual acuity in Patient 1. gnosis with focal forms associated with a paternally-inherited mutation and We report herein the first patient with COQ6 mutations and ocular invol- i Cn .t Seraminst- oMfa gretinne: tNico nceo.u Qns. eZlhlionug:. None. C. Vaury: None. J. Arnoux: None. P. De vement in association with renal and auditive defects. COQ10 substitution Lonlay: None. S. Shyng: None. C. Bellanné-Chantelot: None. m Ci.g Rhot ussigsneitf-iRcoanuvtliyè riem: pNroonvee. tMh.e C daiisleleazs:e N coonuer.s Fe. iGna trhaeix p: aNtoiennet. sA.. Cano: None. O. Gribouval: None. O. Boyer: None. C. Antignac: None. M. Tsimaratos: None.  P10
.16 Connexin50 mutation  L7
Q attenuates hypertension in spontaneously hypertensive rat SHR/OLAIPCV  P10
.18 M. Krupkova1, F. Liška1, M. Pravenec1,2, V. Zídek2, Z. Vernerova3, D. Krenova1, V. Kren1,2, O. Genomic anatomy of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia Šeda1; patient (CPEO) related multiple deletions on mitochondrial genome 1First Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, K. Takahashi1, Y. Ohnuki1, T. Shiina1, S. Suzuki1, Y. Ozaki1, Y. Goto1, E. Iijima1, W. Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Physiology, Academy of Sciences of The Czech Takahashi1, A. kondo1,2, S. Izumi1, T. Takizawa1, H. Inoko1; Republic, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Third Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathology, 1Tokai Univercity School of Medicine, Isehara,Kanagawa, Japan, 2Kagawa National Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. children‘s Hospital, Zentuuji,Kagawa, Japan. The aim of this study was to determine the metabolic, hemodynamic and Mitochondrial genome (mtgen) deletion syndromes comprise three major transcriptomic outcomes of recently identified connexin50 gene (Gja8) mu- phenotypes, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), Kearns-Sayre tation  L7
Q that arose spontaneously in the spontaneously hypertensive inb- syndrome (KSS), and Pearson syndrome. PEO is conventionally defined as red rat strain SHR/OlaIpcv, creating thus a coisogenic rat strain SHR-Dca. progressive limitation of eye movements with normal pupils and ptosis of Adult, standard chow-fed male rats of SHR/OlaIpcv and SHR-Dca strains the eyelids. 1.1 kb to 10 kb of multiple deletions were previously reported were used (n = 8/strain/procedure). We assessed metabolic and mor- from the mtgen analyses of skeletal muscle, however systematic considera- phometric profiles of the two strains, measured arterial blood pressures tion and molecular mechanism of the multiple deletions are unknown. continuously by radiotelemetry (36 days). We used Affymetrix GeneChip® Here we report detail mitochondrial genome analysis using a patient (31 Rat Exon 1.0ST Array to assess the heart and renal transcriptome. Immu- y/o male) who suffering from PEO, muscle weakness, hearing loss, leuko- nohistochemistry was performed using polyclonal rabbit anti-Connexin50 encephalopathy and hypogonadism. After receiving his agreement through (H-65) antibody . a genetic counselling, we performed extraction of the genomic DNA from The distribution of triglycerides and cholesterol across major lipoprotein muscle tissue, peripheral blood cells and oral mucosa, long range PCR co- fractions was similar in both strains except for significantly lower high-den- vering the whole mtgen region, sub-cloning of the PCR products, nucleotide sity lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations in SHR-Dca. There were no diffe- sequencing of the sub-clones, and identification of the deletion points by rences in morphometry, glucose tolerance, adiponectin and leptin levels. We comparing with normal mtgen sequences structures. found significant 10-15mmHg decrease of both systolic and diastolic blood At least four kinds of deletions, ranging from 7627 bp to 8976 bp, were pressures in SHR-Dca compared to SHR (repeated measures ANOVA p<0.01 detected in the muscule tissue, but these deletions were not observed in and p<0.05, respectively). By immunohistochemistry we localized Cx50 in peripheral blood cells and oral mucosa. Of them all deletion points invol- heart, kidney, aorta, liver and lungs, mostly in endothelium. There were 15 ved in whole mtgen region were identified, and none of them had identical transcripts common to the heart and kidney sets including  S100
A9, Bcl6 short nucleotided see nqouveonces near the deletion points that have not been so and Clec4d downregulated and Cyr61, Frs2 and Dusp1 upregulated in both far reported. These findings suggest that the onset of the CPEO in caused by heart and kidney of SHR-Dca compared to SHR. accumulation of deletions and it may lead to solution why he has the We show that Cx50 mutation  L7
Q attenuates hypertension in SHR-Dca strain u Kn.i Tqaukea shyamshpit:o Nmosn.e. Y. Ohnuki: None. T. Shiina: None. S. Suzuki: None. Y. and significantly changes the renal and cardiac expression of sets of genes Ozaki: None. Y. Goto: None. E. Iijima: None. W. Takahashi: None. A. kondo: None. S. Izumi: None. T. Takizawa: None. H. Inoko: None. involved in blood pressure regulation and related pathways. S Mu.p Korrutepdk obvya: :G NAoCnRe .g Fr.a Lnitš kPa3: 0N1o/n1e2. /M0.7  P7
r7a.venec: None. V. Zídek: None. Z. Vernerova: None. D. Krenova: None. V. Kren: None. O. Šeda: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 247ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.19 C.A. Biagosch: None. S.W. Sauer: None. T. Haack: None. S. Hensler: None. K. Molecular analysis of mitochondrial DNA in children with vomiting Danhauser: None. T. Wieland: None. C. Staufner: None. E. Graf: None. J. cyclic syndrome Zschocke: None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Traub: None. J.G. Okun: None. T. S. Cara1, F. Pugliatti1, C. Di Bella1, V. Procopio1, M. Fuoti2, S. Martinazzi2, A. Ravelli2, V. Meitinger: None. G.F. Hoffmann: None. R. Kühn: None. S. Kölker: None. H. Salpietro1, C. Salpietro1, L. Rigoli1; Prokisch: None. 1Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, Messina, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Children‘s Hospital, Brescia, Italy.  P10
.21 Exploration of the impact of low-frequency and rare coding variation Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is a disabling condition affecting mostly in the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes susceptibility children characterized by recurrent attacks of unremitting nausea and vo- A. Mahajan1, C. Fuchsberger2, D. Pasko3, J. Flannick4, N. Robertson1, X. Sim2, N. Burtt4, A. miting, often a. ssociated with lethargy and separated by asymptomatic inter- Morris1, for the GoT2D study; vals. Neuromuscular disease manifestations are present in approximately 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2University of 25% of cases In CVS children with a family history of migraine, migraine Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Institute of Biomedical & Clinical Science was identified on the maternal side only in 63% versus the paternal side Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. only in 16% . Therefore, it has been suggested that at least some of the pre- disposing genetic factor is located on the maternally-inherited mitochondri- al DNA (mtDNA). In order to further study the relationship between mtD- Custom genotyping arrays, like the Illumina HumanExome Beadchip, provide NA sequences and CVS, we screened the entire mtDNA D-loop in 37 Italian a cost-effective alternative to sequencing to explore the role of low-frequency children (23 males and 14 females) (age 11.9±4.8 years) with CVS, in their (LF; 1-5% MAF) and rare (<1% MAF) coding variants in type 2 diabetes (T2D) first-degree relatives and in 103 control subjects. The subjects included in susceptibility.We studied 12,778 cases and 24,474 controls of European ance- our study had mtDNA haplogroup H. stry from the UK, Finland and Sweden, genotyped on this array to uncover Over 1200 bp of mtDNA, including the D-loop region, were amplified by ne- novel T2D loci and examine whether LF and rare coding alleles could explain sted PCR using primers  L15990
-H617. Four overlapped nested PCRs were established common variant GWAS associations. We combined summary performed using primers  L15990
-H16434,  L16431
-H162,  L039
-H407, and statistics (single-variant and gene-based) of up to 109,227 highP-quality au-  L361
-H617. PCR products were analyzed by automatic sequencing. Exclu- tosomal variants across studies by meta-analysKisR. TWAeP 4id-3entified twPo LF no-n7- ding insertions in the ultravariable 302-315 region, 22 different mtDNA va- synonymous (NS) vDarOiCaKnt6s achievingP study-wide significance ( <2.5 x 10 )- riants were identified in two or more CVS subjects. Most prominently, one of 1in7 genes not mPaSpOpRinSg1 Cto1 established T2D loci:-8 (P P152
S; =1.7x10 the SNPs, 16519C>T, was found to be highly associated with CVS vs. controls ; 0.3% MAF) and (R430H; =6.2x10 ; 0.4% MAF). One addi-t7ional (p<0.001). Another, 73A>G SNP was found to be highly associated with CVS NS variant in approached significance ( E34
K; =6.4 x 10 , 9% in subjects with 16519T vs. in controls (p>0.01) with 16519T. Our findings MAF). We found no evidence of LF or rare coding variants with large effects provide further evidence that there is a component of mitochondrial dys- f Su.n Cctairoan: iNno CneV.S F.. Pugliatti: None. C. Di Bella: None. V. Procopio: None. M. (Odds ratio>1C.51)6 oinrf 9e1staILb2li2sRheAd2 TF2ADM 6r3isAk loci GthSaGt2 could explain common Fuoti: None. S. Martinazzi: None. A. Ravelli: None. V. Salpietro: None. C. SNP GWAS associationPs. Gene-based analysis (SKAT-o) of rare NS variants Salpietro: None. L. Rigoli: None. in four genes , -6 , , and met the gene-based si- gnificance threshold ( < 5x10 ), but each is driven by association in a single study and further confirmation is required.Our results indicate that the ge- netic landscape of T2D susceptibility is not dominated by LF and rare coding  P10
.20 variants of large effect. In an effort to provide power to identify variants of DHTKD1 mutations cause 2-aminoadipic and 2-oxoadipic aciduria wAe. aMkaehra ejaffne:c tN, ownee .a Cre. Feuxcphasnbdeinrgge trh: eN soanme.p Dle. Psiazsek too: >N8o0ne,0. 0J0. Fsluabnjneicctks:. and suggest a therapeutic strategy for glutaric aciduria type 1 None. N. Robertson: None. X. Sim: None. N. Burtt: None. A. Morris: None. C. A. Biagosch1, S. W. Sauer2, T. Haack1,3, S. Hensler4, K. Danhauser5,1, T. Wieland1, C. Staufner2, E. Graf1, J. Zschocke6, T. M. Strom1,5, T. Traub2, J. G. Okun2, T. Meitinger5,1, G. F. Hoffmann2, R. Kühn4, S. Kölker2, H. Prokisch1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center  P10
.22 for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Department of General Pediatrics, Humans have an active endogenous D-lactate dehydrogenase Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, University Children‘s Hospital, Heidelberg, A. van Eerde, K. Lichtenbelt, K. Duran, G. Monroe, M. van Roosmalen, M. Oostendorp, G. Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Visser, I. Nijman, J. Jans, N. Knoers, E. Cuppen, N. Verhoeven-Duif, G. van Haaften; Center for Environmental Health, München, Germany, 4Institute of Developmental UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, 6Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. Lactate exists as two stereo-isomers, the L and the D form. In human cells L- lactate is produced from pyruvate during the anaerobic metabolism of car- bohydrates, mammals are not believed to produce and metabolize D-lactate. Glutaric aciduria type 1, caused by mutations in GCDH, results in a severe Increased levels of bacterial produced D-lactic acid are only occasionally neurological phenotype for which the only available treatment is a lysine seen in patients that underwent gastrointestinal surgery. reduced diet. However, the identification and characterisation of novel me- Here we present a patient with mental retardation and a normal intestine tabolic disease genes together with the elucidation of their physiological length. He was found to have chronic increased D-lactic acid levels in urine, function can provide guidance for therapeutic interventions. which did not decrease after repeated antibiotic treatment, indicating an Recently, by exome sequencing of individuals with 2-aminoadipic and 2-o- inborn metabolic defect in D-lactate metabolism. xoadipic aciduria we identified mutations in DHTKD1. This gene encodes Because his parents were consanguineous, we performed homozygosity for dehydrogenase  E1
 and transketolase domain-containing protein1. The mapping and identified several large stretches of homozygosity. The third accumulation metabolites argued that this enzyme acts upstream of GCDH largest homozygous stretch contained a gene with homology to D-lactate in the L-lysine-degradation pathway. Elevated levels of 2-oxoadipate in in- dehydrogenases from lower organisms. Sanger sequencing subsequently dividual-derived fibroblasts could be restored upon lentiviral complemen- identified a homozygous missense variant Thr463Met in human lactate de- tation using wild-type DHTKD1 mRNA. Moreover, experiemts with deuteri- hydrogenase D (LDHD), the variant is predicted to have a damaging (Sift) um-labeled 2-oxoadipate showed accumulation in DHTKD1-deficient cells, and deleterious (Polyphen) effect on protein function. Currently we are per- indicating that DHTKD1 mediates the last unresolved step in the L-lysine- forming functional studies to assess the effect of the mutation on protein degradation pathway. function. Since patients with DHTKD1 mutations showed only a mild phenotype with We conclude that contrary to common textbook knowledge the human body developmental delay, this opened the posibility to treat glutaric aciduria ty- does require endogenous D-lactate dehydrogenase activity for proper D- pe1 patients with DHTKD1 inhibitors. An existing GCDH- mouse is known to l Aac. tvaatne cEleeradrea:n Nceo.ne. K. Lichtenbelt: None. K. Duran: None. G. Monroe: None. M. van Roosmalen: None. M. Oostendorp: None. G. Visser: None. I. develop a severe phenotype upon lysine-rich diet. To clarify whether inhibi- Nijman: None. J. Jans: None. N. Knoers: None. E. Cuppen: None. N. tion of DHTKD1 activity can rescue the severe phenotype of GCDH deficien- Verhoeven-Duif: None. G. van Haaften: None. cy we are creating a DHTKD1-/GCDH- double KO mouse by using a TALENs (transcription activator-like effector nucleases) approach. These nucleases bind to the desired DNA sequence and disrupt gene function by small inser- tions or deletions with high specificity, which has been verified in an in vitro system. This approach mimics the condition of a Glutaric Aciduria Type 1 p2a4ti8ent, who receives an inhibitor for DHTKD1 actEivSitHy.G 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.23  P10
.25 Clinical Exome Sequencing Leads to the Diagnosis of Mitochondrial Haplotype-based regulation of frataxin by microRNAs in Friedreich Complex I Deficiency in a family with global developmental delays, Ataxia ataxia, and cerebellar and pons hypoplasia S. Bandiera1,2, M. Girard1, E. Hatem1, A. S. Jannot1, L. Rifai1, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1, A. P. Gray1, W. Zeng1, S. Tang1, J. Wei1, K. Gonzalez1, X. Li1, H. Lu1, H. Lu1, E. Chao2, V. Henrion Caude1,2; Kimonis2; 1Inserm U781, Paris, France, 2Institut Imagine, Paris, France. 1Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 2Division of Genetics & Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics; University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that can modulate gene expression by interfering with translation or stability of messenger RNAs Exome sequencing was performed on a 14 year-old female with familial ata- (mRNAs). The differential expression of miRNAs in patients with Alzheimer xia, global developmental delays, and cerebellar and pons hypoplasia. The disease or various ataxia suggest a crucial role of miRNAs in neurodegene- family history was remarkable for a 3 year-old sister with a similar pheno- ration. We hypothesized a differential regulation of frataxin by miRNAs that type. Nearly a decade of molecular, cytogenetic, and biochemical testing was could affect protein levels in patients with Friedreich ataxia (FRDA). To this uninformative. Exome sequencing revealed compound heterozygous altera- end, we searched for miRNA binding sites in the frataxin gene using various tions of the NUBPL gene (c.311T>C; p. L104
P & c.815-27T>C). The c.311T>C computational tools, and identified a subset of target sites. By sequencing missense alteration is located at a highly conserved amino acid. The c.815- the 3‘-UTR of frataxin in our cohort of patients with FRDA (n = 57), we were 27T>C alteration is located at a highly conserved nucleotide and previous in able to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) defining several vitro analyses demonstrated splicing defects. The affected sister manifested haplotypes with one reaching 89% of homozygosity in patients versus 24% both alterations; each parent carried one alteration. Alterations within the in controls. This result was confirmed in another cohort of FRDA Reunione- NUBPL gene occur in an autosomal recessive fashion in association with mi- se patients, with 94% patients who were found homozygous for this haplo- tochondrial complex I deficiency syndrome (CI deficiency) (MIM_252010). type. Finally, by evaluating the potential regulator of those 3‘-UTR haplo- The NUBPL gene was first discovered in association with disease in 2010 types, we established differential regulation, and specifically demonstrated and has only been reported in two other families, both of which displayed the involvement of miR-124 in the down-regulation of the FRDA haplotype. remarkable clinical overlap with the family herein. Exome sequencing is an Our results suggest for the first time that post-transcriptional regulation of especially powerful tool to aid in the diagnosis of CI deficiency given the ex- frataxin occurs through the 3′-UTR and involves miRNA targeting. We pro- treme clinical and genetic heterogeneity making establishing a clinical dia- pose that the involvement of miRNAs in a FRDA-specific regulation of frata- gnosis exceedingly difficult. Further, the underlying mutation has not been xin may provide a rationale to increase residual levels of frataxin through discovered in about half of patients with CI deficiency, thought to be due to m S.i RBNaAnd-iinehraib: iNtoornye .m Mo. lGecirualreds:. None. E. Hatem: None. A.S. Jannot: None. L. yet undiscovered associated genes. Diagnostic exome sequencing led to the Rifai: None. A. Munnich: None. S. Lyonnet: None. A. Henrion Caude: None. successful identification of the NUBPL alterations and, after years of unsuc- c ePs. sGfural ya:n Aa.l yEsmeps,l oleymd eton ta ( fmullo oler cpualrat-rt imdiea)g; nSoigsnisifi fcoarn tt;h Aem fabmryi lGy.enetics. W. Zeng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. S. Tang:  P10
.26 A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. J. Wei: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. K. Gonzalez: A. Mutation spectrum in Indian patients with mucopolysaccharidosis Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. X. Li: A. Employment IVA (full or part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. H. Lu: A. Employment (full or A. M. Bidchol1, H. Shah2, A. Dalal3, B. Joseph2, M. Kabra4, N. Gupta4, S. Nampoothiri5, S. part-time); Significant; Ambry Genetics. H. Lu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Danda6, S. R. Phadke7, S. Kapoor8, M. Kamate9, K. Gowrishankar10, V. H. Sankar11, I. C. Significant; Ambry Genetics. E. Chao: None. V. Kimonis: None. Verma12, A. R. R. Devi13, P. M. Gopinath14, K. Satyamoorthy14, K. M. Girisha1; 1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University, Manipal, India, 2Pediatric Orthopedic Services, Department of Orthopedics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal University, Manipal, India, 3Diagnostic  P10
.24 Division, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India, 4Genetics Pro-oxidant state and effect of anti-oxidants in Fanconi anemia and Unit, Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, Down syndrome patients 5Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research M. M. Thomas1, R. M. Kamal2, H. H. El-Gebaly2, H. H. Afifi1, S. A. Abd El-Maksoud1, H. T. El- Center, Cochin, India, 6Clinical Genetics Unit, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India, Bassyouni1, M. M. Eid1, G. S. M. El-Saeed1; 7Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. Sciences, Lucknow, India, 8Department of Pediatrics, Moulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India, 9Child Development Unit, KLE Hospital, Belgaum, India, 10Department Background: of Medical Genetics, Kanchi Kamakoti Childs Trust Hospital, Chennai, India, 11Genetic Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, SAT Hospital, Government Medical College, Fanconi anemia and Down syndrome are two genetic disorders Thiruvananthapuram, India, 12Center of Medical Genetics, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New cOabujseecdti vbey: chromosomal aberrations. Oxidative stress is an important patho- Delhi, India, 13Genetic Division, Rainbow Children Hospital,, Hyderabad, India, 14Division logical factor in both disorders. of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences Centre, Manipal University, Manipal, India. Evaluation of the effect of antioxidant treatment on the level of oPxaitdieantitvse asntrde sms eatnhdo dDsN:A damage in Fanconi anemia and Down syndrome patients. Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA is an autosomal recessive inborn error of me- Seventeen Egyptian patients diagnosed to have Fan- tabolism caused by the mutations in the N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase coni anemia, and Fifteen Egyptian patients diagnosed to have Down syndro- (GALNS) gene and manifests with a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Bidirec- me were recruited from the outpatient clinic of Clinical Genetics Department, tional sequencing of all the coding region was performed in 60 patients from National Research Centre. Fifteen healthy children were used as controls. Oxi- 58 families. In silico analysis was carried out for novel missense mutations dative stress parameters including total antioxidant capacity (TAC), Superoxi- to peredict the effect of mutations on protein function. We identified 37 dif- de dismutase (SOD) enzyme activity and Malondialdehyde (MDA) biomarkers ferent mutations, 26 of which had not been previously described. The 26 were estimated. DNA damage was determined using the alkaline comet assay. novel mutations consisted of 22 missense mutations (p.MlI, p.N32T, p. L36
R, DReiespuoltxsy:b utane (DEB) test was used for Fanconi anemia patients. Re-estimati- p. P52
L, p. P77
S, p. C79
R, p. S82
P, p. L86
P, p.H142P, p.G188S, p.Y191D, p.N204T, on of these parametersp w< as done after six months of antioxpi<d ant intake. p.F216S, p.W230C, p.R251Q, p.A291S, p.T313M, p.G317R, p.H329P, p.R386S, In Fanconi anemia patients after antioxidants intake, there was an p. E450
G, p. C501
S), one nonsense mutation (p.Q414X), 3 intronic variations improvementp <o f DEB ( 0.01), and DNA damage levelsp, <( 0.01). Improve- (c.120+1G>C, c.1003-3C>G and c.1139+1G>A) that affect the splice sites and ment pi<n oxida tive stress paramet ers occurred with significant lowering of 11 previously reported mutations. The missense mutations p. S287
L and MDA levels ( 0.01) and signpi<fi cant elevation in TAC ( 0.01) and SOD le- p.A291S account for 9.1 % (10/111) and 7.3 % (8/111) of the cases respec- vels ( 0.01).DNA damage levelsin Down syndrome patients improved after tively and were the common mutations in Indian patients. This is the first re- apn<ti oxidants administratiopn< ( 0.01). Also, improvement in oxpi<d ative stress port of screening for mutations in GALNS gene in the Indian population and pCoarnacmluestieorns: occurred after antioxidant administration with lowering of MDA the largest number of patients studied in the literature till date. The identi- ( 0.01) and SOD levels ( 0.05) and elevation in TAC levels ( 0.01). f Aic.aMt.i oBnid ocfh tohle: sNeo mneu.t Hat. iSohnas hh:a Ns ohneel.p Aed. D 5a flaaml: Nilioense f.o Br .p Jroesneapthal: dNioangen.o Msi. s. Improvement in oxidative stress parameters and DNA damage Kabra: None. N. Gupta: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. S. Danda: None. S.R. Phadke: None. S. Kapoor: None. M. Kamate: None. K. Gowrishankar: after giving antioxidants occurred in each of Fanconi anemia and Down syn- None. V.H. Sankar: None. I.C. Verma: None. A.R.R. Devi: None. P.M. Gopinath: dMro.Mm. eT hpoamtieanst:s N.one. R.M. Kamal: None. H.H. El-Gebaly: None. H.H. Afifi: None. K. Satyamoorthy: None. K.M. Girisha: None. None. S.A. Abd El-Maksoud: None. H.T. El-Bassyouni: None. M.M. Eid: None. G.S.M. El-Saeed: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 249ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.27 Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States. Increased level of alpha-synuclein oligomers in blood plasma in Gaucher disease T. Usenko1,2, A. Emelyanov1,2, E. Nuzhnyi2, T. Boukina3, E. Zakharova3, S. Pchelina1,2; We undertook genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of type 2 diabetes 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Pavlov’s (T2D) in five ancestry groups: African American (AA), East Asian (EA), Eu- State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, ropean (EU), Hispanic American (HA) and South Asian (SA). We performed 3Research Centre for Medical Genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. trans-ethnic meta-analysis (MANTRA) of GWAS, imputed up to the 1000 Genomes Project Phase I reference panel (~32.3 million variants), in 5,464 T2D cases and p5,483 controls. We identified three novel T2D susceptPibDiGli-- At present alpha-synuclein is regarded as the key pathological molecular in FtyR Llo ci at genome-wiCdLe-8D sNig1n0i ficance, defined by loLg E10
 P Bayes’ factor (BF)>6 pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Oligomeric alpha-synuclein, the (equivalent to < P5
Dx1G0FRLunder a fixed-effects model), mapping near form of the protein most likely causing neuronal death, has been found in (log10BF=6.43), (log10BF=6.37) and (log10BF=6.36). The brain tissues of PD patients. Gaucher disease (GD) is the most common lyso- lead variant near is common (MAF≥5%)L iEnP all ancestry groups and somal storage disorders (LSD). Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) has homogeneous allelic effects on T2D susceptibility across ethnicities gene result in lysosomal dysfunction and glucosylceramide accumulation. (OR = 1.20 [1.13-1.28]). The lead variant near is also common in all The carriers of GBA mutations are at an increased risk for PD. Dysfunctions ancestry groupsC, LbDuNt 1th0e allelic effect is heterogeneous between ethnicities in alpha-synuclein cellular degradation may link PD and LSD. (log10BF=5.07), and is specific to EA populations (MAF=10.5%, OR=1.85 The aim of our work was to estimate the level of alpha-synuclein oligomers [1.50-2.27]). At , the lead variant is monomorphic or rare (MAF<1%) in blood plasma in GD patients. in EA, EU, HA and SA populations, so that the effect on T2D appears specific We generated blood plasma of 22 GD patients (mean age 14, range1-42, 9 to AA populations (MAF=8.7%, OR=1.98 [1.58-2.49]). We identified no low- males) and 24 individuals of control group (mean age 20, range 1-41, 13 frequency variants (1%≤MAF<5%) at novel or established loci at genome- males). Diagnosis of GD is based on assay of glucocerebrosidase activity and wide significance. The common lead SNPs are specific to one ancestry group, genetics genotyping of mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene. or are polymorphic across ethnicities with predominantly homogenous al- We present a quantitative measurement of blood plasma alpha-synuclein lelic effects. Our results highlight the benefits of trans-ethnic meta-analysis oligomers in healthy control subjects and GD patients using enzyme-linked for discovery and characterisation of complex trait loci, and emphasize the immunosorbent assay ELISA (Human Synuclein OLIGO kit aj Roboscreen, opportunity to extend insights into the genetic architecture of human disea- Germany). s Ae..P a.c Mroosrsri sd:i vNeornsee. p Xo. pSuimla:t iNoonnse.. P. Fontanillas: None. The level of oligomeric alpha-synuclein was significantly elevated in blood plasma of GD patients (median 4.75 ng/ml, range 0.80-36.3 ng/ml) compa- red to controls (median 1.22 ng/ml, range 0.00-40.10 ng/ml), p < 0.02.  P10
.30 This is the first report of elevated level of alpha-synuclein oligomers in Diabetes associated endothelial dysfunction begins in utero blood plasma in GD patients. Our results allow to suggest that GBA muta- S. Cvitic1, L. Gordon2, U. Hiden1, R. Saffery2, G. Desoye1; tions promote alpha-synuclein aggregation in GD, which might explain the 1Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Murdoch Children´s Research Institute and p Ta. tUhsoelongkioc:a Nl moneec. hAa.n Eismmesly uanndoevr: lNyionnge .G EB.A N-uaszshoncyiia: tNedon PeD. T.. Boukina: Department of Pediatrics, Melbourne, Australia. None. E. Zakharova: None. S. Pchelina: None. in utero The ‘Developmental Origin of Health and Disease (DOHaD)’ paradigm pro-  P10
.28 poses that environmental factors in pregnancy act to program the GCK mutations are not common cause for MODY2 and Gestational risk for adverse diseases, i.e. gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) that con- Diabetes in Turkey fers an increased risk for vascular and endothelial dysfunction. Ö. Yalcın Capan1, I. Sozen1, A. Lembet2, N. Aydin3, E. Berber1; The feto-placental compartment is also affected by the maternal diabetic en- 1Istanbul Arel University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Turkish vironment. We hypothesized that primary human arterial endothelial cells Diabetes Foundation, Istanbul, Turkey. isolated from term placentas after healthy pregnancies (normal AEC) and pregnancies complicated with GDM (diabetic AEC) would differ in their in- trinsic biological program. We focused on two key endothelial processes i.e., Maturity-onset diabete of the young (MODY) is an early-onset non autoim- proliferation and anIng ivoigtreonesis. mune form of diabetes with an autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance. Viable and dead cells were counted to determine proliferation of normal MODY has at least 10 subtypes associated with distinct genes. MODY2 as- and diabetic AEC. angiogenesis (2-D network formation) was stu- sociated with glucokinase (GCK) gene mutations is the second most com- died in media containing 2% normal or diabetic cord blood serum (CBS). In mon type of MODY. It accounts for 20-30% of all MODY cases. MODY2 is addition, the DNA methylation profile was determined by 450k methylation characterized by a glucose sensing defect and mild chronic hyperglycemia. arrays and global gene expression profile by Human GeneChip 1.0ST arrays. In addition GCK gene mutations have been asssociated with increased risk Biological interpretation of the candidate genes was assessed using IPA. of gestational diabetes. Studies have demonstrated that heterozygous GCK Diabetic AEC had reduced proliferation (ANOVA p<0.003) after 96h culture mutations are associated with mild fasting hyperglycemia and gestational than normal AEC. In the presence of normal CBS total tube length was in- diabetes while homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations are as- creased in diabetic vs. normal AEC (ANOVA p<0.001). Diabetic CBS did not sociated with mutations cause more severe clinical phenotypes like Perma- influence network formation potential. Thus the difference in proliferation nant Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus. The purpose of the study is to determine and tube formation is the result of an intrinsic program of the cells. In fact the genetic profile of MODY2 and Gestational diabetes in the Turkish patient principal component analysis revealed differences in the global methylati- population by analyzing GCK gene. In order to identify GCK gene mutati- on and expression pattern between normal and diabetic AEC. IPA identified ons, GCK gene exonic sequences, exon-intron boundaries and the promoter that differentially methylated and expressed genes clustered to cell growth sequence was analyzed by direct DNA sequencing in 35 MODY suspected a Sn.d C pvritoicli:f eNroanteio. nL .r Geloartdedon p:r Noocenses. eUs.. Hiden: None. R. Saffery: None. G. and 15 gestational diabetes patients. Studies have revealed presence of one Desoye: None. novel mutation (c.765delC) and two previously known mutations (c.3G>A and c.686delC) in the MODY suspected patients. On the other hand, no pa- thogenic alteration in the GCK gene was detected in the gestational diabetes  P10
.31 patients. This study demonstrated that GCK gene mutation is not a common cÖa.u Ysea locıfn M COaDpYan a:n Ndo gnees. tIa. tSioonzeanl :d Niaobneet.e As .i nL eTmubrkeet:y .None. N. Aydin: None. E. Glycogen storage disease type III in Tunisian patients Berber: None. A. MILI1,2, A. AMARA1, I. BEN CHARFEDDIN E1
, O. MAMAÏ1, W. CHERIF3, L. ADALA1, S. PAGLIARANI4, S. LUCCHIARI4, A. AYADI5, N. TEBIB6, A. HARBI7, J. BOUGUILA8, D. HMIDA1, A. SAAD1, K. LIMEM2, G. COMI4, M. GRIBAA1; 1Laboratory of Human Cytogenetic, Molecular Genetics and Biology of Reproduction,  P10
.29 Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Biochemistry, Genome-wide association study of 10,947 type 2 diabetes cases and Faculty of Medicine, University of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Molecular Investigation of controls from five ancestry groups provides novel insights into the Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit UR04/S P03
, Institut Pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Dino Ferrari Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan, genetic architecture of the disease Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangialli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, A. P. Morris1, X. Sim2, P. Fontanillas3, on behalf of the T2D-GENES Consortium; 5Paediatric Department, Tahar Sfar University Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia, 6Paediatric 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2University of Department, La Rabta University Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 7Paediatric Department, Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Sahloul University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 8Paediatric Department, Farhat HACHED 250 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. Taskinen: None. S. Ripatti: None. Purpose: Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) is a rare autosomal re-  P10
.33 cessive disorder caused by a deficiency of the glycogen debranching enzy- A fourth type of Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia me, amylo-1, 6-glucosidase (AGL). GSD III is characterized by the storage of characterized by an alteration of the LDL endosomal transport structurally abnormal glycogen, termed limit dextrin, in both skeletal and M. Varret1,2, E. Girard3, B. Védie3, K. Ouguerram4, S. Lestavel5, M. Guerin6, Y. Zair4, M. cardiac muscle and/or liver, with great variability in resultant organ dys- Krempf4, M. Abifadel1,7, J. P. Rabès1,8,9, C. Lamaze10, C. Boileau1,8,9; function. Here, we present the molecular and enzymatic analyses of 22 Tu- 1INSERM U698, hopital Bichat, PARIS, France, 2Université Paris Denis Diderot, Paris, nisian GSD III patients. France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, PARIS, France, 4INSERM U915, Methods: To examine the heterogeneity Glycogen Storage Disease Type III, Institut du Thorax, NANTES, France, 5INSERM UMR1011, Lille, France, 6INSERM UMR S939
, pitié Salpétrière, PARIS, France, 7Université St-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 8AP- we genotyped the AGL gene and sequenced all its exons in 22 Tunisian pati- HP, Hôpital A. Paré, Boulogne Billancourt, France, 9Université Versailles Saint-Quentin- ents with a clinically and biochemically confirmed diagnosis. en-Yvelines, Guyancourt, France, 10UMR144 Curie/CNRS, PARIS, France. Results: Molecular analysis revealed three novel mutations; a nonsense (Ty- r1148X) and two deletions (3033_3036del AATT and 3216_3217del GA), and five known mutations; three nonsense (R864X, W1327X and W255X), Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is characterized by high a missense (R524H) and an acceptor splice-site mutation (IV S32
-12A/G). LDL levels, high risk of premature cardiovascular disease and is due to LDLR, Each mutation is associated to a specific haplotype. APOB or PCSK9 mutations. Through the analysis of a large ADH family which Discussion: This is the first report of screening for AGL gene mutations in excluded these three genes, we localized a fourth gene (HCHOLA4) at 16q22 the Tunisian population. We concluded that Glycogen Storage Disease Type (Marques-Pinheiro, Eur J Hum Genet 2010). Functional candidate genes in III is a highly heterogeneous disorder in our population, requiring full gene the locus were sequenced but no causal mutation was detected. s Ae.q Mueilni:c Ninogn eto. Aid. eAnmtiafrya c: oNmonmeu. nI. Bore nsp cehcaifrifce dmduintaet: iNonons.e. O. Mamaï: None. W. Cherif: None. L. Adala: None. S. Pagliarani: None. S. Lucchiari: None. A. In parallel to the genetic approach, we searched for specific intermediate Ayadi: None. N. Tebib: None. A. Harbi: None. J. Bouguila: None. D. Hmida: metabolic traits that could point out a metabolic pathway. Several analyses None. A. Saad: None. K. Limem: None. G. Comi: None. M. Gribaa: None. were performed for two members of the HCHOLA4 family. In vivo kinetic studies of apo B-100-containing lipoproteins showed a decreased LDL cata- bolism. At the cellular level in primary fibroblasts, the repression of the gene expression in response to a LDL overload was delayed in time for two sterol-  P10
.32 dependant genes (HMGCoAR and LDLR), the LDL binding to their receptor is Genomic, transcriptomic, and lipodomic profiling demonstrates the increased, indicating a likely increased receptor recycling. Immunohistoche- benefits of extreme phenotype approach and highlights the role of mistry analyses showed alterations of LDL endosomal transport, and larger inflammation in individuals low HDL-cholesterol P. Laurila1, I. Surakka1, A. Sarin1, L. Yetukuri2, S. Söderlund3, J. Naukkarinen1, J. Tang4, J. early endosomes (EE) than in control cells. Labeled LDL-Dil, or labeled Shiga Kettunen4, J. Soronen1, T. Lehtomäki5, V. Salomaa6, O. Raitakari7, M. Järvelin8, A. Palotie9, toxine B subunit, do not concentrate around the nucleus as seen in control M. Oresic2, M. Jauhiainen6, M. Taskinen3, S. Ripatti4; cells, pointing out a delayed traffic between EE and Golgi. And, this was also 1Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2VTT, Espoo, Finland, 3Department observed for the intracellular distribution of the small GTPase Rab6a known of Medicine, HUCH, Helsinki, Finland, 4Institute for Molecular Medicine, Finland, FIMM, to regulate the transport of vesicles into the Golgi compartment. Altogether, Helsinki, Finland, 5University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 6National Institute for these observations indicate impaired endosomal sorting machinery. These Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 7University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 8Imperial results provide more insight into the alterations associated with mutations College, London, United Kingdom, 9The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. w Mi.t hVianr rtehte: Nstoinlle u. nEi.d Geinratirfdie: dN HonCeH. OBL. VAé4d giee:n Ne.one. K. Ouguerram: None. S. Lestavel: None. M. Guerin: None. Y. Zair: None. M. Krempf: None. M. Abifadel: None. J.P. Rabès: None. C. Lamaze: None. C. Boileau: None. Low HDL-C is a major risk factor for CVD. To elucidate novel pathways behind low HDL-C, we have employed 3 different omics:genomics,  P10
.34 transcriptomics,and lipidomics. LDLR and APOB gene analysis in the Slovene population of the We performed GWAS on 450 Finns with extreme HDL-C-phenotypes(90th children and adolescents with hypercholesterolemia percentiles). We obtained subcutaneous fat biopsies for transcriptome-ana- G. Klancar1, U. Groselj1, N. Bratina1, K. Trebusak Podkrajsek2, T. Battelino1; lysis, and isolated plasma HDL particles for MS-lipidome analysis. 1UMC Ljubljana, University Children‘s Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes We first conducted network analysis for low-HDL-C-associated loci obser- and Metabolic Diseases, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC Ljubljana, University ving that SNPs within inflammatory pathways(e.g.antigen-presentation) Children‘s Hospital, Unit for special laboratory diagnostics, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. were enriched among low-HDL-C-associated genes (p=10^-5). Also,these inflammatory pathways were over-expressed in SC-fat of low-HDL- subjects(p=10^-10). We then calculated genetic risk scores based on low- Introduction: Hypercholesterolemia (HCH) is a major risk factor for athe- HDL-C-associating SNPs from these pathways,observing that high risk score rosclerosis and its premature cardiovascular complications. HCH can be resulted in both decreased HDL-C-levels and increased expression of these multifactorial or less frequently monogenic. Monogenic form leads to Auto- inflammatory pathways. Moreover, individual genes of these pathways (e.g. somal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) and is most frequently asso- HLA-DRB1[p=10^-7],TA P2
[p=10^-27]) exhibited cis-eQTLs, their expressi- ciated with mutations in the LDLR gene, while much rarer with mutations in on inversely correlating with HDL-C. the PCSK9 or APOB gene. Consistent with this,the inflammatory and potentially less vasoprotective Objective: To analyze the LDLR and APOB gene in the Slovene population of nature of the HDL-particle of low-HDL-C-subjects was further highlighted the children and adolescents with the probable or definite HCH according to by the elevation of proinflammatory ceramides and reduction of anti-oxida- the clinical criteria. tive plasmalogens in the lipidomic analysis, which was also GRS/genotype- Methods: We have used various molecular genetic methods (PCR, dHPLC, dependent. HRM and sequencing). We analyzed all 18 exons of the LDLR gene and most Interestingly,in a replication meta-analysis of 5 Finnish population- common missense mutation p.Arg3527Gln in APOB gene in 98 patients. cohorts(n=11,211) we demonstrate that the genes found are indeed ‘low- Results: 44 patients have had 21 known and 3 novel (p.Asp100Glu, c.1587- HDL-genes’;the SNP-effects get stronger and more significant using more 1G>C and c.1706-1G>C) causative mutations in the LDLR gene. 13 patients extreme low/high-HDL-C-criteria (e.g.HLA-DRB1; OR for low HDL-C<25%/ have had mutation p.Arg3527Gln in APOB gene. high HDL-C>75%=1.11,OR(10%/90%)=1.38,OR(5%/95%)=1.77), but not Conclusions: In addition to the known pathogenic LDLR and APOB mutati- observed for HDL-C as quantitative trait. ons, 3 novel LDLR gene mutations were identified. Remaining 41 patients Here we demonstrate the following novel phenomena in cardiovascular without identified causative mutation will be subsequently analysed for genetics: extreme phenotype-approach may detect additional novel rare or PCSK9 mutations. The genetic characteristics of the Slovene HCH population common variants not detected in population-GWAS; and the major effect of w Ge. rKel acnocmapr:a Nraobnlee. aUs. iGnr noesieglhj: bNoounrei.n Ng .a Bnrda/tionra r: eNlaotneed. Kpo. Tpruelbautisoanks . HDL-C associated variants on cardiovascular phenotypes may in fact result Podkrajsek: None. T. Battelino: None. from their association with impaired lipoprotein quality rather than quan- t Pit.y L.aurila: None. I. Surakka: None. A. Sarin: None. L. Yetukuri: None. S. Söderlund: None. J. Naukkarinen: None. J. Tang: None. J. Kettunen: None. J. Soronen: None. T. Lehtomäki: None. V. Salomaa: None. O. Raitakari: None. M. Järvelin: None. A. Palotie: None. M. Oresic: None. M. Jauhiainen: None. M. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 251ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.35  P10
.37 After LDLR, APOB and PCSK9, APOE is another major gene of Anorexia associated with a de novo 7q32 duplication spanning the autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia LEP gene: characterization of the duplication using Whole Genome J. P. Rabès1,2,3, M. Marduel1, K. Ouguerram4, V. Serre5, D. Bonnefont-Rousselot6, K. Berge7, Sequencing, DNA combing and qRT-PCR of the duplicated genes G. Luc8, J. Lecerf8, M. Abifadel9,10, T. Leren7, C. Boileau1,3,2, M. Varret1,11; A. Delahaye1,2,3, S. Lebon3, T. Wilhem4, L. de Pontual5,2,6, I. Netchine7,8,9, B. Dubern10,8,11, F. 1INSERM U698, hopital Bichat, PARIS, France, 2AP-HP, Hôpital A. Paré, Boulogne Bouteloup3, A. Rakkah1, M. Oufadem6, V. El Ghouzzi3, N. Vogt4, J. Benoist3,12, J. Lacorte11, Billancourt, France, 3Université Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Guyancourt, France, P. Tounian8,10,11, J. Amiel13,6, M. Debatisse4, Y. Le Bouc7,8,9, N. de Roux3, P. Gressens3, B. 4INSERM U915, Institut du Thorax, NANTES, France, 5INSERM U781, hopital Necker, Benzacken1,3,2, E. Pipiras1,3,2; PARIS, France, 6AP-HP, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, PARIS, France, 7Oslo University Hospital 1AP-HP, Service d’Histologie, Embryologie, et Cytogénétique, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 8Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France, 9INSERM U698, Bondy, France, 2Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UFR SMBH, Bobigny, France, hopital Bichat, Paris, France, 10Université St-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 11Université Paris 3INSERM, U676, Paris, France, 4Institut Curie, UMR 32344, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Service Denis Diderot, Paris, France. de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 6INSERM, U781, Université Paris- Sorbonne Cité, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France, 7AP-HP, Laboratoire d‘Explorations Fonctionnelles Endocriniennes, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 8Université Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is characterized by Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Paris, France, 9INSERM, UMRS-938, Paris, France, 10AP- HP, Nutrition Department, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 11INSERM, UMRS U872, high LDL levels, high risk of premature cardiovascular disease and is due Paris, France, 12AP-HP, Biochemistry-Hormonology Laboratory, Hôpital Robert Debré, to LDLR, APOB or PCSK9 mutations. We found further genetic heterogenei- Paris, France, 13AP-HP, Services de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants ty of ADH through a genomewide scan in a large French family with a new Malades, Paris, France. disease locus at 19q13.31-13.32. Whole exome and candidate genes sequen- cing showed an unique APOE mutation: p.Leu167del. This finding was un- expected since APOE mutants are essentially associated with familial com- Next generation sequencing technologies had revolutionized genodme icn orveo- bined hyperlipidemia (FCHL). APOE p.Leu167del was not detected in over search. While whole genome sequencing has been used several tdime enso vtoo 440 control chromosomes and two other APOE mutations (p.Arg235Trp, identify successfully physical breakpoints of apparently balanced p.Arg269Gly) were found in three unrelated ADH probands. chromosome translocations, here it allowed us to characterize a In silico structural prediction of the mutant protein p.Leu167del showed 7q32 duplication in an index-case with unexplained precocious anorexia an alpha-helix disruption within the receptor-binding domain that could and ponderal growth retardation. The whole-genome sequencing revealed affect apoE affinity for its receptors. In vivo apo B-100 kinetics from one that the duplication was a direct tandem duplication. The exact identified APOE p.Leu167del carrier, showed: an increased LDL pool, which was the breakpoint suggested a gene fusion and was validated by Sanger sequen- consequence of both an increased LDL production and a decreased LDL cing. In addition the DNA combing approach was used to confirm the struc- catabolism. These findings are similar to those from patients with a LDLR ture of the duplication. TLK2 mutation. Together, these observations indicate a decreased catabolism of The 5’ part of the gene-fusion is unknown in current humanL EgPene databases. LDL-bearing the mutant apoE, explaining ADH, and underscoring the hypo- This potential pseudogene is paralogous to the gene. The 3’ part of thesis that some APOE mutations may be responsible of ADH and should be the gene-fusion includes the whole coding region of the gene, coding looked for. for the well-known adipokine protein involved in the regulation of appetite. The APOE p.Leu167del was also reported in FCHL. Conversely, hypertrigly- Several fusion transcripts by alternative splicing were detected by RT-PCR ceridemia is sometimes observed with ADH, mainly because of the many on patient’s fibroblasts and lymphocytes. genetic/environmental factors contributing to triglyceride elevation. Thus, In parallel, real-time quantitative RLET-PPCR revealed that the 7 genes included mutations in LDLR or APOE may amplify the effects of these factors, and in the duplication were over-expressed in patient’s fibroblasts compared t Jh.uPs. ,R caobuèlsd: bNeo anses. oMc.i aMteadrd wueitlh: NFoCnHeL. Ko.r OAuDgHu.erram: None. V. Serre: None. D. with controls. Despite of the gene over-expression in the patient’s fibro- Bonnefont-Rousselot: None. K. Berge: None. G. Luc: None. J. Lecerf: None. M. Abifadel: None. T. Leren: None. C. Boileau: None. M. Varret: None. blasts and lymphocytes, his leptinemia was normal. We will present the exact nature of the gene fudsei onno vaond the preliminary molecular characteristics of any fusion protein possibilities. Several hypo- theses trying to explain the phenotype from the duplication will be  P10
.36 discussed, however these studies provide insight into the current ways to A new homozygous frame shift mutation of the leptin receptor- c Ah.a Draeclatehraiyzee: a N dounpe.l iSca. tLieobno.n: None. T. Wilhem: None. L. de Pontual: None. I. (LEPR)-gene identified by SNP array analysis is causing an early onset Netchine: None. B. Dubern: None. F. Bouteloup: None. A. Rakkah: None. M. of a severe form of generalized obesity that is also associated with Oufadem: None. V. El Ghouzzi: None. N. Vogt: None. J. Benoist: None. J. intellectual disability and general psychomotor retardation. Lacorte: None. P. Tounian: None. J. Amiel: None. M. Debatisse: None. Y. Le C. Windpassinger1, A. Noor2, E. Fröhlich-Reiterer3, U. Gruber-Sedlmayr3, K. Wagner1, E. Bouc: None. N. de Roux: None. P. Gressens: None. B. Benzacken: None. E. Petek1, J. B. Vincent2, P. M. Kroisel1; Pipiras: None. 1Medical University of Graz, Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Neurogenetics Section, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Medical University of Graz, Department of Pediatrics, Graz, Austria.  P10
.38 Wolman Disease: the importance of early diagnosis. A review of 7 cases with complete lysosomal acid lipase deficiency. Extreme obesity in children of less than a year of age is rare and in nearly all P. Benlian1,2, A. Pagnier3, K. Mention4, F. Feillet5, C. Sevin6, S. Mary1, M. Voicu7, D. Plantaz3, cases a genetic basis can be established. In the majority of these patients a T. Levade8, P. de Lonlay9, V. Valayannopoulos9; mutation of the leptin gene can be found. Involvement of further genes like 1Université Lille 2 - European Genomic Institute for Diabetes, LILLE, France, 2Molecular the melanocortin-4 receptor gene, the leptin receptor gene, and the Proo- Medicine of Metabolic Diseases (U4M) - CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 3Reference Center for piomelanocortin gene (POMC) has recently been shown, however, additional Rare Diseases - CHU Grenoble, GRENOBLE, France, 4Reference Center for Rare Metabolic genes might be of importance as well. In association studies and in particu- Diseases - CHRU Lille, LILLE, France, 5Reference Center for Rare Metabolic Diseases - CHU Nancy, NANCY, France, 6Pediatric Endocrinology - CHU Cochin/St Vincent de Paul lar in affected patients born to consanguineous parents SNP-array analysis - APHP, PARIS, France, 7Molecular Medicine of Metabolic Diseases (U4M) - CHRU Lille, can be helpful to identify candidate gene loci which could be of relevance. LILLE, France, 8Biochemistry - CHU Toulouse, TOULOUSE, France, 9Reference Center for Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations of the leptin receptor Rare Metabolic Diseases - CHU Necker - APHP, PARIS, France. (LEPR) gene are infrequent but represent a very important cause of this dis- order. Since sequencing of a number of these large genes is challenging and the probability that another new gene might be responsible the mentioned Background. Wolman disease (WD) is a recessively inherited disease (<60 strategy was chosen. Here we describe a patient with a very severe obesi- cases since 1961) resulting from complete lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) de- ty, and the use of SNP-array analysis to identify a homozygous frameshift ficiency (OMIM#278000). Although normal at birth following normal preg- mutation, c.461dupA[p.N154Kfs*3] in exon 5 of the LEPR-gene, leading to a nancy, Wolman infants die by age 6-mo of multiorgan failure caused by ge- loss of function of the membrane and leptin binding domains. Since this also neralized lysosomal neutral lipid storage. Despite secure biochemical and the first report describing a severe form of intellectual disability associated genetic diagnosis and potential for curative therapy, WD remains largely w Ci.t Wh LinEdPpRa-sgseinngee mr:u Ntaotnieo.n As,. tNhoiso ra:s Npoencte .i sE d. iFsrcöuhslsicehd- Rase iwteerlelr.: None. U. underdiagnosed. Gruber-Sedlmayr: None. K. Wagner: None. E. Petek: None. J.B. Vincent: None. P.M. Kroisel: None. Aim. Identify early clinical, imaging and biological signs from 7 WD cases. Results. Parental consanguinity was present in 5 cases. All had <0.08N leu- cocyte LAL activity, resulting either from severe homozygous or compound heterozygous gene mutations (c.193C>T, c.419G>C, c.429-1G>C, c.482del, c.538G>A, c.676-2A>G, c.1024G>T, c.1055_1057del). In all cases, between 1 & 3 wks of life, alerting signs were persistent regurgitation/vomiting and 252 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG abdominal pain, fast followed by hepato-splenomegaly, gut distension andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index growth failure (<-1SD) by age 4 wks; low grade fever was unusual (2/7 ca- lings are very comptible with reported patients with MEGDEL syndrome, ses). By age 8wks, bilateral adrenal calcification and mesenteric adenome- SERA C1
 gene was selected as a candidate gene for mutation screening. Se- galy were constant on ultrasound or MRI imaging. Fasting TG and TC were quencing analysis of SERA C1
 gene in patients showed novel homozygous moderate-high; liver cytolysis with anicteric cholestasis, very low HDLC c.799_800delC (p.Pro267Leu fs*10) mutation in exon 9. (<0.5N), and inflammation (CRP>10N, Ferritin >5N) associated with foamy It is the first report of MEGDEL syndrome due to SERA C1
 gene mutation leucocytes were constant. Serum and stool bile acids and sterol precusors after the report of Wortmann et.al. (2012) that describes a novel mutation were high. Untreated cases died by age 16wks of malnutrition, liver and ,its molecular effects and clinical correlation in the literature. multi-organ failure. This study was supported by the Scientific and Technology Research Council Conclusion. Wolman disease a lethal condition of infancy may be underdia- oDf .T Yuürckeely Y (ıTlmÜaBzİ:T NAoKn-eS.B ÖA.G Ü-1n1al1: SN2o1n7e). .R. Özgül: None. A. Dursun: None. gnosed because early signs are unspecific after a 4wk lag phase. Abdominal imaging, serum liver, lipids and inflammation profiling combined with enzy- me activity and genotyping may early identify infants amenable to curative  P10
.41 t Ph.e Braepnyli.an: None. A. Pagnier: None. K. Mention: None. F. Feillet: None. C. Reduction of mutated mitochondrial DNA in MERRF cells by Peptide Sevin: None. S. Mary: None. M. Voicu: None. D. Plantaz: None. T. Levade: Nucleic Acids modified twice None. P. de Lonlay: None. V. Valayannopoulos: None. M. Lamla1, K. Mellert2, R. N. Lightowlers3, H. Seliger4, D. Kaufmann2; 1Institute of Organic Chemistry III, Ulm, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 3Mitochondrial Research Group, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle  P10
.39 University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Research Group Chemical Function in Biosystems, Ulm, Germany. Expanding the mutation spectrum in beta-mannosidosis: Identification of two novel beta-mannosidosis associated sequence variants H. M. F. Riise Stensland1, G. M. Hansen2, G. H. Bruun3, G. Evjen4, T. Levade5, B. S. The intracellular number of mutated mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) can in- Andresen3; crease during life resulting in cellular dysfunctions, e.g. in patients with the 1Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health, University mitochondriopathy MERRF. We developed a method using peptide nucleic Hospital of Northern Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Tumor Biology Research Group, acids (PNA) modified twice to inhibit the replication of mutated mtDNA spe- Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, cifically. For this purpose, PNAs targeting the coding strand were modified Tromsø, Norway, 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of C-terminal with a cell penetrating peptide and N-terminal with a mitochon- Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 4Molecular Cancer Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Tromsø, Norway, 5Center for Cancer drial targeting peptide. Transfection of a MERRF cybrid cell line with these Research, INSERM, Toulouse, France. PNAs results in a highly specific and efficient inhibition of replication of mu- tated mtDNA. The inhibition of replication strongly depends on the length of the PNAs, their concentration and the duration of treatment. The dramatic Beta-mannosidosis (OMIM #248510) is a rare lysosomal storage disorder reduction of mutated mtDNA after 4 PNA treatments persists for at least 60 caused by deficient activity of the enzyme beta-mannosidase (MANBA, E.C. additional days in the MERRF cell line. We suggest that the used PNA modi- 3.2.1.25). The disorder has been reported in goats, cattle and man. It is a fications and the choice of the targeted strand are crucial for the successful severe autosomal recessive neurological disease in animals, but the human i Mnh. iLbaimtiolan: oNfo mnet.D KN.A M reellpelritc:a Ntioonne b. Ry .PNN. ALisg.htowlers: None. H. Seliger: None. D. Kaufmann: None. disorder is generally milder, and the clinical spectrum is heterogeneous. So far, only 21 cases and 15 disease associated sequence variants have been re- ported, indicating substantial genetic heterogeneity in beta-mannosidosis. By sequeent cael .analysAisn onf N geeunroomlic DNA from an African patient with demye-  P10
.42 linating peripheral neMuAroNpBaAthy, but without apparent mental retardation Genomic determinants of metabolic syndrome features in the rat (Graber 1994 35:116-119), heterozygosity for a 2-bp dele- recombinant inbred strain panel PXO tion in exon 17 in the gene was the only obvious disease associated M. Mrázová1, L. Šedová1, M. Janků1, F. Liška1, D. Křenová1, M. Krupková1, L. Kazdová2, V. Křen1, O. Šeda1; variant detected. However, RNA analysis revealed a heterozygous frames- 1Charles University in Prague, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2IKEM, hifting deletion of exon 15 from the transcript. A mutation located outside Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. the splice site sequences in exon 15, and originally believed to be silent, was shown by use of hybrid splicing reporter minigenes to cause aberrant spli- cing. Bioinformatics analyses predicted that the mutation weakens a poten- Background: Metabolic syndrome is a prevalent disease characterized by tial binding site for splicing stimulatory protein SRSF1, and our preliminary concurrent manifestation of 3 symptoms (elevated waist circumference, results from RNA affinity binding studies corroborates this. Studies are in triglycerides, reduced HDL cholesterol, hypertension, elevated fasting glu- progress to evaluate this further. The present study provides a new and in- cose). We preformed genome-wide association and linkage study of major teresting example on how translationally silent substitutions can be dele- metabolic syndrome components in recombinant inbred strain panel PXO. terious by disrupting the finely tuned balance between splicing regulatory Methods: Adult male rats of 14 PXO strains and two progenitor strains SHR- eHle.Mm.eF.n Rtsii isne cSotnesntsiltauntidv:e N eoxnoen. sG..M. Hansen: None. G.H. Bruun: None. G. Evjen: None. T. Levade: None. B.S. Andresen: None. Lx a BXH2 (n=183) were subjected to one-week of high-sucrose diet feeding. We established morphometric and metabolic profile of the whole PXO pa- nel including glucose tolerance and triacylglycerol (TG) and cholesterol (C) concentrations in 20 lipoprotein fractions were determined. The association  P10
.40 and linkage analyses utilizing > 20,000 SNPs were performed using MapMa- Megdel syndrome in two Turkish siblings: a novel SERA C1
 mutation nager, the significance validated by 2000 permutations per trait. D. Yücel Yılmaz1, Ö. Ünal1, R. Özgül2, A. Dursun1; Results: In most of the phenotypes we identified substantial gradient among 1Hacettepe University Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism the strains (e.g. area under the glycemic curve from 237±25 to 606±35 Unit, Ankara, Turkey. mmol/l/180 min). Using interval mapping, we have identified 14 loci sho- wing suggestive or significant linkage to studied traits. Except for linkage si- gnals of LDL-TG on chromosomes 3 and 12, PXO strains carrying the SHR al- MEGDEL syndrome was described as a distinct entity with association of lele displayed significantly higher values of the lipid linked traits, e.g. LDL-C 3-methylglutaconic aciduria with impaired oxidative phosphorylation, (21.2±0.4 vs. 12.5±0.4 mg/dl in PXO strains with SHR allele vs. BXH2 allele deafness, encephalopathy, Leigh-like lesions on brain imaging, progressive in D3Rat50-D3Got19 block). C concentrations in large, medium and very spasticity and dystonia. It is an autosomal recessive disorder and, recently, small LDL particles were significantly associated to a single gene (Lrp1b). it has been reported that SERA C1
 (Serine Active Site Containing 1) gene mu- Conclusion: Using genome-wide linkage and association we have identified tations cause this syndrome. new genetic determinants of glucose tolerance, TG and C distribution into Here we present two siblings with 3-methylglutaconic acid and 3-methyl- lipoprotein fractions. glutaric aciduria, microcephaly, growth retardation, dysmorphic features, S Mu.p Mporárzteodvá b:y N MonSeM. LT. pŠreodjoevcát: LNKo1n1e.2 M17. J“aINnkTůE:G NRoAnGe.E FN. ”L.iška: None. D. Křenová: None. M. Krupková: None. L. Kazdová: None. V. Křen: None. O. severe sensorineural deafness, progressive spasticity, dystonia, seizures, Šeda: None. basal ganglia involvement and degeneration consistent with leigh-like syn- drome. Other types of methylglutaconic acidurias were excluded by enzymatic analysis and clinical findings. Since the cE linS iH caG l p i2 ct0 u1 re3 s o| fP oA urR aI fS fe, c F teR d A siN b-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 253ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.43 Rötig15, N. Aoutil5, M. Gilleron5, V. Desquiret-Dumas3, P. Reynier3, J. Ceresuela10, L. Molecular diagnosis of mitochondrial diseases in Egyptian pediatric Jonard11, A. Devos12, C. Espil-Taris14, D. Martinez9, P. Gaignard13, K. Le Quan Sang15, P. patients : A two year study Amati-Bonneau3, M. Falk16, C. Florentz17, B. Chabrol18, I. Durand-Zaleski6, V. Paquis- Flucklinger1,2; D. Mehaney1, L. Selim2, M. Shaarawy3; 1Chemical Pathology department,Faculty of Medicine-Cairo University, Cairo, 1Hôpital Archet 2, CHU de Nice, Service de Génétique Médicale, NICE, France, 2IRCAN, Egypt, 2Pediatrics department,Faculty of Medicine-Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, CNRS UMR 7284/Inserm U1081/UNS, Faculté de Médecine, Nice, France, 3IBS 3Ophthalmology department,Faculty of Medicine-Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. Laboratoire de Génétique, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 4Inserm U781 Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Biochimie Métabolique, Centre de Génétique moléculaire et chromosomique, Groupe hospitalier Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 6URCEco Ile de France, APHP, Hôpital de l‘Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France, Mitochondrial diseases (MCDs) are an important cause of morbidity and 7Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Loyola University Health mortality in both adults and children. MCDs are caused by mutations in both Sciences Division, Maywood, IL, United States, 8Bioinformatics Core Facility The nuclear and mitochondrial encoded genes. This report is the first one to de- Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 9Laboratoire de scribe the screening and diagnostic molecular service for MCDs routinely Biochimie et Génétique moléculaire, CHU de Grenoble, La Tronche, France, 10Service des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Est started at the Inherited Metabolic Disease Unit laboratory at Cairo Universi- Groupement Hospitalier Est, CHU de Lyon, Lyon, France, 11Centre de Référence des ty Children’s hospital from January 2011. surdités génétiques, APHP, Hôpital des Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 12UF DNA was extracted from whole blood samples of 62 Egyptian Pediatric pa- Génopathies, Laboratoire de Biochimie, Centre de biologie CHRU de Lille et Université tients using standard protocol. Eight patients were clinically and radiologi- Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 13Laboratoire de Biochimie, CHU de Bicêtre, APHP, cally suspected to have Myoclonus epilepsy and ragged-red fibers (MERRF), Le Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, France, 14Laboratoire de Physiopathologie Mitochondriale 17 patients with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy , lactic acidosis and U688 INSERM, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 15Inserm U781 stroke-like episodes (MELAS), 31 patients with and Leigh‘s syndrome/Neu- Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 16Divisions of Human Genetics and Pulmonary Medicine, The Children‘s Hospital ropathy Ataxia Retinitis Pigmentosa syndromes (LS/NARP), 3 with Leber‘s of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 17Architecture et Réactivité de l’ADN, hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), 2 patients with Mitochondrial Neuro- Université Louis Pasteur de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMC, Strasbourg, France, 18Department gastrointestinal Encephalopathy (MNGIE) and one with chronic progressive of Neuropediatrics, T external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO). Background. Common mtDNA point mutations were screened using Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism and confirmed by di- Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) diseases are rare disorders rect sequencing. Sequencing analysis of the nuclear Thymidine hosphoryla- whose prevalence is estimated around 1/5000. Patients are usually tested se (TP) gene was done in MNGIE patients. only for deletions and for common mutations of mtDNA which account for The A3243G mutation was detected in one patient with MELAS and the 5M-e4t0h%o dosf. cases depending on the studies. However, the prevalence of rare T14484C was detected in two patients with LHON. The c.3371A>C and mtDNA mutations is totally unknown. c.4183G>A in TP gene were detected in MNGIE patients. We analysed the whole mtDNA in a cohort of 743 patients, suspec- As Egypt is a country with high rate of consanguineous marriage, the mole- ted of manifesting a mitochondrial disease, after excluding of deletions and cular pathogenesis of MCDs is suspected to be of nuclear genetic origin. Mi- common mutations. Both heteroplasmic and homoplasmic variants were toexome and whole exome sequencing represents an appealing approach identified using two complementary strategies (Surveyor and MitoChip). f Dor. Mdeetheacntieoyn: Nofo dneis. eLa.s See cliamu:s iNnogn vea. rMia. nSthsa.arawy: None. Multiple correspondence analyses followed by hierarchical ascendant clu- sRteesru plrtoscess were used to explore relationships between clinical spectrum, age at onset and localisation of mutations.  P10
.44 . A total of 7.4% of deleterious mutations andv e2r2s.u4s% of no vel puta- Interest of exome sequencing in prenatal diagnosis of mitochondrial tive mutations were identified. Pathogenic heteroplasmic mutations were disorders. more frequent than homoplasmic mutations (4.6% 2.8%).Patients S. Ait-El-Mkadem, A. Chaussenot, C. Rouzier, K. Fragaki, S. Bannwarth, V. Paquis- carrying deleterious mutations showed symptoms before 16 years of age in Flucklinger; 67% of cases. Early-onset disease (<1 year) was significantly associatMedT wNDith5 Nice Hospital - Medical Genetics Department , National Center for Mitochondrial mutaMtiToNnsD 6in protein-coding genes (mainly in complex I) while late-onset diseases - IRCAN UMR7284 / INSERM U1081 / UNS, NICE, France. disorder (>16 years) was associated with mutations in tRNA genes. aCnodn clusionsg. enes were identified as “hotspots” of mutations, with Leigh syndrome accounting for the large majority of associated phenotypes. Mitochondrial dysfunction is a major cause of metabolic disorders and Rare mitochondrial DNA mutations probably account for accounts for a large variety of clinical symptoms in both childhood and more than 7.4% of patients with respiratory chain deficiency. This study adulthood. Genetic diagnosis is complex and challenging because of the in- shows that a comprehensive analysis of mtDNA is essential, and should in- volvement of mitochondrial or nuclear DNA and of primary or secondary clude young children, for an accurate diagnosis that becomes now accessible nature of respiratory chain (RC) dysfunction. While mutations in nuclear wSi.t Bh atnhnew daervtehl:o Npomneen. Vt .o Pf rNoecxatc-cGieon: eNroanteio. nA .S Leqebureen:c Ninogn ete. cCh. nJoalrodgeyl:. None. A. genes underlie the vast majority of RC deficiencies, in most patients, genes Chaussenot: None. C. Hoarau: None. H. Maoulida: None. N. Charrier: and molecular mechanisms responsible remain unknown. Here, we report None. X. Gai: None. H. Xie: None. M. Ferré: None. K. Fragaki: None. G. Hardy: three consanguineous families with two affected siblings born from healthy None. B. Mousson de Camaret: None. S. Marlin: None. C. Dhaenens: None. A. parents suggesting an autosomal recessive transmission. Affected children Slama: None. C. Rocher: None. J. Bonnefont: None. A. Rötig: None. N. Aoutil: None. M. Gilleron: None. V. Desquiret-Dumas: None. P. Reynier: presented with severe symptoms from the mitochondrial disease spectrum, None. J. Ceresuela: None. L. Jonard: None. A. Devos: None. C. Espil-Taris: beginning before 2 months of age, and associated to a RC deficiency. No mu- None. D. Martinez: None. P. Gaignard: None. K. Le Quan Sang: None. P. tation was found in mtDNA nor in known nuclear genes possibly involved Amati-Bonneau: None. M. Falk: None. C. Florentz: None. B. Chabrol: None. I. regSaErRdAinCg1 pChOeQn2otypesS IaAnTd9 affected RC complexes. By using Whole Exome Durand-Zaleski: None. V. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. Sequencing (WES), we identify causative genes in all cases with mutations in , and encoding the GM3 synthase (GM3S). In the last family, we showed that GM3S deficiency was responsible for a secondary  P10
.46 RC defect with a decrease of mitochondrial membrane potential leading to The effect of citrulline and arginine supplementation on lactic apoptosis in patients’ fibroblasts. Moreover, our findings allow direct bene- acidemia in MELAS syndrome fit for parents since prenatal diagnosis was performed in the 3 families and A. W. El-Hattab1, L. Emrick2, K. Williamson2, W. Craigen2, F. Scaglia2; mutation analysis showed the non affected status of the fetus. In conclusion, 1King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, our work highlights the importance of WES in prenatal diagnosis of mito- TX, United States. c Sh.o Anidt-rEila-lM dkiasdoerdme:r Ns.one. A. Chaussenot: None. C. Rouzier: None. K. Fragaki: None. S. Bannwarth: None. V. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. Background: Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stro- ke-like episodes (MELAS) syndrome is a common mitochondrial disorder in  P10
.45 which nitric oxide (NO) deficiency can play major roles in the pathogenesis Prevalence of rare mitochondrial DNA mutations in mitochondrial of several complications including stroke-like episodes, myopathy, and lactic disorders acidosis. Arginine and citrulline act as NO precursors and their administra- S. Bannwarth1,2, V. Procaccio3, A. Lebre4, C. Jardel5, A. Chaussenot1,2, C. Hoarau1,2, H. tion can restore NO production in MELAS. Lactic acidemia in MELAS results Maoulida6, N. Charrier6, X. Gai7, H. Xie8, M. Ferré3, K. Fragaki1,2, G. Hardy9, B. Mousson from an inability of dysfunctional mitochondria to generate sufficient ATP, de Camaret10, S. Marlin11, C. Dhaenens12, A. Slama13, C. Rocher14, J. Bonnefont15, A. leading to shunting of pyruvate to lactate. Hypoperfusion may result in lactic 254 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRaAcidNoCsisE. T| hWerWefoWre., ENSOH deGfi.cOieRncGy in MELAS can result in decreased blood perfusion and therefore aggravates lactic acidosis.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Methods: PDX1 We measured plasma lactate concentrations in 10 adults with glucose 98 mg/dl) and slightly elevated C-peptide level (1,42 nmol/l). MELAS before 2and after 48-hour supplementation of oral L-arginine at a Direct sequencingH oNfF t1hAe GCK H gNeFn4eA revealHedN Ft1hBe heterozygous mutation Rdoesseu lotfs 1: 0 g/m body surface area/day. The study was subsequently repea- c.204C>G resulting in a preliminary stop codon (p.Tyr68*). Sequencing and ted before and after L-citrulline. MLPA analysis of , , , and revealed no pathogenic The average plasma lactate concentration was lower after arginine mutations. (3.16→2.99 mmol/L) and citrulline (3.17→2.94 mmol/L) supplementati- We analysed the maternal family of the index patient and detected the mu- oCnosn. cTluhissi orendsu: ction was statistically significant after citrulline (p<0.05), but tation in her mother (suffering from non-insulin dependent diabetes melli- not after arginine. tus) and aunt (showing elevated blood sugar levels but no diabetes). In her The reduction in lactate after arginine and citrulline supple- grandmother with type 2 diabetes requiring insulin therapy the mutation mentations add more evidence to their potential therapeutic utility in ME- was not detected. The diseased grandfather, knownP tDoX h1ave diabetes, is thus LAS. Previous study showed that both arginine and citrulline supplementa- an obligate carrier of the mutation. PDX1 tions increase NO production in MELAS with citrulline resulting in higher Until the year 2013, altogether 13 mutations in the gene have been de- increment. In this study the lactate reduction was more significant after scribed. Here we describe the first nonsense mutation in the gene. In a citrulline supplementation which can be due to the superiority of citrulline hPe.Jte. rLoazityingoenu-sF sotrastbel, otmhi:s Nmountea. tTio. Kn riösp alsins:o Ncioanteed. C w. iNthe vai nmniyld-S ftoicrkme lo-Hf iMnzOpDeYte.r: None. in increasing NO leading to a better perfusion and lower lactate levels. These r Ae.sWul. tEs la-Hlsaot tsaubg: gNeosnt et.h La.t Ecimtrruicllki:n Ne ocnaen. hKa. vWe iall ibaemtsteorn t:h Neornaep.e Wut.i cC reaffigecetn.: None. F. Scaglia: None.  P10
.49 HNF1A gene analysis in the MODY suspected Turkish patients  P10
.47 O. Yalcin Capan1, M. Sargin2, E. Berber1; The RedMIT mouse 1Istanbul Arel University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Kartal Education and Research Hospital, A. Diot1, L. MacLeod1, C. Liao1, J. Carver1, R. Neves2, R. Gupta3, Y. Guo3, T. Enver3, F. Iborra4, Istanbul, Turkey. J. Poulton1; 1Oxford University, NDOG, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3UCL, Cancer Institute, London, Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an early-onset non autoim- United Kingdom, 4Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de mune form of diabetes with an autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance. Biotecnologia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, Madrid, Spain. MODY has at least 10 subtypes associated with distinct genes. MODY3 asso- ciated with hepatocyte nuclear factor- 1 alpha (HNF1A) gene mutations is the most common type of MODY. It accounts for 12-65% of all MODY cases in Mitochondrial diseases are common and symptoms range from isolated Europe. MODY3 is dignosed during adolescence or early adulthood. MODY3 presbyacusis, to loss of vision, to catastrophic neurodegeneration. Treat- requires pharmocological treatment and late-onset microvascular compli- ments are ineffective but mitophagy, mitochondrial recycling which is im- cations are frequently observed in the patients. More than 300 different mu- portant in mitochondrial quality control, has been suggested in studies to tations were identified in the MODY3 patients. Functional studies revealed have a role in neurodegeneration. We have generated a transgenic mouse that they cause insulin deficiency by the loss of function or by the dominant strain (RedMIT mouse) expressing the dsRed-monomer targeted to mito- negative effect. The purpose of the study is to determine the genetic profile chondria to follow mitochondrial turnover. of MODY3 in the Turkish patient population by analyzing HNF1A gene. To We confirmed that dsRed is targeted to mitochondria in tissues section and identify HNF1A gene mutations HNF1A gene exonic sequences, exon-intron in MEFs from this mouse. We used Imagestream (Amnis) to investigate the boundaries, the promoter sequence was analyzed by direct DNA sequencing co-localisation of mitochondria and the autophagic marker L C3
; an increase in 35 MODY suspected patients. One novel (p.Ser345Tyr) and two previous- in co-localisation with a chloroquine treatment validated the system. ly known (p.Thy10Met, p.Arg263Cys) mutations were identified. In addition We identified two populations of mice with either low or high proportion of 6 of the patients were heterozygous for p.Ile27Leu polymorphism that was blood cells expressing dsRed. Interestingly the low expressing population associated with insulin resistance. Besides,a common haplotype (p.459Leu, shows the most L C3
 labelling. Similarly MEFs with more L C3
 have less ds- p.487Asn, and IV S7
+7G>A polymorphisms) was identified in 38 percent of Red. These observations suggest that dsRed expressing mitochondria could the patients. Case control association study revealed that it was not assso- be removed by mitophagy and thus that dsRed might impair the mitochon- ciated with MODY3.In conclusion, this study revealed that the frequency of drial functions. MODY3 in the Turkish MODY suspected patients is 8.5 percent. Future stu- Oxygen consumption measurements of RedMIT tissues and MEFs showed dies will reveal whether there are other genes responsible for the MODY a slightly affected function compared to wild-type. A lower mitochondrial p Oh.e Ynaolctyinp eC ianp athne: NTounrke.i sMh. pSoaprguilna:t iNoonn.e. E. Berber: None. potential in RedMIT MEFs than wild-type MEFs is also found. Finally we monitored the blood level of dsRed in mice and showed a drop with time. This latter result recapitulates the age-dependent fall in level of  P10
.50 3243 mutant mtDNA in mitochondrial disease patients. Genetic heterogeneity of patients with Familial Young-Onset Diabetes: In conclusion we have a mouse model with dsRed targeted to mitochondria data from the Slovak nation-wide survey in years 2003-2012 that mildly impairs mitochondrial functions. This RedMIT mouse may use- fAul. lDy iroetc: aNpointuel.a Lt.e M feaactLueroeds :o Nf ohneete. rCo. pLliaasom: Nico mnet.D JN. AC adrivseera:s Ne.one. R. Neves: D. Gasperikova1,2, J. Stanik1,3, M. Huckova1,2, L. Valentinova1, I. Masindova1, D. None. R. Gupta: None. Y. Guo: None. T. Enver: None. F. Iborra: None. J. Stanikova1,3, J. Michalek4; Poulton: None. 1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Centre for Molecular Medicine, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3First Dep. of Pediactrics, Children`s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4National Instituten of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lubochna, Slovakia.  P10
.48 Identification of the first nonsense mutation in the PDX1 gene in a family with diabetes mellitus INTRODUCTION: Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is a hetero- P. J. Laitinen-Forsblom1, T. Kröplin2, C. Nevinny-Stickel-Hinzpeter1; geneous group of monogenic diabetes with early onset, familiar appearan- 1synlab MVZ Humane Genetik, Munich, Germany, 2Diabetes Schwerpunktpraxis, ce, and autosomal dominant inheritance. Familial Young-Onset Diabetes Elmshorn, Germany. (FYOD) represents a part of MODY caused predominantly by mutations in the genes for transcription factors. PDX1 PDX1 THE AIM of this study was to identify the etiology of the Slovakian families Maturity onset Diabetes of the Young type 4 (MODY4) is a monogenic form with the clinical suspicion on the Familial Young-Onset Diabetes by the DNA of diabetes mellitus caused by mutations in the homeobox gene. analysis of the known MODY genes. encodes a pancreatic beta-cell specific transcription factor essential for the METHODS: 399 patients from 184 families were recruited from outpatient embryonic development of the pancreas. clinics throughout Slovakia. Relevant genes responsible for FYOD (HNF1A, The index patient presented with a gestational diabetes at the age of 28 years HNF1B, HNF4A, NEUROD1, KCNJ11, insulin, ABC C8
) were sequenced and (1-hour-OGTT 192mg/dl). No insulin therapy was necessary. The pregnan- MLPA analyzed. cy ended at a spontaneous full term delivery (birth weight 3530g). Three RESULTS: 66 patients from 28 families had a mutation in one of the target months after the pregnancy the patient showed impaired glucose tolerance genes: 24 probands and their 37 family relatives had a mutation in HNF1A (1-hour-OGTT 148 mg/dl) but no other symptoms of diabetes. Her habitus gene; one family (2 pts) had a mutation in the HNF4A gene, one proband had is slender (BMI 19). Currently, she showsE nSorHmGal 2bl0oo1d3 s u| gPaAr lRevIeSls, F(faRsAtinNg CEa | mWuWtatiWon. EinS iHnsGul.iOn gReGne, one proband had a HNF1B whole gene del2et5io5nABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and one proband had a novel mutation in ABC C8
 gene. No KCNJ11 and NEU- To find early expressed FGF23-induced transcripts, we performed who- ROD1, gene mutation carriers were found. In 44 families no mutations in the le transcriptome analysis. We used the technology of RNA-Seq, which is a analyzed genes were found (MODY-X). massively parallel sequencing approach to allow genome-wide analysis of CONCLUSIONS: Among 399 from 184 families with clinical suspicion on gene expression profiles at a far higher resolution than is available with mi- FYOD the monogenic diabetes was confirmed in 66 patients from 28 fami- croarray-based methods. Genome-wide transcriptional changes in HEK293- lies. 20 different mutations (from which 8 are novel) were found in 4 out of KL cells specifically caused by FGF23 were defined by comparing the tran- 6 analyzed genes. These results indicate a high heterogeneity of etiology of scriptome of FGF23-induced HEK293-KL cells with the transcriptomes of the Familial Young-Onset Diabetes in Slovakia. not induced HEK293-KL cells and mock-treated HEK293 cells. We tried to S Du.p Gpaosrpteedri kboyv: aT:r Nanosneen. dJ.o Sgetann/i2k:6 N24on0e2.2 M0.0 H5u1c, kVoEvGaA: N2o/n0e1.5  L1
. /V1a1lentinova: identify new FGF23-responsive genes that might belong to a network of fac- None. I. Masindova: None. D. Stanikova: None. J. Michalek: None. tSo.r sD iiennveorlv: eNdo nine .t hT.e S rcehgwulaartzimona yorf: pNhoonsep. hAa. tWe ahlothmeer:o Nstoanseis. .T. Wieland: None. B. Lorenz-Depiereux: None. T.M. Strom: None.  P10
.51 Mutational spectrum of glucokinase (GCK) gene and prevalence of  P10
.53 monogenic diabetes type GCK-MODY in Slovakia Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VI L. Valentínová1, J. Staník2,1, M. Hučková1,3, M. Balogová1, I. Mašindová1, I. Klimeš1,3, D. (Maroteaux-Lamy Syndrome) at Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia Gašperíková1,3; N. A. Al-Sanna‘a1, R. P. Mathew2; 1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, 1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahrab, Saudi Arabia, 2Vanderbilt Children Hospital, Slovakia, 2First Dept. of Paediatrics, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Centre Vanderbilt, TN, United States. for Molecular Medicine, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. Mucopolysaccharidodis (MPS) type VI or Maroteaux-Lamy Syndrome Heterozygous inactivating glucokinase (GCK) mutations cause a subtype of (MIM#253200) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused maturity-onset diabetes of the young (GCK-MODY) characterised by familial by deficiency of the enzyme N-acetylgalatcosamin-4-sulfatase or Arylsuulfa- mild stable fasting hyperglycaemia. Over 600 GCK mutations have been re- te B. This will lead to a progressive intracellular accumulation of the glyac- ported, nevertheless none of them prevails between GCK-carriers. The aim sosaminoglycans, dermatan sulfate resulting into a wide range of multi-sy- of the study was 1) to determine the GCK mutation spectrum and 2) to disc- stemic dysfunction. It is a clinically heterogeneous disorder ranging from lose the prevalence of GCK-carriers among the Slovakian population. a mild to moderate and severe phenotype. So far, more than 130 different Patients and methods: 369 unrelated probands with clinical suspicion on mutations in the ARSB gene have been identified. However, most are uni- MODY were referred for genetic testing to our laboratory between 2004 - que to individual families making population screening is difficult. Here we 2012 from >100 clinical diabetologists and endocrinologists across Slova- report 16 Saudi Arab affected patients from 6 unrelated families from the kia. Following the proband’s clinical phenotype consistent with GCK-MODY, Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia presented with a severe phenotype. All direct sequencing and MLPA analyses of pancreatic GCK gene were carried of the tested patients were found to be homozygous the nonsense mutati- out. on c.753C>G (p.Y251X) at ARSB gene. This is a good reflection of the high Results: DNA analyses identified 31 different GCK mutations in 55 probands consanguinity rate among this population. We propose that this mutation and 90 relatives located in promoter, coding and intronic regions. Missense could be utilized for screening individuals at risk within this region of the mutations occurred most frequently - 77% (24/31), followed by deletions c No.uAn. tAryl-.Sanna‘a: None. R.P. Mathew: None. 10% (3/31), splice-site substitution 6% (2/31), promoter substitution 3% (1/31) and intronic variant 3% (1/31); no exon deletion was detected. Dif- ferent exon mutations were scattered along the entire GCK length, no hot-  P10
.54 spot region was found. The most frequent GCK mutation in Slovakia (pro- Prenatal diagnosis of Mucopolysaccharidosis by two-dimentional moter -71G>C) occurred in 27% (15/55) of unrelated families. In Slovakia electrophoresis of amniotic fluid glycosaminoglycans: An Egyptian with population of 5,4 millions the minimum prevalence of GCK-MODY was experience. estimated to 27 cases/million inhabitants. M. M. Ibrahim1, A. L. Aboulnasr2, K. Gaber1; Conclusion: We have determined the GCK mutation profile with the Slovaki- 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2College of Medicine - Cairo University, Cairo, an prevailing mutation (-71G>C). The minimum prevalence of GCK-MODY in Egypt. SFluonvdaekdia b iys V2 E7
G cAa2se/s0/1m51il/li1o1n, inhabitTaRnAtsN, SwEhNicDhO iGs EhNig/h2e6r2 t4h0a2n2 o0u0r5 p1reviously published data. L. Valentínová: None. J. Stan EíkR:D NFo(ne. M. Hučková: None. M. Balogov).á: Abstract: Objective: Prenatal diagnosis of Mucopolysaccharidosis(MPS) in None. I. Mašindová: None. I. Klimeš: None. D. Gašperíková: None. pregnancies at risk by means of two-dimensional electrophoresis for ana- lysis of glycosaminoglycans(GAGs) in amniotic fluid. Subjects and methods: This study included 53 pregnant females having previously affected child or  P10
.52 more with one of the MPS types. Those cases came from allover Egypt du- A comparative transcriptome analysis identifies FGF23-regulated ring the period from 2000 till 2012. Consanguineous marriages was present genes in HEK293 cells stably expressing KLOTHO in 39 cases (73.6%) and gestational age at time of amniocentesis ranged S. Diener1, T. Schwarzmayr1, A. Walther1, T. Wieland1, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, T. M. between 15-19 weeks. All the pregnant females were subjected to history Strom1,2; taking, pedigree construction, clinical examination, amniocentesis guided 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, by ultrasound scan. Two-dimensional electrophoretic separation of GAGs Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Klinikum Rechts der Isar der was done in amniotic fluid of all cases. Technischen Universität München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. Results: 18 cases (34%) out of the 53 pregnant females were affected. Eight cases showed electrophoretic pattern of MPS type-I with dermatan and he- parin sulfate spots, 4 cases MPS type-II with small dermatan and heparan Phosphate is the most abundant anion in the human body and is crucial for spots, one case showed pattern of MPS type-III with heparan and heparan various biological functions like cellular activity and bone mineralization. sulfate spots and 5 cases showed pattern of MPS type-VI with big dermatan A key regulator of phosphate homeostasis is fibroblast growth factor 23 spots. (FGF23). It is mainly secreted from osteocytes, circulates in the blood and Conclusion: Prenatal diagnosis of MPS for women with previously affected binds to receptor heterodimers composed of FGF receptor 1 (FGFR1) and child or more using two-dimensional electrophoretic separation of GAGS in KLOTHO in the kidney. As elevated FGF23 levels are the main cause of hy- amniotic fluid is a sensitive, rapid and reliable method for diagnosis. It helps pophosphatemia in monogenic disorders of phosphate homeostasis (XLH those families to have healthy infants and prevent having another affected (MIM 307800), ADHR (MIM 193100), ARHR1 (MIM 241520) and ARHR2 c Mh.iMld. iInb rtahhei mfa:m Niolyn.e. A.L. Aboulnasr: None. K. Gaber: None. (MIM613312)), further studies on the regulation of phosphate metabolism are necessary to identify possible therapeutic targets. FGF23 activates KLO- THO/FGFR1 to inhibit renal phosphate reabsorption and to suppress 1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D3 synthesis. Little is known about FGF23/KLOTHO/ FGFR1 signalling and downstream targets of FGF23 contributing to its phos- phaturic action. For this purpose, we established an in vitro cell system of F2G5F623-inducible HEK293 cells that stably expresEs SKHLOGT H2O0 (1H3E K| 2 P9
A3-RKILS)., FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.55  P10
.57 Association of mitochondrial respiratory chain polymorphisms with Mutation Screening in NP C1
 and NP C2
 Genes in 37 Turkish Patients obesity and type 2 Diabetes in the spanish population Suspected with Niemann-Pick disease Type C: Six Novel Mutations G. O. De Marco Solar1, M. L. Mansego1, M. Pineda-Alonso2, G. Rojo-Martínez3,4, M. T. R. K. Özgül1, D. Yücel Yılmaz2, A. Yüce3, A. Dursun2; Martinez-Larrad4,5, S. Morcillo3,4, M. M. Morales-Suárez-Varela6,7, A. Corbaton-Anchuelo4,5, 1Hacettepe University Institute of Child Health, Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism A. Dueñas-Laita2, G. M. Martín-Núñez3,4, J. C. Martín Escudero2, J. Redon1,8,9, F. Soriguer3,4, Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University , Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, R. Carmena1,4,10, M. Serrano-Rios5,4, F. J. Chaves1,4; Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 1Research Foundation of the University Clinic Hospital-INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, 2Rio Gastroenterology Unit, Ankara, Turkey. Hortega University Hospital of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 3Carlos Haya Universitary Hospital of Málaga, Málaga, Spain, 4CIBER of Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Diseases (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain, 5Biomedical Research Foundation from the Niemann-Pick disease Type C (NPC) is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal San Carlos University Clínic Hospital of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 6Research group CIBER lipid storage disorder with probable minimal incidence of 1/120,000 live CB06/02/0045, CIBER actions - Epidemiology and Public Health, Madrid, Spain, 7University of Valencia, Center for Public Health Research (CSIP), Valencia, Spain, births. Clinical presentation of NPC is extremely heterogeneous, featuring a 8University Clinic Hospital of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 9CIBER 03/06 Physiopathology range of systemic and neurological signs that are not specific for the disease of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Institute of Health Carlos III, Minister of Health, progression and prognosis. As a result, the diagnosis of NPC can be a pro- Madrid, Spain, 10University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain. longed and complicated. NPC is caused by mutations in the NP C1
 (in 95% of OBJECTIVE: cases) or in the NP C2
 (in around 5% of cases) genes. To date more than 300 disease-causing mutations have been reported. To study the association between genes codifying for mito- In this study, mutation screening of 25 exons in NP C1
 gene and 5 exons of chondrial respiratory chain (MRC) subunits and BMI and obesity as well as NP C2
 was performed in 37 unrelated Turkish patients suspected with NPC. tRhEeS iEmApRaCcHt o Dn EtShIeG rNis kA NtoD d MevEeTloHpO tyDpSe: 2 diabetes in the general population Twelve different mutations in NP C1
 and NP C2
 gene were detected in 13 of from Spain. 37 patients. In regard to novel mutations in NP C1
 gene, c.2229_2230delTG, Three thousand seven hundred and p.Trp949Gly, p.Asn906Tyr were detected as homozygously and c.3246- thirty-one subjects (age range 21 to 89) from three different population- 2delAG¬¬_¬3246-3247delTG mutation was detected with p.Pro1007Ala based studies of Spain, were studied. Forty-eight single nucleotide poly- mutation in compound heterozygously. In addition, two novel mutations p. mREoSrUphLTisSm: s (SNPs) of chromosomal genes which codify MRC proteins were Ala181Thr and p.Thr375Pro were detected in patients as heterozygously in selected and processed by the SNPlex method. NP C1
 gene. Significant associations were observed between polymorphisms NP-C diagnosis in these individuals were confirmed by this molecular gene- rs4600063 (SDHC gene), rs11205591 (NDUF S5
 gene), rs10891319 (SDHD tic analysis study. The mutation detection rate which resulted in confirmed gene) and BMI (p-value= 0.04, 0.0011 and 0.0004, respectively) and obesity molecular genetic diagnosis, is found 25% in this selected group of patients. risk (OR=0.72, p-value=0.0072; OR=0.72, p=0.039; OR=1.25, 0.0038, respec- This study would be helpful for to raise the awareness and improve the early tively). In addition, polymorphisms rs11205591 and rs10891319, showed a d Ria.Kg.n Öoszigsü al:n Ndo tnhee.r Dap. Yy üocf etlh Yeı dlmisaeza:s Neo inne T. uAr. kYiüshc ep:a Ntioennet.s A.. Dursun: None. significant epistatic interaction for BMI levels and obesity risk. Finally, the GG genotype of rs11205591 polymorphism significantly reduced the risk oCfO bNeCinLgU dSiIaObNeSti:c after including age and sex as covariables (OR= 0.32, 0.17-  P10
.58 0.62; p-value =0.0001), and BMI (OR=0.37, 0.19-0.72; p-value =0.0008). Characterization of the human ornithine carbamoyltransferase Polymorphisms of genes codifying MRC can be involved in promoter BMI variation and can be related to the risk for being obese in the Spanish O. Luksan1, L. Dvorakova2,3, M. Jirsa1; general population. Furthermore, the rs11205591 (NDUF S5
 gene) polymor- 1Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of pGh.iOsm. D me Migahrtc coo Snotrliabru: tNeo tnoe .t hMe. Lr.i sMka tnos deegvoe: lNopon tey.p Me .2 P diniaebdeat-eAslo.nso: Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, None. G. Rojo-Martínez: None. M.T. Martinez-Larrad: None. S. Morcillo: Prague, Czech Republic, 3General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. None. M.M. Morales-Suárez-Varela: None. A. Corbaton-Anchuelo: None. A. Dueñas-Laita: None. G.M. Martín-Núñez: None. J.C. Martín Escudero: None. J. Redon: None. F. Soriguer: None. R. Carmena: None. M. Serrano-Rios: None. F.J. Chaves: None. Full transcriptional activity of human ornithine carbamoyltransferase (OTC, EC 2.1.3.3; MIM#300461) promoter depends on an upstream enhancer. The promoter-enhancer interaction contributes to tissue specific expression of OTC in the liver. The aim of our study is a detailed characterization of basic  P10
.56 OTC regulatory elements in human. Dysmorphic features in Niemann-Pick type C disease: Blurring the Using the luciferase reporter assay wcitish constructs containinCgis a series of frontiers between dysmorphology and biochemical genetics truncated promoter variants, we specified the 173 bp core promoter region C. M. Lourenco1, V. van der Linden2, E. Ribeiro3, M. Santos4, W. Marques Jr1; carrying three positive and a negative -acting element. The 1+ positive 1University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Hospital Barão de Lucena, Recife, Brazil, 3Albert Einstein Hospital, Fortaleza, Brazil, 4Pequeno Principe Hospital, Curitiba, regulatory element reaching 8 C0
is% ofC tihse promCoitser activity was found in a Brazil. short sequence of 35 base-pairs located close to the transcription start site. Another regulatory elements 2+, 3- and 4+ were localized within the positions 128-179 bp, 180-219 bp and 220-269 bp upstream the initia- Background: Niemann-Pick type C disease (NP-C) is a rare lysosomal disor- tion codon. der whose presentation in early infancy is usually nonspecific and may be We set up an innovated DNase I footprinting method based on the capillary overlooked, specially because at this age, the classical neurological features electrophoresis ofC ifsluoresceCnitsly labeled fragments after DNase I cleavage. of the disease - as the vertical supranuclear gaze palsy - are absent. Facing The comparative analysis of electrophoreograms revealed protected regions this challenge, it is important to develop tools and to recognize clinical clues corresponding to 1+ and c2i+s elements. Cis that can lead to an early diagnosis. Here we report, for the first time, a cohort CInistroducing the electromobility shift assay we demonstrated DNA-protein of NPC patients whose facial features point out to a similar “facial gestalt” interaction in all investigated -aOcTtCing elements. Two of them, 1+ and that could help both the non-specialist clinician and the clinical geneticist 2+, contained short sequences recognized by HNF-4, a transCcrisiption fac- to a early recognition of the disease or at least to raise a clinical suspicion. tor playing an essenCtisial role in the gene regulation in rodents. A binding Discussion: In an apparent opposition to other lysosomal storge disorders site for COUP-TF, an antagonist to HNF-4 in rat was found in the 3- region. (LSDs), NPC was generally considered a non-dysmorphic inborn error of The nature of the 4+ element remains unknown; however it contains a metabolism, nevertheless there are some facial features that can make pos- conserved TATA-like domain and could serve as a binding site to the TBP sible to recognize a facial phenotype in infants with NPC. This fact is not transcription factor. surprising since dysmorphic manifestations can be expected as a result of F Oin. aLnuckisaal ns:u Npopnoer.t :L I.K DEvMor_aMkZo0va-0: 0N0o2n3e0. M01. ,J GirAsaU:K N-2on5e1.168_99910 disorders which affect the synthesis, traffic or early steps in the degrada- tion of the large molecules. Conclusion: Identification of some dysmorphic features can add one more ‘layer’ in the investigation of NPC in early infan- cy, although that there is still a need to further development of screening tools in a effort for a better and earlier recognition and management of the dCis.Mea. sLeo.urenco: None. V. van der Linden: None. E. Ribeiro: None. M. Santos: None. W. Marques Jr: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 257ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.59  P10
.61 Fatal Outcome of Iron-Sulfur Cluster Scaffold NFU1 Gene mutations in Transcription factor gene MNX1 is a novel cause of permanent a Neonatal Patient. neonatal diabetes in a consanguineous family S. SENECA1,2, J. Smet3, A. Vanlander3, R. Van Coster3, D. Roland4, B. De Paepe3, W. Lissens1,2, M. Vaxillaire1,2,3, A. Bonnefond1,2,3, E. Vaillant1,2,3, B. Skrobek1,2,3, S. Lobbens1,2,3, M. M. Bonduelle1,2, L. De Meirleir5,2; Huyvaert1,2,3, J. Philippe1,2,3, L. Yengo1,2,3, H. Cavé4, K. Busiah5,6, R. Scharfmann5, M. Polak5,6, 1UZ Brussel, Center for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2REGE, Vrije Universiteit M. M. Abdul-Rasoul7, P. Froguel1,2,3; Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3Ghent University Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, 1CNRS UMR8199, Pasteur Institute of Lille, Lille, France, 2European Genomic Institute for Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Ghent, Belgium, 4Centre Agréé des Diabetes (EGID) FR 3508, Lille, France, 3Lille 2 University, Lille, France, 4Department of Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Genetics, Robert-Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 5Inserm-U845, Université Paris Descartes, Belgium, 5UZ Brussel, Pediatric Neurology, Brussels, Belgium. Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 6Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Necker Enfants-Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 7Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait City, Kuwait. Mitochondrial diseases are a heterogeneous group of disorders characteri- Background: zed by a variety of clinical symptoms and a defect of the OXPHOS system, but only part of the genes involved in these pathways have been identified. The Permanent neonatal diabeteAsB mCCe8llitKuCsN (J P1
N1DM) IiNs Sa rare mo- NFU1 protein is implicated in the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biogenesis. The nogenic form of non-autoimmune diabetes. Genetic defects have been iden- latter are conserved protein co-factors with anN eFsUse1ntial rBoOleL iAn3 a wide varie- tified in ~60% of cases, with mutations in , and being the ty of enzymatic processes, including the e-transfer of complexes I to III of the mObojsetc ftrievqeu: ent causes of PNDM. Recognition of genetic subtypes strongly respiratory chain. Recently, mutations in the and genes were impacts on both patients care and family counselling. identified in patients with a multiple mitochondrial dysfunction syndrome. Methods: To identify the genetic aetiology of PNDM in a diabetic child born from consanguineous parents of Egyptian origin. - DNA samples from both the proband and non-diabetic parents Here we report on a patient with lactic acidosis, tubulopathy, failure to thri- were analysed for homozygosity mapping using the Illumina 660KSNP ve and cardiac hypertrophy who died at 3 months of age. He is compound chip. MWNeX 1then fGoAcuTAse6d on the runs of homozygosity (ROHs) over 2.5 Mb, heterozygous for the common c.622G>T (p.Gly208Cys) missense mutation which were detected only in the patient. Sanger sequencing of candidate ge- and a novel c. 62G>C (p.Arg21Pro) mutation changing a completely conser- nes ( and ) present in those ROHs was subsequently performed, ved arginine residue into a proline. Both parents are heterozygous carriers. aRse swuelltls a:s expression analyses on human embryonic and adult pancreatic His metabolic profile was largely characterised by an enzymatic complex II islet samples. MNX1 defect in lymphocytes, fibroblasts, muscle and liver tissue. Preliminary ob- We identified a putatively causal homozygous mutation in the tran- servations by BN-PAGE analysis concord with the conclusions of Ferrer-Cor- scription factor gene (c.816C>A/p.Phe272Leu) in the PNDM patient, tès et al. 2012. They also observed a profound complexN IFI Ud1eficiency as the who was clinically diagnosed as a typical case of PNDM without any pan- main molecular signature of a pNFU1 malfunction and patients surviving creas developmental defects or other clinical features. The probably delete- the first months of life as compared to patients with an null allele. To- rious mutation isM loNcXa1ted within MNX1 homeodomain helix 2 that is highly day, only a small number of patients with Fe-S cluster protein defects, most conserved between species. In human embryonic pancreatic islet samples, of them compound heterozygous for the p.Gly208Cys mutation in the NFU1 we showed that expression was significantly enriched in pancreatic gene, have been identified. eCpointhcleulisuimon c:ompared to mesenchyme, suggesting a role of MNX1 in human S. Seneca: None. J. Smet: None. A. Vanlander: None. R. Van Coster: None. D. pancreatic beta-cell development. Roland: None. B. De Paepe: None. W. Lissens: None. M. Bonduelle: None. L. De Meirleir: None. We repMoNrtX 1a- new putative cause of PNDM from a consan- guineous family. Replication in other cohorts would be helpful to draw the c Mli.n Vicaaxli lslpaiercet:r Nuomn eo.f A. Bonnmefuotnadte: dN PonNeD. ME. pVaatilileanntts: .None. B. Skrobek: None. S. Lobbens: None. M. Huyvaert: None. J. Philippe: None. L. Yengo:  P10
.60 None. H. Cavé: None. K. Busiah: None. R. Scharfmann: None. M. Polak: Association between dyslipidaemia and mutations in the genes None. M.M. Abdul-Rasoul: None. P. Froguel: None. PCSK9, LDLR A. Zarina1, L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1, D. Juhnevica2, K. Trusinskis2, A. Erglis2, A. Krumina3; 1Riga Stradins university Scientific laboratory of molecular genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Pauls  P10
.62 Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Latvian Cardiology Center, Riga, Latvia, 3Latvian LC-MS/MS Analysis of Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorder (PBD) Biomedical Research and Study Center, Riga, Latvia. Patients’ Plasma Bile Acids (BA) Implicate Cytosolic BA-CoA:amino Introduction: acid N-acyltranferase (BAAT) Activity in BA Reconjugation and Homoeostasis Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the main cause of death in D. Oglesbee, C. T. Turgeon, P. Hall, M. Magera, D. Gavrilov, S. Tortorelli, K. Raymond, D. developed countries. One of the main cPaCuSsKes9 of CHLDDL iRs atherosclerosis, in Matern, P. Rinaldo; which pathogenesis dyslipidemia is a crucial factor. There are several genes Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. involved in cholesterol metabolism, e.g. and . Mutations and po- lAyimmo: rphisms in these genes can be associated with hyper- or hypocholeste- rPoClSeKm9ia, and can cause Familial hypercholesterolemia. Bile acids (BA) are required for lipid and vitamin absorption, and choleste- To determine theL aDsLsRociation of the polymorphism  E670
G in the gene rol elimination among other functions. BA synthesis originates in the liver, Materi awl aitnhd d myesltihpoiddse:m ia and to test patients with dyslipidemia for seven and requires thirteen enzymatic steps, including cholesterol nucleus modi- mutations in the gene . fication and side-chain oxidation. Glycine- and taurine-conjugation via BAAT The study population included 38 patients with dysli- is the last step before BA excretion into bile. Intestinal bacteria deconjugate pidemia and 66 healthy individuals served as a control population. LDLR BAs, but 95% of the BA pool is reabsorbed within enterohepatic circulation. The  E670
G polymorphism was detecTteepdn beyl MRoFlLePcu alanra lDyisaisg,n boustti cthse mutati- BAAT is mostly peroxisomal, implying that deconjugated BAs must circulate Ronessu: lDts3: 74Y,  P664
L,  L458
P, R329X,  E207
X, D200G,  E80
K in the gene to peroxisomes for reactivation and reconjugation via a currently unknown were detected by ELUCIGENE FH20 ( ). mechanism. As investigations with PBD patients are indispensible for the Polymorphism  E670
G - the G allele’s frequency in affe-5cted indivi- elucidation of the peroxisome’s role in BA synthesis, we used an LC-MS/MS duals was 0.3947, in control population - 0.1339 (p=3.9x10 , OR 4.217, method to measure 18 conjugated and unconjugated plasma BAs (all pri- CI95% 2.069-8.587). After linear regression analysis there was not found mary, secondary, glycine-, and taurine-conjugates) alongside BA precursors, sCiognncilfuicsaionnt sassociation (p>0.05) with any of biochemical markers. Mutation dihydroxycholestanoate (DHCA) and tetrahydroxycholestanoate (THCA), in  E80
K in the gene LDLR was found in two individuals with dyslipidemia. PBD patients (n = 52) and controls (n = 279). Whereas PBD plasma contai- ned elevated BA precursors, DHCA and THCA (median: 379x and 19x > con- 1) Polymorphism  E670
G in the gene PCSK9 is one of the genetic risk factors trols, respectively), indicating BA synthesis impairment, taurine-conjugated in development of dyslipiLdDeLmRia, but it is not associated with specific bioche- primary BAs (taurocholate and taurochenodeoxycholate) were also marke- mical markers; dly elevated (median: 136x and 26x > controls, respectively). In addition, 2) Mutation  E80
K in the gene suggests that two patients have Familial the percentage of glycine-conjugated BAs in PBD specimens was half that of hypercholesterolemia, but to make precise diagnosis, the mutations should controls (42% vs. 89%, respectively), suggesting preferential taurine-recon- bAe. cZoanrifniram: Nedon bey. Lo.t hPeierk musoele: cNuolanre .m Me.t Khroedil.e: None. D. Juhnevica: None. K. jugation of BA pools. In summary, the analysis of BA levels in PBDs demon- Trusinskis: None. A. Erglis: None. A. Krumina: None. strates the existence of BAAT activity without functional peroxisomes. Mo- reover, the reduction of the proportion of glycine-conjugated BAs suggests a cytosolic localization of BAAT activity in PBD hepatocytes and questions the 258 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG functional purpose of peroxisomal BAAT in BA reconjugation.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index D. Oglesbee: None. C.T. Turgeon: None. P. Hall: None. M. Magera: None. D. Gavrilov: None. S. Tortorelli: None. K. Raymond: None. D. Matern: None. P. Rinaldo: None. R261Q mutation was found in 5 patients with a frequency 0.096 in hete- rozygous state. 5 patients had  P281
L mutation with a frequency of 0.096. IV S12
+1 was detected in getorozigous state in 2 patients (frequency 0.038). IV S10
-11 mutation identified only 1 patient with a frequency 0.019. Other  P10
.63 patient with PKU had unknown mutation, which requires a whole genome Biallelic mutations in the mitochondrial caseinolytic peptidase, CLPP, sequencing RAH gene. 2 patients had a whole genome sequencing RAH cause Perrault syndrome, an inherited disorder of deafness and gene. It was found Arg243Glu (c.728g.a.) and R243Q/R243Q in 7 exon of ovarian failure E. M. Jenkinson1, A. U. Rehman2, T. Walsh3, J. Clayton-Smith1, K. Lee4, R. J. Morell2, M. PAH gene. C. Drummond2, S. N. Khan5, M. A. Naeem5, B. Rauf5, N. Billington6, J. M. Schultz2, J. E. Application of molecular genetic techniques provided opportunities for dia- Urquhart1, M. K. Lee3, A. Berry7, N. A. Hanley7, S. Mehta8, D. Cilliers9, P. E. Clayton10, H. gnosis of hereditary diseases including ethnicity. Molecular genetic study of Kingston1, M. J. Smith1, T. T. Warner11, G. C. Black1, D. Trump1, J. R. E. Davis7, W. Ahmad12, patients allows PKU prenatal diagnosis and detect heterozygous carriers. To S. M. Leal4, S. Riazuddin5,13, M. King3, T. B. Friedman2, W. G. Newman1; dDa.tNe., Sthailsim isb taheev am: oNsotn aed. eGq.uSa. tSev pyraetovvean:t iNoonn oef. PGK.MU. iBne Kreazziankah: sNtoanne.. I.G. 1Centre for Genetic Medicine, University of Manchester and Central Manchester Horoshilova: None. University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, United States, 3Department of Medicine (Medical Genetics), Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle,  P10
.65 WA, United States, 4Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College Characterization of PMM2 mutations: identification of target mutants of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, for specific pharmacological chaperone therapy University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 6Laboratory of Molecular Physiology, P. Yuste-Checa1, P. Sierra-González1, A. Gámez1, M. Martinell2, L. R. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, B. Pérez1; United States, 7Centre for Endocrinology & Diabetes, University of Manchester and 1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, CBMSO, CIBERER, IDIPaz., Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Madrid, Spain, 2Minoryx therapeutics, Barcelona, Spain. Kingdom, 8East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 9Oxford Regional Genetics Centre, Oxford Universities NHS Trust, The Churchill Old Road, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Manchester and Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) are a group of multisystemic, Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 11UCL Institute of Neurology, University College, inherited, metabolic diseases resulting from defects in the protein N-glyco- London, United Kingdom, 12Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, sylation pathway. Phosphomanomutase 2 (PMM2) is the affected protein in Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan, 13Allama Iqbal Medical College/Jinnah CDG-PMM2 disorder, the most common CDG, for which there is currently Hospital Complex, University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan. not an effective treatment. PMM2 is a cytosolic enzyme which converts man- nose 6-phophate to mannose 1-phosphate. The screening of target mutati- ons for specific therapies was performed through the functional analysis of Perrault syndrome is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous autosomal nine PMM2 mutations. All the studied mutations presented lower amounts recessive condition characterized by sensorineural hearing loss and prCemLPaP- of PMM2 protein detected by western blot from crude bacterial extracts and ture ovarian failure. By a com bination of linkage, homozygosity mapping purified proteins. The analysis of the oligomerization pattern showed an oli- and exome sequencing in three familiCeLsP, Pwe identified mutations in gomeric profile similar to the wild-type protein with abundance of dimers as the cause of this phenotype.In each family, affected individuals were ho- for several mutations others showed increased levels of aggregates while mozygous for a different pathogenic allele: the missense mutations one mutation, p.Pro113Leu, did not present any oligomeric state. Protein cC. L4
P3 P3
A>C (p.Thr145Pro), c.440G>C (p.Cys147Ser), and an experimentally stability, studied by differential scanning fluorimetry, showed that all mu- demonstrated splice donor site mutation c.270+4A>G. tants are more unstable than wild-type shifting the Tm from 2 to 7 °C. Fi- encodes a highly conserved endopeptidase, a component of a mito- nally, the specific activity of mutants from pure protein and bacterial crude chondrial ATP-dependent proteolytic complex that forms an element of tmhte extracts showed a reduction from 50 to 100% compared to the wild-type evolutionarily ancient mitochondrial unfolded-protein responseC L(PUPPR ) protein. Based on this results and the localization of residues in the PMM2 stress signaling pathway. Protein modelling studies indicate the pathogenic crystal structure, we have classified the mutations as catalytic, destabili- nature of the mutations. Our findings define biallelic variants in that zing and mutations affecting the dimerization. The destabilizing mutations cause a strikingly variable phenotype of profound pre-lingual sensorineural pV44A, p.D65Y, p.R162W, p. C241
S, p.F207S and p.T237M are promising hearing loss and ovarian failure/ovarian dysgenesis. This expands the un- candidates for testing the 15 pharmacological chaperones previously selec- derstanding of the contribution of mitochondrial proteins to health and di- ted by high-throughput screening from 100 000 library´s compounds using sease and allows accurate risk assessment and counselling in families with t Ph.e Y wusiltde--tCyhpeec pa:r oNtoenine.. P. Sierra-González: None. A. Gámez: None. M. P Ee.rMr.a Jueltn skyinnsdorno:m Neo.ne. A.U. Rehman: None. T. Walsh: None. J. Clayton-Smith: Martinell: None. L.R. Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. K. Lee: None. R.J. Morell: None. M.C. Drummond: None. S.N. Khan: None. B. Pérez: None. None. M.A. Naeem: None. B. Rauf: None. N. Billington: None. J.M. Schultz: None. J.E. Urquhart: None. M.K. Lee: None. A. Berry: None. N.A. Hanley: None. S. Mehta: None. D. Cilliers: None. P.E. Clayton: None. H. Kingston: None. M.J. Smith: None. T.T. Warner: None. G.C. Black: None. D. Trump:  P10
.66 None. J.R.E. Davis: None. W. Ahmad: None. S.M. Leal: None. S. Riazuddin: Interest of QMPSF analysis in the detection of large intragenic POLG1 None. M. King: None. T.B. Friedman: None. W.G. Newman: None. rearrangements through the study of a large French cohort C. ROUZIER1,2, A. CHAUSSENOT1, V. SERR E3
, K. FRAGAKI1,4, S. BANNWARTH1,2, S. AIT- EL-MKADEM1,2, E. KAPHAN5, S. ATTARIAN5, A. CANO6, E. DELMONT7, S. SACCONI7, b. Mousson de Camaret8, M. Rio9, A. LEBR E9
, C. JARDE L10
, R. DESCHAMP S11
, C. RICHELM E12
,  P10
.64 J. POUGET13, B. CHABRO L6
, V. PAQUIS-FLUCKINGER1; The spectrum of mutations PAH gene in patients with 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hôpital L‘Archet 2, NICE, France, 2IRCAN, CNRS phenylketonuria in Kazakhstan UMR 7284/INSERM U1081/UNS School of Medicine, Nice sophia antipolis, France, D. N. Salimbaeva, G. S. Svyatova, G. M. Berezina, I. G. Horoshilova; 3Jacques MONOD Institute, PARIS, France, 4IRCAN, CNRS UMR 7284/INSERM U1081/ The Scientific Center of the obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakhstan. UNS School of Medicine, NICE Sophia Antipolis, France, 5Department of Neurology, Hôpital La Timone, MARSEILLE, France, 6Department of Neuropediatrics, Hôpital La Timone, MARSEILLE, France, 7Department of Neurology, Hôpital L‘Archet 2, NICE, France, 8Department of Metabolic diseases, Biology and Pathology centre Est, Lyon, In 2007, in the Republic of Kazakhstan has been introduced the State pro- France, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Necker Hospital, PARIS, France, 10Department gram of genetic screening of newborns for phenylketonuria (PKU). With of Molecular and Chromosomal Genetics, Pitié-Salpétrière hospital, PARIS, France, the introduction this program, 54 patients with PKU were identified. The 11Department of Neuromuscular disorders, Fort-de-France Hospital, Martinique, France, national register of patients with PKU in Kazakhstan includes information 12Department of Neuropediatrics, Lenval hospital, NICE, France, 13Department of about 106 patients. 57 children with PKU were studied by molecular genetic Neurology, Hôpital La Timone, NICE, France. method. The average frequency of PKU in Kazakhstan is equal of 1:18593. The aim of our study was detection in genome of PKU patients known mu- tations in PAH gene. POLG1 is the most commonly gene involved in mitochondrial disorders Molecular genetic analysis of mutations in PAH gene (R408W, R261Q, with mitochondrial DNA instability and causes a wide range of diseases R252W, IV S10
-11, IV S12
 +1, R158Q,  P281
L, IV S14
 +5) carried out using PCR with recessive or dominant transmission. More than 170 mutations have technique. been reported. Most of them are missense mutations but nonsense, splice- The most widespread R408W mutation was detected in 20 patients (fre- site mutations and small deletions and insertions have also been identified. quency was 0.538), 4 patient were hoE mS oH zyG go u2 s0 a1 n3 d | 1 P 6 A hR etI eS ro, zF yR goA teN s. CE H | oW weW veW r, t. oE dS aH te,G o. nO lyR onG e large-scale rearrangement has been describ2 ed5 9 inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index a child with Alpers syndrome. Herein, we report a large cohort of 160 pa- BstUI. Lifestyle has been evaluated by the PhenX Toolkit and DataShaper tients with clinical, molecular and/or biochemical presentation suggestive questionnaires. of POLG deficiency. Using sequencing, we identified POLG1 variants in 25 In case of an increased calorie intake, low fiber ingestion and sedentary life- patients including 5 novel pathogenic mutations. Two patients with novel style, IRI was found to be significantly higher (3.1 vs 2.71, p=0.003). Diffe- mutations had unusual clinical presentation: one patient exhibited an iso- rences have been maintained and reproduced in the presence of the unmo- lated ataxic neuropathy and one child presented with endocrine signs. We difiable inherited factor (PP vs PA+AA), in subjects following (2.76 vs 2.68, completed sequencing step by QMPSF analysis in 40 patients with either p=0.02) or not (3.06 vs 2.93, p=0.03) a healthy lifestyle. only one POLG1 heterozygous variant or a family history suggesting a domi- In conclusion, diet and physical activity may have beneficial effects even nant transmission. We identified a large intragenic deletion encompassing in the presence of risk alleles contributing to insulin resistance. Given the part of intron 21 and exon 22 of POLG1 in a child with refractory epilepsia complex nature of GxE, minor effect of rs1801282 complicated by populati- partialis continua. In conclusion, we describe the first large French cohort on differences and contradictory data reported in the literature, extension of patients with POLG1 mutations, expanding the wide clinical and mole- of analysis on a high number of subjects is necessary. Efforts, though, are cular spectrum observed in patients with POLG1 mutations. We also show motivated by insight that could directly facilitate a more active intervention that large deletions are probably less rare events than previously thought tKh.r oCusgehp :l iNfeosntey.l eC c. hBoainceessc tuo: r Neodnuec.e A c.a Troddioomraent aBbuotliliac :r Nisokn.e. and the great interest of using QMPSF in patients with a single heterozygous P CO. LRGo1u zmieurt:a Ntioonne,. pAa.r Ctihcauulasrsleyn inot s: eNvoenree. iVn.f aSnetrirlee: pNhoenneo. tKy.p Fersa.gaki: None. S. Bannwarth: None. S. Ait-el-mkadem: None. E. Kaphan: None. S. Attarian:  P10
.69 None. A. Cano: None. E. Delmont: None. S. Sacconi: None. B. Mousson de Camaret: None. M. Rio: None. A. Lebre: None. C. Jardel: None. R. Unusual presentation of propionic acidemia : dilated cardiomyopathy Deschamps: None. C. Richelme: None. J. Pouget: None. B. Chabrol: None. V. of adult onset and premature ovarian failure Paquis-fluckinger: None. V. Drouin-Garraud1, S. Grotto1, S. Tariel-Laurent2, G. Zmuda3, C. Nafeh-Bizet3, T. Frebourg1,4, B. Chadefaux5, S. Gobin6, P. de Lonlay7, S. Bekri2; 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Department of  P10
.67 Thoracic Surgery, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 4Inserm U1079, University Genetic variants of organic cation transporters (Octs) in patients with of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, Rouen, France, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and their association with glucose 5Department of Biochemistry, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 6Department of Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 7Metabolic Center, Necker Hospital, Paris, France. metabolism N. Schweighofer, E. Lerchbaum, H. Warnkross, O. Trummer, T. R. Pieber, B. Obermayer- Pietsch; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical Propionic acidemia (PA) is characterized by neonatal or infancy-onset me- University, Graz, Austria. tabolic decompensation. The vast majority of patients develop long-term complications including progressive encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy and seizures in spite of adapted clinical management. We report an unusual late- Metformin, a well-known oral insulin-sensitizing drug, is commonly used in onset PA diagnosis in an adult female patient. the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). It decreases also hepatic The patient was referred to our department of genetics at the age of 28 years lipogenesis and activates hepatic SHBG production. There is a great variabi- in the context of premature ovarian failure (POF). At the age of 17 years, she lity in the clinical response to metformin, mainly due to genetic variances had presented acute heart failure secondary to a dilated cardiomyopathy influencing the pharmacokinetics/dynamics of metformin or its action. Met- which had required cardiac transplantation. Clinical examination, serum formin is a substrate of organic cation transporters (Octs), especially Oct1 creatine phosphokinase concentration and karyotype were normal. No epi- (liver) and Oct2 (kidney). sode of metabolic acidosis nor neurocognitive impairement has been repor- We investigated the pattern of metformin response mediating genotypes in ted. Nevertheless, her personal history prompted us to perform metabolic PCOS patients to identify potential “bad responders” and “non responders” investigations, which revealed an abnormal urine organic acid profile with and determined their relation to glucose metabolism prior to metformin elevated methylcitric acid. Acylcarnitine analysis showed an important in- treatment. crease of propionyl-carnitine. Enzymatic analysis showed no detectable PCC We genotyped R61C, G465R,  S14
F,  S189
L, G220V,  P160
L and M408V (Oct1), activity on cultured fibroblasts. Sequence analysis revealed two mutations A270S (Oct2) and rs11212617 (ATM) variants in 676 PCOS and 90 control within the PCCB gene: c.1218_1231del14ins12 and c.1514T>C. Both parents women and performed oral glucose tolerance tests in 422 patients and 88 were shown to be heterozygous for one PCCB mutation. This observation is controls prior to metformin treatment. the second description of POF in a patient with PA, suggesting that POF is a In PCOS women, we found 30% with non-functioning alleles and 50% with complication of the disease. Dilated cardiomyopathy is commonly described decreased metformin response alleles. Oct variants were associated with as a long term complication in PA, but to our knowledge, only three other ca- elevated C-peptide levels at baseline (p=0.006) and following oral glucose ses of PA revealed by DCM have been reported. This observation illustrates load (AUC C-peptide p=0.005). A high percentage of our PCOS patients might that a systematic metabolic evaluation should be performed in patients with be “bad responders” or “non-responders” due to their Oct genotypes. Oct ge- d Vi.l aDtreodu cina-rGdaiorrmauyodp: aNtohnye.. S. Grotto: None. S. Tariel-Laurent: None. G. Zmuda: notypes are able to modulate the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic None. C. Nafeh-Bizet: None. T. Frebourg: None. B. Chadefaux: None. S. profile of metformin, thus contributing to differences in metformin efficacy. Gobin: None. P. de Lonlay: None. S. Bekri: None. In addition, Oct genotypes might have effects on glucose metabolism which a Nr.e S incdhwepeeignhdoefnetr :f rNoomne m. Ee.t fLoerrmchinb.aum: None. H. Warnkross: None. O. Trummer: None. T.R. Pieber: None. B. Obermayer-Pietsch: None.  P10
.70 Transient expression of ATIC and ADSL restore affected purinosome assembly in cultured skin fibroblasts from patients with ADSL  P10
.68 deficiency The effect of Mediterranean diet and exercise on insulin resistance M. Zikanova, V. Baresova, V. Skopova, S. Kmoch; in the presence of PPARG2 rs1801282 polymorphism in a central Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague 2, Czech Republic. Romanian population K. Csep, C. Banescu, A. Todoran Butila; University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg Mures, Romania. De novo purine synthesis (DNPS) is one of the basic processes in eukaryo- tic cells. Purinosome is multienzyme complex composed by enzymes of As the environment has a role in modifying the relationship between ge- DNPS that cells transiently assemble in their cytoplasm upon depletion or netic variants and clinical measures of disease, consideration of gene-en- increased demand of purines. Dysfunction of DNPS is represented by two vironment interactions (GxE) is mandatory. Based on the Nutritional Phe- genetic diseases: AICA-ribosiduria and adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency notype Database initiated to facilitate GxE GWAS or single-gene studies, we (dADSL). We hypothesized that some of the mutations may affect formation proposed to follow the role of lifestyle and rs1801282 on insulin resistance or stability of the purinosome. in a non-diabetic population from central Romania. We investigated purinosome formation in cultured skin fibroblasts from In 210 subjects (median age 52) living in an urban environment, insulin one AICA-ribosiduria patient and nine dADSL patients representing three resistance has been estimated by QUICKI (Quantitative Insulin Sensitivity groups of the disease - neonatal form, type I form and type II form. Skin  C2
h6e0ck Index, IRI=1/QUICKI), while genotyping waEs dSoHneG b y2  P0
C1 R3-R |F LPPA uRsiInSg, FRfiAbrNobClaEs t|s WculWturWed. EinS pHurGin.eO dRepGleted medium were immuno-labeled withABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .72 Common g.1541G>A SCO2 gene mutation carriership among Polish various combinations of DNPS proteins. We observed correlation between patients with negative molecular testing for spinal muscular atrophy. purinosome formation and the disease severity : no creation of purinosome S. Łuczak1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, J. Zimowski2, P. Kowalski1, E. Ciara1, M. Borucka- in neonatal and type I forms and reduced formation in type II form of dADSL Mankiewicz1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Pelc1, J. Trubicka1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1, and AICA-ribosiduria. J. Zaremba2; Then we investigated the possibility of the purinosome formation recovery 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Institute of Psychiatric and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. in AICA-ribosiduria skin fibroblasts transfected with wtATIC; and dADSL skin fibroblasts transfected with wtADSL. We observed renovation of puri- Introduction nosome formation in transfected dADSL fibroblasts comparable to control fibroblasts in the purine depleted medium. In contrast, no purinosome for- SMN/ mation was observed in transfected AICA-ribosiduria fibroblasts. SNpAiInPal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the most frequent among rare di- These results indicate that genetic defects of DNPS affect not only activity seases in Poland (1:7000-10000 births). Direct molecular testing for and structure of the individual enzymes, but according to disease severity, deletions is a routine diagnostic appSroCaOc2h-. About 80-100 such tests are also functionality of the DNPS pathway by purinosome complex destabili- performed per year. zation. Muscle histology and EMG records SiMn N/NAIPrelated encephalomyopathy Funding: LH11031_Ministry of Education of Czech Republic, 
P305 /12/ (with g.1541G>A as a common mutation) are similar to these observed in 
P419 _Czech Science Foundation, UNCE 20401, PRVOUK-
P24 /LF1/3 Charles SMA, which may suggest necessity of teSsMtiNng/.NAIP U Mni. vZeirksaintyo vina :P Br.a Rgueese.arch Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or TMhaet earimia lo af nthdi sM setuthdyo dwsas to determine frequency of g.1541G>A mutation in consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; a cohort of 468 archive DNA samples negative for deletions. grant No. LH11031_Ministry of Education of Czech Republic, grant No. 
P305 /12/ 
P419 _Czech Science Foundation. V. Baresova: None. V. Skopova: None. S. We examined samples of DNA isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes. Kmoch: None. Genotyping with Taqman’s probe (based on Real Time equipment) was used fRoers supltescific mutation identification. Presence of the mutation in selected samples was confirmed by direct sequencing. 
P10 .71 Infantile Refsum disease: a clinical diagnosis for a complex TSChOe2 study revealed nine g.1541G>A positive samples: three g.1541G>A car- biochemical algorithm riers , in addition to six finally established non-SMA diagnoses (5 cases of M. J. Sá1, E. Martins2, M. Santos3, M. Coutinho4, V. Miranda5, L. Nunes6, R. Ferreira7, L. Conc-lruesliaotned encephalomyopathy and one SMARD). The carrier frequency Lacerda7, A. Fortuna1, G. Soares1; in the studied group was finally established as 1:156 (3/468). 1Medical Genetics Unit, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto de Magalhães/INSA, IP, Porto, Portugal, 2Metabolic Disorders Consultation, Pediatrics Department, Hospital de It remains to be clarified if the number of g.1541G>A carriers identified in Santo António/CHP, Porto, Portugal, 3Neuropediatrics Department, Hospital de Santo António/CHP, Porto, Portugal, 4ENT Department, Hospital de Santo António/CHP, Porto, this study corresponds to the true population frequency or may be asso- Portugal, 5Ophthalmology Department, Hospital de Santo António/CHP, Porto, Portugal, ciated with a neurogenic muscle pathology. 6Genetics Department, Hospital Dona Estefânia/CHLC, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Biochemical The study was supported by the National Science Centre project no. 1154/B/ Genetics Unit, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto de Magalhães/INSA, IP, Porto, P
S0 . 1Ł/u2c0z1ak1:/ N40on aen. dD C. PMieHkIu ptorowjsekcta -nAob. rSa1m2c6z/u1k2: None. J. Zimowski: None. P. Portugal. Kowalski: None. E. Ciara: None. M. Borucka-Mankiewicz: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. M. Pelc: None. J. Trubicka: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. E. Background Pronicka: None. J. Zaremba: None. Peroxissomal biogenesis disorders (PBD) include InfPaEntXi le Refsum disease (IRD), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, belonging to the mild end of the 
P10 .73 Zellweger spectrum disorders (ZSDs). Mutations in genes, coding for The effects of the (TAAAA)n VNTR on serum SHBG and lipid levels in peroxins, result in general impairment of peroxisomal functions. We report men with coronary heart disease aC afisfeth r ePporotrutguese patient with IRD, establishing a comparison with the re- Ö. Kurnaz Gömleksiz1,2, B. Akadam Teker2, Z. Bugra3, B. Omer4, H. Yilmaz Aydogan2; maining Portuguese patients. 1Haliç University, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Institute DETAE Department of Molecular Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, A 3 years-old girl born from consanguineous parents was referred to the Department of Cardiology,, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medical Genetics consultation for retinitis pigmentosa, bilateral sensorineu- Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Istanbul, Turkey. ral hearing loss, developmental delay and dysmorphic cranio-facial features. Hypotonia was observed at birth. She had had neonatal jaundice and in- creased hepatic enzymes. Nystagmus, detected at 3 months, prompted oph- HDL-C levels are inversely associated with the CHD risk. Serum SHBG con- thalmologic evaluation that later documented retinal dystrophy. Pyramidal centration is partially under genetic control and positively associated with syndrome was evident at 16 months. Plasma levels of very long chain fatty the HDL-C levels. In our study, the possible relation between SHBG (TAAAA) acids were slightly increased, which in combination with increased phyta- n VNTR and low HDL-C were investigated in 75 men with CHD and in 50 nic acid and pristanic acid levels supported the hypothesis of a peroxisomal healthy men by analyzing this polymorphism andp also measuring SHBG levels. disorder, either a ZSD or a D-bifunctional protein deficiency. The deficient In CHD patients who had SHBG>35nmol/l, the possibpility of having a HDL-C aDcitsicvuitsys oiof ndihydroxyacetone-phosphase acyltransferase in fibroblasts is in levels >0.90mmol/l was observed significant ( =0.004;OR:6.319). The fre- accordance with diagnosis of ZSD. quency of six repeats allele was higher in controls ( =0.002;OR:0,293). Six repeats allele in patients and short repeats (≤8) in controls were found to be When comparing to the other Portuguese patients with IRD, biochemical associated with higher SHBG (p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively). In patients abnormalities in the present patient were found to be milder. Hearing and with eight repeats allele, HDL-C/LDL-C was observed lower than in non-car- visual impairment should prompt a comprehensive investigation of PBD, riers (p<0.05). Triglycerides were lower in controls with six repeats allele as the onset and severity of manifestations is variable and numerous clini- and short repeats and higher in controls with nine repeats allele (p<0.05). cal differential diagnoses exist. Since the ZSDs are a continuum of at least HDL-C/LDL-C was lower in controls with nine repeats allele. Our findings 3 phenotypes (Zellweger syndrome, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, IRD), indicate six repeats allele has a positive effect on SHBG levels in both pati- to name a specific profile of ZSDs is useful when discussing prognosis and ents and controls. Consequently, this is a preliminary study to establish the c Mou.Jn. sSeál:li Nngo nfaem. Ei.l iMesa.rtins: None. M. Santos: None. M. Coutinho: None. V. link among (TAAAA)n VNTR, SHBG and HDL-C levels in CHD pathogenesis Miranda: None. L. Nunes: None. R. Ferreira: None. L. Lacerda: None. A. Fortuna: None. G. Soares: None. in a Turkish population. It was demonstrated 6 repeat allele may protect against CHD risk. Additional studies with larger sample sizes are needed to define the influence of SHBG (TAAAA)n VNTR on clinical outcomes. Finally, we suggest a positive correlation between SHBG and HDL-C levels in CHD p Öa.t iKeunrtnsa, az nGdö tmhiles kassiszo: cNiaotnieo.n B m. Aigkhatd baem a Tffeekcetre:d N boyn eS.H ZB. GB uggernae: vNaorniaet. iBo.n s. Omer: None. H. Yilmaz Aydogan: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 261ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .74 
P10 .76 Study of an asymptomatic mother heterozygous for X-linked creatine Discovery of new potentially associated loci from pathway analysis of transporter defect known influencing genes for Type 2 Diabetes A. Philippe1, N. Boddaert2, A. Mazery3, C. Fournier3, J. Steffann1, J. Bonnefont1, A. Chabli4, L. Marullo1,2, A. Antonov3, A. Morris2, C. Scapoli1, I. Prokopenko2,4; A. Tanet5, L. Colleaux6, V. Valayannopoulos7; 1The Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, 1Inserm U781 & Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 2Département Italy, 2The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique, United Kingdom, 3Medical Research Council, Toxicology Unit, Leicester, United Kingdom, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 4Service de Biochimie Métabolique, Hôpital Necker, Paris, 4Department of Genomics of Common Disease, School of Public Health, Imperial College France, 5Service de Psychiatrie de l‘enfant et l‘adolescent, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Paris, France, 6Inserm U781, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 7Centre de référence des maladies héréditaires du métabolisme, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. Genome-wide association studies have contributed to the description of 71 loci that influence susceptibility to T2D; however, our understanding of the Female carriers of SL
C6 A8 mutations may have learning disabilities or be underlying pathophysiological processes is still limited. asymptomatic. Therefore, X-linked creatine transporter defect is likely to be We explored the mechanistic basis of T2D associations assuming their func- under diagnosed in females and almost all of female carriers reported in the tional dependence and, therefore, connectivity via non-interrupted gene literature are related to an affected boy. networks. An increased creatine/creatinine ratio in urine or a relatively low cerebral We considered 84 T2D-associated genetic variants within 71 known loci creatine signal in 1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) compared to (Jan 2013) and explored their gene network connections using the Locus- other metabolic peaks (choline-containing compounds, myo-inositol, N-ace- Spider tool, enabling interrogation of functional gene-gene relations from tylasparate) is used to detect the creatine transporter defect in females. KEGG, Reactome and PPI pathways. LocusSpider prioritised genes having: We report two female carriers of SL
C6 A8 mutations (c1006-1008 delAAC), (i) maximal connectivity within the 71 pinput loci; and (ii) located most clo- aunt and mother of an affected boy: the aunt has mild cognitive impairment, sely to the associated variants. the mother is asymptomatic. The LocusSpider gene network model ( model=0.01) connected variants from Interestingly, the aunt has normal urinary creatine/creatinine ratio but low 62 T2D-associated loci (41 genes were <50kb distant from the SNP) and cerebral creatine signal in MRS whereas her sister has increased urinary suggested 44 additional genes required to connect genes from the input creatine/creatinine ratio but normal cerebral creatine signal. loci. The most represented pathways included signal transduction (WNT/ The cognitive evaluation of the asymptomatic mother shows IQ scores in the EGFR-signaling), transcription, cell cycle and insulin secretion regulation. range of low average intellectual functioning with inter-scale heterogenei- At 22 known loci, pathway analysis suggested a gene different from the ty. However, it represents a 35-40 point deficit when compared to her two previously assigned locus label, underscoring a need for further functional healthy brothers’ IQ scores. characterisation. We observed at least nominal associations (p-value<0.05, In the same way as it is necessary to take into account the urinary creatinine FDR q-value<0.20) with T2D in DIAGRHALMAv-D3Q mA1e,tap-analysis (Morris et al. or cerebral metabolic peaks to interpret respectively the urinary creatine 2p012) within 25 loRcAiS (G+R/F-510kb reAgRioAnPs1) CsuArMroKu2nBding the 44 su-g7gested genes, and the cerebral creatine peak of individuals, we suggest considering cogni- wpith stron-5gest PsRigKnAaClsB at rs927098A6D C(Y5 KCN J1=12.7x10 ), rs7169735 tive levels of family members to assess effects of SL
C6 A8 mutations on IQ ( =4.7x10-4) at as - inter-link, and rs603939 female carriers in further research. ( =5.7x10 ) at connecting and . Screening based on urinary creatine/creatinine ratio and MRS could be pro- Our findings suggest that novel pathway analysis methods may underscore p Ao.s Pehdi ltiop pfeem: Naolense w. Nit. hB loedadrnaeinrtg: dNioffniecu. Alt.i eMsa azfeteryr: g Nloobnael. cCo. gFnoiutirvnei eerv: aNluoantei.o Jn.. important biological mechanisms of T2D pathogenesis and highlight biolo- Steffann: None. J. Bonnefont: None. A. Chabli: None. A. Tanet: None. L. Colleaux: None. V. Valayannopoulos: None. g Lic. aMllayr urellloe:v Naonnt ea.s Aso. cAinattoionnosv f:o Nro snueb. sAe.q Muoenrrti sfo: lNloowne-.u Cp.. Scapoli: None. I. Prokopenko: None. 
P10 .75 
P10 .77 Growing up with cholesterol biosynthesis deficiencies Congenital Disorders of Glycosilation: Antisense therapy in TMEM165 M. L. Cardoso1,2, E. Martins3, D. Serra4, M. Barbosa5,6, A. Fortuna6, M. Reis-Lima7, A. deficiency Bandeira3, A. Balreira2, F. Marques1,2; P. Yuste-Checa1, C. Medrano1, L. R. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, G. Matthijs2, B. 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Institute for Molecular and Pérez1; Cell Biology (IBMC), Porto, Portugal, 3Metabolic Unit, Porto Hospital Centre, Porto, 1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, CBMSO, CIBERER, IDIPaz, Madrid, Portugal, 4Coimbra University Hospitals, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Gulbenkian Institute of Spain, 2Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Science, Oeiras, Portugal, 6Medical Genetics Centre Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, 7Portugal Private Hospitals, Porto, Portugal. Deficiency of glycosyltranferases, glycosidases or nucleotide-sugar trans- In the last two decades, several genetic defects affecting different steps of porters involved in protein glycosylation leads to Congenital Disorders of the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway were described and nine inherited Glycosylation (CDG), a rare group of diseases characterized by multisystemic errors of the distal part of cholesterol biosynthesis have been recognized. phenotype. Recently, others proteins implicated in Golgi trafficking and Gol- Affected patients present complex malformation syndromes involving diffe- gi pH homeostasis have been identified as CDG causing genes. In this work, rent organs and systems. we describe the functional analysis of the intronic change c.792+182G>A We report on the biochemical data, genotype and evolution, since young identified in TMEM165 causing new CDG type II. The protein function is life till adulthood, of three patients with enzymatic defects at three distinct, unknown, but points to an important role in Golgi glycosylation and Golgi steps of cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, namely: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syn- morphology maintenance. Using a functional in vitro splicing assay based drome (SLO); X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata type 2 (CDPX2) on minigenes and transcriptional profile studies in patient-derived fibro- and congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb blasts, we have validated its pathogenic effect. Once functionally analyzed defects (CHILD) syndrome in order to contribute for a better knowledge of the deep intronic change we have applied a mutation specific therapy. We the natural history of these genetic disorders. The differences on clinical have designed a specific antisense oligonucleotide targeted to rescue the manifestations depended on several factors: the step in cholesterol synthe- abnormal splicing process. After transfection we have detected normal tran- sis that is blocked, the type of mutation and its impact in the structure and script mRNA which is efficiently translated into a well localized protein. We function of the enzyme, and the amount of exogenous cholesterol that the have observed a protein recovery (3-fold) detected by double inmunofluo- patient received either via placenta during embryonic development or later resce using TMEM165 and the Golgi-specific marker GM130 antibodies. The by oral intake. recovery was dose and sequence specific with no effect on patient-derived None of our patients showed life threatening episodes and their phenotypes fibroblasts harboring missense changes. The results show the efficiency of actually improved over time probably due to the fact that the western adult the antisense therapy targeted to intronic changes, which are detectable by diet became progressively enriched in cholesterol (due to the increased combined DNA and RNA studies. Up to now, five TMEM165-CDG patients amount of animal products ingested), which may partially compensate for have been described and three of them are homozygous for the intronic the deficiency after birth. In order to diagnose such disorders it is impor- change c.792+182G>A which makes antisense morpholino therapy an ex- tant to look for malformations, minor dismorphic features and chronic skin c Pe.l Yleunstt eca-Cnhdeidcaa:t eN torneea.t mC.e Mnet dforar nthoi:s N noenwe. CLD.RG. Dtyepsev iIaI.t: None. M. Ugarte: None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. G. Matthijs: None. B. Pérez: None. cMh.aLn. gCeasr idno psoat: iNenotnse .w Eit. hM laorwtin osr: bNoorndee. rDli.n See crrhao:l eNsotneer.o Ml l.e Bvealrsb oats aa:n Ny oangee.. A. Fortuna: None. M. Reis-Lima: None. A. Bandeira: None. A. Balreira: None. F. Marques: None. 262 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .78 
P10 .80 Disruption of NUBPL due to balanced translocation [t(3;14) A homozygous UQCR
C2  mutation cause a neonatal onset metabolic (q26.33;q14)] increases severity of a family-specific PGK1 mutation decompensation due to complex III deficiency. D. David1, I. Haltrich2, B. Marques1, C. Fernandes1, S. Malveiro1, G. Fekete2; N. Miyake1, S. Yano2, Y. Goto3, N. Matsumoto1; 1Department of Human Genetics, National Institute of Health Dr Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, 1Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Portugal, 22nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Yokohama, Japan, 2Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, LAC+USC Medical Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, NCNP, Tokyo, Japan. An intriguing group of familiar translocations are those which not always segregate with the “associated” disorder. Here we report the genetic altera- tions underlying a clinical phenotype characterized by haemolytic anemia The mitochondrial respiratory chain generates energy as adenosine tri- and neuro-myopathy, seemingly associated with the familial translocation phosphate (ATP) by means of the electron-transport chain and the oxida- [t(3;14)(3q26.33;q14)T]. TTCw1o4 affected probands and two unaffected relati- tive-phosphorylation system. The mitochondrial respiratory chain, located ves have been identified asN cUaBrrPiLers. The 3q26.33 breakpoint was mapped in the inner mitochondrial membrane, is composed of five complexes: I, II, about 40 kb from the 5’ end, at position 180.28 Mb and the 14q14 III, IV, and V. Among them, mitochondrial complex III (CIII) comprises 11 breakpoint within IVS 6 of . The latter has been implicated in thDe NaAe-- subunits encoUdQeCdR Bby UoQnCeR mQitBoCcSh1oLndrial TaTnCd1 910U nQuCcRleBar genUeQsC. RUQn til now, JtCio1l9ogy of mitochondrial complex I deficiency (OMIM 252010). The most im- mutations in four genes have beeBn CkSn1oLwn to TcaTuCs1e9 a utosomal recessive CIII portant additional possible candidate gene identified in this region is deficiencies: , , and . and encode causing an autosomal recessive disorder (OMIN 610198) that partially components of CIII itself, while and produce mitochondrial overlaps the reported phenotype. The recognition that a deceased relative assembly factors. Here, we report three patients from a consanguineous Me- most likely suffered from a similar disorder suggested the possibility of an xican family presenting with neonatal onset of hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, X-linked disorder. Exclusion of additional genomic alterations within the ketUoQsiCsR, aCn2d hyperammonemia. By whole exome sequencing combined with breakpoint regions or elsewhere in the genome, familial X-chromosome se- linkage analysis, we successfully found a homozygous missense mutation grePgGatKio1n analysis and whole exome sequencing identified a novel missen- in that encodes mitochondrial ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase se mutation, c.358G>A, p.Glu120Lys, in exon 4 of phosphoglycerate kinase core protein II. In its native state, the CIII monomer is quickly converted into 1 ( ). Segregation analysis confirmed the association of this mutation a catalytically active homodimer that is incorporated into a supercomplex, with the disease phenotype. Re-evaluation of clinical data indicates that and this supercomplex functions as a single enzyme. Based on structural myopathy is considerably more severe in PGK 1P GdKef1icient patients carriers of modeling, the mutation (p.Arg183Trp) was predicted to destabilize the hy- the translocation. The confirmation of this observation is cuNrrUeBnPtlLy under- drophobic core at the subunit interface of the core protein II homodimer. In way. In conclusion, we have identified a novel mutation whose clinical vitro studies using fibroblasts from the index patient clearly indicated CIII phenotype is exacerbated by co-inheritance of the disrupted and/or dUeQfCicRieCn2cy, as well as impaired assembly of the supercomplex consisting of by alterations affecting the genes in the breakpoint regions. complexes I, III, and IV. This is the first described human disease caused by D. David: None. I. Haltrich: None. B. Marques: None. C. Fernandes: None. S. N. Miyak aeb: nNoornme.a Sli.t yY.ano: None. Y. Goto: None. N. Matsumoto: None. Malveiro: None. G. Fekete: None. 
P10 .82 
P10 .79 Association and molecular analysis of 3’ UTR polymorphisms of the Novel mutations in HPD causing tyrosinemia type III in Northern WF
S1  gene Israel Z. Ronai, N. Nemeth, A. Somogyi, M. Sasvari-Szekely; T. C. Falik-Zaccai1,2, D. Raviv Shay1, N. Nasser Samra1, L. Kalfon1, O. Dementyev1, M. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. Baydany1, F. Fares3, A. Shaag4, S. Almashanu5, H. Mandel6,7; 1Western Galilee Hospital-Naharia, Naharia, Israel, 2The Galilee Faculty of Medicine, Bar Ilan University, Safed, Israel, 3Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel, 4Monique and Jacques Wolframin is a major protein of the endoplasmic reticulum, loss of function Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical Center, mutations of the WF
S1  gene result in the monogenic Wolfram-syndrome, Jerusalem, Israel, 5Newborn Screening, National Center for Newborn Screening, Tel- characterized by optic atrophy, diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus and Hashomer Hospital, Tel Aviv, Israel, 6Meyer Children’s Hospital, Metabolic Unit, Rambam deafness, whereas polymorphisms of the gene are putative risk factors of Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 7Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel. diabetes. Our aim was the association and molecular analysis of two SNPs (rs1046322 and rs9457) in the 3’ UTR of the WF
S1  gene, which are sup- posed to alter the miRNA binding according to in silico data. Impaired tyrosine catabolism result in elevated plasma tyrosine concen- Association analysis was carried out by case-control study. 617 patients and trations. Malfunction enzymes along the tyrosine catabolic pathway results 1147 healthy controls particiapted. Genotype analysis was carried out using in hereditary tyrosinemia. Tyrosinemia type III is caused by deficiency in PCR based methods, functional analysis was done by luciferase reporter sy- 4-HPPD. To date, only 14 cases have been described, showing a wide clinical stem. spectrum. Reported patients have either presented with mental retardation Our results showed that rs9457 “C” allele was significantly more frequent and neurological symptoms while others, detected by neonatal screening, among patients with type 2 diabetes, whereas the rs1046322 variant sho- have been asymptomatic. wed a significant association with the type 1 form of the disease. Luciferase We report 4 new patients, 3 from a highly consanguineous Druze family, pre- reporter experiments suggested that the rs1046322 and the rs9457 SNPs senting elevated blood tyrosine levels with normal development and intel- altered the binding of miRNA-668 and miRNA-185, respectively. ligence. Clinical evaluation revealed novel eye and skin phenotype not pre- Our results suggest that the rs9457 and rs1046322 polymorphisms are the viously described in tyrosinemia type III. The fourth patient, from a Muslim genetic components of diabetes mellitus. Earlier studies showed an associa- origin consanguineous family, was diagnosed with hypertyrosinemia in the tion between WF
S1  rs1046320 and diabetes, however no biological func- neonatal metabolic screen. Her psychomotoric development is normal for tion of the SNP could be observed. We suggest that this result is due to the her age. Sequencing revealed two novel splicing mutations in HPD. Healthy strong linkage disequilibrium between rs9457 and rs1046320, thus the lat- control screening from two Druze villages detected 3:100 carriers in one ter polymorphism can be a genetic marker of rs9457. village and none in the second. This work was supported by the Hungarian grant OTKA K83766 and by the We suspect tyrosinemia type III to be under-diagnosed and more common Bolyai János Scholarship (BO/00089/10/5) of the Hungarian Academy of than is currently known. With neonatal metabolic screen becoming more S Zc.i eRnocneasi.: None. N. Nemeth: None. A. Somogyi: None. M. Sasvari-Szekely: widespread, more patients are likely to be diagnosed. Molecular analysis None. is the gold standard for diagnosing tyrosinemia type II and III. In light of the minute number of patients with tyrosinemia type III worldwide, clinical characterization of new patients is highly significant, determining the natu- ral history of the disease, and describing the treatment and its contribution t To. Cn.o Framliakl- Zgarocwcatih: Nanonde d. eDv.e Rloapvmiv eSnhta oyf: tNhoen pea. tNie. nNtass.ser Samra: None. L. Kalfon: None. O. Dementyev: None. M. Baydany: None. F. Fares: None. A. Shaag: None. S. Almashanu: None. H. Mandel: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 263ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P10 .83 Medizinische Genetik, Charité Universitäts Medizin, Berlin, Germany, 6Dept of Human X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: Two manifesting heterozygotes in a Genetics, University Medical Centre St. Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7INSERM U781- cohort of Czech and Slovak patients Université Paris Descartes-Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 8Division of K. Peskova1, L. Dvorakova1, H. Vlaskova1, H. Treslova1, H. Jahnova1, M. Magner2, P. Jesina1, Neurology, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. P. Hornik1, P. Bartova1, H. Waterham3, R. Wanders3, M. Hrebicek1; 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, General University Mabry syndrome (hyperphosphatasia with developmental disability) was Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, first described in 1970 (OMIM#239300). At first considered rare, improved Netherlands. syndrome identification has led to recruitment of more than twenty families world-wide. Salient features of the disorder include: characteristic facial dysmorphology (hypertelorism, a broad nasal bridge The most common peroxisomal disorder, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X- and a tented mouth); variable shortening of middle and distal phalanges; ALD; MIM# 300100), is a recessive neurodegenerative disease. The major and neural abnormalities on biopsy (plaques disrupting Schwann cells). phenotypic forms are Like many infantile metabolic storage disorders, seizures associated with childhood cerebral (ccALD) and adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN). The dia- Mabry syndrome have an onset in the first year of life. Persistently elevated gnosis of X-ALD was establisheAdB iCnD 215 Czech and Slovak families. All pati- serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels are now known to be associated ents had elevated concentration of 
C26 :0, elevated ratios of 
C26 :0/
C22 :0 and with abnormalities of the phosphatidylinositol glycan (GPI) anchor due to 
C24 :0/
C22 :0 and a mutation in gene. mutations in the PIGV, PIGO and PGA
P2  genes. Lysosomal storage materi- In the cohort there are two symptomatic females. The first presented with al detected in some patients with Mabry syndrome. It has been putatively AMN symptoms from the age of 27 years. She is a carrier of previously pu- identified as glycolipid in nature - possibly resulting from changes in lipid blished mutation c.887A>G (p.Tyr296Cys). Sequencing of cDNA showed a raft functions that result from GPI anchor disruption. Not all patients with a strong prevalence of the peak corresponding to the mutated allele. clinical diagnosis of hyperphosphatasia with neurologic deficit result from The second female patient was a two-year-old girl with microcephaly, psy- known GPI disruptions. We present data on patients that suggest there are chomotor delay, hearing and vision disorder, seizures, and leukodystrophy. f Mur. tThheor msupbstoynp:e Nso onfe t.h Te. Rdiossocridoelir:. None. M.M. Nezarati: None. E. Sweeney: Pathological VLCFA profile and a previously found a pathogenic mutation None. P.N. Krawitz: None. H. van Bokhoven: None. C. Marcelis: None. B. c.1553G>A (p.Arg518Gln) in a heterozygote state was identified. Sequencing DeVries: None. A. Munnich: None. D.M. Andrade: None. D.E. Cole: None. of cDNA showed 70 - 80% prevalence of the mutated allele. However, the se- quencing of the patient’s asymptomatic mother revealed very similar results (including biochemical findings). HUMARA analysis confirmed the unfavo- 
P10 .86 rable X-inactivation skewing in the mother blood sample. Newborn screening for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy These data show that molecular diagnostics in heterozygous females is not S. Tortorelli1, C. T. Turgeon1, M. J. Magera1, A. B. Moser2,3, F. Lorey4, P. Rinaldo1, D. straightforward. It may reflect at least three possible explanations: 1) The X- Matern1; inactivation status does not correspond to the phenotype in X-ALD heterozy- 1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, gotes in all cases. 2) The genotype-phenotype correlation is poor. 3) Clinical United States, 3Johns Hopkins Universitty, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4California Department of Public health, Richmond, CA, United States. picture of heterozygotes may result from a combination of X-ALD and other factors, like severe perinatal risks. S Ku.p Ppeosrkto: RvaV:O N-VonFeN. 6
L4 . 1D6v5o/ra2k0o1v2a,: P NRoVnOeU. HK.- PV2la4s/kLoFv1a/: 3None. H. Treslova: None. H. Jahnova: None. M. Magner: None. P. Jesina: None. P. Hornik: None. P. Objective: X-ALD is the most common peroxisomal disorder (incidence Bartova: None. H. Waterham: None. R. Wanders: None. M. Hrebicek: None. 1:21,000 males). It is a progressive and fatal disorder that affects nervous system, adrenal cortex and testis. Adrenal insufficiency is totally prevented by presymptomatic therapy, while the cerebral phenotype, affecting 40% of 
P10 .84 all male patients, can be prevented by hematopoietic cell transplantation. Arrested leukodystrophy in a young man with However, this intervention has a narrow window of opportunity to be effec- adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) tive. Lysophosphatidylcholine species (lyso-PC) on blood spots have been D. L. Renaud, J. D. Port, K. M. Welker, M. R. Trenerry; shown to be abnormally elevated in newborns affected with X-ALD and per- Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. oxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBD), allowing identification of presympto- Background matic patients. Methods and Results: Using a flow injection analysis MS/MS (FIA-MS/MS) X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a peroxisomal dis- method, we have measured lyso-PC species (
C26 :0 to 
C20 :0) on dried blood oCradseer Rwehpiochrt presents with progressive leukodystrophy in boys or as pro- spots from 16 male patients with X-ALD (12 adults and 4 newborns), 12 gressive spasticity and neuropathy in men (AMN). XALD adult heterozygotes, and 6 patients with PBD (4 adults and 2 new- A 30 year old male presented to the Neurometabolic Clinic borns). Data were compared with 340 controls (NBS dried blood spots). with worsening stiff gait and paresthesias, suggestive of AMN, and a recent Results are shown in the table diagnosis of X-ALD. He was diagnosed with Addison’s Disease at age 4. He Conclusions: The data of the present study strongly indicate that our method was a gifted student until high school when he had a change in personality, is analytically suitable as a screening tool for X-ALD. Patients affected with decreased attention and executive functioning. This was progressive during peroxisomal biogenesis disorders and 70 - 85 % of XALD female carriers high school and then stabilized. IQ testing at age 16 years revealed a verbal will be detected by this assay. With support from NICHD and the NBSTRN, IQ of 115 and performance IQ of 92. a pilot study on 100,000 leftover NBS sample is ongoing to test the clinical At the time of his evaluation, neuropsychological testing revealed a verbal validity of this approach. IQ of 115 and an improved performance IQ of 110. MRI of the spine revealed Concentration of 
C26  Lyso-PC species in peroxisomal cases and controls 
C26  (ug/ml) 
C26  (ug/ml) generalized atrophy of the spinal cord and the EMG revealed sensorimotor 1 percentile 99 percentile neuropathy. XALD (16) 0.28 0.75 The MRI scan revealed abnormal signal in the white matter of the parieto- XALD H (12) 0.15 0.51 PBD (6) 0.25 1.06 occipital, temporal and cerebellar white matter bilaterally which has remai- S. Tortorelli: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant controls (340) 0.07 0.28 nCeodn csltuasbiloen. There was no enhancement or restricted diffusion to suggest and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Eunice active demyelination. MR spectroscopy was normal. Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, DHHS (Contract No. HHSN275201000017C). C.T. Turgeon: B. Research This case demonstates a rare arrested form of leukodystrophy Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as i Dn .aL .y Roeunnagu md:a Nn owniet.h J A.DM. NPo.rt: None. K.M. Welker: None. M.R. Trenerry: None. well as grants already received); Significant; Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, DHHS (Contract No. HHSN275201000017C). M.J. Magera: None. A.B. Moser: None. F. Lorey: None. 
P10 .85 P. Rinaldo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Eunice Genetic heterogeneity in Mabry syndrome Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, M. Thompson1, T. Roscioli2, M. M. Nezarati3, E. Sweeney4, P. N. Krawitz5, H. van Bokhoven6, NIH, DHHS (Contract No. HHSN275201000017C). D. Matern: B. Research C. Marcelis6, B. DeVries6, A. Munnich7, D. M. Andrade8, D. E. Cole1; Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as 1Dept of Lab Medicine & Pathobiology, Univ Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Dept of well as grants already received); Significant; Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Women‘s and Children‘s Health, Sydney Childrens‘ Hospital and University of New Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, DHHS (Contract No. South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 3Dept of Genetics, North York General Hospital, Toronto, HHSN275201000017C). ON, Canada, 4Royal Liverpool Children‘s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5Inst für 264 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .001 
P11 .003 Intellectual disability and cancer susceptibility in a family with Cytogenetic abnormalities and monosomal karyotypes in a large inherited 14q32.13q32.2 deletion series of adult Greek patients with acute myeloid leukemia A. Jacquinet, J. H. Caberg, V. Bours, F. G. Debray; A. Daraki1,2, P. Diamantopoulou1, M. Kalomiraki1, V. Patriarcheas1, M. Margariti1, D. 1. Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium. Pantelia1, D. Koumbi1, G. Pantelias1, C. Sambani1, K. N. Manola1; 1Laboratory of Cytogenetics, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Genetics DICER1 & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Located in 14q32.13, codes for an RNase III endoribonuclease es- sential in the processing of microRNAs. These microRNAs are functional non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at a post-transcriptional Cytogenetic abnormalities constitute one of the most important prognostic level by interfering with translation DaInCdE Rd1egradation of target messenger factors in Acute Myeloid Leukaemidae ( nAoMvLo). We performed a convsentional cy- RNAs. Their deregulations have been implicated in several human diseases togenetic study in AML patients in order to defdine en tohveo chromosomal sa-bnor- and cancers. Germline mutations in are associated with a low sus- malities and their frequencies in and secondary AML ( -AML). Our ceptibility risk to tumor development. Inactivating mutations have been study includes 619 patients of whom 503 had AML andde 1 n1o6v oAML. identified in patients and familieDsI CwEiRth1 various benign and malignant tu- Chrosmosome studies were performed on unstimulated bone marrow cells. mors, especially pleuropulmonary blastoma, cystDicI CnEeRp1hroma and ovarian The sex ratio (males/females) was 1.2/1. The median age of AML Sertoli-Leydig tumors. Germline deletion has not been reported so and -AML was 59.46 and 68.9 years respectively. The most common FAB far. We report a 7-year-old girl with an inherited deletion. She was subtype was M4 in 23.5% of patients followed by M2 in 22.6%, M3 in 19.7% referred for mild intellectual deficiency, a medical history of cystic nephroma and M5 in 15.3d%e. nAo vsouccessful karyotypic result wsas achieved in 98.2% of and dysmorphic features. Her father, two paternal uncles and the paternal patients. Among them, nordme anlo kvaoryotypes were fsound in 183 (30.1%) pati- grandmother had mild to moderate intellectual disabilities. The deceased ents; 165 with AML (33.5%) and 18 with -AML (15.6%). Complex grandmother had presented uterin and ovarian tumors. Array-CGH analysis karyotypes had 32.6% of and 34.5%de o nf ov-AoML patients, while mo- identified a 5041kb deleDtiIoCnE Rin 1 14q32.13-q32.2 in the patient, the father, nosomal karyotypes were observed in 19.9% and 27.8% respectively. The the two uncles and the paternal grandmother. The deletion contained 50 most common chromosome aberrations in AML patients were +8 coding genes and led to haploinsufficiency which was responsible (25s.5%), -7/del(7q) (15.7%), -5/del(5q) (11.2%), abnormalities of 11q23 for cancer susceptibility. Moreover, transmission of the deletion was related (6.5%), inv(16) (5.9%), t(15;17) (5.9%), t(8;21) (5.7%) and +21 (3.3%). to intellectual disability in this family. The 14q32.13q32.2 locus has been In -AML the most common abnormalities were +8 (27.4%), -7/del(7q) previously associated with autosomal recessive mental retardation, sugge- (28.7%), -5/del(5q) (28.7%), t(9;22) (6.1%), +21 (6.1%), -Y (4.3%) and ab- sting the presence in the region of genes implicated in cerebral development a An.d J caocgqnuiitnievte: fNuonncet.i oJn.Hs.. Caberg: None. V. Bours: None. F.G. Debray: None. normalities of 11q23 (3.5%). In conclusion the most common abnormality in AML was +8 followdee dn obvyo -7/del(7q). Secondary AML occurred in older adults and showed a higher frequency of abnormal karyotypes and monoso- m Aa. lD kaarraykoi:t Nypoense .t hP.a Dn iamantop AoMulLo.u: None. M. Kalomiraki: None. V. 
P11 .002 Patriarcheas: None. M. Margariti: None. D. Pantelia: None. D. Koumbi: MiRNA related polymorphisms as susceptibility markers of childhood None. G. Pantelias: None. C. Sambani: None. K.N. Manola: None. Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia A. Gutierrez-Camino1, E. Lopez-Lopez1, I. Martin-Guerrero1, P. Garcia-Miguel2, J. Sanchez-Toledo3, A. Carbone4, M. A. Piñan5, J. Uriz6, A. Navajas7, A. Garcia-Orad1; 1University of Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2University Hospital La Paz, Madrid, 
P11 .004 Spain, 3Hospital Materno Infantil Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Miguel Association of A313G glutathione S-transferase 
P1  germline Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 5University Hospital Cruces, Bilbao, Spain, 6University Hospital polymorphism with the susceptibility of de novo acute myeloid Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain, 7University Hospital Cruces, Bilbao, Spain. leukemia A. Daraki1,2, F. Rosmaraki1,2, S. Zachaki1, K. Kakosaiou1,2, K. Stavropoulou1, C. Sambani1, G. Pantelias1, P. Kollia2, V. Aleporou2, K. Manola1; Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy in 1Laboratory of Cytogenetics, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Genetics & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, children. ALL is developed in early life, and consequently, a strong genetic Athens, Greece. influence could be expected. In fact, previous Genome-Wide Association Stu- dies (GWAS) have provided evidence of this fact. Nevertheless, most of these studies are focused in coding regions. Genetic approaches for understanding the etiology of Acute Myeloid Leuke- MicroRNAs (miRNA) are non-coding RNAs that act as negative regulators mia (AML) comprise polymorphic variants in xenobiotic metabGoSlTizPe1r loci. of the expression of other genes. Up to 171 deregulated miRNAs have been Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are phase II detoxification enzymes, in- reported in pediatric ALL, showing their importance in the disease. volved in the metabolism of carcinogens and antican31c3er drugs. gene Recent studies have shown that SNPs in miRNAs-related genes might be as- is subjected to a single nucleotide polymorphism (A G) that decreases the sociated with risk of cancer. These polymorphisms could affect miRNA func- catalytic activity, and consequently, the detoxification capacity. Individuals tion. Nevertheless, there are no studies in ALL risk. homozygous for the mutant allele (G/G) have a lower conjugating activity The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of SNPs in miRNAs-related than individuals homGoSTzyPg1ous for the wild type allele (A/A), while hetero- genes in ALL susceptibility and to determine their functional implication. zygotes (A/G) display intermediate activity. This study investigates the pos- We analyzed 213 childhood B-ALL patients in complete remission and 387 sibleG SimTPp1lication of polymorphism in AML susceptibility and AML- healthy controls. We studied 118 SNPs in pre-miRNAs and genes of miRNA specific chromosomal abnormalities. PCR-RFLP assay was applied to detect biogenesis pathway. The implication of these SNPs in miRNA function was the polymorphism in 184 primary AML patients and 370 unrelated evaluated by qRT-PCR. healthy donors. Abnormal karyotypes were found in 62.6%GS oTfP p1atients and We found 11 polymorphisms significantly associated (p<0.05) with ALL risk. among them, 32.1% and 20.5% had complex and monosomal karyotypes, Of them, 8 SNPs were in processing machinery genes and 3 in pre-miRNA respectively. A significantly higher incidence of the muGtaSnTtP 1 genotypes genes. The functional effect of each SNP was evaluated. (A/G and G/G) was observed in AML patients as compared to the controls Our results suggest that SNPs in miRNAs and miRNA biogenesis pathway (p<0.0001). No association was found between the polymorphism may affect childhood ALL susceptibility. and gender or age. Stratification of patients according to karyotype revealed This project was supported by RETICS (RD/06/0020/0048), UPV/EHU (UFI an increased frequency of G/G homozygotes with normal karyotypes as com- 11/35), Basque Government (GI
C10 /71, S-P
E12 UN060) and Jesús de Gan- pared to the abnormal karyotypes (19.5% vs 8.9% respectivelGy,S pT=
P01 .056). goiti Barrera Foundation. Support by SGIker (UPV/EHU) is gratefully ack- nAo.w Gluetdiegrerde.z-Camino: None. E. Lopez-Lopez: None. I. Martin-Guerrero: Furthermore, a higher frequency of heterozygotes A/G was observed in 3p13a- None. P. Garcia-Miguel: None. J. Sanchez-Toledo: None. A. Carbone: tients with -Y, -7/del(7q) and +G2
S2 T. PO1ur results suggest that the A G None. M.A. Piñan: None. J. Uriz: None. A. Navajas: None. A. Garcia-Orad: polymorphism may be a predisposing factor for the development of AML. None. Moreover, homozygosity of the polymorphism seems to be associated w Ai.t Dh adreavkei:l oNpomnee.n Ft. oRfo AsMmLa rwakiti:h N noonrem. Sal. kZaarcyhoatkyip: eN.one. K. Kakosaiou: None. K. Stavropoulou: None. C. Sambani: None. G. Pantelias: None. P. Kollia: None. V. Aleporou: None. K. Manola: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 265ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .005 
P11 .007 Immunophenotypic and clinical features of acute myeloid leukemia Exome sequencing identifies potential new candidate genes for patients with normal cytogenetics and mutation of FLT3 gene colorectal adenomatous polyposis E. Petrova, I. Martynkevich, M. Kozlovskaya, L. Martynenko, M. Ivanova, N. Cybakova, S. I. Spier1, D. Drichel2, M. Kerick3, J. Altmüller4, A. Laner5,6, S. Horpaopan1, S. Vogt1,7, T. Gritsaev, K. Abdulkadyrov; Becker2,8, P. Nürnberg4, S. Perner9, E. Holinski-Feder5,6, M. M. Nöthen1,10, P. Hoffmann1,10,11, Russian Research Institute of Hematology and Transfusion, St.-Petersburg, Russian B. Timmermann12, M. Schweiger3, S. Aretz1; Federation. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Medizinische Klinik und The goal of the research was to determine distinctive features of de novo Poliklinik IV, Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, München, Germany, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with FLT3-ITD mutation. Objects: to review 6Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, München, Germany, 7MVZ Dr. Eberhard & Partner, the variability of morphological and cytogenetic characteristics of AML pa- Dortmund, Germany, 8Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, tients with FLT3-ITD; to identify homogeneity of the group of AML patients University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 9Department of Prostate Cancer Research, Institute with normal karyotype (NK) with FLT3-ITD based on haematological data of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Department of Genomics, and immunophenotype of blast cells. The investigation group included 101 Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 11Division of Medical Genetics, AML patients. FLT3-ITD mutation were detected by PCR method in 21 cases University Hospital Basel, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 12Next Generation Sequencing Group, Max Planck Institute for Molecular (20,8%). Meanwhile 13 patients (61.9%) from this group had NK. The group Genetics, Berlin, Germany. of patients with expression of several antigens more than 20% (diagnosti- cally significant number) were analyzed. There рw=e0r,6e3 n5o. significant diffe- rence in number of patients with high expression of CD34 in control group Background: In up to 50% of families with colorectal adenomatous poly- and group with FLT3-ITD: 83,3% against 90,0%; At onрce=,0 t,h0e0 7num- posis no germline mutation in the currently known genes APC causing fa- ber of patients with highр e=x0p,0r1e4ssion of HLA-DR and CD7 were significantly milial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or MUTYH causing MUTYH-associated higher in group with NK and FLT3-ITD: 6,2% against 50,0%; and polyposis (MAP) can be identified. Missense mutations in polymerase genes 55,6% against 100,0%; ; r=0,400,; rpe=s0p,e0c3t4iv.ely. Correlation analysis showed have recently been found as rare cause of multiple colorectal adenomas/ FLT3-ITD to be determined significantly often in patients older 51 years in carcinomas. Methods: To uncover new causative genes, the exomes of ten comparison with young Received data allowed to make a unrelated APC and MUTYH mutation negative polyposis patients were se- conclusion that AML with NK and FLT3-ITD represent the group, homoge- quenced (Illumina HiSeq platform). For data analysis and variant filtering neous on a number of haematological data and biological characteristics of the GATK software and in-house tools were applied. Results: Altogether, 66 leukemic cells. Thereby such markers as leukocytosis in combination with genes affected by biallelic truncating variants (recessive model) in at least aberrant expression of HLA-DR and CD7 on blast cells allowed to prognosti- one patient and 63 genes affected by truncating heterozygous variants (do- cate the probability of detection FLT3-ITD mutation in AML patients with NEK. .Petrova: None. I. Martynkevich: None. M. Kozlovskaya: None. L. minant model) in at least two patients were found. After detailed manual Martynenko: None. M. Ivanova: None. N. Cybakova: None. S. Gritsaev: investigations of the variants and data mining according to functions and None. K. Abdulkadyrov: None. pathways seven genes of high interest remained (three for the recessive, four for the dominant approach), some of which are involved in cell adhe- sion, proliferation, or recombination repair. Moreover, we found a missense variant in the polymerase gene POLD2 in one patient, which is predicted to 
P11 .006 be damaging by in-silico analysis. In another patient, an APC nonsense mu- Detection by array-based comparative genomic hybridization in a tation in mosaic state below the detection threshold of Sanger sequencing case of adenoid cystic carcinoma of an unbalanced translocation (10% of reads) was recognised. Conclusions: Using exome sequencing we t(6;9)(q23;p22.3~23) which generates a MYB-NFIB fusion oncogene. identified new potentially causative genes for adenomatous polyposis. The S. TOUJANI1,2, E. MONTEIRO3, P. FOURET4,5, A. BERNHEIM6,5; 1Hôpital paul brousse, Villejuif, France, 2Université Paris Sud, Unité Inserm UMR-
S935  ES clinical relevance of the genes is presently clarified in a validation sample Team, Villejuif, France, 3Unité de génétique des tumeurs Inserm U985, Villejuif, France, of 200 polyposis patients. (Supported by German Cancer Aid and BONFOR 4Service d’Anatomie Pathologique-Hôpital la Pitié-Salpêtrière-APHP Université Pierre et p I.r Sogpriearm: Nmoen eo.f Dth. eD rUicnhiveel:r Nsiotnye o. fM B. oKnenr)ick: None. J. Altmüller: None. A. Laner: Maris Curie, Villejuif, France, 5Unité de génétique des tumeurs INSERM U985, Villejuif, None. S. Horpaopan: None. S. Vogt: None. T. Becker: None. P. Nürnberg: France, 6Département de bio pathologie-Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. None. S. Perner: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. P. Hoffmann: None. B. Timmermann: None. M. Schweiger: None. S. Aretz: None. Background: adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) has been shown as a histolo- gically distinctive neoplasm for nearly 150 years. It is among the most com- 
P11 .008 mon carcinomas of the salivary glands. A recurrent t(6;9)(q23; p22.3~23) Mosaic pattern of familial Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome revealed translocation was reported in ACC. Recently, it has been shown that the ACC- by isolated benign adrenocortical tumor: a case report specific t(6;9)(q23;p22.3~23) translocation results in a MYB-NFIB fusion D. H’mida-Ben Brahim1, M. Haddaji Mastouri1, S. Hammami2, M. Chourabi1, S. Trabelsi1, oncogene which is the hallmark of ACC. Array comparative genomic hybridi- S. Sassi1, M. Gribaa1, S. Mougou1, A. Zakhama3, N. Gueddiche2, A. Saad1; zation (aCGH) is a suitable method for studying oncogenomic imbalances. 1Laboratory of cytogenetics, molecular genetics and reproductive biology, Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of pediatrics, Fatouma Bourguiba Results: a 44k aCGH analysis was performed on 17 frozen ACC. In one tumor, Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 3Department of cytophatology, Fatouma Bourguiba genomic imbalances involved only 6q and 9p. A 35.24 Mb deleted region Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia. was detected on 6(q23q27) and a gain segment of 13.87 Mb was observed on (9)(pterp23) <0.20-14.08 Mb>. Genomic mapping indicated that bre- akpoints lied within MYB/6q22.3~23 sequence and NFIB/9p23 gene. The We report a familial BWS presented with a benign hypersecretant adreno- unbalanced form of t(6;9)(q23;22.3~23) translocation: der(6)t(6;9) was cortical tumor (ACT) which proved to be isolated in a 2 months old baby hence suspected. The MYB-NFIB chimeric transcript was detected by RT- girl. Family history revealed a paternal aunt who developed at 60 years a PCR. The latter fusion gene link MYB exon 9b to NFIB exon 11. benign ACT. Our patient was managed surgically and tumoral tissue so as Discussion and conclusion: Analysis of 17 frozen ACC by aCGH has allowed blood sample and skin tissue underwent molecular analysis using MS-MLPA the suspicion -of an unbalanced t(6;9)(q23;p23p24) translocation in one (Methylation-sensitive multiplex ligation probe analysis) in order to detect case. This tumor displays the der(6)t(6;9) as the sole cytogenomic imba- epigenetic alterations associated with BWS. lances, indicating that it is a primary rearrangement in this carcinoma. The Genetic investigations noticed in blood sample a methylation mosaic pat- der(6) is the critical derivative chromosomal of the t(6;9) translocation be- tern at imprinted domain 2 (I
C2 ) encompassing KCNQ1, KCNQ1OT1, and cause the MYB-NFIB transcript was detected by RT-PCR. In cancer, the aCGH CDKN1C genes. This mosaicism was associated in tumoral tissue to a com- data should be analysed carefully and the chimeric fusion gene should be plete loss of methylation at I
C2 , however skin tissue analysis showed a nor- looked for because this type of abnormality may change the prognosis and mal methylation profile. tSh.e T torueajatnmi:e Nnot.ne. E. Monteiro: None. P. Fouret: None. A. Bernheim: None. This rare epigenetic constellation may explain the mild phenotype observed in both patient and her aunt. However appropriate genetic counseling to the affected patient and her family members should be provided and clinicians should be aware that patients may develop isolated benign ACT in the con- tDe.x Ht ’omf ihdae-rBeedni tBarrayh simyn: dNroonme. eMs.. Haddaji Mastouri: None. S. Hammami: None. M. Chourabi: None. S. Trabelsi: None. S. Sassi: None. M. Gribaa: None. S. Mougou: None. A. Zakhama: None. N. Gueddiche: None. A. Saad: None. 266 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .009 
P11 .012 Exome sequencing identifies drivers of progression of Transient Mutation of the ARID1A gene in Endometrial Carcinoma in Spanish Myeloproliferative Disorder to Acute Megakaryoblastic Leukemia in patients children with Down Syndrome M. Fernández-Prieto1, C. Cieza-Borrella2, M. Núñez-Casado3, M. Sancho-de-Salas4, V. S. I. Nikolaev1, A. Vannier1, E. Falconnet1, E. Giarin2, G. Basso2, A. Hoischen3, J. A. Sancho-de-Salas5, Á. García-Iglesias5, R. González-Sarmiento2; Veltman3, J. Groet4, D. Nizetic4, S. E. Antonarakis1; 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Medicina. IBMCC, Salamanca, Spain, 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 3Radboud 2Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Medicina. IBMCC-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Queen Mary University of 3Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Medicina., Salamanca, Spain, 4Servicio de London, Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School of Anatomía Patológica. Hospital Clínico Universitario de Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, Medicine, London, United Kingdom. 5Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia. Hospital Clínico Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. Megakaryoblastic leukemia in children is almost exclusively associated with Down Syndrome (DS) - trisomy 21 and acquired mutations in GATA1. Up to Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most common gynaecological tumor in 10% of DS neonates develop Transient Myeloproliferative Disorder (TMD), developed countries. There are several common mutated genes depending which is self-regressing in the majority of cases, but in 20-30% it progresses on the type. PTEN, PI3K, K-RAS and B-RAF genes are frequently altered in to malignant acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). Currently there is endometrioid carcinomas and 
P53 , E-Cadherin, p16 and PP
P2 R1A genes in no evidence of a genetic component underlying the progression of the di- non endometrioid. sease. In this study we have performed exome-sequencing of 7 megakaryo- ARID1A is a recently identified tumor suppressor which participates in chro- blastic leukemias in DS-children to test the hypothesis that somatic genetic matin remodeling, specifically, in forming switch/sucrose non-fermentable variants contribute to the progression of TMD to AMKL. chromatin remodeling complexes. It has been reported that ARID1A gene is In four out of seven studied AMKL/TMD cases we have observed somatic mutated in ovarian clear cell, endometrioid carcinomas and in uterine endo- mutations, additional to GATA1, occurring in genes with established func- metrioid carcinomas. Most ARID1A mutations are nonsense, frameshift or tion in different types of leukemia (EZH2, APC, FLT3 and JAK1). In addition, in-frame, leading to loss of expression of the protein which encodes. the AMKL genomes were characterized by genomic instability which was The aim of our study has been the analysis of the ARID1A gene in order to not observed in the TMDs. In one patient we have detected two putative determine the incidence of mutations in the different types and grades of driver mutations, a frameshift indel in EZH2, and a hemizygous loss of APC EC. in AMKL which were absent at the TMD stage of disease in this patient. Our We extracted DNA from a set of 48 fresh tumor from patients diagnosed findings favor a three-hit hypothesis, where transition of TMD to AMKL re- with EC (33 endometrioid carcinoma: 17 grade I, 13 grade II and 3 grade III; quires a 3rd genetic event additional to T21 and GATA1 mutation. These 15 non endometrioid: 7 mixed carcinoma; 6 serous carcinoma; 1 carcinosar- additional driver mutations were observed in genes of WNT, JAK-STAT and coma; 1 clear cell carcinoma. We studied the ARID1A gene by PCR, CSGE, MAPK/PI3K pathways, aberrant activation of which may enhance the effect cloning and automatic sequencing. of GATA1 mutation resulting in overexpression of MYC therefore facilitating The results are showed in the annexed table. We found 21 ARID1A pathoge- t Sra.In. sNiitkioonla teovw: Narodnse .m Aa. lVigannanniecry:. None. E. Falconnet: None. E. Giarin: None. G. nic mutations including some deletions, insertions and base substitutions. Basso: None. A. Hoischen: None. J.A. Veltman: None. J. Groet: None. D. Our results confirm that ARID1A gene mutations are a frequent event in Nizetic: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. EC. Supported by FIS PI 10/000219 Tumor type Patients mutated (%) Endometrioid carcinoma 57.57 
P11 .010 -I grade 27.27 Array CGH analysis of acute myeloid leukemia patients with normal -II grade 27.27 and complex aberrant karyotype. -III grade 3.03 M. Fernández-Prieto: None. C. Cieza-Borrella: None. M. Núñez-Casado: D. Koczkodaj1, S. Zmorzynski1, M. Michalak1, E. Wasik-Szczepanek2, A. A. Filip1; Non endometrioid carcinoma 40 None. M. Sancho-de-Salas: None. V. Sancho-de-Salas: None. Á. García- 1Department of Cancer Genetics, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, Lublin, Poland, Iglesias: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. 2Department of Hematooncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, Lublin, Poland. 
P11 .013 Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is the most common type of leukemia Molecular profile of low- and high-grade astrocytomas: a multivariate affecting adults, and is responsible for a large number of cancer-related approach deaths. Lymphocytes of approximately 55% of AML patients show various I. Rodríguez-Hernández1, J. García2, A. Santos-Briz3, J. Gómez-Moreta4, J. González- chromosomal aberrations, including structural and numerical alterations. Valero2, R. González-Sarmiento1; Such changes may not only correlate with morphological and clinical data, 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute for Health Science Studies of Castilla y León, Salamanca, but also serve as prognostic factors. Spain, 3Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, In our study we analyzed bone marrow samples of 60 AML patients with 4Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. normal (18 patients) or complex (42 patients) karyotype by conventio- nal cytogenetics. We then assessed the genomic changes by the array CGH (aCGH) method. Genomic losses were found more frequently than gains. The Malignant astrocytomas are the most common and aggressive primary brain most frequent losses affected 5q (25%), 7q (20%) and 3p (18%), and the tumors in adults with a dismal prognosis. In an attempt to better under- most frequent genomic gains included 11q (20%) and 21q (17%). stand the biology of astrocytomas, we have performed a molecular analysis In patients with initially normal karyotypes it was possible to determine of T
P53 , IDH1, EGFR, PI3KCA, PTEN and BRAF genes in a set of 105 astrocy- single or multiple aberrations by means of aCGH. In this group losses were tomas (24 low-grade astrocytomas and 71 high-grade astrocytomas). also more frequent than gains. Changes detected using aCGH were verified Nineteen low-grade (79.2%) and 71 high-grade astrocytomas (87.7%) had by FISH analysis in all cases. at least one alteration in these genes, and more than 50% of cases showed In the second part of this study we analyzed the prognostic effects and inter- two o more alterations. Mutations in T
P53 , IDH1 and BRAF genes were actions of the nucleophosmin (NPM1) gene mutation and fms-like tyrosine more frequent in low-grade astrocytomas while alterations in EGFR, PTEN kinase-3 internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) in patients with normal- and PI3KCA genes were more represented in high-grade astrocytomas (Ta- karyotype (AML-NK). ble 1). Identification of all possible rearrangements is valuable for better under- Table1. Alterations in low- and high-grade astrocytomas standing of the mechanisms of leukemogenesis, as well as for more precise T
P53  EGFR EGFRvIII PI3KCA LOH PTEN BRAF IDH1 sDtr. aKtiofciczaktoiodna jo: fN poantei.e Sn.t sZ imnotorz aypnpsrkoi:p Nrioantee. rMis.k M gircohuaplask.: None. E. Wasik- mutation amplificationexpressionmutation 10q23 mutation mutation mutation Szczepanek: None. A.A. Filip: None. Low-grade 13(56.5%) 0(0.0%) 1(4.3 %) 4(33.3%) 2(8.7%) 15(65.2%) Astrocitomas High-grade 17(22.7%) 26(35.1%) 23(33.3%) 5(6.7%) 49(75.4%)19(25.3%) 1(1.3%) 3(4.0%) Astrocytomas Total 30(30.6%) 26(35.1%) 24(26.1%) 5(6.7%) 53(68.8%)19(25.3%) 3(3.1%) 18(18.4%) 43.3% of tumors with T
P53  mutation carried IDH1 mutation; 26.7% of cases showed both EGFR amplification and PTEN loss; 20.3% of tumors displayed PTEN deletion and mutation, and 14.3% of tumors carried T
P53  mutation and PTEN mutation/deletion. However, mutations in PTEN and PI3KCA ge- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 267 nes were mutually exclusive.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Multivariate analysis by logistic biplot and hierarchical clustering classified had uneventful childhoods and no morphological anomalies. Both patients high-grade tumors in proneural subtype distinguished by T
P53  and IDH1 presented colorectal adenocarcinomas (microsatellite stable) with either mutations and EGFRvIII expression; classical subtype defined by EGFR am- gastric lymphoma or breast cancer around the age of 30. Another sibling plification and PTEN deletion along with EGFRvIII expression and PTEN mu- died at the age of 5 of acute myeloid leukemia. Biallelic FANCD1/BRCA2 tation; and mesenquimal subtype characterized by PTEN deletion with T
P53  mutations were identified: one frameshift mutation (c.1845_1846delCT, and PTEN mutations. Furthermore, proneural subtype patients demonstra- p.Asn615LysfsX6) and one missense mutation (c.7802A>G, p.Tyr2601Cys) t Ie. dR iomdrpígrouveezd-H seurrnváinvdale oz:v eNro tnhee. Jp.r Golairfecríaa:t iNvoen oer. mA.e Ssaenntqousi-mBrailz g: rNoounpes. .J. with a frame-shifting splicing anomaly leading to both a truncated protein Gómez-Moreta: None. J. González-Valero: None. R. González-Sarmiento: and a residual point-mutant protein. This protein, predicted to be delete- None. rious, is presumably partially active and might explain the clinical spectrum with delayed FA diagnosis. Spontaneous and mitomycin-induced chromoso- mal instability was pathognomonic of FA and only the molecular investiga- 
P11 .014 tions permitted the diagnosis. The lack of other symptoms in the two older The malignant transformations in Ewing’s sarcoma cells are siblings and the occurrence of colon cancers raise the hypothesis that varia- correlated with beta arrestin1 level tions in spliceosomal proteins might participate in subtle defects in the spli- D. Nedelcu1, N. Cucu2, M. Puiu1; cing machinery and thus lead to constitutional and tissue-specific variabili- 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2Bucharest ty of the phenotype. An interaction between BRCA2 and the MMR pathway University, Faculty of Biology, Bucuresti, Romania. cEo.u Cldo uarlscoe tb: eN qonuee.s Jti.o Snoekdo ilno wpsreksae: nNcoen oe.f Mea. rPlya dceoalonroe:c Ntaoln aed. eSn. oGcuairuc:i nomas. None. M. Bronner: None. C. Chery: None. F. Coron: None. C. Lepage: None. C. Chapusot: None. C. Loustalot: None. J. Jouve: None. C. Hatem: None. E. Ewing’s sarcoma is a malignant tumor which can have mesodermal and Ferrant: None. A. Baurand: None. G. Couillault: None. A. Delignette: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. P. Fumoleau: None. S. Lizard-Nacol: None. L. ectodermal origins. It appears most frequently in children and adolescents Arnould: None. F. Mugneret: None. T. Frebourg: None. P. Jonveaux: None. L. and in most of the cases is the result of a translocation between chromo- Faivre: None. somes 11 and 22 which affect Ewing’s sarcoma and Friend leukemia inte- gration 1 transcription factor genes. Beta arrestin1 and insulin-like growth factor receptor has an important role in the activation of a signaling cascade in MAPK pathway which is involved in the initiation and transformation of 
P11 .016 the malignant phenotype. Genetic variants involved in specialized DNA replication and their The aim of this study was to experience proper cell culture techniques in relation with bilateral breast cancer order to mimic pathological characteristics of Ewing sarcoma and provide A. C. Brandalize1,2,3, L. Schuller-Faccini1,2,3, P. Ashton-Prolla1,2,3; 1Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Centro de Pesquisa Experimental, Porto Alegre, adequate experimental model for drug screening. It is known the fact that Brazil, 2Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Programa de Pós -Graduaçao cell culture lines represent an actual experimental study model of epigenetic em Genética e Biologia Molecular, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Instituto de Genética Médica and genetic mechanisms involved into the initiation of pathological proces- Populacional - INAGEMP, Porto Alegre, Brazil. ses. Many of these new research activities are based on genetic reprogram- ming of the patient derived cell lines. The experiment envisaged to evaluate the effect of beta-arrestin1 concentratons in two types of ES cell line, gene- One of the hallmarks of cancer BisR tChAe occuRrrAeDn5c1e of high levels of chromoso- tically modified by B-arr1 shRNA. Quantifying cell proliferation and estima- mal rearrangements as a result of inaccurate repair of double-strand breaks tion of cellular viability were used for the correlation between Beta arrestin (DSB). Germline mutations in and genes, involved in DSB re- level and its tumorigenicity. Results indicate that malignant transformations pair, are strongly associated with bilateral breast cancer. BPRoCl Aθ, a “DRNAAD 5re1-. are connected with beta-arrestin1 level and the malignant phenotype is mo- pair” polymerase speciPaOliLzeQd in the replication of damaged DNA may also be dified when the intracellular levels of beta-arrestin1 decrease. The protein involved in DSB repair and could act in this pathway with anPdO LQ beta-arrestin 1 play an important role in IGF1R signaling and also in the It is noteworthy that is highly expressed in breast tumors and this i Dni.t Niaeldizealtciuo:n N pornoec.e Nss. Couf ctuum: Noornigee. nMic. iPtyu iiun: ENSo nceel.ls. expression is able to predict patient outcome. Here we analyzed va- riants in hereditary (HBC) and sporadic (SBC) breast cancer. We recruited 229 breast cancer patients (94 SBC and 135 HBC) and 206 controls. In this 
P11 .015 case-control study seven SNPs (rs6 1757736, rs55748151, rs41545723, Unexpected diagnosis of Fanconi anemia with biallelic FANCD1/ rs1381057, rs587553, rs13065220, rs3806614) were analysed using Ta- BRCA2 mutations associated with early onset colorectal tumors qman Real Time PCR. The rs581553SNP located in a promoter region of in adulthood: potential role of pre-mRNA splicing in phenotypic POLQ was strongly associated with HBC (g.121265913C>T; HBC TT=18, variability. Control TT=8; OR=2.30, CI95%= 1.47-3.55; p<0.0001). Interestingly, all of E. Courcet1, J. Sokolowska2, M. Padeano3, S. Guiu4, M. Bronner5, C. Chery5, F. Coron6, C. the homozygous for this polymorphism fulfilled criterions for HBOC (Here- Lepage7, C. Chapusot1, C. Loustalot4, J. Jouve7, C. Hatem8, E. Ferrant9, A. Baurand6, G. ditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer) syndrome, where 16 of them developed Couillault10, A. Delignette11, C. Thauvin-Robinet12, P. Fumoleau4, S. Lizard-Nacol13, L. bilateral breast cancer and one had familial history of bilateral breast can- Arnould14, F. Mugneret15, T. Frebourg16, P. Jonveaux2, L. Faivre12; cer. The age at diagnPoOsLisQ (> or < 50 years) did not show statistic differences 1Service d‘Anatomie et Cytologique Pathologiques, Pole Technique et Biologie, CHU, DIJON, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique et INSERM U-954, CHU Nancy, Université de when compared patients with or without this polymorphism. Considering Lorraine, NANCY, France, 3Département de Chirurgie, Centre de lutte anti-cancereux the evidences that may be involved in DBS repair our study suggest Georges François Leclerc, DIJON, France, 4Département d‘oncologie médicale, Centre that this polymorphism may contribute to the etiology of bilateral breast de lutte anti-cancereux Georges François Leclerc, DIJON, France, 5Laboratoire de cAa.nCc.e Br riann oduarli zpeo:p Nuolantei.o Ln.. Schuller-Faccini: None. P. Ashton-Prolla: None. Génétique et INSERM U-954, CHU Nancy, Université de Lorraine, DIJON, France, 6Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon et Université de bourgogne, DIJON, France, 7Service d’ Hepato-gastro-enterologie, CHU “Bocage Central”, DIJON, France, 8Hepato- gastro-entérologie, Clinique Drevon, DIJON, France, 9Service d’hématologie clinique, 
P11 .017 Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, DIJON, France, 10Service de Pédiatrie 1, CHU, DIJON, France, DNA repair gene polymorphisms involved in bladder cancer 11Service de Radiologie, Centre de lutte anti-cancereux Georges François Leclerc, DIJON, development France, 12Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon et Université de bourgogne, L. Akhmadishina1, G. Korytina1, O. Kochetova1, M. Urmantsev2, A. Izmailov2, S. Dijon, DIJON, France, 13Laboratoire de Génétique moléculaire, Centre anti-cancéreux Izmailova2, G. Kunsbaeva3, V. Pavlov2, T. Viktorova1,2; Georges François Leclerc, DIJON, France, 14Département de Biologie et de Pathologie 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical des tumeurs, Centre de lutte anti-cancéreux Georges François Leclerc, DIJON, France, University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. 15Service de Cytogénétique, Pole Technique et biologie, CHU, DIJON, France, 16Laboratoire de Génétique, CHU Rouen et Faculté de médecine de Rouen, ROUEN, France. To assess c.839G>A and c.1196A>G XRC
C1 , g.45854919T>G XPD, c.-4A>G XPA gene polymorphisms contribution in the development and severity of Fanconi anemia (FA) is characterized by progressive bone marrow failure, bladder cancer we carried out a study 306 DNA bladder cancer patients congenital anomalies, and predisposition to malignancy. A small proporti- samples and 271 healthy individuals DNA samples. It was shown c.839 G>A on of FA is due to biallelic FANCD1/BRCA2 mutations which is associated XRC
C1  associated with bladder cancer development in several models, but with earlier onset and increased incidence of leukemia and solid tumors. significantly in log-additive (p<0.0001, OR=2.40, AIC=765.9). Second poly- Here we describe the clinical and molecular features of a family in which the morphism c.1196G>A XRC
C1  associated with disease in recessive (p=0.03, diagnosis of FA was unexpectedly made from a female proband with early OR=1.61, AIC=784) and overdominant (p=0.02, OR=0.66, AIC=782.7) mo- o2n6se8t breast cancer. Remarkably, she and her sisteEr,S aHlsoG d i2ag0n1o3se d| PwAithR FISA,, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG dels. No association with bladder cancer was observed for c.-4A>G XPA andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index g.45854919T>G XPD. In order to estimate the contribution of studied poly- The results from Cancer drug targets panel show up-regulation of TO
P2 A morphisms in the development of invasive and non-invasive bladder cancer and genes from MRP subfamily (ABC
C1  and ABC
C5 ), involved in resistance sample of patients with these forms were compared separately with control to thiopurine anticancer drugs in the muscle invasive versus non-invasive cohort. Interestingly, c.839 G>A XRC
C1  contributes to the development of bladder tumors. both non-invasive and invasive bladder cancer (p = 0.0017, OR= 2.06, CI Acknowledgements: This study was supported by contract № ДМУ 03/48 (1.31-3.26) and p<0.0001, OR= 2.70, CI (1.78-4.10), respectively). Thus we of the Ministry of Education and Science, Bulgaria and by contract № 13- can assume XRC
C1  polymorphisms make a definite contribution to the de- ДO/.2
S0 . A12n toofn tohvea M: Neodnicea. lR U. nSitvaenresviaty: Nofo Snoe.f iZa., HBaumlgmaroiau.deh: None. S. velopment and severity of bladder cancer. However, the results should be Karachanak-Yankova: None. V. Sabriev: None. E. Popov: None. R. Cherneva: c Lo.n Afikrhmmeadd iinsh iinndae: pNeonndee. nGt. sKtuodryietisn.a: None. O. Kochetova: None. M. None. C. Slavov: None. D. Toncheva: None. Urmantsev: None. A. Izmailov: None. S. Izmailova: None. G. Kunsbaeva: None. V. Pavlov: None. T. Viktorova: None. 
P11 .020 Prediction of recurrence in bladder cancer by real-time quantitative 
P11 .018 PCR analysis: cDNA microarray results Expression of B7-H4 gene polimorphisms in transitional cell J. Mares1, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova2, A. Horinek2, M. Klabanova3, M. Babjuk1; carcinoma of the bladder 12nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 21st Faculty of Medicine, Prague 2, H. Samli1, M. Samli2, A. Sahin2, U. Ince2, F. Balci1, Y. Saglican2; Czech Republic, 3Diana Lucina, Prague 4, Czech Republic. 1Uludag University, School of Veterinary Medicine, Bursa, Turkey, 2Acibadem University, School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. The aim of the stu dy was to define specific genetic profile in Ta and T1 urina- ry bladder carcinoma patients with and without recurrence by gene expres- B7-H4 is one of the most recently identified members of B7 superfami- sion microarrays.Eleven patients with the time to recurrence shorter than ly of costimulatory molecules serving as an inhibitory modulator of T-cell one year (patients with recurrence) and 11 patients with time to recurrence response. The expression of B7-H4 has been observed in various types of longer than 4 years (patients without recurrence) were enrolle d. human cancer tissues and its soluble form has been detected in blood samp- Data from microarrays were subjected to a panel of statistical analyses to les. identify bladder cancer recurrence-associated gene signatures.Initial scree- In this study B7-H4 gene rs10754339, rs10801935 ve rs3738414 SNPs ning revealed a putative set 47 genes differing in gene expression in both were studied by PCR-RFLP method in paraffin embedded tumor specimens groups. After the validation, 33 genes manifested significant differences bet- from 62 transitional cell bladder cancer (TCC) patients and in the control ween both groups. AThNeX Asi1gniAfiRcHanGtE eFx4p,r eFsLsJi3o2n2 w5a2s, oGbNsEe,r vNeIdN iJn1 ,t hPeR gIrCoKuLpE o1f, group including 30 patients without bladder cancer. Both groups were in the PpaStAiTen1t, sR wNAitShEo1u,t SrPecTuArNre1n, cSeY NbGy R310, gTeNnFeSsF o1f5 w, ThSicPhA Nth1e, highWesDt Rd3if4ferences similar age interval (patient group 63.34+12.5 vs control group 60.8+11.1; were detected by , p>0.05). Male gender was more frequent among cancer patients (55 male and . These vs 7 female) and the same gender distribution was detected in non-bladder genes code for signal transduction, vascular remodeling and vascular endo- cancer patients (28 male vs 2 female) (p>0.05). t(hPeLlOiaDl 2g rowt Wh iDnRhi7b2it)ion mainly. In the group with recurrence, 3 genes had According to WHO 2004 bladder cancer classification system 19 non-mus- significant differences, the highest differences were identified by two genes cle invasive low-grade carcinomas, 20 non-muscle invasive high-grade car- and . We have selected and validated 15 genes that are dif- cinomas and 23 high-grade invasive carcinomas were included. We detected ferentially expressed in superficial bladder cancer. We hope that this cohort rs3738414 and rs10754339 polimorphisms were more frequent in cancer of genes will serve as a promising pool of candidate biomarkers for early patients when compared with control group (p<0.05). Only rs3738414 po- stage bladder cancer. Our results indicate that it may be possible to identify limorphism showed statistically significant difference in frequency between patients with a low and high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage pathologic diagnostic groups (p<0.04). u Js. iMnga rae ms: oNleocnuel. aVr. pSrooufkiluep. .: RNeosneea.r Jc.h D wuassk osvuap:p Noornteed. Ab.y H MoSriMne 0k0: 2N1o6ne2.0 M80. 8 In both rs10754339 and rs3738414 polymorphisms, AA and GG genotype Klabanova: None. M. Babjuk: None. distributions were found to have higher frequencies in the cancer group when compared with control group (p<0.05). None of the genotype distri- butions showed statistically significant difference from the control group in 
P11 .021 rs10801935 polimorphism. Detection of p53 gene mutations and ATPase6, Cytb, ND1 and D310 We conclude that B7-H4 has the potential to be a useful prognostic marker mtDNA mutations in bladder carcinomas f Hor. Spaamtielin: tNso wneit.h M T. CSCa.mli: None. A. Sahin: None. U. Ince: None. F. Balci: T. Avcilar1, D. Kirac2, D. Ergec1, G. Koc1, K. Ulucan3, Z. Kaya4, E. C. Kaspar5, L. Turkeri6, A. None. Y. Saglican: None. I. Guney1; 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Uskudar University, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, 
P11 .019 Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Marmara University, Chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity determination through expression Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Yeditepe profiling of bladder tumors University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Marmara O. S. Antonova1, R. Staneva1, Z. Hammoudeh1, S. Karachanak-Yankova1, V. Sabriev2, E. University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, Istanbul, Turkey. Popov2, R. Cherneva3, C. Slavov2, D. Toncheva1; Introduction: 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Urology, University Hospital Aleksandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Intenal Bladder carcinoma is the most common malignancy of the Medicine, University Hospital Aleksandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria. urinary tract. Analysis of p53 gene and mtDNA mutations might be useful to monitor the prognosis of bladder carcinoma. Therefore the aim of this sMtuedthyo isd tso: investigate the relation between mtDNA and p53 gene mutations Background: Cancer of the bladder is a disabling disease with multifocali- in bladder carcinomas. ty, frequent recurrence and growing incidence in the economically develo- 30 patients and 27 controls were recruited to the study. Bladder ped countries. The majority of tumors at presentation are low grade, non cancer tissues were obtained by radical cystectomy or transurethral resec- muscle-invasive, papillary tumors. The aim of our study is investigation the tion. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. ATPase6, Cytb, expression levels of the genes responsible for sensitivity and resistance to ND1, and D310 regions of mtDNA as well as the exon 5,6,7 and 8 regions known chemotherapeutic agents. oRfe spu5l3t sg:ene were amplified by PCR and sequenced directly. Results were Materials & Methods: Tumor sample of 40 patients with bladder neoplasia evaluated statistically. in different stages: precancerous, pTa, pT1 and pT2 were analyzed. 168 ge- In patient group, 33 mtDNA mutations and 3 p53 gene mutations nes from two panels for Cancer drug resistance and metabolism (84 genes) were found in which 3 of them are novel and 15 of them cause amino acid and Cancer drug targets (84 genes) were investigated. substitutions. A15607G mutations in Cytb gene and 12570 A-insertion in Reaults: Our results reveal a 3-5 times up-regulation of five genes for drug p53 gene were found statistically significant in patient group whereas response related to xenobiotic metabolization, degradation of aromatic 
C12570 A was found statistically significant in control group. Additionally, 8 compounds, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and the anti-cancer drug ta- dCiofnfecrleunsti o1n00:% correlations between mtDNA mutations and 3 different po- xol. A more than 10 fold up-regulation of PPARG, CY
P3 A5 and ABC
C3  genes sitive correlations between p53 gene and mtDNA mutations were detected. related to metabolism of cyclosporine and steroid hormones was observed High incidences of A15607G mutation and 12570 A-insertion in a tumor stage dependent manner (pTaE, pSTH1 Gan d2 p0T123). | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 269 may be important markers for the detection of bladder tumors. Despite that,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .024 Intronic sequence variants in BRCA genes among breast and ovarian 
C12570 A mutations may have a protective effect against the disease. Addi- Romanian patients tionally, based on correlation values, it has been suggested that there is a L. Negura1, D. Azoicai1, Y. Bignon2, N. Uhrhammer2, A. Negura3; relation between p53 gene and mtDNA gene mutations and this relationship 1Gr. T. Popa Medicine and Pharmacy University, Iasi, Romania, 2Centre Jean Perrin, c To. uAlvdc pillaary: Nano nime. pDo. rKtairnatc r: oNloen ien. bDl.a Eddrgeerc c:a Nrcoinneo. gGe.n Keosics:. None. K. Ulucan: Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3Alexandru Ioan Cuza University, Iasi, Romania. None. Z. Kaya: None. E.C. Kaspar: None. L. Turkeri: None. A.I. Guney: None. BRCA1 BRCA2 Molecular diagnosis in cancer predisposition is mainly targeting and 
P11 .022 genes, involved in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome Bortezomib Induces Apoptosis by Interacting with JAK/STAT Pathway (HBOC). Carriers of deleterious mutations are at significantly higher risk of in K-562 Leukemic Cells developing cancer than general population. Screening for BRCA mutations N. Selvi1, B. Kaymaz1, Ç. AKTAN1, C. GÜNDÜZ1, H. D. KİPER2, F. ŞAHİN2, B. KOSOVA1, G. is now standard practice in Europe, and permits medical follow-up anBdR aCdA- Saydam3; apted genetic counselling. 1Ege University Medical Faculty Dept. of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Currently, most laboratories performing diagnostic analysis of the Medical Faculty Dept. of Hematology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University Medical Faculty genes use direct Sanger sequencing of exons and intron-exon boundaries. Dept. of Haemotology, Izmir, Turkey. Thousands of BRCA sequence variations have already been reported, but not all variants can be considered pathological. DeleteriouIsn m-siulitcaotions and common non-pathogenic SNPs are usually detected, but almost a half of the In the current study, we aimed to identify the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects observed variations are of uncertain clinical significance. analysis of Bortezomib (BOR) on human K-562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cells is therefore essential for undeBrsRtCanAd1ing pBosRsCibAl2e effects on protein function and to evaluate the potential roles of JAK/STAT pathway members STAT3, and pathogenicity. BR- STAT5, JAK2 and IL-6 on BOR induced cell death of leukemic cells. WCAh1ile completely seqBueRnCcAi2ng and genes in routine molecular Cell viability was assessed via Trypan blue dye exclusion test and cytotoxici- diagnosis, we found a total of 14 intronic varianitns-,s eilqicuoally distributed to ty of the BOR treated cells was conducted by XTT [2,3-Bis (2-methoxy-4-ni- (7 variants) and (7 variants). Half of these variants were novel, tro-5-sulphophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner salt] assay. The not known in BIC, UMD or NCBI databases. By analysis, one variant relative mRNA expression levels of STAT3, -5A -5B, JAK2 and interleukin- 6 showed to be pathogenic, by completely destroying a splicing site, while two were analyzed by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain re- other variants have an unclassified status (type 3 in the UMD 5-levels patho- action (qRT-PCR). On the other hand, their protein expression levels were genicity classification). Eight variants proved to be benign SNPs, and were detected by western-blot method. used to define novel BRCA1 haplotypes. The obtained results indicated that, BOR treatment reduced cell viability This proves that a better investigation of intronic regions can bring useful and induced leukemic cell apoptosis in a dose and time-dependent manner information, either from pathogenic variants responsible for the predisposi- as compared to untreated control cells. While mRNA expression levels of tion to the disease, or form rare benign SNPs defining haplotypes important STAT5A, STAT5B and STAT3 were significantly f Lo.r Npeogpuurlaa:t iNoonn set.u Dd.i Aesz.oicai: None. Y. Bignon: None. N. Uhrhammer: None. A. reduced following BOR treatment when compared to untreated controls; it Negura: None. had no effect upon JAK2 and IL-6 mRNA expressions. As for protein levels, STAthT expretshsions were downregulated after BOR treatment especially at 72 and 96 hours. 
P11 .025 Our results pointed outthat, BOR treatment had a significant potential of Breast and prostate cancers in men in the French National BRCA1/ being an anticancer agent for chronic myelogenous leukemia therapy; and BRCA2 carriers cohort (GENEPSO) this effect could be due to the expressional downregulations of JAK/STAT E. J. M. Mouret-Fourme1, P. Berthet2, V. Bonadona3, C. Lasset3, M. Gauthier-Villars4, D. p Na.t Shwelvayi: mNoenmeb. Ber. sK.aymaz: None. Ç. Aktan: None. C. Gündüz: None. H.D. Stoppa-Lyonnet4, B. Buecher4, J. Fricker5, P. Gesta6, L. Faivre7,8, M. Frénay9, O. Caron10, Kİper: None. F. Şahİn: None. B. Kosova: None. G. Saydam: None. F. Eisinger11, L. Huiart11, H. Sobol11, I. Coupier12, P. Pujol12, L. Gladieff13, E. Luporsi14, C. Colas15, A. Lortholary16, L. Venat-Bouvet17, C. Dugast18, C. Noguès1, G. Genetic19; 1Institut Curie, Saint-Cloud, France, 2Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France, 3Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 4Institut Curie, Paris, France, 5Centre Paul Strauss, 
P11 .023 Strasbourg, France, 6CH Georges Renon, Niort, France, 7Centre Georges François Leclerc, Splicing functional assays of a RCA1 minigene with exons 15-19 Dijon, France, 8Hôpital d‘enfants, Dijon, France, 9Centre Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, H. H. M. Cristina, C. Álvaro; France, 10Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 11Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, IBGM-Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. France, 12Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 13Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France, 14Centre Alexis Vautrin, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 15Groupe hospitalier Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 16Centre Catherine de Sienne, Nantes, France, Deleterious mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 increased up to 20-fold the risk 17CHU, Limoges, France, 18Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France, 19Unicancer, Paris, of developing breast cancer. Previously published data of our group showed France. that a third part of pathogenic mutations affected pre-mRNA processing so that splicing could be one of the most relevant etiopathogenic mechanism in BRCA2 hereditary breast/ovarian cancer. We constructed a hybrid minigene with Breast cancer in men is extremely rare, less than 1% of all breast cancers. BRCA1 exons 15 to 19 in the new splicing vector pSAD (Spanish patent: OThbeje pcrteivseens:ce of germline mutations in the gene increases the risk of 
P201231427 ). Bioinformatics studies of DNA variants in exons 16 and 17 of developing breaBstR cCaAn1c/eBrR aCnAd2 prostate cancer during man’s lifetime. BRCA1 were performed with NNSplice and Human Splicing Finder, to select To describe breast and other cancers in men with deleterious them according to the following criteria: disruption of canonical splice si- mMuattaetriioanls o af tnhde Methods genes and to investigate correlations between tes, broken branch points or creation of de novo silencers. Functional assays type of mutation, age and cancer phenotypes. BRCA1/2 performed either in lymphocyte RNA from patients or in hybrid minigenes : The study population included males participants in MCF7/HeLa cells. We investigated the impact on splicing of pre-selected in the French National cohort study GENEPSO of carriers recrui- variants listed in the international databases and to correlate these results tBeRdC aAt1 3/B3R cCaAn2cer genetic clinics. This cohort study was initiated in 2000 to with those obtained in lymphocyte RNA of patients from Castilla y Leon eRsetsimulattse: breast and other cancer risk and to assess risk-modifying factors in (Spain). muBtRaCtiAo1n carriers. All the RT-PCR products were sequenced to characterize all the splicing out- To date, the GENEPSO cohort study has included 376 men, 6B0R%CA o1f comes. Splicing functional assays allow a better molecular characterization them carrying a mutation. 24 breast cancers were observed. Mean of DNA variants of unknown clinical significance. The ultimate goal of this age at breast cancer diagnosis was 62.4 yeaBrRsC (Ara2nge: 45-77). All the 3 research is to improve the quality of life of patients and their families that mutation positive male breast cancer (MBC) were invasive ductal carcinoma, will benefit from new preventive measures, surveillance and prophylaxis. RE+, RP+ and grade 3 for 2 men. 52% of -related MBCs (n=21) were Acedo et al. 2012. Breast Cancer Res 14: R87 gBrRaCdAe1 2 or 3, 7B1R%C Aw2ere RE+, 66% RP+ and 3 of them (14%) presented an S Ha.nHz.M et. Calr.i s2t0in1a0: CNloinn eC. aCn.c Áerlv Rareos: 1 N6o: n1e9.57-1967 invasive lobular carcinoma. Prostate cancers ranked second in this cohort: 5 Conclu asinodn 10 mutation carriers. Median age at prostate cancer dia- gBnRoCsAis2 was 64 years (range: 53-77). : In men, breast and prostate cancers are mainly associated with mutation and breast cancer phenotypes seem to be different accor- d Ei.nJg.M to. Mseoxu arentd-F toyuprem oef: gNeonnee.. P. Berthet: None. V. Bonadona: None. C. Lasset: 270 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index None. M. Gauthier-Villars: None. D. Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. B. Buecher: 
P11 .028 None. J. Fricker: None. P. Gesta: None. L. Faivre: None. M. Frénay: None. O. Haplotype analysis and ancient origin of the BRCA1 c.4035delA Baltic Caron: None. F. Eisinger: None. L. Huiart: None. H. Sobol: None. I. Coupier: founder mutation None. P. Pujol: None. L. Gladieff: None. E. Luporsi: None. C. Colas: None. A. R. Janavicius1, V. Rudaitis2, L. Tihomirova3, D. Goldgar4, L. Griskevicius1; Lortholary: None. L. Venat-Bouvet: None. C. Dugast: None. C. Noguès: 1Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Hematology, oncology and transfusion None. G. Genetic: None. medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Dept. of Oncogynecology, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Latvian Biomedical Research & Study Center, Riga, Latvia, 4Department of Dermatology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. 
P11 .026 Next-generation sequencing and analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 95 Bulgarian women S. Ivanov1, L. T. Balabanski1, M. Nacheva2, I. Gavrilov3, D. Nesheva4, B. Rukova4, S. Uncertainty exists about the origin of BRCA1 c.4035delA mutation which is Hadjidekova4, I. Dimova4, M. Malinov1, D. Toncheva4,1; prevalent in Baltic countries, with the highest frequency being in Lithuania 1Malinov Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Oncology Centre, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Oncology (53% of all BRCA1 mutations), although formal founder mutation analysis Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. by haplotype has not yet been undertaken. In this study we genotyped 78 Background: unrelated BRCA1 c.4035delA mutation carriers families from Lithuania, Lat- BRCA1 BR- via, Poland and Russia. The results from the haplotype analyses were used CA2 Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in women. to estimate the age of the mutation. Using maximum likelihood methods we Most of its hereditary forms are caused by mutations in the and estimated that the mutation arose approximately 1550 years (62 genera- genes, the main function of which is DNA repair of double-stranded tions of 25 years) ago (ca. 5th century) somewhere in the present territo- breaks. Genetic testing in women with familial history is recommended to ry of Lithuania, in the area inhabited by ancient Baltic tribes at that time. dMeetethrmodinse: whether they have a hereditary predisposition to this type of Our results show that this mutation gradually entered the gene pool in the cancer. n Re.i gJhanbaovuirciinugs :c Nouonnetr. iVe.s R. udaitis: None. L. Tihomirova: None. D. Goldgar: After giving their informed consentB, RbCloAo1d/ 2samples from 25 wo- None. L. Griskevicius: None. men diagnosed with cancer and 70 controls were collected, from which ge- nomic DNA was isolated. Sequence-targeted libraries were then pRreespualrtes:d using the TruSeq Custom Amplicon technique, which werBe RtChAen1 
P11 .029 sequencedB oRnC Aa2n. Illumina MiSeq system. Design of a multiplex PCR panel for semiconductor sequencing of the A wide range of mutations were foBuRnCdA, o2f, which 55 were in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes on the Ion Torrent PGM and 69 in In total, 5 (4%) were categorised as deleterioBuRsC, Ain1cluding A. R. Mensenkamp1, J. L. Costa2, H. Ouchene1, M. Tychon1, A. Justino2, S. Sousa2, J. C. a donor splice-site mutation in intron 2 of 11 (9%) supposed dele- Machado2, M. J. Ligtenberg1; terious, e.g. an in-framBeR tCrAin1u cleotBidReC Ad2e,l etion in exon 17 of within 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2IPATIMUP Diagnostics, Porto, Portugal. the BRCT functional domain and non-synonymous mutations within other functional domains of and 28 (23%) variants with unknown sCiognncifliucasniocne,: 21 (17%) favoured polymorphisms and 59 B(4R8C%A1) ben iBgnR CpAo2- The introduction of benchtop massive parallel sequencing machines enab- lymorphisms. les the development of methodologies that are faster and more cost-effecti- This is the first genetic study, in which the and ve than conventionalB sReCqAu1encingB. RInC Ath2is study we describe a collaborative genes of women from the Bulgarian population were sequenced paving the effort for the validation of a strategy for the screening of the breast cancer way for finding local founder mutations as well as polymorphisms typical f Sor. Itvhains orve:g Nioonn.e. L.T. Balabanski: None. M. Nacheva: None. I. Gavrilov: susceptibility genes and , making use of the most recent ad- None. D. Nesheva: None. B. Rukova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. I. Dimova: vances on Ion AmpliSeq multiplex PCR technology combined with Ion PGM None. M. Malinov: None. D. Toncheva: None. System. Strict criteria were set to the design of the amplification primers, including 100% coverage of all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries and the ab- 
P11 .027 sence of recurrent SNPs in the last five nucleotides of primer. Twenty-five Women with sporadic breast cancer between age 36 and 41 should be Dutch and twenty-five Portuguese mutations were selected for this analysis. offered BRCA1/BRCA2 testing The first 20 cases were used to test and optimize the methodology and were C. Tlemsani, P. Benusiglio, M. Guillaud-Bataille, V. Byrde, M. Di Maria, O. Cabaret, D. selected based on the presence of mutations in or within close proximity to Wehrer, B. Bressac-De Paillerets, S. Delaloge, O. Caron; homopolymeric regions. The additional 30 cases were used for an indepen- Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. dent evaluation of the new methodology. These samples included common BACKGROUND: BRCA1 BRCA2 mutations in Portugal and the Netherlands. In all these cases all SNPs and mutations that were previously identified by capillary electrophoresis se- and are the two best-known breast cancer quencing were detected with our multiplex-based approach. The mutations predisposition genes. Gene analysis is warranted in women with both a per- identified included missense, nonsense and indel mutations. The number sonal and family history of the disease, or with sporadic breast cancer at a fBaRlsCeA p1ositiveB RreCsAu2lts were consistently less than five per sample and repro- very young age (≤35). There is however no consensus regarding testing in ducible. This work demonstrates the potential for mutational screening of women with sporadic breast cancer between ages 36 and 41, as the proba- and using the AmpliSeq technology combined with the Ion bMilEitTyH oOf DfinSd: ing a mutatioBnR mCAight be too low to justify a long and expensive T Aor.Rre. nMte PnGsMen.kamp: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of procedure. drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Life Technologies. J.L. Costa: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); We offered testing to all women with sporadic breast Modest; Life Technologies. H. Ouchene: None. M. Tychon: None. A. Justino: cancer ages 36-41, without other personal or familial history, and treated None. S. Sousa: None. J.C. Machado: None. M.J. Ligtenberg: None. bReEtSwUeLeTnS 2: 006 and 2012 in our hospital. We searched for point mutBaRtiCoAn1s (Sang er sBeRqCuAe2ncing) and large rearrangements (MLPA). BRCA1 Out of 99 tested women, 11 (11%) carried a mutation, 7 in aDnIdSC 4UiSnS ION: . Four and four carriers had triple-negative ( only) and 
P11 .030 bilateral disease, respectively. Lack of referral for genetic counseling and testing in BRCA1/2 and There is a consensus within the Cancer Genetics community Lynch syndromes: A nationwide study from the French National that genetic testing should be performed when the probability of finding a Cancer Institute based on 240·134 consultations and 134·652 genetic mutation exceeds 10%. AccoBrdRiCnAg 1t o thisB lRaCrgAe2 single-center study, women tests P. Pujol1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2, T. Frebourg3, J. Blin4, M. Picot1, C. Lasset5, C. Dugast6,7, with sporadic breast cancer between ages 36-41 fit in this category, and P. Bertet8, C. Bonaiti-Pellié9,10, S. Hagay11, S. Grandjouan12, F. Soubrier13, B. Buecher2,14, should therefore be offered and analysis, especially if their R. Guimbaud15, R. Lidereau16, P. Jonveaux17, C. Houdayer2, B. Bressac de Paillerets18, S. tumour is triple-negative or bilateral. The identification of a mutation in a Giraud19, E. Nogué1, V. Galibert1, C. Bara4, S. Olschwang20, F. Nowak21, C. Nogues16; substantial proportion of these women would lead to a personal manage- 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Institut Curie, m Ce. nTtle, mressaunltii:n Ngo inne d. Pe.c rBeeansuesdi gmlioor: bNiodnitey. aMn. dG muiollratuadli-tbya.taille: None. V. Byrde: Paris, France, 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rouen, Rouen, France, 4Institut None. M. Di maria: None. O. Cabaret: None. D. Wehrer: None. B. BRESSAC-de National du Cancer, Boulogne Billancourt, France, 5Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, PAILLERETS: None. S. Delaloge: None. O. Caron: None. 6Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France, 7Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Rennes, France, 8Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France, 9INSERM, UMR-S 669, Paris, France, 10Hôpital Paul Brousse, AP-HP, Villejuif, France, 11Institut Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 271ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Gabon, 12Hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, Paris, France, 13Hôpital La Pitié Salpétrière, AP-HP, Paris, 
P11 .032 France, 14Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France, 15Institut Claudius BRCA1 Splicing Régaud, Toulouse, France, 16Institut Curie, Saint-Cloud, France, 17Centre Hospitalier D. Baralle1, L. Smith2, J. Blaydes3; Universitaire de Nancy, Nancy, France, 18Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 1Wessex Genetics, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Human 19Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, 20Hôpital La Timone, AP-HM, Marseille, France, Development and Health, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 21Institut du Cancer, Boulogne Billancourt, France. 3Cancer Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Background : Based on nationwide data from the French national cancer BRCA1 is integral for maintaining genome integrity and correct cellular institute (FNCI), we analyzed the evolution of cancer genetics consultations function. It has been shown to play a pivotal role in DNA damage repair, cell aMnedt hteosdtisng over time, and the uptake of targeted tests in relatives of families cycle control, and gene expression regulation. Importantly, BRCA1 function carrying BRCA1/2 or MMR gene mutations. has been shown to be altered through alternative splicing of BRCA1 pre- : All French cancer genetics centers completed annually a survey mRNA, leading to the expression of BRCA1 splicing isoforms which exhibit collecting standardized parameters for the FNCI from 2003 to 2011. We re- diminished function. Two key BRCA1 splicing isoforms have been identified pRoerstu oltns the analysis of a total of 240·134 consultations and 134·652 genetic in both breast cancer tissue and cell lines: BRCA1 Δ11 and 11Q. The BRCA1 tests that identified 32·494 mutation carriers. Δ11 splicing isoform, generated through skipping of exon 11, is associated : From 2003 to 2011, 141·639 (59 %) and 55·698 (23·2 %) patients with dramatic loss of BRCA1 function, particularly in DNA repair. The 11Q were referred for a breast or a cBoRloCrAe1ct/a2l cancer predisposition syndrome, isoform is produced through use of an internal 5’ splice site in exon 11, ge- respectively. During this period, we found a dramatic and steady increase in nerating an mRNA containing a partial section of exon 11. This isoform has genetic tests performed for the genes (from 2095 to 7393 tests/ a relatively unconfirmed function, exhibiting a contextual effect of promoti- year, P<0·0001) but not for the MMR genes (from 1144 to 1635/year, P=NS). on or inhibition of cancer cell growth. Developing an understanding of the The percentageB RofC Ade1l/e2terious mutations identified in the probands tested mechanism involved in the expression of these splicing isoforms in breast was 13·8 % and 20·9 % in BRCA1/2 and Lynch syndromes, respectively. In cancer, which also utilizes patient identified point mutations, helps us to un- fCaomniclileuss wiointh a or a MMR identified mutation, there was an average derstand how to regulate their expression for therapeutic benefit. Antisense number of 3·03 relatives performing target tested. oligonucleotide’s (ASO’s) can be used to alter the pattern of splicing, leading : This nationwide study shows a lack of referral and genetic te- to either stimulation or suppression of particular splicing isoforms. ASO’s sting in Lynch syndrome as compared to BRCA1/2 syndrome. Only a third of can be applied to alter the splicing pattern of BRCA1 exon 11, and in turn relatives of a proband carrying a BRCA1/2 or MMR gene mutations perfor- alter the function of the wild-type protein. Endogenously altering BRCA1 med a targeted test. Enhanced information about benefit of genetic testing splicing isoform expression in this way allows us to explore novel avenues is crucial in Lynch syndrome and for relatives of a proband carrying an iden- f Dor. Bthaera dlleev:e Nloopnme. eLn. tS omf inthe:w N borneea. sJt. cBalnaycdere sth: eNroanpee.utics. t Pif.i ePdu jBoRl: CNAo1n/e2. D o.r S MtoMpRpa g-eLnyoesn nmeut:t aNtoionen.. T. Frebourg: None. J. Blin: None. M. Picot: None. C. Lasset: None. C. Dugast: None. P. Bertet: None. C. Bonaiti- Pellié: None. S. Hagay: None. S. Grandjouan: None. F. Soubrier: None. B. Buecher: None. R. Guimbaud: None. R. Lidereau: None. P. Jonveaux: None. C. 
P11 .033 Houdayer: None. B. Bressac de Paillerets: None. S. Giraud: None. E. Nogué: Identification pathogenic regulatory and non-coding variants in the 5’ None. V. Galibert: None. C. Bara: None. S. Olschwang: None. F. Nowak: region of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes None. C. Nogues: None. M. Beault1, A. Briaux1, C. Andrieu1, C. Lefol1, F. Lallemand1, R. Lidereau1, S. Caputo1, M. Brown2, E. Rouleau1; 1Institut Curie - Service de Génétique, Paris-St Cloud, France, 2School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. 
P11 .031 BRCA1 missense mutation p.Met18Lys detected in 11 Czech high-risk BRCA1 BRCA2 hereditary breast cancer families: segregation analysis and clinical BACKGROUND : and are major breast/ovarian cancer sus- data ceptibility genes, deleterious mutation increase in risk of breast/ovarian E. Machackova, M. Mikova, E. Stahlova Hrabincova, J. Hazova, P. Vasickova, L. Foretova; Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, BRNO, Czech Republic. cancer. More than 60% of families with a significant cancer history do not have any coding deleterious mutation identified. The hypothesis is there are some variants in the non-coding variants which canB RhCavAe1 /a2n impact in the Identifying women who carry pathogenic mutation in BRCA1 is important risk of breast/ovarian cancer. for cancer prevention and individualised treatment. Many of tested women METHODS : 384 breast/ovarian cancer probands, BRCA n2egative wBitRh- are discovered to have variant of unknown clinical significance. One of them, CthAe1 routine scBrReCenAi1ng processB, RhCaAve1 been explored in four non-coding regi- which is nearly exclusively detected in Czech population, is BRCA1 missen- ons with qPCBRR-HCRAM2 approach and Sanger sequencing: exon 1, se variant c.53T>A, p.Met18Lys located 6 aminocids upstream of the highly exon 1a, exon 1b, intron 2. conserved 
C3 H
C4  - RING zinc finger domain. The p.Met18 is highly conser- RESULTS : In exon 1, 4 families with variants were identified (c.-277 ved residue where p.Met18Lys substitution represents replacement of non- _-272dup in two families, c.-273G>T, c.-213T>G). All variants were related polar hydrophobic methionine to a polar charged lysine with highest value to very conserved interspecies regions, typBicRaCl Af1amily histories (ovarian of Align-GVGD prediction: 
C65 ; likely to induce distortion of helical bund- cancer, male breast cancer and several breast cancer under 60 year-old) le. Functional tests of p.Met18Lys exhibits loss of ubiquitin ligase activity and with several transcription factor sites. In exoBnR 1C,A n1o medium size (Morris 2006) and significantly resulted in a reduction of BRCA1/BARD1 deletion was identified in a 1.5kb fragment. Only one variant could have an complex formation (Sarkar 2008). impact (c.-20+279 G>A) close to the Alu sequence. In intron 2, one Here we present available segregation data and clinical data of 11 Czech variant was detected (c.81-3985A>T) in a family with breast cancers under high-risk hereditary breast/ovarian cancer families. In six families segrega- 40 years-old and which have a potential interaction with the promoter. tion with cancer diseases were apparent and in 4 families only insufficient DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: As expected, those variants are very seldom in data were available to make any conclusion. Out of these 10 families: 12 wo- those regions (1.5% -6/384). Further analyses are needed to confirm any men with breast cancer (diagnosed from age of 26 to 64) and 4 women with implication in the cancer predisposition (RNA allelic imbalance and luci- ovarian cancer (diagnosed from age of 41 to 65) were carriers of BRCA1 ferase assays). Currently, in the ENIGMA consortium, a database has been p. Met18Lys; whereas only 2 individuals diagnosed with cancers were not c Mre. aBteeadu tlot: iNnoitniaet. eA c. oBllraiabuoxr:a Ntiovnee w. Cor. kA nind rtiheeui:r Ncloanses.i fCic. aLteiofonl.: None. F. Lallemand: None. R. Lidereau: None. S. Caputo: None. M. Brown: None. E. carriers (glans penis cancer diagnosed at 53 and breast cancer diagnosed Rouleau: None. at 61). Two mutations were segregating in the last family where 2 affected woman were double heterozygote for BRCA1 p. Met18Lys and BRCA2 p.Arg3052Trp 
P11 .034 (IARC class 5). S Eu.p Mpaocrhteadc kboyv Oa:P N VoanVep. IM -. RMEikCoAvMa:O N, ConZe.1. .
E0 .5 S/2ta.1h.l0o0va/ 0H3r.a0b1i0nc1o.va: None. J. Confirmation of cancer family history: Impact on models predicting Hazova: None. P. Vasickova: None. L. Foretova: None. BRCA1/BRCA2 germ-line mutations V. Viassolo1, A. Ayme1,2, A. E. Murphy1, V. Membrez3, G. Benais-Pont4, M. Rebsamen4, P. O. Chappuis1,3,5; 1Oncogenetics and Cancer Prevention Unit, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine Specialities, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic and Laboratory Medicine , University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Division of Genetics, Institut Central de l’Hôpital du Valais, Sion, 272 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Switzerland, 4Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Genetic and Laboratory A. Ayme: None. V. Viassolo: None. B. Pardo: None. M. Rebsamen: None. P.O. Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Division of Genetic Chappuis: None. F. the SAKK Network for Cancer Predisposition Testing: Medicine, Department of Genetic and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals of None. Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Background: BRCA1 BRCA2 
P11 .036 and mutations are responsible for 5 toB 1R0C%A 1of Spectrum of mutations in predisposing genes to hereditary breast aBlRl CbAre2ast and ovarian cancer. Risk assessment tools based on personal and and ovarian cancer in Czech Republic family history are used to evaluate the probability of identifying / A. Panczak1, P. Pohlreich2, J. Stříbrná2, J. Kotlas1, M. Janatová2, J. Soukupová2, I. Tichá2, K. germ-line mutations. To provide accurate counselling, gathering a Veselá1, M. Zimovjanová3, P. Kleiblová2, Z. Kleibl2; detailed family history is important. The aim of this study is to evaluate the 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, iMmeptohrotdans:c e of confirming all familial cancer cases before using risk assess- Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Experimental Oncology, First ment tools. Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Clinsitc al andnd histopathologicaBl RcChAar1acBteRrCiAst2ics of cancer affecting Oncology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, and General teching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. index cases, 1 and 2 degree-relatives and cousins, have been extracted from medical files for 204 families with / screening performed BRCA1 BRCA2 between 1998-2009. BRCAPRO, BOADICEA and Manchester Scoring System have been retrospectively apstplied with 3 distinct criteria: 1) using informa- and are major predisposition genes to hereditary breast/ova- tion collected during the 1 consultation; 2) integrating histopathological rian cancer (BOC) but geCrHmE-Kli2neA mTMutaTtPio5n3s NinB tNh1ese genPeAsL Bac2count for only characteristics for index cases; 3) integrating clinicopathological features 24.1% of inherited BOC cases in Czech Republic. BMRuCtAa1tio2ns in additional for all available cancer diagnoses after the confirmation process. Receiver susceptibility genes, i.e. BRCA,1 , BRCA2, , and were studied oRpeesrualttisn:g characteristics (ROC) curves were generated to evaluate the per- in families at high risk of BOC negatively tested for / mutations. formance of each risk assessment tool within these 3 situations. Coding sequences of both and were analyzed by protein trun- Histopathological characteristics were validated for all (n=189) cation test (PTT) and direct sequencBiRnCg;A p1at2ients negative for point mutati- affected index cases. Overall confirmation rates among affected relatives ons and small deletions/insertions were screBeRnCeAd1 f/o2r large genomic deleti- were 39% (144/372) for breast cancer and 51% (19/37) for ovarian cancer. ons and rTeaPr5r3angements (LGRs) at / by MLPA, long range PCCRH EaKnd2 Only 7% (27/396) diagnoses changed after the confirmation process. All genomic sequencing. In patients negative for mutations, the coding risk assessment tools showed a statistically significant better performance region of was sequenced using cDNA, two moPsAtL fBre2quent Czech C(po<n0c.l0u5s)i ownh:en all cancer features were taken into account after the confir- alterations (c.1100delC and a 5395 bp deletion comprising exons 8 and 9) mation process. were detected by MLPA, and the coding regioBnR oCfA 1 was sequenced via BCRoCnAfi1rm/BaRtiCoAn2 of cancer diagnosis among affected index cases cDNA; all mutations were confirmed by direct DNA sequencing. and close relatives is associated with a significantly better evaluation of the The four mBoRsCtA 1fr equent mutaBtiRoCnAs2 in (c.300t>G, c1806C>T, l Vik. eVliiahsosoodl oo:f None. A. Ayme: mNountea.t iAo.nEs. .Murphy: None. V. Membrez: None. G. c3819_3823del5, and c 5385dupC) accounted for 69.1%PA LanBd2 LGRs for Benais-Pont: None. M. Rebsamen: None. P.O. Chappuis: None. 11.4% of all mutations. In CHEK, 2th e eight most frequent mutations accounted for 43% andT Pn5o3 LGATRMs were NfoBuNn1d. Mutations in were pre- sent in 2% and two most frequent mutations tested in 1.2% of our patients. Mutations in , , and genes were rare. 
P11 .035 Mutation testing BoRf CoAt1h/e2r predisposing to BCO genes with moderate risk Fifteen years of BRCA1/BRCA2 screening in a Swiss diagnostic would help in clinical genetic consulting in Czech families at high risk of laboratory: Issues with unclassified variants (UVs) BAC. OP annecgzaatkiv:e N foonre . P. Pohlr eailcthe:r aNtoionnes. .J. Stříbrná: None. J. Kotlas: None. M. A. Ayme1,2, V. Viassolo1,3, B. Pardo4, M. Rebsamen4, P. O. Chappuis1,3,5, f. the SAKK Network Janatová: None. J. Soukupová: None. I. Tichá: None. K. Veselá: None. M. for Cancer Predisposition Testing3; Zimovjanová: None. P. Kleiblová: None. Z. Kleibl: None. 1Oncogenetics and Cancer Prevention Unit, Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine Specialities, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Network for Cancer Predisposition Testing and Counseling, Swiss Group 
P11 .037 for Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK), Bern, Switzerland, 4Laboratory of Molecular Evaluation of ERBB2, C-MYC and CCND1 gene status and its association Oncology, Department of Genetic and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals of with tissue aluminum concentration in breast cancer Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Genetic and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. R. M. Rodrigues-Peres1, J. K. Heinrich1, L. O. Z. Sarian2; 1CAISM – Women´s Hospital, State University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Introduction: BRCA1 BRCA2 Brazil, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Sate University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Brazil. and testing has moved from research to clini- Introduction: cal setting some years ago. Analytical performance improvement of scree- In vi- ninBgR mCeAt1h/oBdRsC hAa2s added complexity in interpreting genetic results due to an tro inI vt ihvoas long been hypothesized whether body tissue uptake of increased detection of uncla ssified variants (UVs). We extensively reviewed aluminum may have biological or clinical implications in breast canceOr. bjec- Malle thods: UVs identified between 1996-2009 in a diagnostic labora- tivea:nd a few studies have shown that aluminum may trigger genomic tory in Geneva, Switzerland. instability by interfering directly on the assembly of DNA strands. Various techniques [SSCP, HA, PTT (1996-1999); DHPLC pres- to EeRxaBmB2ineC -tMheY CrelatioCnCsNhDip1 of aluminum concentration in peripheral creening, Sanger sequencing confiBrmRCaAti1o/nB R(1
C9 A929-2007); HRM prescree- and central areas oSfu bbrejeacstts t uamnodr sM wetithho tdhse: instability of key genes in breast ning, Sanger sequencing confirmation (2007-2009); MLPA (since 2005)] cancer, , and , and aneuploidy of chromosomes harbo- were successively used to identify in gsielricmo-line modifications. ring these genes. For this study, 118 samples of Significance of all UVs was re-evaluated as follows: 1) referring to gene- breast cancer tissue were obtained. Evaluation of tissue aluminum content specific databases (BIC, LOVD, UMD); 2) using toBoRlCsA (1AlBigRnC-GAV2GD, was carErRieBdB o2uCt -uMsiYnCg GrapCChNiteD 1Furnace Atomic Absorption Spectrometry. A SIFT, PolyPhen); 3) reviewing literature. BRCAPRO scores, as well as family tissue microarray slide containing the samples was used in FISH assays to Rhiesstourlyts c: haracteristics, werBeR cCoAll1ecBteRdC Aan2d compared to / te- assess Resu,l ts: and and the respective chromosomes 17, 8 and sting results. 11 centromere status. Clinicopathological data were obtained from patient BRCA1 1’163 BcoRmCAp2lete / analyses were performed: 218 records. Levels of aluminEuRmB B>22/.0CmEPg1/7kg Cw-MerYeC f/oCuEnPd8 in 20.
C3 C%N Dan1d/ (18.7%) index casBeRsC wA1ere identBifRieCdA 2as carriers of pathogenic mutations 2C
E2 .
P11 %1 of the central and peripheral areas, respectively. The amplification ( : n=134; : n=84) and 127 (10.9%) as carriers of UVs. Among and/or aneuploid status for the , and 114 distinct UVs ( : n=45; : n=69), 77 were missense variants, were detectedC ino n2c4l%us, i3o6n.s7:% and 29.3% of the tumors, respectively. 33 intronic variants and 4 in-frame deletions. Before 2009, 3 (2.6%) UVs We found that aluminum concentration was not related to any of these al- were reclassified as pathogenic. Distribution of BRCAPRO scores and fami- tered gene statuses. Recent lines of evidence, including our ly history were not statistically different between families with UVs or non findings, suggest that aluminum concentration may not directly affect geno- informative testing results. Higher BRCAPRO scores (p<0.0001) and some mic stability in breast tissues. Tissue microenvironment modifications due parBtRicCuAla1r BfaRmCAil2ial phenotypes, such as ovarian cancer or multiple early- to the presence of aluminum compounds seems more appealing as possible oCnosnectl ubsreioanst: cancer cases, w ere siBgRnCifAic1anBtlRyC aAs2s ociated with identification targets to current and future studies on the implications of aluminum in bre- of / pathogenic mutations. aRs.tM c.a Rrcoidnroiggeuneess-Pise.res: None. J.K. Heinrich: None. L.O.Z. Sarian: None. In our cohort,most / UVs were associated with similar features as non informative testing results. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 273ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .038 
P11 .040 Mutation spectrum and prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Detection of copy number variations on oncogenes and tumor patients with familial and early-onset breast/ovarian cancer from suppressor genes by multiplex ligation probe amplification analysis Tunisia : Novel and high proportion of recurrent germline mutations I. Maleva1, K. Kubelka-Sabit2, D. Jasar2, A. Arsovski3, L. Stojanovska3, D. Plaseska- A. Riahi1, F. Khomssi2, M. Kharrat1, K. Rahal2, A. Gammoudi2, A. El May2, H. Chaabouni- Karanfilska4; Bouhamed1,3; 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research center for Genetic Engineering and 1Faculte de medecine University Tunis Elmanar, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Institut Salah Azaiez, Biotechnology „Georgi D. Efremov“, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic Tunis, Tunisia, 3Charles Nicolle hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. of, 2„Adzibadem-Sistina”, Private hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3„Re-Medika”, Private hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 4Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. Background: Hereditary factors are the most significant risk causing breast cancer and many of these are depending on mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes. Estimate of pathogenic mutations prevalence of BRCA1/2 genes va- Copy number variations (CNVs) on chromosomes 8p, 11q and 17q are ries within different populations. The contribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 among the most common aberrations in breast cancer (BC). Several oncoge- mutations to hereditary breast cancer in the Tunisian population has not nes and tumor suppressor genes involved in development and progression been accurately estimated. of the tumor are located on these chromosomes. Some of them are proposed Methods: We studied 48 unrelated Tunisian high-risk cases selected for their to predict and guide therapy, but their prognostic value is still a subject of in- family history of breast /ovarian cancer . Coding regions of BRCA1, BRCA2 tense study and controversy. The aim of the study was to examine the CNVs and exon-intron boundaries were screened using direct sequencing. in 21 BC related genes and to couple the data with pathological features Results: We identified five different pathogenic mutations in twelve families, of tumor that are currently used for prognosis and treatment selection. We three in BRCA1 and tow in BRCA2 with a prevalence of 25%. We also iden- analyzed 71 female invasive breast cancers with multiplex ligation-depen- tified 20 distinct polymorphisms and unclassified variants. Among BRCA1 dent probe amplification kit 
P078  (MRC Holland). We identified PRMD14 mutation carriers, four unrelated families shared the c.211dupA deleterious amplification in 42.2% of the patients, MTDH in 35.2%, CCND1 in 31%, MYC mutation which seems to be Tunisian specific mutation, since it was descri- in 28.1%, ERBB2 and CD
C6  in 22.5%, FGFR and MED1 in 21.2%, IKBKB, bed for the first time in Tunisia and was not reported elsewhere. Morover TO
P2 A and AURKA in 19.7%, BIR
C5  in 16.9%, CDH1 in 15.5%, ADAM9 in analysis of twelve microsatellite markers in the BRCA1 locus has shown a 14.9%. Co-amplification of ERBB2/TO
P2 A, ERBB2/CCND1, ERBB2/MYC, common haplotype associated with this mutation in all carriers, suggesting MYC/CCND1 and MYC/TO
P2 A genes were observed in 15.5%, 8.5%, 5.6%, a new Tunisian founder mutation. 12.7% and 7% of the tumors. Significant association was observed between Conclusion: This study indicates that our population has a spectrum of pre- HER2 positive tumors and high level amplification of 17q genes: MED1, valent BRCA mutations which account for a high proportion of hereditary ERBB2 and TO
P2 A (p=1.63x10-6, 3.52x10-4 and 0.001); between IKBKB breast/ovarian cancer, and demonstrated a predominance of BRCA1 germ- gain and increased p53 expression (p=0.003); and CDH1 loss and lobular line recurrent mutations, accounting for more than 66% of all identified al- type of tumor (p=0.036). terations and appears as founding mutations. Identification of a recurrent In conclusion, MLPA is fast, simple and accurate method for detection of mutation could reduce the cost of mutation analysis, for genetic counseling a GAn a.d mR c miaah oni uc:e dNr i: o r Nnise ok. n F ea. .s Ks Aeh . so Esm lm Mses ani y:t :.N No on ne e. .M H. .K Ch ha ar ara bt o: uN no in -Be o. uK h. aR mah ea dl :: NN oo nn ee .. A. C a I.nN MdV as tul ea mvn aod :r c N sa oun np ec p.o rKn e.st r sKi oub rbu gete elk nt aeo -sS b iane bt idt te :e r vN eu oln noed p.e m Drs e. t nJa atn sad ani rn d: g Np o roof n get rh . eAe s .sr Ao iorle ns o o ovf fs Bo kn Ci:c . ogenes None. L. Stojanovska: None. D. Plaseska-Karanfilska: None. 
P11 .039 
P11 .041 The SWEA study - an extended analysis of hereditary breast cancer in Qualitative analysis of the CTC levels in Bulgarian patients with Sweden metastatic breast cancer H. Ehrencrona1, B. Arver2, Z. Einbeigi3, Y. Karlsson-Pålsson4, A. Kvist5, A. Lindblom6, B. D. R. Dacheva1, S. Valev2, M. Taushanova2, V. Mitev1, K. Timcheva2, R. Kaneva1, A. Melin7, M. Stenmark Askmalm8, T. Törngren5, Å. Borg5; Mitkova1; 1Clinical Genetics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Molecular Medicine Centre, University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Oncology, Göteborg University, MU- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Medical Oncology Clinic, Specialised Hospital for Active Göteborg, Sweden, 4Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, Treatment in Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria. 5Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 6Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Cancer Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 7Radiaton Sciences, Oncology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, 8Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Background: The vast majority of cancer-related death is due to the meta- Linköping University, County Council of Östergötland, Linköping, Sweden. static spread of the primary tumour. Circulating tumour cells (CTC) detec- tion has been considered as a reliable biomarker for overall survival and assessment of the therapeutic response in patients with metastatic breast The SWEA study (The SWE-BRCA Extended Analysis) is a national colla- cancer (MBC). borative study involving all cancer genetics clinics in Sweden. Within the Materials and methods: We have analyzed the CTC levels in 18 MBC patients SWEA study, index cases from breast cancer families are screened for muta- at three specific points: before therapy, after three and after six cycles of tions in 17 known breast cancer susceptibility genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, T
P53 , chemotherapy, by commercial AdnaGen diagnostic tests based on CTC iso- PTEN, STK11, CDH1, CDKN2A, CHEK2, PALB2, BRI
P1 , ATM, RAD50, RAD51C, lation from 5 ml blood samples with immunomagnetic separation and RT- RAD51D, BARD1, NBN and MR
E11 A. In addition, we screen the protein co- PCR of three BC-associated expression markers GA733-2, Her-2 and Muc-1. ding exons of 47 candidate susceptibility genes, selected based on the func- Samples from 12 healthy women were used as negative controls. The PCR tional networks in which the known 17 genes exert their effect. Putative products were analysed by 4% agarose gel electrophoresis and Agilent Bio- risk alleles will be followed up with segregation analysis. All patients who analyzer 2100. undergo clinical BRCA1/2 screening in Sweden are offered participation in Results: CTC were detected in 44.4% (8/18) of MBC patients before thera- SWEA. The study opened for inclusion in April 2012. In the first nine months py. All of the initially negative CTC patients remained negative in the course over 400 index individuals were screened, and we estimate that over 1200 of treatment. All CTC positive patients lost their expression markers after prospective families will be included within the first two years of the study. three cycles of chemotherapy, but one of them became positive after the We will also perform pooled mutation screening in 5000 healthy controls, sixth course. Two patients died and could not be followed. The frequencies 5000 consecutive breast cancer patients and 4000 familial high-risk cases. of the studied expression markers were 44.4% (8/18) for GA733-2, 33.3% P Hr.e Elihmreinnacrryo nreas: uNlotsn ew. iBll. bAer vperre:s Nenonteed. .Z. Einbeigi: None. Y. Karlsson-Pålsson: (6/18) for Muc-1 and 11.1 % (2/18) for Her2. Interestingly two of the pa- None. A. Kvist: None. A. Lindblom: None. B. Melin: None. M. Stenmark tients with Her2 negative primary tumor demonstrated positive Her2 ex- Askmalm: None. T. Törngren: None. Å. Borg: None. pression in CTC. Conclusions: Our results demonstrated that CTC levels determined by RT- PCR can be used as reliable surrogate biomarker of the clinical outcome and t Dre.Rat. mDaecnht erveasp: oNnosnee .i nS .B Vuallgeavr:i aNno npea.t Mie.n Ttas uwsihthan MovBaC:. None. V. Mitev: None. K. Timcheva: None. R. Kaneva: None. A. Mitkova: None. 274 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .042 
P11 .044 Breast cancer risk prediction using the novel germline signatures in The Importance of MIR-126 in Breast Cancer epigenome regulatory pathways. C. Oner, D. Turgut Cosan, S. M. Erkasap, I. Degirmenci, H. V. Gunes, F. Sahin Mutlu; C. Adaniel1, J. Rendleman1, J. Smith1, R. Klein1, Y. Shao1, F. Schnabel1, K. Offit2, T. Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey. Kirchhoff1; 1New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 2Memorial Sloan- Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States. There are many effective mechanisms in cancer development. Breast can- cer is the most seen cancer type in women on the World. The effect of mi- croRNAs in cancer and its mechanisms haven’t been fully elucidated. There- Epigenetic regulatory pathways are intensely studied for their involvement fore, micro-RNAs are important because of the possibility of as a biomarker in breast tumorigenesis, however little is currently known about the genetic of cancer. variation in epigenome components contributing to the risk and/or progno- In this study, we have investigated and the effect of miR-126, which is thought sis of breast cancer. In this study we have tested how novel germline genetic to play a role in vessel development and the cell movements control like me- signatures identified in epigenetic regulatory genes (ERGs) may potentially tastasis and invasion in breast cancer cases. Furthermore, in this study, we contribute to clinical prediction of breast cancer risk. We have genotyped have also researched the gene expression of miR-126*, the complementary 711 SNPs tagging 87 ERGs in 1985 breast cancer cases and 1609 controls. of miR-126, and the Epidermal Growth Factor Like-7 (Egfl-7) mRNA expres- The samples were of white European origin with a fraction of Ashkenazi sion, which includes miR-126/126* in breast cancer patients. The decrease Jewish (AJ) ancestry (n=1642). Associations with risk were assessed using of miR-126 gene expression caused an increase in gene expression of Egfl-7, logistic regression, adjusted by age and AJ status. The strongest associati- which was inhibited by miR-126. ons were observed for RUNX1 (rs7280097, OR=0.83, CI 95%: 0.71-0.94, Firstly we collected peripheral blood samples of breast cancer patients and p=0.006) and PRDM16 (rs12135987, OR=1.22, CI 95%: 1.06-1.42, p=0.007). isolated mononuclear cells. Then, we isolated RNA from these mononuclear The predictive ability of SNP signatures was tested by ROC curves using lo- cells and determined gene expression levels by using Real Time PCR me- gistic regression models, and the area under the curve (AUC) was used to thod. assess their utility in the classification of breast cancer risk. A signature of In our study, we observed a decrease in miR-126 gene expression and an 20 SNPs tagging 13 ERGs (20-SNP-ERG) was significantly associated with increase in Egfl-7 gene expression when compared to that of healthy people. breast cancer risk. The inclusion of predictor variables (age, AJ status) and The decrease of miR-126 gene expression caused an increase in Egfl-7 gene 20 associated SNPs in the ROC analysis yielded a best fitting model involving expression, which is then inhibited by miR-126. 10 SNPs tagging 8 ERGs with AUC of 0.723, compared to 0.660 with predic- Our results supported that miR-126 can be a tumor suppressor in breast tor variables alone (p=0.003). These results suggest the promising clinical c aCn. cOenr.er: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant potential of 20-SNP-ERG signature in identification of high-risk individuals and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Eskisehir in the population, and point to possible biological implication of germline Osmangazi University. D. Turgut Cosan: B. Research Grant (principal p Ca.t Atedrannsi einl: eNpoingee.n Je.t iRce enndzleymmaens :i nN obnree.a Jst. Stummitohr: iNgeonnees. iRs.. Klein: None. Y. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Shao: None. F. Schnabel: None. K. Offit: None. T. Kirchhoff: None. already received); Significant; Eskisehir Osmangazi University. S.M. Erkasap: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Eskisehir Osmangazi University. I. Degirmenci: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Eskisehir 
P11 .043 Osmangazi University. H.V. Gunes: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Prognostic and predictive significance of HOXB13:I
L17 BR expression Eskisehir Osmangazi University. F. Sahin Mutlu: Other; Significant; Eskisehir ratio in breast cancer Osmangazi University. E. Demirdogen1, U. Egeli1, G. Tezcan1, G. Cecener1, B. Tunca1, S. Gokgoz2, I. Tasdelen2, S. Tolunay3; 1Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 
P11 .045 2Department of General Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey. Analysis of miR-195 Expression and Role in Breast Cancer G. Cecener1, E. Demirdogen1, E. Erturk1, B. Tunca1, U. Egeli1, S. Gokgoz2, G. Tezcan1, S. Ak1, T. B. Hayal1, V. Polatkan1, S. Tolunay3, I. Tasdelen2; 1Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, Breast cancer progression is directly related to estrogen hormone (ER) sta- 2Department of General Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, tus of patients. Although most of ER (+) cases beneHfiOt XfrBo1m3 adjuvIaLn1t7 eBnRd ocri- 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey. ne treatment with tamoxifen, almost 40% of these patients are not respond to this therapy. Recent studies hHaOvXeB s1h3owILn1 7thBaRt and have both significant prognostic and predictive utility. The aim of this study was Because of the utility of currently available tumor markers is limited by tHoO iXnBve1s3t igateI Lth1e7 BsiRgnificance of : ratio in recurrence/distant disappointing sensitivities and specificities, the discovery of novel classes metastasis potential of ER (+) primary Turkish breast cancer patients. of molecular markers in cancer has provided exciting, potentially viable and gene expression levels were determined by quantitative biomarkers that may have utility in early cancer detection. The potential of RT-PCR analysis from formalin-fiHxOedX Bp1a3ra: fIfLin1-7eBmRb edded. tissues of 40 tumor microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel tumor markers has been the focus of recent and 40 normal primary breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen. research because of their tissue specificity, stability, and association with cli- ΔCt values were used t oH bOuXiBld1 3a index AILll1 s7tBatRis tical analy- nicopathological parameters. The objective of this study was to investigate ses were performed using MedCalc 12.4.0 Statistical software. HOXB13 expression and potential role in prognosis of miR-195 in breast cancer. The eIxLp1r7eBsRsion level of was 12,2 fold higher and was 0,0006 miR-195 expression levels were determined by quantitative RT-PCR analysis fPold lower in tumors. Although there was no significant coHrOrXelBa1ti3onIL, 17BR from fresh frozen tissues of 72 tumor and 72 normal primary breast cancer and demonstrated opposing patterns of expression (r=-0.03465, patients not receiving neoadjuvant chemotheraphy. The Statistical analysis =0.834
P1 ). According to two sample T test, the ratio of : si- were performed to clar ify the correlation with miR-195 expression level and gnificantly difPferent between metastatic and non-metastatic tumors of pa- clinical features of breast tumor tissues. tients ( < 0.0001). APlso, ROC Curve analysis vaPlidated to this significancy The expression level ofmiR-195 was 0,283 fold lower in tumors than normal (AUC: 0.725, =0.017). In addition, hormonotherapy was associated with tissues. AlthougPh miR-195 expression levels were not significantly different longer disease-free ( =0,0166) and HmOeXdBia1n3 (I
L1  =70B,R0101) survival in the between tumor and normal tissues of patients according to Independent entire cohort. Sample T test ( =0.
P2  17), Binary Logistic Regression Analysis demonstrated Even further studies needed, a higher : expression may be a that there was a significant correlation bePtween miR-1
P95  expression levels candidate biomarker of recurrence /distant metastasis in breast cancer in and tumor grade ( = 0.023). Also, miR-195 expression levels were asso- t Eh.e D seemttiirndgo ogfe and: jNuovnaen.t Uta. mEgoexliif:e Nno tnhee.r Gap. Ty.ezcan: None. G. Cecener: None. B. ciated with tumor size and tumor type ( =0.020 and =0.018, respective- Tunca: None. S. Gokgoz: None. I. Tasdelen: None. S. Tolunay: None. ly). A low miR-195 expression was related with increased tumor size and grade. So our data imply that miR-195 play role in breast cancer malignancy and mGa. yC becee tnheer :p Notoennet.i aEl. tDheemrairpdeougteicn t:a Nrgoente.. E. Erturk: None. B. Tunca: None. U. Egeli: None. S. Gokgoz: None. G. Tezcan: None. S. Ak: None. T.B. Hayal: None. V. Polatkan: None. S. Tolunay: None. I. Tasdelen: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 275ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .046 Segregation Analysis Offers a Mechanism for Variant Reclassification in a Small Subset of Cases but is Especially Powerful in Classifying with Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer syndrome. Current genetic ana- Deleterious Mutations lysis identifies BRCA1 and BRCA2 deleterious mutations as well as variants J. Eggington1, J. Saam1, K. Bowles1, K. Moyes1, S. Manley1, L. Esterling1, S. Sizemore1, B. of unknown clinical significance. Reclassification of uncertain variants to Robinson1, C. Arnell1, E. Rosenthal1, J. Bennett1, M. McKellar2, B. Roa1, R. Wenstrup1; more clinically interpretable categories is critical for patient management. 1Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Myriad Genetics, We have developed a statistical algorithm that aids in the assignment of Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. clinical classifications to uncertain variants. This algorithm is based on the premise that disease-associated mutations will be observed more often in individuals at high risk for carrying a mutation, as determined by personal Accurate classification of variants in regards to their clinical significance is and family history. Statistical analysis weights the family histories of each a critical challenge associated with gene sequencing tests. Thus, it is impor- proband carrying the variant of interest and compares these histories to tho- tant to evaluate the effectiveness of various strategies for variant reclassi- se of control probands carrying variants known to be benign or deleterious. fication. This studByR cCoAm1/p2ares the use of segregation analysis against other Data from over 400,000 probands were utilized for algorithm development. methodologies for the reclassification of variants in HeredBitRaCrAy 1B/r2east and This technique was validated by and used to analyze over 6000 BRCA1 and Ovarian Cancer ( ). Reclassification methods independent of addi- BRCA2 variants. The algorithm successfully classified well-documented va- tional family testing and powered by Myriad’s extensive variant riants such as BRCA1 c.181T>G (Deleterious), BRCA1 c.1065G>A (Polymor- database resulted in 61% of reclassifications, mostly downgrades. Determi- phism), and BRCA2 c.2808_2811del (Deleterious). The BRCA1 c.5096G>A ning if a novel variant segregates with cancer in a family is the classic gene- (Suspected Deleterious with reduced penetrance) and BRCA2 c.7878G>C tic tool used to assess a variant‘s effect on hereditary cancer risk. Myriad (Suspected Deleterious with reduced penetrance) mutations were classified Genetics’ test reports of variant of unknown significance (VUS) and favor as „Not Callable“ by the algorithm, consistent with their previous hypomor- polymorphism (FP) are accompanied by an offer of research testing to ad- phic interpretations. This ‘history weighting’ algorithm allows for the accu- ditional family members. These data are then used to reclassify variants. In rate reclassification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 uncertain variants and improved this study, we recorded family history submissions from 17% of the VUS/ clinical management of at-risk patients. With modifications, this algorithm FP results. Research testing was offered to an average of 2.3 relatives per is expected to be applicable to other autosomal dominant cancer-associated family history submission, with a 24.1% response rate. While we made a a Knd. Bnoownl-ecsa:n Ace. rE-maspslooycmiaetnetd ( fguelln oers p.art-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic significant effort to collect segregation data, this effort resulted in only 3.5% Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other of all variant reclassifications during a 13-month time period. However, of intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. B. Morris: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetics, Inc. E. Ownership the 10 variant upgrades to deleterious or suspected deleterious, two (20%) Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; were based on co-segregation data. These results illustrate the power of se- Myriad Genetics, Inc. E. Hughes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; gregation analysis in identifying deleterious variants and suggest that the Myriad Genetics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or tailoring of family analysis to specific families may be the most productive other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetics, Inc. J. Eggington: A. u Js.e E ogf glainbgotroant:o Ary. Eamndp lcooymmemnut (nfuitlyl o rre psaorut-rticmees.); Significant; Myriad Genetic Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. J. Saam: A. Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. L. Esterling: A. Employment (full or Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. K. Bowles: A. Employment (full or Laboratories, Inc. B. Robinson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Genetic Laboratories, Inc. K. Moyes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Inc. A. Van Kan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. B. Roa: A. Inc. S. Manley: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. L. Esterling: A. Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. E. Rosenthal: A. Employment (full or Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. S. Sizemore: A. Employment (full or Genetic Laboratories, Inc. A. Gutin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Laboratories, Inc. B. Robinson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Inc. R. Wenstrup: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. D. Pruss: A. Inc. C. Arnell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetics, Inc.. E. Ownership Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. E. Rosenthal: Genetics, Inc.. A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. J. Bennett: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest 
P11 .048 (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Germline mutation in the RAD51B gene confers predisposition to Laboratories, Inc. M. McKellar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; breast cancer Myriad Genetics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other L. Golmard1,2, V. Caux-Moncoutier1, G. Davy1, E. Al Ageeli1, B. Poirot1, C. Tirapo1, D. intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetics, Inc. B. Roa: A. Employment (full Michaux1, C. Barbaroux1, C. Dubois d‘Enghien1, L. Castéra1, M. Stern1,2, C. Houdayer1,2,3, D. or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2,3; (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic 1Institut Curie, Department of Tumour Biology, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, INSERM Laboratories, Inc. R. Wenstrup: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; U830, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc.. Background. RAD M51ost currently known breast cancer predisposition genes play a role in DNA repair by homologous recombination. Recent studies con- 
P11 .047 ducted on parRalAoDgs5,1 iCn,vRoAlvDe5d1 iDn the sXaRmCeC 2D NA repair pathway, have A Clinical History Weighting Algorithm Accurately Classifies BRCA1 identified rare gerRmAliDn5e1 mutations conferring breast and/or ovarian cancer and BRCA2 Variants predisposition in the and genes. The present study K. Bowles1, B. Morris2, E. Hughes3, J. Eggington1, L. Esterling1, B. Robinson1, A. Van Kan1, B. Roa1, E. Rosenthal1, A. Gutin1, R. Wenstrup1, D. Pruss3; aPnaatilyesnetds athned fMiveet hods. paralogs to estimate their contribution to breast and ovarian cancer predisposition. 1Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Myriad Genetics, Inc, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3Myriad Genetics, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United The study was conducted on 142 unrelated patients States. with breast and/or ovarian cancer either with early onseBtR oCrA w1/it2h a breast/ ovarian cancer family history. Patients were referred to a French family can- cer clinic and had been previously tested negative for a mutation. Genetic testing, including full gene sequencing and large rearrangement Coding sequences of the five genes were analysed by EMMA (Enhanced Mis- 276 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG analysis for germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, can identify individuals match Mutation analysis). Detected variants were characterized by SangerABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results. sequencing analysis. RAD51B RAD51C RAD51C allele increased breast cancer risk (OR=2.05; p<0.01) and the T allele was si- Three splicing RmAuDt5a1tBions and two likely causal missenseX RvCaCri3- gnificantly protective (OR=0.49; p<0.01). rs1801320 in RAD51 and the SNPs ants were identified: RAD c5.415D2+3AX>RGC, 
C2  c.706-2A>G, in XRC
C4  did not show any association with breast cancer. rs3218536 (G>A) c.1026+5_1026+7del, c.475C>T/p.Arg159Cys and in XRC
C2  showed a marginal association where the OR for the mutant allele cC.o4n4c8lCu>sTio/nps.A.rg150Cys. No R aAnDd5 1B gene mutations were detec- was 1.82 and for the wild type allele was 0.54. We will present the results ted. XRC
C3  of association between the genotypes and age of diagnosis, family history, This study identified RAD51 as a new breast cancer predis- dSi.s eTauslbea she:v Nerointey. aMn.d A rleacnuarzri:e Nncoen er.i sNk. oRfe cdadnyc:e Nr oinne S.a Au.d Pisa.than: None. W. position gene and is the first report of mutation analysis in breast Khan: None. A.S. Warsy: None. and ovarian cRaAnDce5r1. It confirms that paralog mutations confer breast and ovarian cancer predisposition and are rare events. In view of the low frequency of paralog mutations, international collaboration of family 
P11 .051 cancer clinics will be required to more accurately estimate their penetrance Two novel RAD51C mutations in families with breast and ovarian a Ln. dG eoslmtaabrldis:h N colninei.c Va.l Cgauuidxe-Mlinoensc oinu tciaerr:r iNeor nine.d Giv.i dDuaavlys:. None. E. Al Ageeli: cancer None. B. Poirot: None. C. Tirapo: None. D. Michaux: None. C. Barbaroux: J. Hauke1,2, A. Becker1,2, G. Schnurbein1, G. Neidhardt1,2, A. Meindl3, E. Hahnen1,2, B. None. C. Dubois d‘Enghien: None. L. Castéra: None. M. Stern: None. C. Wappenschmidt1,2, R. K. Schmutzler1; Houdayer: None. D. Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. 1Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar at the Technical University, Munich, Germany. 
P11 .049 Germline copy number variations in BRCA1/2-negative Finnish breast RAD51C and ovarian cancer families K. M. Kuusisto1,2, O. Akinrinade1,2, M. Vihinen3, S. Laasanen4, J. Schleutker1,2,5; Since its discovBerRyC Aby1 /M2eindl et al. in 2010, RisA dDe5f1inCed as a breast 1University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 2Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland, and ovarian cancer (BC, OC) susceptibility gene besidBeRsC thAe1 /tw2o highly pene- 3Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 4Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, trant BC genes . Heterozygous mutations in are predomi- 5University of Turku, Turku, Finland. nantly found in families with both BC and OC. While mutatRioAnDs5 a1rCe BACKGROUND found in 21% of the families that fulfill the inclusion critieria of the German consortiuRmA Do5f 1hCereditary breast and ovarian cancer (GC-HBOC), Breast cancer (BrCa) is the most common cancer among wo- mutations are only found in 1 - 1.5 % of theses families Seven distinct pa- men in western countries, including Finland. Inherited factors are known to thogenic mutations hRaAvDe 5b1eCen described so far in 14 families by the account for 5-10% of all BrCa cases. Several BrCa susceptibility genes have GC-HBOC. been recognized but the predisposing factors remain mostly unidentified We here describe two novel mutations segregating in one BC and in majority of the hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families. In one BC/OC family respectively. One large genomic deletion including exons recent years, copy number variations (CNVs) have been shown to have an 5 to 9 was discovered in a BC family by MLPA technique during screening of important role in predisposition to several complex diseases. Our aim was 168 non-BRCA BC and 151 BC/OC families. The genomic break point was tMoE iTdeHnOtiDfyS germline CNVs contributing to HBOC predisposition in the Fin- determined by quacntitative real-time PCR followed by Sanger-sequReAnDc5in1gC. nish population. BRCA1/2- The second mutation, an exonic splice site mutation affecting the last nu- A genome-wide SNP array was performed for 84 HBOC indivi- cleotide of exon 2, .404G>C, was found during clinical screening of duals, who have been tested negative for founder mutations and by Sanger-sequencing. RT-PpC.R revealed the activation of a cryptic splice site pre-screened for most common BrCa genes, and 36 healthy controls. Gene- RinA iDn5tr1oCn 2 with subsequent inclusion of 27 nucleotiRdAesD 5fr1oCm intron 2, lea- affected CNVs were analysed by Gene Ontology term enrichment, pathway ding to a truncated protein Met136X. The finding of two novel deleterious aRnEaSlUysLeTsS, and database searchEePs.H SAix3 potential CNVs were validated and ge- mutations supports previous findings that mutations are notyped in 209 additional healthy controls by qPCR. prevalent in high risk BC/OC as well as BC only families in Germany and PIntronic deletion at receptor tyrosine kinase was enriched may be included in routine clinical diagnostic testing in selected high risk in HBOC individuals (8 of 81, 9.9%) compared with controls (7 of 185, 3.8%) f Ja.m Hialiueks.e: None. A. Becker: None. G. Schnurbein: None. G. Neidhardt: (OR=2.7; =0.05). EPHA3 was identCifSiMedD i1n several enriched molecular func- None. A. Meindl: None. E. Hahnen: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. tions including receptor activity. A rare novel deletion affecting intronic region of tumor suppressor gene, , was observed in 1 of 81 (1.2%) HCOBNOCCL inUdSiIvOidNu als but it was absent in healthy controls implicating a disease susceptibility. 
P11 .052 The study reveals new information about the germline CNVs Identification of breast cancer susceptibility loci in genes unregulated t Kh.aMt .l iKkueluys cisotnot:r Nibountee. tOo. HABkiOnCri nsaudsece: pNtoibneil.i tMy. i Vni Fhiinnelann: dN.one. S. Laasanen: in breast cancer gene-expression arrays None. J. Schleutker: None. M. Loizidou1, I. Neophytou1, K. Siontis2, J. Ioannidis3, K. Kyriacou1, A. Hadjisavvas1; 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Clinical Trials and Evidence-Based Medicine Unit, Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina School of Medicine, Ioannina, Greece, 3Department of Health Research and 
P11 .050 Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. DNA repair gene (XRC
C2 , XRC
C4  and RAD51) polymorphisms and breast cancer in Saudi females S. Tulbah1, M. Alanazi2, N. Reddy2, A. Pathan2, W. Khan2, A. S. Warsy1; Breast cancer is a complex, multifactorial, polygenic disease. Some of the 1Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, Center for Science and Medical Studies for Girls, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Biochemistry, familial risk for breast cancer can be explained by rare mutations in high- College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. penetrance genes such as BRCA1 and BRCA2. The failure of linkage studies to identify further susceptibility genes suggests that most familial clustering of cancer is due to a combination of multiple lower penetrance alleles. In an Double strand breaks in DNA are repaired by different mechanisms, inclu- attempt to gain a further insight into the inherited basis of breast cancer we ding homologous recombination and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). performed a meta-analysis of publically available gene expression profiling We investigated seven SNPs in XRC
C2  and RAD51 (homologous repair) data for breast cancer and used this information for prioritizing candidate and XRC
C4  (NHEJ) in 100 Saudi breast cancer patients and 100 controls, genes to be investigated. A total of 243 single nucleotide polymorphisms to study the association between rs3218536 (G>A) X iRnC XCR4C 
C2 ; rs1801320 (SNPs) located within or in close proximity to the top 50 meta-analysis ge- (G>C), rs1801321 (G>T) and rs2619681 (C>T) in RAD51; and rs2075685 nes were selected and subsequently genotyped in the MASTOS study cohort (G>T), rs10474081 (C>G) and rs1120476 (A>G) in and occurrence (which consists of 1109 Cypriot breast cancer patients and 1177 healthy of breast cancer in Saudis. Genotyping was performed using genomic DNA controls) using the Sequenom Mass-ARRAY platform. Of the 243 SNPs stu- obtained from peripheral blood, by TaqMan genotyping assay, PCR-RLFP died, eighteen were found to be statistically significantly associated with bre- and DNA sequencing. We observed a highly significant association between ast cancer risk. Of these eighteen SNPs, two are located in the HMMR gene, breast cancer occurrence and RAD51 rs1801321 (G>T) where the G allele two in the NTRK2 gene and the rest in the FLJ10357, KIT, TGFBR3, TXNIP, (OR=7.93; p<0.0001) homozygocity (GG) was observed only in the pati- ZBTB16, MME, GSN, CK
S2 , EGR1, PTRF, NEK2, SYNM, ANXA1 and MTHF02 ents and the T allele was significantly protective (OR=0.13; p<0.0001). For genes. Our study demonstrates that this approach is useful for disease risk RAD51, rs2619681 (C>T) also showed a sEigSnHifiGca n2t 0as1s3oc |ia PtiAonR, wISh,e FreR thAeN C CEl o | c Wi id Wen Wtif .i Eca Sti Hon G i .n O g Ren Ges which are upregulated in breast tissues an 2d 7ar 7e thus potentially important in the carcinogenesis pathway. However, large-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .055 Genetic heterogeneity of amplification of ERBB2 status in breast scale replication in multi-ethnic cohorts is warranted in order to replicate invasive carcinoma with 2+ HER2 immunostaining:a challenge for o Mu.r L roeiszuidltosu a:n Ndo cnoen. If.i rNmeo tphhey atsosuo:c Niaotnioen. Ks .o Sbisoenrtvise:d N inon oeu. rJ .p Ioopaunlnaitdioisn: . genetic scoring. None. K. Kyriacou: None. A. Hadjisavvas: None. A. VALENT, M. Ferchiou, S. Delaloge, N. Auger, V. Koubi-Pick, M. Mathieu, A. Bernheim; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. ERBB2 
P11 .053 Analysis of the BRCA1 promoter methylation in triple-negative The genetic heterogeneity of gene amplification (GA) in breast sporadic breast cancer cancer has previously been described, but its clinical significancEeR rBeBm2ains J. Fernández Mateos1, J. Ceballos Viro2, A. Gómez Bernal2, T. Martín Gómez1, J. J. Cruz unknown. We studied the genetic categories of EaR sBeBri2es of consecutive 4491 Hernández2, R. González Sarmiento1; invasive breast carcinomas 2+ IHC, with a focus on cases with GA 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Departamento de Medicina. Universidad de Salamanca- detected in minor clone(s). We compared the status in primary tu- IBSAL,, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología Médica. Hospital Clínico Universitario mors and positive axillary lymph nodes (ALN) to test the hypothesis that de Salamanca-IBSAL,, Salamanca, Spain. HER2 amplified cells are more aggressive and metastase quicker than non amplified cells. Heterogeneous amplification was defined as the presence of 5-50% of amplified cells (ratio>2,2) within the tumors otherwise classified Background: Breast cancer is the most frequent neoplasia in women. Ap- as not amplified or borderline. proximately 5% of them are hereditary, caused by inherited mutations in The genetic heterogeneity of IHC 2+ tumors is a common event. FISH can breast cancer susceptibility genes: BRCA1 and BRCA2. The 95% remaining classify these tumors into 5 genEetRiBc Bca2tegories (monosomy, disomy, polyso- are sporadic. Epigenetic regulation, especially promoter methylation, is an my, ERBB2 gain and GA). 48 cases (10% of 2+ cases) declared as negative important mechanism for down-regulating tumour suppressor genes in hu- cases contained one or several amplified clones. All types of clones man cancer cells. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter has been reported in (amplified and not amplified) have a metastatic capacity. We continue our sporadic breast cancer with links to reduced mRNA and protein expression work in collaboration to: in tumours and cancer cell lines. 1) Find out a proportion of such patients in HER2 IHC 2+ group in other The aim of our study was to estimate the percentage of methylation in the hospitals ERBB2 promoter region of BRCA1 oncosupressor gene, in patients from Salamanca 2) Study a status of the gene in relapsed cases (Spain), diagnosed with sporadic breast cancer and to compare these results Institut Gustave Roussy Guidelines for FISH heterogeneous and diffi- with their clinical data. cult cases will be proposed in order to help to analyse the breast cancers and Patients and methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from paraffin blocks r Ae.a Vcha laecnct:u Nraotnee c. oMn.c Fluesrciohniosu.: None. S. Delaloge: None. N. Auger: None. V. from triple-negative breast cancer samples of 98 women. After bisulphite Koubi-Pick: None. M. Mathieu: None. A. Bernheim: None. conversion, DNA methylation was measured by quantitative analysis of me- thylated alleles (QAMA), to estimate the extent of methylation of 2 CpG sites in the promoter region of BRCA1 gene. Association between methylation 
P11 .056 and clinico-pathological features was evaluated using statistical tests with Genetic polymorphisms and breast cancer risk SPSS. D. Fernández García1, E. Sánchez Tapia1, T. Martín Gómez2, R. Vidal Tocino2, J. Cruz Results and conclusion: Preliminary analysis showed a big percentage of Hernández1,2, R. González Sarmiento1,3; cases with BRCA1 methylation with an inverse relationship between C-KIT 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología, Hospital gene expression and BRCA1 methylation (p=0.017). Universitario, Salamanca, Spain, 3Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Our results show that BRCA1 promoter is an important mechanism of BR- Medicina, Salamanca, Spain. C JA. 1F egrennáen dsielze nMcaintego isn: sNpoonrea.d Ji.c C treibpalell-onse Vgairtoiv: eN bonreea. sAt. cGaónmceerz. Bernal: None. T. Martín Gómez: None. J.J. Cruz Hernández: None. R. González Sarmiento: None. Breast cancer risk in BRCA1/2 mutations carriers appears to be modified by different genetic or environmental factors. GWAS (genome-wide association studies) identified genome regions that contain SNPs that appear to be as- 
P11 .054 sociated with breast cancer risk in high penetrance genes mutation carriers. Breast cancer, I
L6  gene polymorphism and infection with Torque teno Specific variations in this regions act as risk modifiers, however their me- virus: a pilot association study chanisms of action remain unknown. S. Spandole1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, I. Radu1, G. Mihaescu2; The aim of the study was to determine if genetic variants could be associated 1Department of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Department of with different phenotypes of cancer, segregated in function the presence/ Microbiology, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. absence of BRCA mutations and whether risk modification by these genetic variants is associated to immunohistochemical characteristics. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by standard techniques. Inflammation leads to dysplasia and was associated with cancer develop- We selected 8 non-synonymous SNPs that are involved in risks modifica- ment. tion. Studies were performed using TaqMan probes for the analysis of po- The -174C allele of interleukin 6 -174G>C gene polymorphism is assumed lymorphisms: rs2981582 (FGFR2), rs13281615 (8q24 region), rs2910164 to confer breast cancer risk. Torque teno virus (TTV) was proven to increase (miR146), rs799917 (BRCA1), rs1042522 (T
P53 ), rs16941 (BRCA1), production of I
L6 . rs16942 (BRCA1) and rs2279744 (MDM2). The aim of this study was to assess if the combination of I
L6 -174G>C geno- Allelic distribution were studied in three group of patients: Familiar breast types and TTV infection represents a risk factor for breast cancer. cancer patients with BRCA mutation, breast cancer patients without BRCA Blood samples were collected from 200 subjects (100 breast cancer patients mutation and less than 3 relatives affected, and breast cancer patients wi- and 100 healthy controls). Subsequent to total DNA extraction, genotyping thout BRCA mutation and 3 or more relatives affected. Statistical analysis of I
L6  polymorphism and presence of TTV were assessed with PCR based was performed using SPSS. methods. Preliminary analysis showed a strong association between rs2981582 and I
L6 -174G>C genotype distribution respected the Hardy-Weinberg equilibri- BRCA mutation carriers, the association of rs2910164 with breast cancer um (p>0.05). The I
L6 -174CC genotype was more frequent in cancer patients incidence according to age, and association of rs799917 with breast cancer (p=0.7). In our study, the presence of the C allele was not associated with incidence according to presence/absence of hormonal receptors. These re- breast cancer (p=1.7). sults support the hypothesis that SNPs in high penetrance genes mutation The average prevalence of TTV was 77%, with a significantly higher value c Da.r rFieerrnsá cnoduelzd Gacatr caísa :r iNsokn me.o Ed.i fSieárnsc.hez Tapia: None. T. Martín Gómez: in cancer patients (p=0.001; OR=0.3). The presence of C allele was not asso- None. R. Vidal Tocino: None. J. Cruz Hernández: None. R. González ciated with TTV infection (p=0.3) when both cohorts were analyzed. However, Sarmiento: None. cancer patients carriers of C allele were prone to TTV infection (p=0.01). TTV was more prevalent in cancer patients. Our results disagreed with other studies that reported I
L6 -174C allele as a risk factor for breast cancer. Never- theless, the combination of I
L6 -174C allele and infection with TTV showed a m S.o Sdpesatn adsosloe:c iNaotinoen. Dw.i tChi mbrpeoansetr ciua:n Nceorn ein. Mou. rT ocmohao: rNto.ne. M. Stavarachi: None. P. Apostol: None. I. Radu: None. G. Mihaescu: None. 278 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .057 Feliubadaló: None. A. Lasa: None. M. de la Hoya: None. E.M. Esteban- Determining a role for germline mutations in genes associated with Cardeñosa: None. O. Díez: None. C. Martinez-Bouzas: None. J. Godino: an intermediate risk for breast cancer in the Belgian population None. A. Teulé: None. A. Osorio: None. E. Lastra: None. R. González- K. De Leeneer, A. Dejaegher, W. Vermeesch, P. Schietecatte, J. Vandenhaute, F. Malfait, T. Sarmiento: None. C. Miner: None. E.A. Velasco: None. Van Maerken, B. Poppe, K. Claes; Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium. BRCA1&2 
P11 .059 A high rate of mutations is identified in a single exon of the CHEK2 In our patient population PALB2 gerAmTlMin e mutations arBeR iCdAe1n/ti2fied in less gene in Greek breast/ovarian patients than 15% of patients referred for genetic testing. In this study we evaluated F. Fostira1, P. Apostolou1, A. Stavropoulou1, I. Konstanta1, A. Vratimos1, I. the mutation prevalence of and mutations in mutation Konstantopoulou1, G. Fountzilas2, D. Yannoukakos1; negative families referred for genetic testing. 1NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, We screened the complete UTR, codIinn gs ialincod splice site regions of these ge- Greece. nes with high resolution melting curve analysis followed by Sanger sequen- cing of the aberrant melting curves. predictions of variants with an unclear clinical significaPnAcLeB w2a s performed with the Alamut software. CHEK2 gene encodes for a cell cycle checkpoint kinase that is activated by We ideAnTtMified 10 mutations predicted to lead to a premature stop codon or ATM in response to DNA damage and interacts with and phosphorylates to affect splice sites: 4 mutations in 357 unrelated patients (1.1%) BRCA1 and influences its role in DNA repair pathway by homologous re- and 6 mutations in 190 unrelated patients (3.2%). In case mPAoLrBe 2fami- combination. ly meAmTbMers were available, we confirmed segregation of the miunt astiliiocno with Certain mutations in CHEK2 are associated with increased risk of breast the disease. In addition, we detPeActLeBd2 11 miAsTseMnse variants (4 in and cancer in women, while 80% of CHEK2-associated breast cancers are ER 7 in ), which may also affect protein function, based on pre- and PR positive. diction programs. Deleterious and mutations wereP AexLcBl2usively The aim of this study is to elucidate CHEK2 breast cancer susceptibility in identified in familial and not in sporadic cases with early onset or bilateral Greek breast/ovarian patients. breast cancer. IntAeTrMestingly, the average age at diagnosis for the (62y; We analyzed, 466 women with breast/ovarian cancer diagnosed with syn- range 48-71) mutation carriers was higher compared to the average age at chronous or metachronous cancer, or having at least one family relative diagnosis of the carriers (44y, range: 33-66) and the nonP cAaLrBri2ers (A3T9My, diagnosed with breast and/or ovarian cancer and 223 women diagnosed range: 25-78). with early onset breast/ovarian cancer (<45 years). All patients have been Cancer prevention guidelines have not been established for or previously tested negative for BRCA1 founder and recurrent mutations. heterozygous carriers. Currently screening schedules are based on family Missense and loss-of function mutations were detected in 17/466 (3.6%, hKis. tDoer yL eoef nbereera:s Nt coanne.c eAr.. Dejaegher: None. W. Vermeesch: None. P. mean age 42,2 years) patients previously reported with family history and Schietecatte: None. J. Vandenhaute: None. F. Malfait: None. T. Van Maerken: in 10/223 (4.85%, mean age 34,7 years) of early onset breast cancer pati- None. B. Poppe: None. K. Claes: None. ents. Remarkably, all the identified variants were located on exon 3 of the gene. The present study demonstrates the existence of a large proportion of 
P11 .058 CHEK2 mutations within breast/ovarian cancer patients in Greece, all of BRCA2-c.2808_2811del is located in a mutational hotspot and has which identified in exon 3. Women with early-onset breast/ovarian cancer multiple origins in Spanish population should be considered for CHEK2 mutation testing, after a negative BRCA1 M. Infante1, M. Durán1, A. Acedo1, E. M. Sánchez-Tapia2, B. Díez-Gómez1, A. Barroso3, M. and BRCA2 result. García-González4, L. Feliubadaló5, A. Lasa6, M. de la Hoya7, E. M. Esteban-Cardeñosa8, This research has been co-financed by theESF and Greek national funds O. Díez9, C. Martinez-Bouzas10, J. Godino11, A. Teulé12, A. Osorio3, E. Lastra4, R. González- through the Operational Program „Education and Lifelong Learning“ of the Sarmiento2, C. Miner1, E. A. Velasco1; N F.S FRoFs -t iRrae:s Neaornceh. PF.u Anpdoinsgto Ploruo:g rNaomne o. fA t.h Set GavSrRoTp:o TuHloAuL: INSo.ne. I. Konstanta: 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2CIC, Salamanca, Spain, 3CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 4Complejo None. A. Vratimos: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None. G. Fountzilas: None. D. Hospitalario de Burgos, Burgos, Spain, 5ICO-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat Yannoukakos: None. (Barcelona), Spain, 6Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 8Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 9VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 10Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo (Bizkaia), Spain, 11Hospital Clínico Lozano Blesa, Zaragoza, Spain, 12ICO-IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain. 
P11 .060 BRCA2- Identification of tumor microRNAS in plasma samples from hereditary breast cancer patients c.2808_2811delACAA is one of the most reported germline mutati- K. Yanowsky1, N. Matamala1, M. Tanic1, I. Marquez-Rodas2, A. Barroso1, V. Fernandez1, J. ons in non-Ashkenazi breast/ovarian cancer patients. We aimed to investi- Benitez1, B. Martinez-Delgado3; gate its genetic origin inB SRpCaAn2is h carrier families. 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 3Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Mutation carriers of 51 families were genotyped with seven microsatelli- Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. tes and four intragenic SNPs. Mutation age was calculated with the DBRMCLA
E2  software. DNA secondary structure was predicted with Quikfold. Ran- dom mutagenesis experiments were performed over a 923-bp fragment of There is increasing evidence that microRNAs (miRNAs) may be good bio- . markers for diagnosis, prognosis or monitoring of various diseases. It has Three independent founder haplotypes associated with c.2808_2811delACAA been observed that miRNAs are present in detectable levels in a variety of were clearly distinguished that accounted for 23 families (West Castilla y body fluids, and it has been shown that serum/plasma miRNAs are stab- León/WCL), 20 families (East Castilla y León/ECL) and 6 families (South of le and resistant to degradation. We analyzed the expression of miRNAs in Spain). Mutation age was estimated in a range of 45-68 and 45-71 generati- plasma samples from patients with hereditary breast cancer compared to ons for WCL and ECL haplotypes, respectively. The most prevalent variants the expression in blood plasma of healthy women to establish their role as of this DNA region, c.2808_2811delACAA and c.2803G>A, were located in a disease markers with diagnostic utility. double-hairpin loop structure (c.2794-c.2825) that was proposed as a can- Based on miRNA expression profile data of hereditary tumors previously didate mutational hotspot. To check this hypothesis, random mutagenesis set by microarray analysis, 19 miRNAs were selected because they were glo- was performed and a total of 86 DNA variants were characterized. Intere- bally expressed at high levels in tumors, to study their presence in plasma stingly, three mutations reported in the mutation databases (c.2680G>A, of breast cancer patients. Expression in tumors was previously validated by c.2944delA and c.2957dup) were replicated in this experiment and 20 af- quantitative PCR. fected the same position with different nucleotide changes. Moreover, five RNA from plasma samples was extracted (miRNeasy kit, Quiagen) in 20 variants were placed in the same hairpin-loop of c.2808_2811delACAA, and women with hereditary cancer (BRCA1, BRCA2 and BRCAX) and 20 female one of them (c.2808A>G) affected the same position. BR- controls. The expression level of the 19 tumoral miRNAs, 3 control serum COAu1r results suppor t tha Bt RatC Ale2a-st three diffe ren t mutational events occurred miRNAs, 2 interplate calibrators, were analyzed by quantitative PCR (qPCR), to generate this mutation. A relevant fraction of DNA variants, including using a customized designed Pick&Mix specific panel (Exiqon), and the de- -c.68_69delAGand c.5946delTandc.8537delAG, are preferenti- tection system of miRNAs from Exiqon (LNA miRCURY miRNAs Universal ally concentrated in predicted hairpin-loops suggesting that these structu- rMes. Imnfaayn tree:p Nreosneen. tM m. Duutartáino:n Nalo hneo.t sAp. oAtcse.do: None. E.M. Sánchez-Tapia: RT PCR). None. B. Díez-Gómez: None. A. Barroso: None. M. García-González: None. L. We were able to identify significant increased expression of 4 tumor specific miRNAs in plasma samples of women with breast cancer, compared to the ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEc |o WntrWol sWam.EpSleHs (Gp<.O0.0R5G). 279ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .063 Pharmacogenomic assessment of outcomes of cisplatin-based The detection of tumor-specific miRNAs in plasma support them as promi- chemotherapy in ovarian cancer patients sing noninvasive biomarker with potential utility in the diagnosis or moni- A. V. Khrunin1, D. V. Khokhrin1, A. A. Moisseev2, V. A. Gorbunova2, S. A. Limborska1; t Kor. iYnagn oofw tshkeys:e N tuonmeo. rNs.. Matamala: None. M. Tanic: None. I. Marquez-Rodas: 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian None. A. Barroso: None. V. Fernandez: None. J. Benitez: None. B. Martinez- Federation, 2N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Delgado: None. Moscow, Russian Federation. Background: 
P11 .061 Platinum drugs are among the most active and widely used The common missense polymorphism rs2229742 in NRI
P1  is chemotherapeutic agents. However, their effective clinical use is impeded associated with non-BRCA hereditary breast cancer risk by significant variations in both the response rate and the rate of adverse A. Desrichard1, A. Castet-Nicolas2,3, A. Boulahtouf2, Y. Bignon1,4, V. Cavaillès2, N. reactions and requires the identification of genetic markers that can be used Uhrhammer4; to screen patients before treatment. Here, we have evaluated the associati- 1Université d‘Auvergne, EA 4677 ERTICa, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2IRCM, Institut de ons between polymorphisms in approximately 100 genes, involved mainly Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier, Montpellier, F-34298, Montpellier, France, in dMruegt hmoedtsa:bolism, DNA repair, cell cycle and apoptosis, and outcomes in 3CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Lapeyronie, Pharmacie, Montpellier, France, 4Centre Jean ovarian cancer patients receiving cisplatin-cyclophosphamide chemothera- Perrin, Département d’Oncogénétique, Clermont-Ferrand, France. py. DNA was isolated from blood samples of 104 patients by pro- BRCA1 BRCA2 teinase K treatment. 228 single nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped using the arrayed primer extension technology. Correlations between the Non or related hereditary breast cancer (HBC) represents 80- polymorphisms and survival were assessed using the Kaplan-Meier product 85% of all HBC families. Increasing evidence highlights the contribution of limit method and the log-rank tResets uanltds :χ2 test. TGo SeTvPa1luaTtPeM thTe NasQsOo1ciaCtOioMnTs low-risk variants such as common polymorphisms to a polygenic HBC mo- betwGeRePnR the genotypes and treatment toxicity, patients were classified as del. MaNnRyI Pof1 the genes involved are related to either DNA repair or hormone having good or poorN tAoTl2eraGnScTeA. 4 GSTM3 SNPs CinC NH , , , metabolism. Several studies have suggested that a common polymorphism and genes were EsRigCnCif5icRanAtDly5 2asMsoUciTaYteHd withL IpGr3ogression free survival. in the gene, Arg448Gly (c.1342C>G; rs2229742) BmRiCgAht be associated Polymorphisms in , , and genes were associated with pathologies involving estrogen signaling. In this case/control study, we with anemia. SNPs in , , and geMnSeHs 3coMrrSeHla6teEdP wHiXth1 investigated the contribution of this variant in 159 nonv-s HBC cases and the oCcYcPu1rrAe1nce of severe neutropenia. ThArDoHm1bCocytopenia, emesis, nephro- 416 unaffected controls. The frequency of the G allele (Gly448) was signi- toxicity and neurotoxicCitoyn wcleursei aosnsso:ciated with SNPs in , , ficantly higher in cases compared to controls (16.0% 9.7%; p = 0.0024). and genes, respectively. SNP in gene correlated with com- The risk of breast cancer increased in carriers of at least one copy of this plete tumor response. The obtained results suggest that poly- allele (p < 0.001; 95% CI, 1.33-3.05) with an OR of 1.79 (95% CI, 1.23-2.61). morphisms in different genes involved in drug metabolism can be important Functional tests confirNmReIdP 1that the Gly448 variant reduced the intrinsic in distinguishing subgroups of cancer patients who would have benefit from transrepressionB RacCtAivity of the central NRI
P1  repressive domain. Altogether, cAis.Vp.l aKthinru-bnainse: dN otrneea. tDm.Ve.n Kt.hokhrin: None. A.A. Moisseev: None. V.A. our data indicate that Arg448Gly might influence the risk of HBC in Gorbunova: None. S.A. Limborska: None. tAh.e D aebssreicnhcea rodf: None. mAu. Ctaatsiotents-N.icolas: None. A. Boulahtouf: None. Y. Bignon: None. V. Cavaillès: None. N. Uhrhammer: None. 
P11 .064 RAD51D germline mutations in Greek ovarian cancer patients 
P11 .062 A. V. Stavropoulou, I. Konstanta, F. Fostira, P. Apostolou, A. Vratimos, I. Konstantopoulou, Comprehensive and rapid approach detects the most frequent BRCA1 D. Yannoukakos; and BRCA2 mutations in Slovak HBOC population NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece. M. Konecny, K. Zavodna, Z. Bartosova; Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. Ovarian carcinoma is the most common cause of cancer death from gyne- cologic tumors. One in four ovarian cancer cases is now known to be at- Detection of germline mutations in BRCA1/2 genes represents, according tributed to germline mutations in at least 16 genes. Germline mutations in to many facts (e.g. lack of mutational hot spots, several types of mutations, the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes contribute to approximately 18% of hereditary genomic rearrangements, size and number of exons) serious methodical ovarian cancers, 1% is associated with deleterious mutations in MMR genes, problem. Complex analysis of both genes by direct sequencing is also time- while 5% is associated with other genes of the Fanconi Anemia- BRCA DNA consuming and financially demanding and even after all this effort, appro- repair pathway. ximately 70% of families remains negative for the presence of any causal Recent studies have shown that 0.8-0.9% of BRCA1 and BRCA2-negative mutation. ovarian cancer cases are positive for loss-of-function mutations in RAD51D. Here we describe a rapid and comprehensive approach for the detection of The aim of this study was to identify the prevalence of RAD51D mutations most frequent mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Slovak HBOC po- in Greek ovarian cancer patients, both in familial and sporadic cases that pulation. Currently, we are able to detect 77% of all BRCA1/2 mutations were previously found negative for the most common BRCA1 mutations. detected in our population, namely 13 mutations in BRCA1 (c.68_69delAG, Subsequent analysis of the full BRCA1 gene in familial cases did not identify c.181T>G, c.1938_1947del10, c.1953_1956del4, c.2068delA, c.2921T>A, any mutations. We thus sequenced the full coding sequence and intron-exon c.3016_3019del4, c.3018_3021del4, c.3700_3704del5, c.3770_3771del2, boundaries of RAD51D in 235 sporadic and 60 familial cases. We identified c.4065_4068del4, c.4243delG, c.5266dupC) and 4 different mutations in one deleterious mutation and two probably damaging unclassified variants. BRCA2 gene (c.3076A>T, c.5645C>A, c.9098dupA, c.9403delC). The present data provide the first evidence for the existence of RAD51D mu- Altogether, methodology comprises only 3 multiplex PCR reactions, 2 of tations in hereditary ovarian cancers in Greece. Women with ovarian can- which serve as PCR templates for SNaPshot PCR and third is a multiplex cer should be considered for RAD51D gene testing after a BRCA1-BRCA2 fluorescently-labeled PCR. SNaPshot PCR analysis detects selected point negative test result, irrespective of ovarian cancer family history, or age at mutations (substitutions as well as 1-2 bp deletions/insertions) and the diagnosis.This research has been co-financed by the European Union (ESF) fluorescently-labeled PCR detects frame-shift mutations in three large regi- and Greek national funds through the Operational Program „Education and ons of exon 11 of BRCA1 gene. Lifelong Learning“ of the NSRF - Research Funding Program of the GSRT: This approach allows us to pre-screen all the samples, assign preliminary A AR.VIS. TSEtaIvAr.opoulou: None. I. Konstanta: None. F. Fostira: None. P. Apostolou: results and finally, in the case of mutation carriers, apply a preventive ma- None. A. Vratimos: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None. D. Yannoukakos: None. nagement to specific patients as soon as possible. This method represents very time and financially efficient approach with relevant sensitivity (77% of all HBOC positive families), which can be offered to a broad spectrum of 
P11 .065 w Mo. mKoenne.cny: None. K. Zavodna: None. Z. Bartosova: None. DICER1 mutations in non-epithelial ovarian tumours L. Witkowski1,2, F. Plourde3, N. Hamel4, J. S. Reis-Filho5, M. J. Murray6,7, J. C. Nicholson7, N. Coleman6, D. Huntsman8, S. Schönberger9, J. Arseneau10, M. D. Tischkowitz11, C. Stewart12, W. D. Foulkes3,2, A. Talerman13; 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Lady Davis Institute/Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Program in Cancer Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 280 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Canada, 4Research Institute, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 
C1 orf24 5Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States, 6Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Department Ectopic expressioCn1 oofr mf2i4R106b inhibited mRNA and protein in WRO of Paediatric Oncology and Hematology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS cells, whenC 1coormf2p4ared to negative control. To show that miR-106b direct- Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8British Columbia Cancer Research ly interacts with mRNA Cat1 o3r’ fU24TR, we then transfected PCC
L3  cells Center, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 9Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, with both 3’-UTR mRNA wild type and mutated. We observed that University of Bonn, University Children‘s Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 11Department of miR-106b directly interacts with 
C1 o. Orfu2r4 findings indicate that miR-106 Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 12King Edward acts as tumor suppressor gene and plays a role in thyroid carcinogenesis, at Memorial Hospital, Perth, Australia, 13Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, lCe1aosrtf 2in4 part by negatively regulating expression. However, further United States. analysis is needed to fully demonstrate the role of miR-106b in regulating expression and, therefore, its role on thyroid carcinogenesis. F Gin.Man.Gc.i aCl aSruvpaplhoeritr:a F: ANPoEneS.P B a.nHd.N C. NNPoqzima: None. J.M. Cerutti: None. Non-epithelial ovarian (NEO) tumours make up 10% of all primary ovarian cancers. They include germ cell tumours (GCTs), sex cord-stromal tumours (SCSTs), and other rare tumours. GCTs include dysgerminomas, embryonal 
P11 .067 carcinomas, yolk sac tumours, teratomas, and mixed GCTs. SCSTs represent A European OncoNetwork Consortium study to develop Ion 3-5% of ovarian malignancies and include granulosa cell tumours and Ser- AmpliSeq™ Colon and Lung Cancer Panel to detect most frequent tDoIlCi-ELRe1ydig cell tumours (SLCTs). SLCTs and juvenile granulosa cell tumours, somatic CRC or NSCLC mutations on FFPE samples. lDikICeE GR
C1 Ts, usually occur in younger women. K. Henriette1, E. Amato2, D. Le Corre3, A. Rachiglio4, B. Tops5, A. Mafficini6, A. Reiman7, O. is involved in cleavage of dsRNA to miRNA. Somatic mutations in the Sheils8, C. Noppen1, I. Cree7, M. Ligtenberg5, N. Normanno4, A. Scarpa2, P. Laurent Puig3, gene have been found in various types of NEO tumours, specifically L. Lacroix9; around the RNase IIIb domain metal-binding sites. These mutations reduce 1VIOLLIER AG, Basel, Switzerland, 2ARC-NET University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 3Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 4Centro Ricerche Oncologiche Mercogliano, the number of miRNAs from 5p strands, leaving those from 3p strands to Mercogliano, Italy, 5Institut GustaveUniversitair Medisch Centrum St Radboud, target mRNAs. Given that recent reports and unpublished data (Foulkes lab) Nijmegen, Netherlands, 62 ARC-NET University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 7Warwick suggest that dDeIlCetEeRr1ious somatic mutations outside of RNase III are uncom- Medical School, Coventry, United Kingdom, 8Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, mon, we focused on the RNase III domain. We have sequenced the RNase 9Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. III regions of inD 1I
C8 E4
R c1ases of NEO tumours, and 32 samples of lym- phocyte DNA from affected patients (Tables below). Our study confirms that somatic mutations in are frequent in Sertoli-Leydig cell tumours Several somatic mutations have been associated with therapeutic benefit in ( TS aL bC leT s 1) . Man ud ta tc io ou nl sd f or ue np dr e as ne dn Nt ua m th bee rr a op f e Su amtic p lt ea sr Age nt a. lyT zh ee dy are uncommon in CRC or NSCLC. Thus, there is a need for simultaneous screening of multiple other types of NEO tumours. Mutations found/ Mutations found/ targetable gene mutations using small amounts of DNA. The OncoNetwork Tumour Type Total Tumour Total Lymphocyte DNA Consortium made up of 8 European Cancer Translational Research Labs Samples Samples developed an approach to identify hotspot mutations in 22 CRC or NSCLC GCT related genes using IonAmpliSeq™ technology. The analyses were perfor- med using the IonAmpliSeq™ workflow, with 10 ng of DNA amplified in a Dysgerminoma (5 cases of 1/55 0/4 single multiplex PCR. Sequencing was carried out with the PGM™ Sequen- Gonadoblastoma) Mixed GCT 1/18 0/9 cer on Ion316 chip (8 samples per chip) and results were analyzed using Yolk Sac Tumour 2/40 0/3 the IonReporter™ Software. In phase 1, all labs tested the same 5 control SE ImCm Smb Tr ay tuo rn ea l C era ar tc oin mo ama 00 // 22 0/- FFPE samples. In phase 2, each lab sent 10 characterized FFPE samples for T 9 5 Mature Teratoma 0/21 0/10 blind analysis by another lab. In phase 3, each lab tested 15 of their own FFPE samples. A total of 140 unique FFPE samples were screened. Overall, Juvenile Granulosa Cell Tumour 0/2 - STLoCtaTl 117//11484 00//312 the percentage of on target reads was greater than 85 % with an average Unclassified SCST 0/3 - per base accuracy >98%. The 6 labs that completed all phases confirmed Table 2. Mutations found in DICER1 RNase IIIb region Tumour Type Codon Change Predicted Effect detection of all expected variants in both controls and blind samples, cor- responding to a 100% true positive rate. For example, a sample of phase 3 with low allele frequency had a mean coverage of 6119, allowing detection Gonadoblastoma/Dysgerminoma c.5429 A>G Exon 25 Skip Yolk Sac Tumour c.5428 G>T Cryptic Splice site of KRAS-G12D variant at 2%. The Ion AmpliSeq™ Colon and Lung Cancer Yolk Sac Tumour c.5438 A>G Exon 25 Skip Panel allows fast, highly sensitive and reproducible detection of frequent Yolk Sac Tumour/Dysgerminoma c.5438 A>G Exon 25 Skip m Ku. Htaetniorinest tfer:o Nmo noen.l yE .1 A0mnga toof: DNNoAne f.r Dom. L eF FCPoEr rCeR: NC oonre N. ASC. RLCa cshaimglpiole: sN.one. B. SLCT c.5429 A>T p.D1810V Tops: None. A. Mafficini: None. A. Reiman: None. O. Sheils: None. C. Noppen: SLCT c.5439 G>C p. E1813
D SLCT c.5438 A>G Exon 25 Skip None. I. Cree: None. M. Ligtenberg: None. N. Normanno: None. A. Scarpa: SLCT c.5437 G>A p. E1813
K None. P. Laurent Puig: None. L. Lacroix: None. SLCT c.5437 G>A p. E1813
K SLCT c.5437 G>C p. E1813
Q L. Witkowski: None. F. Plourde: None. N. Hamel: None. J.S. Reis-Filho: SLCT c.5437 G>C p. E1813
Q None. M.J. Murray: None. J.C. Nicholson: None. N. Coleman: None. D. Huntsman: None. S. Schönberger: None. J. Arseneau: None. M.D.  P11
.068 Tischkowitz: None. C. Stewart: None. W.D. Foulkes: None. A. Talerman: None. Prognostic significance of IDH1 mutations and 1p/19q co-deletion in patients with gliomas G. Stancheva1,2, T. Goranova2, M. Laleva3, S. Petkova2, M. Kamenova4, A. Mitkova1,2, N. Velinov3, R. Kaneva1,2, G. Poptodorov3, V. Mitev1,2, N. Gabrovsky3;  P11
.066 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia,  C1
orf24 is negatively regulated by miR-106b-5p in thyroid Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, tumorigenesis process. 3Department of Neurosurgery, University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment G. M. G. Carvalheira, B. H. N. Nozima, J. M. Cerutti; and Emergency Medicine “N.I.Pirogov”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment and Emergency Medicine “N.I.Pirogov”, Sofia, Bulgaria.  C1
orf24 We have previously shown that the geneis highly exCp1roersfs2e4d in folli- cular thyroid carcinomas while is not expressed in benign lesions. However, Background: little is known about the molecular mechanism involved in expres- Somatic mutations in IDH1, which encodes cytoplasmic isocitrate dehy- sion. It is widely demonstrated that microRNAs (miRs) are potent regulators drogenase 1, were reported to occur at high frequency in glial tumours. In of gene expression. The miRs expression varies in according of tissue, deve- astrocytomas these aberrations are commonly found together with loss of lopment stage, and tumor types. In this study, employing three algCo1roitrhfm24s 1p and/or 19q. Chromosomal co-deletion of the short arm of chromosome (miRBase targets, TargetScan and microRNA.org) we identified miR-17-5p 1(1p) and the long arm of chromosome 19(19q) are found most frequent and miR-106b as potential candidates to regulate the expression of . in oligodendrogliomas. Both events, separately or combined, are associated We initially investigated the expression of miR-17-5p and miR-106b in 64 with favourable prognosis and improved overall survival not only in oli- thyroid lesions by qPCR. Although both miRs showed lower expression in godendrogliomas, but also in astrocytomas even though they are rarer in thyroid carcinomas, compared to benign lesions, the difference was conside- astrocytic tumours. red statistically significant only for miR-106b (p<0,01). Then, miR106b was Methods: transiently transfected into the follicular EthSyHroGid c2a0rc1in3o m| aP cAeRll IliSn,e F(WRRAON). CEW | eW scWreWene.EdS 6H5 Ggli.oOmRasG (astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas) by d2ir8e1ctABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CDH1 BRCA1/2 sequencing of exon 4 of IDH1 gene and MLPA analysis of large genomic de- Methods: AC zDoHo1m-in CGH array that covered exonic, intronic and flanking re- letions within chromosome 1p and 19q performed using SALSA MLPA kit gions of the gene was used to screen a cohort of 148C DH1 negative  P088
. probands. intron 2, including several regulatory regions, was specifi- Results: cally targeted. Real-time RT-PCR has beeCnD uHse1d to assess expression in IDH1 abberations were found in 25 (38%) glial tumours of WHO grade II, related lymphoblastoid cell line and also in breast tumors.BRCA1/2 III and IV. In 24 patients mutations were at position 395 causing amino acid Results: Two large rearrangements of exon 3 causing a premature substitution R132H and in one -amino acid substitution R132L. Mutations stop were detected. In both families, screened also for , lobular in IDH1 were associated with better overall survival (median survival 22.9 breast and gastric cancers were reported. Two large rearrangements within months vs. 9.1 in non-mutated cases; p=0.006). MLPA analysis showed loss intron 2, a deletion and a duplication, were also reported in probands with of 1p and/or 19q in 28% of cases but no significant association with the breast cancer and without any familial gastCriDc Hca1ncer. Recurrent duplication overall survival of patients. However, the combination of 1p/19q co-dele- copy number variations are found in this region. The deletion encompasses tion and IDH1 mutations were associated with increased overall survival an expressed sequence tag and resulted in RCNDAH 1downregulation. Two (p=0.002). novel transcripts starting at the deleted region were characterized. Conclusion: Conclusion: No germline rearrangements in the coding region were Our results indicate that IDH1 mutations combined with chromosomal co- detected iCnD fHam1ilies without gastric cancer and with a broad range of breast deletions of 1p and/or 19q identify gliomas with better survival and may be canCcDeHr 1susceptibility. This study confirms the dCiDvHer1sity of large rearrange- u Gs.e Sdt aasn cshpeevciaf:i cN pornoeg. nT.o Gstoicr abnioovmaa: rNkoenres .i nM .p Laatileenvats: wNoitnhe .g Sli.o Pmeatks.ova: ments in . The intron 2 deletion highlights a putative role for intron 2 None. M. Kamenova: None. A. Mitkova: None. N. Velinov: None. R. Kaneva: in regulation. The four herein described rearrangements invol- None. G. Poptodorov: None. V. Mitev: None. N. Gabrovsky: None. v Ein. Rg oinutlreoanu :2 N coonuel.d H m. Poidnuhleaitreo :t hNeo rnies.k C o. fL berfeoal:s Nt coanne.c ePr. .Oliveira: None. A. Briaux: None. E. Fourme: None. F. Cornelis: None. P. Benusiglio: None. D. Meseure: None. J. Carvalho: None. E. Stupka: None. P. Berteaux: None. G. Guetz: None. D. Stevens: None. L. Demange: None. F. Vialard: None. I. Bieche:  P11
.069 None. R. Seruca: None. C. Nogues: None. D. Huntsman: None. D. Stoppat- A Functional Variant, rs967591G>A, in the 19q13.3 and Survival of Lyonnet: None. R. Lidereau: None. C. Oliveira: None. Early-Stage Lung Cancer H. Jeon, M. Hong, H. Kang, Y. Choi, J. Choi, S. Do, J. Park; Kyungpook National University, Deagu, Korea, Republic of.  P11
.071 Genome-wide association study identifies multiple loci for cervical To define the causative functional SNP of the association, this study was con- cancer ducted to investigate the associations between single nucleotide polymor- U. Gyllensten, D. Chen, I. Juko-Percipep, E. Wilander, S. Enroth, S. Enroth, I. Gustavsson; Uppsala University, Dept of Immunology, Genetics, Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden. phisms (SNPs) in 19q13.3 and survival of early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A two-stage study design was used to evaluate five SNPs in relation to Cervical cancer is caused by infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). survival outcomes in 328 patients and then to validate the results in an Our understanding of the genetic basis of cervical cancer is still limited. We independent patient population (n= 483). Luciferase assay and real-time performed the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) by analyzing PCR was performed to examine functional relevance of a potentially func- 731,422 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,075 cervical cancer tional SNP. Of the five SNPs, three SNPs (rs105165C>T, rs967591G>A and cases and 4,014 controls, followed by replication in 1,140 cases and 1,058 rs735482CAD>3CE)A Pw ere significantly associated with surviPv al outcomes in a controls. Three independent loci in the major histocompatibility complex stage 1 study. The rs967591A allele had significantly PhPigPh1eRr1 p3rLomoter ac- (MHC) region at 6p21.3 were identified to be associated with cervical can- tivity of compared with the rs967591G allele ( = 0C.D030 E2
A),P but the cer; the first is adjacent to the MHC class I polypeptide-related sequence SNP did not have an effect onP the promoter activity of in promo- A gene (MICA) (rs2516448, odds ratio [OR]=1.42, Pcombined=1.6×10-18), ter assay. The rs967591G>A was associated with the level of mRNA the second is between HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQA1 (rs9272143, OR=0.67, expression in lung tissues ( = 0.01). The rs967591G>A exhibited consi- P-combined=9.3×10-24) and the third at HLA-DPB2 (rs3117027, OR=1.25, stent associations in a stage 2 study. InP combined analysis, the rs967591 AA P-combined=4.9×10-8). Using imputed alleles at classic human leukocyte gCeDn3oEtAyPpe exhibited a worse overall survival (adjusted hazard ratio = 1.69, antigen (HLA) loci we confirmed previously reported associations of B*0702 95% confidence interval = 1.29-2.20, = 0.0001). The rs967591G>A affects and DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 with susceptibility (OR=1.42, P=7.9×10-8; expression and thus OR=1.39, P=3.8×10-7, respectively) and DRB1*1301-DQA1*0103- influences survival in early-stage NSCLC. The analysis of the rs967591G>A DQB1*0603 with protection (OR=0.47, P=8.8×10-10). However, none of polymorphism can help identify patients at high risk of a poor disease out- cHo.m Jee.on: None. M. Hong: None. H. Kang: None. Y. Choi: None. J. Choi: them can account for the effects of the three novel loci. The nature of the None. S. Do: None. J. Park: None. new loci and their effect on the susceptibility will be discussed. The results demonstrate the presence of additional loci in the MHC region with a stron- g Ue.r G eyfflelecnt sotne nth: Ne odnisee. aDs.e C shuesnc:e Nptoinbeil.i tI.y J tuhkaon- Ptheorcsiep eppre: vNioonues.l yE .i dWeinlatinfdieedr.: None. S. Enroth: None. S. Enroth: None. I. Gustavsson: None.  P11
.070 Large rearrangements involving intron 2 of CDH1 and breast cancer susceptibility E. Rouleau1, H. Pinheiro2, C. Lefol1, P. Oliveira2, A. Briaux3, E. Fourme4, F. Cornelis5, P.  P11
.072 Benusiglio6, D. Meseure7, J. Carvalho2, E. Stupka8, P. Berteaux9, G. Guetz10, D. Stevens11, Mitochondrial (mt)DNA D-loop region SNPs in human papillomavirus- L. Demange12, F. Vialard13, I. Bieche1, R. Seruca2, C. Nogues12, D. Huntsman14, D. Stoppat- related cervical neoplasia Lyonnet15, R. Lidereau16, C. Oliveira2; C. D. Rusanu1, A. Botezatu2, I. Iancu2, I. Huica2, G. Anton2; 1Institut Curie - Service de Génétique, Paris-St Cloud, France, 2Institute of Molecular 1Ixia Medica Research Centre, Bucharest, Romania, 2Stefan S Nicolau Institute of Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, Virology, Bucharest, Romania. 3Institut Curie, Paris-St Cloud, France, 4Institut Curie - Oncogénétique Clinique, St Cloud, France, 5CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 6Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 7Institut Curie - Anatomopathologie, St Cloud, France, 8University Cervical cancer is the second most common malignant neoplasm in women College London (UCL), London, United Kingdom, 9Service d’anatomopathologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France, 10Hôpital Avicenne, Bobigny, France, 11Institut Curie - and high risk human papillomavirus (hr-HPV) is known to be its etiological Biostatistique, Paris-St Cloud, France, 12Institut Curie - Oncogénétique Clinique, Paris-St agent. On the other hand, alterations in the non-coding displacement (D) Cloud, France, 13Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et Génétique médicale, CHI Poissy-Saint loop mtDNA are present in many cancers, suggesting that the extent of mtD- Germain, Poissy, France, 14British Columbia Cancer Agency (BCCA), Vancouver, France, NA mutations might be useful in the prognosis of cancer outcome. 15Institut Curie - Service de Génétique, Paris, France, 16Institut Curie - Laboratoire In order to evaluate the role of T239C, A263G,  C150
T, T16189C and  C16223
T d‘Oncogénétique, St Cloud, France. mtDNA polymorphisms in cervical lesions, 60 cervical specimens were inve- CDH1 stigated. Isolated DNAs from cervical cells were tested for HPV presence. CDH1 TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays were used for SNP detection. Background: Germline mutatioCnDs Hin1 the gene are associated with In patients with normal cytology and ASCUS (Atypical Squamous Cells of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Large rearrangements in are now Undetermined Significance), hrHPV was absent. 72.2% (13/18) LGSIL being reported as well. Because mutations can be associated with bre- (Low-Grade Intraepithelial Lesion) and 93.3% (14/15) HGSIL (High-Grade a 2s 8t c 2ancer, rearrangements could also impact suscEepStHibGilit 2y 0fo1r 3th i|s PdAiseRaIsSe., FRInAtrNaeCpEit h|e WliaWl LeWsio.En)S pHaGtie.nOtsR pGresented infection with hrHPV in single orABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index co-infection represented mainly by HPV16,18,31 and 33. We detected a si- mutation-based approach was applied for cfDNA detection in which a panel gnificantly greater incidence of mtDNA polymorphisms T239C, A263G and of genes was tested for presence of a mutation in peripheral blood-derived  C150
T and a lower incidence of T16189C,  C16223
T in cervical lesions.  C150
T plasma samples. Mutations were tested by denaturing capillary electropho- and T239C polymorphisms were corelated with hrHPV-positive LGSIL and resis (DCE) exhibiting detection sensitivity limit of 1% mutated alleles. HGSIL lesions (P<0.05). HPV-positive individuals were more likely to carry Results: Cell-free DNA was detected in 16 patients (76%). In most cases the the  C150
T, A263G and T16189C polymorphisms than HPV-negative controls cfDNA occurrence did not correlate with elevated levels of CEA or CA19-9. (P<0.003). A positive corelation between HPV-positive HGSIL patients and No correlation was found when comparing presence of the cfDNA mutation A263G SNP was found. In all cancer subjects, an increased risk of HPV infec- in primary tumor and/or metastatic tissue. tion was associated with the selected polymorphisms. Conclusions: Presence of cfDNA in peripheral blood may be used for obser- These findings suggest that mitochondrial SNPs in the D-loop region may vation of disease development as an alternative to standard tumor markers. represent a cofactor in HPV-induced neoplasia but their carcinogenesis me- Apparently the kinetics of cfDNA release is defined by characteristics of c Ch.aDn. iRsmus raenmu:a Ninosn teo. Abe. Bsooltveezdat.u: None. I. Iancu: None. I. Huica: None. G. both, primary as well as metastatic lesion. Anton: None. SLu. pBpeonretseodv bay: Nthoen eC.z Bec. hB eMlsinainsotrvya :o Nf Honeea.l tJh. Pguradnilt: nNoo.n Ne.T F1. 3 P6
a6z0direk: None. D. Langer: None. J. Hoch: None. M. Ryska: None. M. Minarik: None.  P11
.073 Molecular cytogenetic analyses of hTERC (3q26) and MYCC (8q24)  P11
.076 genes amplifications in 30 patients with cervical carcinomas: Immune infiltration in choroidal melanomas correlations with clinical outcome D. Narasimhaiah1, R. Remark2, E. Becht2, D. Damotte2, C. Legrand3, P. De Potter4, P. G. P. Kuglik1, V. Vallová1, K. Kašíková1, A. Laštůvková1, H. Filková2, L. Mouková3; Coulie5, M. Vikkula6, C. Godfraind1; 1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of 1Laboratory of Pathology, Universite catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 2Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Laboratoire microenvironnement immunitaire University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Gynaecological Oncology, et tumeurs, Inserm UMRS 872, Paris, France, 3Institute of Statistics, Biostatistics and Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic. Actuarial Sciences, Universite catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Universite catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 5de Duve Institute, Universite catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 6Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute & Centre for Human Genetics, Universite catholique de Cervical cancer remains one of the most common malignancies among wo- Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. men worldwide in both incidence and mortality. Although infection of high- risk human papilloma virus (HPV) is recognized as an essential initiating event in cervical tumorigenesis, this alone is not sufficient for the progressi- Introduction: Choroidal melanomas are the most common primary, intra- ohTn EtoR Cinvasive canceMr.Y SCoCme chromosomal aberrations have been associated ocular malignant tumors in adults. In these tumors, the presence of CD8+ T with the progression of CIN to carcinoma, especially the amplification of lymphocytes is associated with bad prognosis. In contrast, in most (3q26) and (8q24) genes. other solid tumors, the CD8+ T cell infiltrate is related to good prognosis. In this study, tumour samples of patients with cervical spino- or adenocar- Materials and Methods: The primary untreated choroidal melanomas were cinoma (stage IA-IVA) were studied using fluorescence in situ hybridization analyzed for gene expression using Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 array (n=15) with the Cervical FISH Probe Kit and Agilent 244K or 180 K microarray. The and by immunohistochemistry (n=89). results of molecular cytogenetic analyses were comparheTdE wRCith clinical fin- Results: Gene expression profile analysis led to the identification of a gene dings. hTERC signature consisting of 39 upregulated genes in a subset of choroidal mela- HPV infection was proven in 97 % (29/30) of patients, copy number nomas. These genes were associated with: antigen changes were found in 26 from 30 patients (87 %). alteration were processing and presentation, cell adhesion molecules, interferon-gamma and dMeYtCeCcted in 3/4 patients with IA, in 17/19 patients with IB, in all 5 patients chemokine signaling pathways. On immunohistochemistry, signature posi- with IIIB and in 1/2 patients with IVA TNM stage. Copy number changes of tive tumors displayed a dense intra-tumoral infiltrate of HLA-DRA+CD163+ gene were found in 18/30 patients (60 %); in 1/4 patient with IA, macrophages and CD3+CD8+ T-cells. It was mild to moderate in tumors lak- 14/19 patients with IB, 2/5M pYCatCi ents with IIIB, and in 1/2 patient with IVA king the signature. On this basis, additional tumors were analyzed by immu- TNM stage. nohistochemistry. In total, 19 melanomas had high immune No single amplification of hTwEaRsC detected. Twelve patients with carci- infiltrate and 70 low. Kaplan-Meier plots demonstrated tumors with high noma were positive for lymfangioinvasion. All patients were in high risk immune infiltrate had shorter disease-free survival (log-rank P < 0.001). group and had amplification of gene. In 13 cases, array CGH profiling Conclusions: We identified in choroidal melanomas an interferon-gamma revealed additional genomic alterations associated with the progression of induced gene signature associated with infiltration of macrophages and cervical carcinoma. CD8+ T lymphocytes. The presence of tumor-infiltrating immune cells cor- FSPu i. l kpK opu vog árl :ti ke N:d oN nbo eyn . ge Lr. . a V Mn. otV uIaG kllA oo v vM áá ::Z NN N ooT nn1 ee ..1 K08. K9-a4šíková: None. A. Laštůvková: None. H. r De.l aNteadra wsiimthh ahiiaghh:e Nr ornisek. Rof. oRcecmuarrrke:n Nceo noef .m Ee. tBaesctahst:e sN.one. D. Damotte: None. C. Legrand: None. P. De Potter: None. P.G. Coulie: None. M. Vikkula: None. C. Godfraind: None.  P11
.074 Evaluation of circulating DNA as an alternative marker in multimodal  P11
.077 care for patients with advanced colorectal cancer Instability of chromosome 5 in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). L. Benesova1, B. Belsanova1, J. Pudil2, F. Pazdirek3, D. Langer2, J. Hoch3, M. Ryska2, M. Z. Zemanova1, K. Michalova1,2, J. Brezinova2, H. Buryova1, K. Kostylkova1, M. Novakova1, Minarik1; D. Bystricka1, L. Lizcova1, I. Sarova2,1, S. Izakova1, J. Zmolikova3, M. Siskova1, J. Cermak2; 1Genomac research institute, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Surgical Clinic, 2nd Faculty of 1General University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Military University Hospital, Prague, Czech Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, Republic, 3Department of Surgery, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague 3CGB Laboratory, Ostrava, Czech Republic. and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Aberrations of chromosome 5 are common findings in bone marrow cells Background: A presence of circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has long been of MDS patients. The most frequent is del(5q) occurring in 10-15% of them. observed in patients with advanced colorectal cancer. It is expected that cfD- Extent of deletion differ among patients, however region 5q31 is common- NA may represent a useful biomarker, especially for monitoring course of ly deleted. Monosomy 5 is described in 3-8% cases. We performed genome therapy. wide analysis in MDS patients with monosomy 5 detected by G-banding Aim: The main purpose of this work was to evaluate a feasibility of using with aim to determine real existence of total monosomy 5 in MDS. cfDNA in process of monitoring patients with progressive colorectal can- Bone marrow cells of 67 patients with suspected monosomy 5 were ana- cer, namely the follow-up after the surgery and in between chemotherapy lyzed by I-FISH (Abbott), mFISH/mBAND (MetaSystems) and array CGH cycles. (BlueGnome). All 67 patients presented a complex karyotype with confir- Methods: A total of 21 patients in advanced stages (III and IV) were inclu- med del(5)(q31). In all cases the deleted 5 entered into unbalanced rearran- ded in the study. Peripheral blood samples were collected at various stages gements with various partners (most frequently chromosomes 3, 7, 12 and of the disease management i.e. before and after the surgery and in some 17). Chromosomes 8, 22 and Y were never included in these translocations. patients also in several time intervals dEuSriHngG c h2e0m1o3th e| rPaApyR rIeSg,i mFeRnAs. NA CEW | eW coWnfWirm.EedS HouGr h.OypRotGhesis that pure monosomy 5 does not exist in2 M8D3SABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results. as separate cytogenetic entity, as declared in the literature and WHO classi- ABCBRL- AMBoLnitor” assay was developed according to WHO reference standard fication. In all patients with suspected monosomy 5 we showed that at least and allows to present results in %IS. Four patients demonstrated part of chromosome 5 is retained elsewhere in the genome. Minimal com- >0.1%4.0-I5S.0 by both methods. MMR (0.01-0.1%IS) was detected in 8 mon preserved region was assessed at 5p11.1-p14.2 (22.31Mb). Complex patients, CMR (0.0001-0.01%IS) was revealed in one patient and negati- karyotypes involving chromosome 5 identified at diagnosis gave extremely ve results were obtained in 12 patients by both methods. Concordance rate poor prognosis (median OS 3 months). was 56% (25 of 45 patients). In 15 cases (33%) GeneXpert results were more We assume that del(5q) is arising in myeloid precursor cells as the primary sensitive than manual ones: two cases of MMR by GeneXpert were CMR by event and subsequently leads to chromosome instability and higher suscep- conventional RT-PCR and 13 cases of CMR by GeneXpert were negative by tibility to the breakage and rearrangements. This process is resulting in in- manual. In 5 cases (11%) GeneXpert demonstrated less sensitive results creased genomic damage and fast disease progression. than obtained by manual method: 2 cases of CMR by GeneXpert were MMIRn R ZV. OZe-VmFaNn6o4v1a6: N5/o2ne0.1 K2., GMAicChRa-lPov3a0:2 N/o1n2e/.G J1. 5B7r/ez1i,n PoRvVaO: NUoKn-eP.2 H7./ BLuFr1y/o1v.a: cboyn mcalunsuiaoln method and 3 negative results by GeneXpert were one MMR and None. K. Kostylkova: None. M. Novakova: None. D. Bystricka: None. L. two CMR by manual. Probably it was closely related to sBaCmR-pAleBsL’ quality. Lizcova: None. I. Sarova: None. S. Izakova: None. J. Zmolikova: None. M. , the results have demonstrated appropriate concordance rate Siskova: None. J. Cermak: None. of GeneXpert Dx System and conventional RT-PCR for transcript measurement. GeneXpert allows detecting fusion gene transcript in higher pSe.rAc.e Snmtaigrnei kohf icnaas:e Ns.one. G.A. Tsaur: None. A.V. Lavrov: None. Y.A. Yakovleva:  P11
.078 None. E.Y. Chelysheva: None. O.A. Shukhov: None. A.G. Turkina: None. S.I. Characterization of a new rearrangement and identification of a novel Kutsev: None. fusion transcript, FNI P1
/ETV6 in an uncommon chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL) with an atypical t(5;12). M. Decamp1,2, N. Richard1, C. Thuillier3, N. Gruchy1,2, H. Johnson-Ansa1, J. Andrieux3, G.  P11
.080 Plessis1, H. Mittre1,2, M. Kottler1,2, M. Leporrier2, N. Leporrier1,2; The role of VHL gene inactivation in sporadic clear cell renal cell 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Caen, France, 2UFR médecine, Université de Caen Basse carcinoma development. Normandie, Caen, France, 3Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Lille, France. I. Gilyazova1, L. Kutlyeva1, A. Shafigina2, V. Pavlov3, A. Khaliullin3, A. Zagidullin3, E. Klimentova2, E. Khusnutdinova1,3; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, Chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CFIEP L1
)L i1s/ aP DclGoFnRaAl prolifEeTraVt6io/nP DoGf FeRoBsi nophil 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State Medical University, precursors with recurrent chromosomal rearrangements, such as del 4q- Ufa, Russian Federation. or t(5;12)(q33;p13), leading to and fusion genes respectively, enhanced tyrosine kinase activity, uncontrolled cellular proliferation. Sporadic clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common type of We describe here a patient first referred to us in 1984 with a high eosino- adult kidney cancer. It’s often associated with aberrations on chromosomes phil count (20.000/μL). A diagnosis of CEL was made and eosinophilia re- 3p. Aberrations on chromosome 3p are associated with inactivation of tu- sumed incompletely with interferon-α. Later on, a t(5;12) was recognised, mor suppressor gene von-Hippel Lindau (VHL), which activates the hypoxia- but subsequent TKI treatment remained ineffective. These atypical feaEtuTrVe6s inducible factors HIF1α and HIF2α. The goal of the study was to investigate (protracted course, resistance to TFKNII)P p1r ompted us to analyse breakpoints. inactivation of VHL gene by mutations, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and BAC-FISH positional cloning showed that the breakpoints occurred at methylation of its promoter in cancer tissues of ccRCC patients. We studied on chromosome 12 (p13) and at on chromosome 5 (q23). A fusion 93 paired DNA samples of tumor tissues and normal renal parenchyma in transcript, EATCV S6
L/6FNI P1
 was identified on the der(5) whereas no fusion ccRCCpatients from Bashkortostan Republic of Russia. DNA extraction was transcript was identified on the der(12) in which an interstitial deletion en- performed by phenol-chloroform extraction. Analysis of mutations in the co- compassing F, NwIaPs1 f ound. ding part of the VHL gene was performed by direct sequencing. Mutations in The underlying mechanism of leukemogenesis in this patient still remains VHL gene were found in tumor tissues with the frequency of 22,6% (21/93). elusive. However, could be involved as this gene has been shown to We found out 10 somatic mutations which hadn’t been described in literatu- interact with mTOR signaling pathway in Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, pre- re previously. Analysis of LOH was performed using D3 S1038
 and D3 S1317
 disposing to kidney tumors. On the other hand, we found that the IL-3 gene microsatellite loci. LOH at D3 S1038
 was detected in 25,3%, at D3 S1317
 - located near the breakpoint on chromosome 5 and ending up on the der(12) 28% (27/83 and 14/50, respectively) of informative cases. Besides, we ana- was overexpressed. The encoding eosinopoiesis cytokines IL-5 and GM-CSF lyzed VHL gene promoter methylation. In 5 cases hypermethylation of VHL genes, located in the vicinity of the translocation could also be involved. gene promoter was identified (3,8%). VHL inactivation through promoter IEnT Vsu6m/F, NwIPe 1describe a new rearrangement in CEL. The deregulation of key hypermethylation and through sequence alterations in tumor DNA didn’t genes of eosinopoiesis, located near the rearrangement or implication of differ by histopathologic characteristics or occupational exposure. Thus, so- M. Decamp: Nfuosnieo.n N t.r Ranicshcarirpdt: rNeomnea.i nCs. tToh bueil ldieert:e Nrmonien.e Nd.. Gruchy: None. H. matic inactivation of VHL gene is the main molecular event in most sporadic Johnson-Ansa: None. J. Andrieux: None. G. Plessis: None. H. Mittre: None. M. RCC and a number of drugs have been developed in the treatment of RCC Kottler: None. M. Leporrier: None. N. Leporrier: None. t Ih. aGti ltyaarzgoevt aH: INFo-rnees.p Lo. nKsuivtley egvean:e N pornoed.u Ac.t sS hanafidg binloac:k N aonngei.o Vg. ePnaevsliosv.: None. A. Khaliullin: None. A. Zagidullin: None. E. Klimentova: None. E. Khusnutdinova: None.  P11
.079 Automated cartridge based method for BCR-ABL detection in chronic myeloid leukemia patients achieved major and complete molecular  P11
.081 response on tyrosine kinase inhibitors therapy Assessment of microarray analysis as a prognostic clinical tool in S. A. Smirnikhina1, G. A. Tsaur2, A. V. Lavrov1, Y. A. Yakovleva2, E. Y. Chelysheva3, O. A. chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Shukhov3, A. G. Turkina3, S. I. Kutsev1,4; N. Prié, S. Bougeon, N. Kramer, L. Etter, D. Ernst, O. Bruzzese, S. Porter, D. Muehlematter, 1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the J. Schoumans; Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Regional Children Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland. Hospital N 1, Research Institute of Medical Cell Technologies, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 3Federal State Budgetary Institution “Hematological Research Centre” of Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4State Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a B-cell malignancy with a highly Budgetary Educational Institution of Higher Professional Education “Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov” of Ministry of Health of the variable clinical course. In addition to the mutational status of the immu- Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation. noglobulin heavy chain, recurrent genomic abnormalities are among the strongest prognostic markers. For risk classifications and clinical decision- Introduction. BCR-ABL making in CLL a standard panel of commercially available FISH probes is Automated cartridge-based GeneXpert Dx System for de- most often used to identify deletions at 11q22, 13q14 and 17p13, dupli- tection of Purpose. level was recently develoBpCeRd-. ATBhLere is lack of findings cations of 6q, and trisomy 12 in the clinical setting. In order to assess the concerning the results’ concordance obtained by routine and automated usefulness of CGH+SNP array analysis as an alternative to conventional ka- methods. To compare the results of gene expression ana- ryotyping and iFISH in routine clinical use, 100 CLL patients were analyzed lysis obtained by GeneXpert and manual standardized RT-PCR in 45 CML both by iFISH and CGH+SNP arrays. In addition, all cases in which no abnor- patients on TKI therapy, most of them were in majo4r.0 molecular response malities were identified were subjected to G-band analysis. The iFISH panel (2M8M4R, n=12) or complete molecular response (CEMSRH,G n =23031). 3“X |p ePrAt BRCIRS-, FRinAclNudCeEd |d Wel(W13)W(q.1 E4
S)(HDGLE.UO1R), Gdel(11)(q22)(ATM), del(17)(p13)(T P53
)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index and trisomy 12. For array analysis a 180K custom-designed cancer focused through the disease progression indicated that, at least in this patient, the array was used from OGT. The array was designed for the detection of single n Ju. mMbeneer zaensd: Nthoen ety. pF.e A ocf qmuuadtartoi:o Nnso nwee. rGe. rGaóthmeerz s-iLmópileazr: a Nt oCnPe .a Sn.d A BlvCa.rez: exon abnormalities in 17 selected genes (average coverage 1probe/100bp) None. M. Trujillo: None. J. Garcia-Talavera: None. D.G. Pisano: None. J.C. Cigudosa: None. as well as the simultaneous identification of CNLOH by adding 36000 SNP probes (12000 different SNPs across the genome). In addition, the array co- vers 1500 cancer-associated genes with an average resolution of 2kb, whilst retaining an average backbone resolution of 50kb. From this study we con-  P11
.084 cluded that CGH+SNP array analysis is a robust, high resolution and sensiti- Copy number variation analysis in 222 patients with colorectal ve screening method for routine clinical use in CLL with a higher diagnostic polyposis reveals potential new causative candidate genes yield than iFISH. It also reliably detected genomic abnormalities present in S. Horpaopan1, I. Spier1, S. Vogt1,2, A. M. Zink1,3, S. Herms1,3,4, A. Laner5,6, J. Altmüller7, K. only 10% of the cells. Wöllner1, S. M. Pasternack1, M. Draaken1,3, R. Büttner8, E. Holinski-Feder5,6, H. Fröhlich9, M. M. Nöthen1,3, P. Hoffmann1,3,4, S. Aretz1; N. Prié: None. S. Bougeon: None. N. Kramer: None. L. Etter: None. D. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2MVZ Dr. Eberhard & Ernst: None. O. Bruzzese: None. S. Porter: None. D. Muehlematter: None. J. Partner, Dortmund, Germany, 3Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University Schoumans: None. of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Division of Medical Genetics, University Children‘s Hospital and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Campus Innenstadt, Munich, Germany, 6MGZ - Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, 7Cologne Center for Genomics,  P11
.082 University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, Exome sequencing during disease evolution in CML patients Cologne, Germany, 9Department of Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT (B-IT), displaying an isochromosome 17q Algorithmic Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. N. E. Larsson1, H. Liljebjörn1, M. Rissler1, C. Högberg1, J. Richter2, T. Fioretos1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2Department of Hematology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. Background: In up to 50% of patients with colorectal adenomatous poly- posis, a tumour predisposition syndrome, no germline mutation in known genes (APC, MUTYH) can be identified. Loss-of-function copy number vari- The acquisition of a Philadelphia chromosome in a hematopoietic stem cell, ants (CNVs) contribute significantly to the mutation spectrum of hereditary resulting in a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, BCR-AB L1
 is a hallmark tumor syndromes and thus those CNVs might also be the underlying cause of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The  P210
 BCR-AB L1
 fusion protein is in yet unidentified genes responsible for adenomatous polyposis. critical and most likely sufficient for establishing the initial chronic phase Methods: Genomic DNA from 222 unrelated mutation negative polyposis (CP), but secondary genetic changes are likely to be important for disease patients was genotyped (HumanOmni1-Quad BeadArray, Illumina). Putative progression in to the acute phase, referred to as blast crisis (BC). Here we CNVs were identified by QuantiSNP v.2.2, filtered according to various crite- describe the clinical features and mutation patterns in three CML patients ria by use of the Cartagenia Bench™ software, in-silico-analysis, comparison exhibiting an isochromosome for the the long arm of chromosome 17, i(17) with data from 531 healthy in-house controls, and validated by qPCR. The (q10), which is one the most common structural cytogenetic change at the expression of affected genes was examined by cDNA analysis of normal co- disease progression of CML. Exome sequencing was performed at different lonic mucosa. Candidate genes were prioritized by function, pathways, and stages of the disease to identify genomic changes critical for the disease segregation analysis. progression. Exome enrichment was performed using the Truseq exome en- Results: 33 unique deletions and 64 unique duplications, encompassing richment kit (Illumina) and paired end 100 bpT sPe5q3u,e AnScXinLg1 was EpZeHrf2ormed 151 protein coding genes, were found in 28 (13%) and 50 patients (23%), on a HiScanSQ (Illumina). Mutations in genes involved in DNA repairT, Pc5el3l respectively. Each except one CNV occurred only once in the cohort. After cycle control and epigenetic regulation such as and were expression analysis and data mining, the number of candidates could be detected, but no recurrent mutations were identified. Interestingly, the further reduced to 23 deletions and 57 partial duplications, including prote- mutation preceded the occurrence of an Ti( P1573
q) in one patient, suggeTstPi5n3g in kinases, transcription factors, and potential tumor suppressors. To iden- that that the loss of 17p-material as a consequence of i(17q)-formation, tify pathogenic point mutations, 24 candidates are currently sequenced in partly served to unmask the effect of the mutation. However, no the whole patient group. mutations were detected in the other two patients, suggesting that i(17q)- Conclusions: By applying stringent filter criteria, we identified a group of formation leads to disease progression by causing dosage imbalances of rare and potentially causative loss-of-function CNVs. The clinical relevance several genes encoded by chromosome 17 rather than via specific gene mu- tNat.Eio. nLsa orsns tohni:s Nchonroe.m Ho. sLoimljeeb.jörn: None. M. Rissler: None. C. Högberg: of the most promising candidates will be verified by a target sequence ap- None. J. Richter: None. T. Fioretos: None. p Sr.o Haochrp. aTohpea snt:u Ndoyn we.a Is. sSuppiepro: rNteodne b. yS t. hVeo gGte:r Nmoanne .C Aa.nMc.e Zri Ankid: .None. S. Herms: None. A. Laner: None. J. Altmüller: None. K. Wöllner: None. S.M. Pasternack: None. M. Draaken: None. R. Büttner: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. H. Fröhlich: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. P. Hoffmann: None. S. Aretz:  P11
.083 None. Clonal evolution in chronic myeloid leukemia revealed by whole- exome sequencing J. Menezes1, F. Acquadro1, G. Gómez-López1, S. Alvarez1, M. Trujillo2, J. Garcia-Talavera2,  P11
.085 D. G. Pisano1, J. C. Cigudosa1; Expression of GA-733 gene family in colorectal cancer. 1Spanish National Cancer Research Center - CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital N Sra La I. Mamaloudis1, P. Kollia2, D. Zacharoulis1, M. Samara3, K. Hatzitheofilou1; Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain. 1Department of Surgery, University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece, 2Laboratory of Human Genetics, School of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece. CML is one of the best examples of a disease that can be targeted by mole- cular therapy however, the success is restricted to the chronic phase (CP) of the disease. If not cured at this stage, CML transforms into a blast crisis (BC). Aim of study: Colorectal cancer is the third more frequent malignancy among To investigate the genetic changes associated with CML progression we per- the newly diagnosed cancer cases in the United States and the third cause of formed whole-exome sequencing (WES) of an individual patient aAt SthXrLe1e dif- death from malignancy. It has been and being an object of study in regards to fTePr5e3nt time points: CP, complete hematological remission (CHR) and BC. the mechanisms that promote oncogenesis as well as the implicated genes. WUeB Eva2lGid2atZeEdB m2utatIioKnZsF 3in gTePn5e3s known to be involved in CML ( and Genomic and protein analyses in colon cancer have proved the significant ) as well as in genes that have notA bSeXeLn1 described soU fBaEr 2inG 2the disease participation of GA733 protein family. However, so far a small number of (ZEB2 , and IKZF)3. mutation (p. E286
K) was found in the three studies have been reported in human-tissue material. phases of CML progression. However, (p.G679*), (p.D35V), Experimental Design: Cancerous and noncancerous tissues were obtained (p. L420
R) and (p. E272
K) were present only in the CP and BC. from 40 patients with colorectal cancer and RNA was extracted from each The evaluation of the number of mutated reads allowed us to study clonality sample (cancerous - non cancerous tissue samples). In order to quantitate and clonal evolution : 93% of the selected SNSs that were present in the CP GA733-1 and -2 mRNA transcripts, we developed and evaluated real-time were also seen in BC. In fact, the percentages of reads of the mutant alleles fluorescence PCR assays. Correlation of GA733-2 mRNA levels in noncan- were the same, both at CP and at BC. cerous versus cancerous tissue with clinicopathologic parameters was per- WTEP S5
 3allIoKwZFe3d us to identifAyB aL l1arge number of mutated genes, even at the cho- formed in adenocarcinoma colon samples. nic phase of CML, that harbour clear prognostic and predictive significance Results: mRNA expression of GA733-1 gene was almost undetectable in ( , , absence of mutationsE ). S ThH eG st u2 d0 y 1 of3 t h| e P mA uR taI tS io, n F pR roA fiN le CE b | o W th W noW nca.E ncS eH roG us. O anR dG cancerous tissues. This can be explained sin2 ce8 n5 oABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index metastasis was diagnosed before or after surgery. In noncancerous tissues a clinical diagnosis of Lynch Syndrome. MLH1 promoter hypermethylation the median ratio GA733-2/h-PBGD mRNA levels was 273.31 (range, 65.24- was responsible for MSI in 54% of cancers with this type of genetic insta- 14862.41), while in cancerous tissues of the above patients, the median ra- bility, suggesting sporadic character of the disease. The BRAFV600E muta- tio GA733-2/h-PBGD was 115.64 (range, 11.58-1189.14) (p<0.05). tion was significantly associated with MSI (p=0.03), being detected in 12% Conclusion: Our results reveal a strong correlation between reduced of MSI cases, and 2% of MSS cancers. All of the evaluated “BRAF+” cancers GA733-2 mRNA levels and lymph node perforation (p=0.0343) in contrast were MLH1 hypermethylated, and only half of the MLH1-hypermathylated to GA733-1 gene expression which was almost undetectable in our samp- cancers bear the BRAFV600E mutation, supporting the previous hypothesis les. Therefore, GA733-2 mRNA measurement could be a potential predictive that the gene- promoter-hypermethylated phenotype creates a permissive m I. aMrakmera flooru dmise:t aNsotnaesi. sP a. nKdo lplioao: rN coanne.c eDr. pZarocghnaorosuisli.s: None. M. Samara: environment for the BRAFV600E mutant clones. A family with MSI cancers None. K. Hatzitheofilou: None. without defects in the mismatch repair genes, but bearing the BRAFV600E mutation and hypermethylated MLH1 promoter was identified, suggesting a role of the later two mechanisms in development of the currently unexplai-  P11
.086 nMe.d H fialjmadilniaikl oCvRaC-B caajsreos: .None. A. Kapedanovska-Nestorovska: None. A. Eftimov: None. N. Matevska-Geskovska: None. T. Josifovski: None. M. The allelic expression of the beta-catenin is polymorphic in the Panovski: None. N. Jankulovski: None. A.J. Dimovski: None. general population and allelic imbalance of the beta catenin constitutes a risk factor for colorectal cancer L. Ippolito1, E. Houivet2, C. Abadie1, J. Mauillon3, A. Killian1, M. Bougeard1, F. Charbonnier1, D. Malka4, J. Duffour5, F. Desseigne6, C. Colas7, A. Cailleux8, H. Sebaoui9, J. Blot9, J. Tinat1,3,  P11
.088 S. Baert-Desurmont1,3, T. Frebourg1,3; Identification of cancer relevant variants by comparison with data 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in from 200 healthy Danes using CLC Genomics Workbench Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Biostatistics, University Hospital, Rouen, A. Joecker1, K. Thorsen2, L. Kahns1, C. Lindbjerg Andersen2, C. Boysen1, N. Thomson1, France, 3Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 4Institut Gustave J. Grydholt1, M. Bundgaard1, J. Buur Sinding1, A. K. Hein1, M. Værum1, R. Forsberg1, B. Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5Comprehensive Cancer Centre Val d‘Aurelle, Montpellier, Knudsen1; France, 6Comprehensive Cancer Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, France, 7AP-HP, Saint Antoine 1CLC bio, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Department of Molecular Medicine (MOMA), Aarhus Hospital, Paris, France, 8Clinical Investigation Centre, Inserm and University Hospital, University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark. Rouen, France, 9Department of Clinical Research, University Hopital, Rouen, France. It is well known that people with a different native background respond dif- In order to identify new genetic risk variations associated with colorectal ferently to drugs and have different prepositions to develop rare diseases. cancer (CRC) risk, we conducted a prospective case-control study in 716 Furthermore, the knowledge about common genetic variants in a populati- CRC patients without detectable germline mutations and highly selected on on can be helpful to identify disease related variants in patients. criteria suggestive of an increased genetic risk for CRC: (i) CRC before 61 Projects like the HapMap and 1000 Genomes project have been proven to be years with a first degree relative presenting with CRC; or (ii) CRC before 51 excellent repositories to explore common as well as rare variants. However, years of age; or (iii) multiple primitive CRC, the first one diagnosed before not all different ethnic groups are part of these projects, yet. Also, if a lot of 61 years. We recruited 550 controls that were CRC-free and had no familial publicly available population data exists, the accurate identification of com- history of CRC in their first-degree relatives. Analysis of the allelic expres- mon and rare variants from this data is a difficult and often time-consuming sion of beta catenin and TCF4 revealed that, in controls, the ratio of allelic step, which requires a lot of specialized knowledge. expression was dispersed for beta catenin, as compared to TCF4 (0.76 +/- In this presentation we will show how fast and easy common and rare va- 0.26 versus 0.91 +/- 0.07; interquartile range: 0.22 versus 0.09; p < 0.0001). riants can be identified using CLC Genomics Workbench and how they can Using cut-off values corresponding to the 5th and 95th percentiles, we ob- be used to distinguish between common and disease related variants in a served, among the 355 informative patients and 274 informative controls, patient with a certain genetic disease. As examples we will use publicly avai- a beta catenin allelic imbalance in 73 patients (20.6%) and in 37 controls lable data from 200 healthy Danes and one cancer sample from a patient of (13.5%) (p = 0.0208; OR = 1.66, CI [1.08; 2.55]). This difference was even D Aa.n Jisohe cekthern:i Aci.t Ey.mployment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. K. Thorsen: more significant after taking into account age at blood sampling and sex (p B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending = 0.0062; OR 2.07, CI [1.25-3,43]). This study reveals that allelic expression grants as well as grants already received); Significant; CLC bio. L. Kahns: A. of the beta-catenin, the main regulator of the APC pathway, is polymorphic Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. C. Lindbjerg Andersen: B. in the general population and that allelic imbalance of the beta catenin con- Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending sLti. tIuptpeosl iato r:i sNko fnaec.t oEr. Hfooru CivReCt:. None. C. Abadie: None. J. Mauillon: None. A. grants as well as grants already received); Significant; CLC bio. C. Boysen: A. Killian: None. M. Bougeard: None. F. Charbonnier: None. D. Malka: None. J. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. N. Thomson: A. Employment Duffour: None. F. Desseigne: None. C. Colas: None. A. Cailleux: None. H. (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. J. Grydholt: A. Employment (full or Sebaoui: None. J. Blot: None. J. Tinat: None. S. Baert-Desurmont: None. T. part-time); Significant; CLC bio. M. Bundgaard: A. Employment (full or part- Frebourg: None. time); Significant; CLC bio. J. Buur Sinding: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. A.K. Hein: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. M. Værum: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. R. Forsberg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CLC bio. B. Knudsen:  P11
.087 E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Association between microsatellite instability, BRAFV600E mutation Significant; CLC bio. and MLH1 promoter hypermethylation in sporadic and familial colorectal cancers M. Hiljadnikova-Bajro1, A. Kapedanovska-Nestorovska1, A. Eftimov1, N. Matevska-  P11
.089 Geskovska1, T. Josifovski2,3, M. Panovski2, N. Jankulovski2, A. J. Dimovski1; Stool DNA methylation markers suitable for colorectal cancer 1Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Clinic for Digestive Surgery, Ss Cyril and Methodius screening University, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3Clinical Hospital K. Rønlund1, J. Lindebjerg2, D. Crüger3, D. Morton4, S. Kølvraa1; Acibadem Sistina, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of Pathology, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 3Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 4the School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. In our ongoing study investigating the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms of colorectal cancer (CRC) development among patients from the Republic Background: Colorectal cancer is the third most commonly diagnosed ma- of Macedonia, we have evaluated the microsatellite instability (MSI), BRAF- lignancy in the world. Research over the last decade has shown that popu- V600E mutation and methylation status of the MLH1-promoter in a total of lation screening for CRC can reduce mortality by 15 - 33%. Until recently 389 patients with histopathologically confirmed CRC. Fluorescent multiplex the method most often used to screen for early CRC has been based on the PCR followed by capillary gell electrophoresis; bidirectional DNA sequen- findings of faecal occult blood. The problem with this test is, however, that cing and quantitative methylation-specific PCR after bisulfite DNA-conver- the sensitivity is only 50-60% when used as a single examination. Tumour sion were employed for the above analyses respectively. MSI was detected specific DNA methylation in stool is a new method for detecting colorectal in 11.2% of all CRCs, acting as a mechanism that enables development of cancer and precancerous lesions at an early stage. cancers with early phenotypic presentation (55 years on average) in the Materials and method: In order to define suitable markers for a DNA me- proximal colon (p<0.001) and lower tumor stage at diagnosis (p=0.046). thylation based screening assay we have conducted analysis of normal colo- N 2e 8a 6rly one third of all MSI cancers (29%) were isEolSatHedG f r2om01 p3at i|e PntAs RwIiSth, FRnAic NmCucEo s|a W anWd aWde.nEoSmHaG ti.sOsuRe Gsamples. First we used a DNA methylationABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index array platform based on immunoprecipitation and then we performed an level of HIG2 (hypoxia-inducible gene 2) strongly correlates with VEGFR1 Illumina Infinium 450K Methylation assay analysis. We have conducted va- expression. Also we observed up-regulation the hypoxia-inducible CA9 (car- rious filtering analysis and performed statistical and bioinformatic analyses bonic anhydrase 9) expression in 8-1300 times which correlated with VEG- to define aberrant methylated candidate CpG sites suitable for a stool based FR1. Up-regulation of VEGFR2 closely associated with availability of nodal screening test. metastasis or peritoneal carcinomatosis. Results: We have identified these 21 candidate genes; ADAMT S5
, DLX5, The expression of VEGF/VEGFR on tumor might be a prognostic marker for DMRTA2, DP P10
, FAM19A4, GRIA4, HAND2, HPS E2
, ITGA4, KCNA1, LRFN5, sYu.Acc. eSshsefulyl guisne: aNnotnie-V. EV.GNF. Kthaesrhanpiekuotvi:c sN.one. S.I. Achkasov: None. O.I. MEOX2, MIR129-2, PAX6, PRMT8, SL C6
A15, TBX5, VCAN, ZI C1
, ZNF568 and Sushkov: None. A.S. Tsukanov: None. N.I. Pospekhova: None. V.P. Shubin: None. ZNF804B, p-value of <0.001, with more than one differential methylated CpG site by the Infinium 450K array. Conclusions: Further work is necessary in order to develop „high-through- put“ methods for each of the potential markers and hopefully it will result in  P11
.092 a K m. Roøren lsuennds:i tNivoen es.c rJe. eLninindge btojeorlg f:o Nr oenaer.l yD d. Ciargüngoesri:s N oofn ceo. lDor. eMcotartlo cna:n Nceorn.e. S. The EMT gene expression signature in advancing stage colorectal Kølvraa: None. cancer V. P. Shubin, Y. A. Shelygin, V. N. Kashnikov, A. S. Tsukanov, O. I. Sushkov, S. I. Achkasov, N. I. Pospekhova; Ministry of Health / State Scientific Center of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian  P11
.090 Federation. Folate metabolism and gene promoter methylation in colorectal cancer A. Lopomo1, F. Migheli1, F. Coppedè1, A. Stoccoro1, A. Failli2, R. Consolini2, R. Spisni3, P. Miccoli3, J. C. Mathers4, L. Migliore1,5; Colorectal cancer (CRC) has been considered to be a molecularly heteroge- 1Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, neous disease. Investigation of gene expression signature in CRC is an effec- Medical Genetics, Pisa, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, tive approach for prognosis of disease and its metastatic status. The ana- University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 3Department of Surgery, Medical, Molecular, and Critical lysis of EMT (epithelial- mesenchymal transition) program classifies colon Area Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4Human Nutrition Research Centre, tumors on two molecular subtypes: epithelial and mesenchymal. Institute for Ageing & Health, Biomedical Research Building, Campus for Ageing & The gene expression signature (45 genes) was investigated on 17 samples Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 5Istituto Toscano of colon and rectal cancers T3-4 N0-2c M0-1 by RT-PCR. 5 of 17 samples Tumori (ITT), Florence, Italy. were characterized as mesenchymal subtype: high level of ZEB1, ZEB2, VIM and low level of CDH1. High level of PDGFR and TH were strongly correla- ted with this gene profiling. The EMT signature was found on 2 of 3 tumors Colorectal cancer (CRC) occurs as consequence of a complex interplay bet- with nodal metastases. 3 of 3 cancers with peritoneal carcinomatosis were ween genetic and epigenetic alterations. Epigenetic modifications represent demonstrated the EMT profiling also. Whereas the sample with MLH1 germ- the dynamic link between the environment and the genome. DNA methyla- line mutation (p.R100X) showed the epithelial gene signature. tion is potentially reversible and therefore is a good target for research and Our data confirm the notion that the mesenchymal subtype of tumor is asso- therapy. One-carbon metabolism is necessary for DNA synthesis, repair and c Via.Pt.e Sdh wuibtihn :p Nooonr ep.r Yo.gAn. oSshies,l ymgeinta: sNtoantiec. CVR.NC. aKnads hpneirkiotovn: eNaoln cea. rAc.iSn.o matosis. methylation and several studies reported its pivotal role in carcinogenesis. Tsukanov: None. O.I. Sushkov: None. S.I. Achkasov: None. N.I. Pospekhova: Folates may influence CRC risk either through dietary intake as well as by None. intrinsic factors. Our study is aimed to evaluate the methylation levels of APC, CDKN2A, hMLH1 and MGMT genes in CRC and healthy adjacent tissue specimens. The correlation among the methylation status of these genes  P11
.093 and the clinical-pathological features of the patients and the association 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase polymorphism in male patients among MTHFR, TYMS, DNMT3B, RF C1
, MTRR, MTR folate metabolism gene with colorectal carcinoma polymorphisms and the methylation levels of CRC key genes were assessed. M. L. Ristanovic1, I. Novakovic1, B. Rovcanin1, J. Trifunovic1, Z. Krivokapic2, I. Allele and genotype frequencies between CRC and healthy control subjects Dimitrijevic3; for the gene polymorphisms were evaluated. Some interesting correlations 1Institute of Human genetics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2First Surgical have been observed, such as an interaction between MTRR A66G polymor- Clinic Clinical center of Serbia, Medical faculty,University of Belgarde, Belgrade, Serbia, phism and CRC risk; a higher gene promoter methylation in CRC tissue with 3First Surgical Clinic Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. respect to the healthy adjacent tissue; a statistically significant positive correlation between age and hMLH1 and MGMT promoter methylation and between gender and hMLH1 promoter methylation. Moreover low folate le- />Introduction:. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common mali- vels were associated with an increase of hMLH1 and APC methylation while gnant tumors and the second leading cancer in Serbia. Recent studies sug- TYMS 1494 6bp ins/del polymorphism correlated with CDKN2A promoter gest important role of both environmental and genetic factors in canceroge- methylation. All these data corroborate the critical role of folate metabolism nesis. 3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (3-PHGDH) gene overexpression i An .C LRoCp.omo: None. F. Migheli: None. F. Coppedè: None. A. Stoccoro: None. A. is assosiated with patogenesis of human cancer and contributes to cell pro- Failli: None. R. Consolini: None. R. Spisni: None. P. Miccoli: None. J.C. liferation. Mathers: None. L. Migliore: None. Aim: The objective of our study was to assess the association of PHGDH gene polimorphism in group of males with colorectal cancer and control group of healthy men.  P11
.091 Methods: The survey was carried out in the Department of Human Genetics- The VEGF/VEGFR pathway in advancing stage colorectal cancer Medical School, University of Belgrade. The study has encompassed 63 man Y. A. Shelygin, V. N. Kashnikov, S. I. Achkasov, O. I. Sushkov, A. S. Tsukanov, N. I. diagnosed with colorectal cancer in The First Surgical Clinic, Clinical Center Pospekhova, V. P. Shubin; of Serbia and 100 health males volonteers. The DNA was isolated from the Ministry of Health / State Scientific Center of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian periferal blood with solting out method. The genotypes 3-PHGDH polimor- Federation. phism were determined by Polimerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Restric- tion Fragment Lenght Polimorphism (RFLP). Gel-electrophoresis was used to separate DNA fragments. Angiogenesis as the process of new capillary formation plays an important Results: There was a statistically significant difference between frequences role in colorectal cancer (CRC) development. The VEGF/VEGFR pathway is for genotypic distribution of rs541503 polymorfism in patiens with colo- one of the most important regulators of angiogenesis. Vascular endothelial rectal carcinoma and healthy volonteers (p=0.00013, p<0.01). growth factor (VEGF) binds to its receptors (VEGFR1/2) and leads to cell Conclusion: In the present study we found TT genopype as the most fre- proliferation and new vascular formation. VEGF is expressed by cancer cells quent in both of group of patients with colorectal carcinoma and control after the activation of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors in response group. The results of our study also suggest that C allele might be factor to hypoxia. of risk associated with colorectal cancer. It is necessary to undergo futher We analyzed the VEGF signaling on 17 samples of advancing stage CRC (T3-4- testing with more adequate test groups in order to get firm results. N0-2cM0-1) compared to normal adjacent tissue by RT-PCR. The VEGF expressi- K Me.yL .w Roirsdtasn: oPvHicG:D NHo ngee.n Ie. ,N coovloarkeocvtiacl: cNaonncee.r B, P. CRRo,v RcFanLiPn : None. J. Trifunovic: on level increased more than 3 times in 7 tumors. VEGFR2 was up-regulated None. Z. Krivokapic: None. I. Dimitrijevic: None. in 8 samples (15-1000 times), VEGFR1 - in 14 samples (5-200 times). Co-ex- pression VEGF/VEGFR1 and VEGFR2/VEE GS FRH 1G w 2 er0 e 1 ob3 s e| rP veA dR aI lwS, a yF sR . HA igN h CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 287ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.095 Colorectal Cancer Inherited Susceptibility in the Brazilian population: gJe.Kt t. hBearra:p Nyo onfe p. Aat.iLe.n Ltiss w-Niathw acroalo: rNeocntea.l Aca. nLceebri.oda: None. A. Jonkisz: the first replication study in Latin America None. M. Jeleń: None. T.M. Dobosz: None. I. Gomy1, E. M. M. Santos1, G. M. G. T. Spilborghs1, S. R. A. S. Viola1, S. Aguiar Jr1, L. Carvajal-Carmona2, S. R. Rogatto1, B. M. Rossi3; 1A.C. Camargo Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil, 2University of California, Davis, CA, United States, 3Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, Brazil.  P11
.097 Background KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations and KRAS-LC S6
 polymorphism in the binding site of let-7 microRNA to the 3´UTR region of KRAS gene in : Czech patients with colorectal cancer Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and fatal cancers world- J. Simova1,2, B. Kubova1, M. Uvirova1,2, I. Urbanovska1,2, D. Konvalinka1, I. Zebrakova1, A. wide, including in developing countries. Genome-wide association studies Hopenstokova1, J. Mazurova1, J. Dvorackova1,2; have uncovered part of the CRC inherited susceptibility through genotyping 1CGB Laboratory Inc., Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of common low-penetrant variants in individuals with European ancestry. Re- Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. plication studies in genetic heterogeneous populations are scarce. Background: AMiemt:h tood ids:entify SNPs previously known to be associated with CRC risk in the Brazilian population. Personalised cancer medicine based on mutation profiling of tumours is now reality in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer Ten SNPs were genotyped in 1,467 individuals (727 cases and 740 controls) (mCRC). KRAS mutations represents a predictive biomarker for resistance using TaqMan assays. SNPs with significant Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium to anti-EGFR therapy. However, up to 65% of patients with KRAS wild-type and genotypes with either poor clustering or call rates <95% were excluded. tumours do not respond to this therapy. This fact suggest that additional ERfefesuctl tssiz: es were calculated by logistic regression and p-values were correc- markers (in the RAS-RAF-MAPK or PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling pathways, ted for multiple analyses. fAuinmct: ional polymorphism in the binding site of microRNA) may also contri- bute to resistance to anti-EGFR therapy. Models Risk Allelic Dominant Recessive Additive Mutation profiling of selected mutations in KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA gene Frequency 1O.4R3 2.p12 1O.6R7 p 1O.5R1 p 1O.5R4 p SNP allele 3.49 aMnedt hSoNdP: (rs61764370) KRAS-LC S6
 in the binding site of let-7 microRNA to [9[15%.23C .I-. ] x [9[15%.33C .I-. ] 0.0001 [9[15%.18C .I-. ] 0.011 [9[15%.20C .I-. ] 1.66] 10-5 2.11] 1.93] 1.98] x 10-5 the 3´UTR region of KRAS gene. rs4939827 C 0.47 0.75 In this study 503 DNA samples of tumours tissues of mCRC pa- [0.60 - 0.040 0.83 [0.68 0.94] 1.19 [0.70 0.71 [0.56 tients were tested for presence of selected mutations of KRAS,BRAF and rs10411210 T 0.17 - 1 1. .2 06 0 ] 0.080 - 1 2. .4 05 1 ] 0.749 - 1 0. .3 98 0 ] 0.083 PIK3CA gene. Analysis was performed by PCR, reverse hybridisation, real- [1.09 - 0.011 [1.14 - 0.012 [1.07 - 0.012 tRimeseu PltCsR: and primer extension method. SNP (rs61764370) was analysed in 1.45] 1.26 [1.00 1.83] 1.78] rs4444235 C 0.51 1.29 0.097 1.85 1.69 164 samples and was performed by PCR+RFLP method. - 1.60] [1.09 - 0.010 [1.23 - 0.009 [1.10 - 0.011 Activating mutations were detected in 40% (KRAS), 5,6% (BRAF) rs3802842 A 0.26 1 1. .5 33 9] 1.2 16 . 4[1 9. 02 0.072 2.78] 2 1. .6 50 5] and 9% (PIK3CA) of the tumours. Coexistence of mutations were detected in - 1.56] [1.07 - 0.038 [1.11 - 0.035 [1.14 - 0.049 4,8% (mutations in KRAS and PIK3CA gene) and 0,6% (BRAF and PIK3CA). rs16892766 C 0.08 1.82] 1.99] 0.96 [0.40 0.920 2.10] TCo/Gn cgleunsoiotynp: e of the SNP (rs61764370) was identified in 11% of 164 mCRC - 2.27] Conclusions: patients. Frequency of mutations of KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA is similar to frequency reported by other authors, respectively. KRAS and BRAF mu- We found significant association with half of SNPs in the first replication stu- tations were mutually exclusive. Additional predictive biomarkers may aid dy carried out in Latin America. This study will proceed to increase sample in the selection of mCRC patients which could profit from targeted cancer size and stratify our population by ancestry in order to avoid type I and II t Jh.e Sraimpyo.va: None. B. Kubova: None. M. Uvirova: None. I. Urbanovska: None. D. Konvalinka: None. I. Zebrakova: None. A. Hopenstokova: None. J. errors. It is worth to replicate GWAS in admixed populations in order to help Mazurova: None. J. Dvorackova: None. to uncover the missing heritability of CRC and narrow the boundaries of the g I.e Gneotmicy a: rNcohnitee.c Etu.Mre.M o.f SCaRnCto ssu:s Nceopntei.b Gil.iMty..G.T. Spilborghs: None. S.R.A.S. Viola: None. S. Aguiar Jr: None. L. Carvajal-Carmona: None. S.R. Rogatto: None. B.M. Rossi: None.  P11
.098 The evaluation of miRNA expression levels in LGR5 and SOX2 positive colorectal cancer tissues  P11
.096 B. Tunca1, S. Ak1, G. Tezcan1, G. Cecener1, U. Egeli1, T. Yilmazlar2, E. Ozturk2, O. Yerci3, A. HER2 gene status in KRAS positive/negative colorectal cancers Zorluoglu4; J. K. Bar1, A. L. Lis-Nawara1, A. Lebioda2, A. Jonkisz2, M. Jeleń1, T. M. Dobosz2; 1Department of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 1Department of Pathomorphology and Oncological Cytology, Wroclaw Medical 2Department of General Surgery, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Molecular Techniques Unit, Department of Forensic 3Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. 4Department of General Surgery, Acıbadem Hospital, Bursa, Turkey. Mutation at codons 12 and 13 of the KRAS gene in patients with colorectal Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths in the cancer has been shown to be predictive of cetuximab response in colorectal world. Cancer stem cell (CSC), suggested to responsLibGlRe5 for tumSOoXr2 i.nitiation, cancer. Fifty three paraffin-embedded colorectal cancer specimens were growth, and metastasis in CRC. The search for a reliable marker to identify analyzed for KRAS mutation and HER2 overexpression/amplification. A these CSCs is ongoing as current markers, such as and Additio- high-resolution melting (HRM) assay and single-nucleotide polymorphisms nally, according toL GrRec5ent stSuOdXie2s , microRNAs (miRNAs), may also contribu- (SNPs) were used to detect somatic mutation in exon 2 notably condons 12 te to preserving stemness of human CSCs. However, the knowledge about and 13 of the KRAS gene. HER2 overexpression was detected using mono- the regulation of and positive CRC ceLlGlsR v5ia miRSNOAX 2e xpressions is clonal antibody and confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) very limited. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the significance analysis. of expression levels of CRLGCR r5e lated S mOXiR2NAs in and positive CRC KRAS mutations for codons 12 and 13 were identified in 19/53 (35.8%) tumors. by SNP and in 17/53 (32.0%) of colorectal cancer by HRM technique. Colo- The expression profiles and genes and 38 CRC related miRNAs rectal cancers showed mainly heterozygous 35G>A and 38G>A KRAS gene were analyzed in tumor tissues of 30 early-onset CRC patients, using RT- mutations. qPCR assays and miRNA PCR arrays respectively. Statistical analyses were The concordance rate between the two methodologies was high at 89.4%. performed using SABioscience PCR Array Data Analysis Software. KRAS mutation was more frequently observed in poorly differentiated tu- The expression level of miR-143 almost 2-fold reduceLdG iRn5 n ormSaOl Xti2ssuPes mors and adenocarcinomas than in other histological types. in compareP to tumor tissues. Furthermore, reduction level of miR-143 was HER2 overexpression was observed in 42/53 (79.2%) of all colorectal can- significantly increased in tumors witShO oXv2er-expressed and ( = cers and in 62.1%, 61.5% of KRAS mutation-positive cases detected by SNP 0LG.0R4-55 and = 0.040, respectively). and HRM techniques respectively. HER2 overexpression was accompanied Although miR-143 associated with previously, its association with by amplification of HER2 gene. determined first time in this study. Even, further studies needed, we In conclusions, the presence of HER2/KRAS positive immunophenotype of suggest that, miR-143 may has a potential to be candidate of new therapeu- c2o8lo8rectal cancers suggests that HER2 might be thEeS cHanGd id2a0te1 g3e n| eP fAorR tIaSr-, FRtiAc tNarCgeEt |in W adWvaWnce.E thSeHraGpy.O prRoGtocols of stemness CRC.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index B. Tunca: None. S. Ak: None. G. Tezcan: None. G. Cecener: None. U. Egeli:  P11
.101 None. T. Yilmazlar: None. E. Ozturk: None. O. Yerci: None. A. Zorluoglu: None. MUTYH mutations and variants in Jews of Moroccan origin with or without minimal colorectal adenomatous polyposis G. Rosner1, D. Bercovich2, S. Pel1, Z. Samuel1, E. Santo1, P. Rozen1; 1Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2Human Molecular Genetics and  P11
.099 Pharmacogenetics, Migal - Galilee Bio-Technology Center, Kiryat-Shmona, Israel. Easy-to-use online referral test detects most patients with a high Background: familial risk of colorectal cancer N. Hoogerbrugge, N. Dekker, A. R. Mensenkamp, M. J. L. Ligtenberg, W. A. v. Zelst-Stams, Israeli-Jews Oofb Njeocrttihv-eAsf:rican origin were a low-risk popuMlaUti-- R. P. Hermens; Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. TonY Hfor colorectal cancer (CRC). This is changing. Little is known of contribu- Mtinegt hgoendest:ic susceptibility. Evaluate frequency and types of Introduction: mutations and variants in a defined population of North-African Jews. Currently, only 12-30% of individuals at high risk for Lynch Patients were of Moroccan origin having colonoscopy 2007-12 syndrome, the most common hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC) syndrome, and volunteering for genetic evaluation. ExcMluUdTinYgH Familial Adenomatous are referred for genetic counselling. We developed a new online referral test PRoelsyuplotssi:s and Lynch Syndrome, patients with ≥3 color eMcUtaTl YaHdenomas and based on current guidelines, aimed at improving referral for genetic coun- non-adenoma controls were examined for 6 mutations & variants. selling, of those at high familial risk of CRC. This study focuses on sensitivi- Seventy-five patients, 52 with adenomas, had analysis; 17 tPya, tuiseanbtisl iatyn da nMde uthseord esx: periences of this test, which is also available as cell (32.7%) had mutations or variants identified. In adenoma patients there phone App. were 8 (15.4%) Y179C, G396D homozygotes or compound heterozygous; all had >10 adenomas and 4 had familial neoplasia. Six others were hete- Sensitivity was assessed by entering pedigree data from high-risk indivi- rozygotes, 4 with <10 and 2 with >10 adenomas; 5 had familial neoplasia duals (i.e., Lynch syndrome mutation carriers) into the referral test to de- and 3 a neoplasm. Other mutations were two  S512
F heterozygotes with <10 termine whether genetic counselling was recommended. For usability, we adenomas and familial neoplasms and one had a neoplasm; another had assessed non-medical staff members’ ability to determine referral according 1186_1187ins GG and >10 adenomas. Four heterozygotes haCdo tnhcel uQs3io2n4sH to guidelines in seven fictive clinical casNeOs Tusing the referral test after mini- variant. In 23 non-adenoma controMlsU: 1T YhHad the  S512
F another the  L417
M mReaslu trltasi:n ing. Referral was also determined by medical specialists (surgeons, variant, another the R509C variant and 16 the Q324H variant. : gastroenterologist, clinical geneticists) using the referral test. Jews of Moroccan origin can have mutations associated with only Sensitivity of the referral test was 91% for mutation carriers with few adenoma, family and perMsoUnTaYlH history of cancer similar to sporadic CRC. CRC (n = 164) and 73% for all mutation carriers (n = 420). Non-medical The  S512
F mutation appears to be pathogenetic, the Q324H a frequent va- staff members (n = 20) determined correct referral according to guidelines riant. The findings suggest evaluation in these patients with even iCno n8c4l%us oiof ncsa:s es using the referral test. Without the use of the referral test few adenomas, and need to follow-up heterozygotes and Q324H carriers for Medical Specialists (n=312) correctly determined referral in 65%. C GR.C R.osner: None. D. Bercovich: None. S. Pel: None. Z. Samuel: None. E. Santo: None. P. Rozen: None. The referral test has a high sensitivity for detecting individuals with a high risk of Lynch syndrome and is suitable for use in clinical practice by cell phone. Widespread use of the online referral test will improve reco- g Nn.i tHioono goefr pbarutigegnets: Nwointhe .h Nig. hD efakmkeilri:a Nl roinsek. oAf. Rco. lMoreencsteanl kcaamncpe:r N. one. M.J.L.  P11
.102 Ligtenberg: None. W.A.V. Zelst-Stams: None. R.P. Hermens: None. Identification of potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (pfSNPs) associated with fluorouracil / platinum drug response in colorectal cancer patients  P11
.100 S. S. Chong1,2, J. Wang1, S. Y. K. Ong3, L. L. Ooi4, C. G. Lee1,3,5; 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University Hospital, Over expression of CK20 may has a potential to be a prognostic Singapore, Singapore, 3National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 4Singapore marker in MSS tumors of early-onset colorectal cancer patients General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 5Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, S. Ak1, B. Tunca1, T. Yilmazlar2, G. Tezcan1, G. Cecener1, U. Egeli1, E. Ozturk2, O. Yerci3, E. Singapore. Erturk1, A. Zorluoglu4; 1Department of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 2Department of General Surgery, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 3Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, Colorectal cancer (CRC) ranks among the most common causes of cancer 4Department of General Surgery, Acıbadem Hospital, Bursa, Turkey. death worldwide. Approximately a third of patients are diagnosed at the me- tastatic stage (stage IV) and a third of curatively resected cases (stages I-III) relapse. Thus a substantial proportion of patients require drug treatment The association between microsatellite instability (MSI) status and gene ex- for metastatic/relapsed CRC. Two common combination drug regimes for pression profiles in tumorigenesis pathways causing early-onset sporadic this cancer are CAPOX (capecitabine and platinum-based oxaliplatin) and colorectal cancer (CRC) has not clearly established. Since molecular targe- CAPIRI (capecitabine and topoisomerase-I inhibitor) but positive response ting therapeutics are being used in clinical settings and trials, identifying to these regimes is only ~40-45%. Availability of a reliable early predicti- differentially regulated molecular target genes depend on MSI status in ear- ve biomarker of drug response in metastatic CRC can enable appropriate ly-onset CRC is required. The aim of this study was to evaluate the altered individualized tailoring of drug regimes for patients, moving personalized gene expressions depend on the MSI status of early-onset CRC to identify medical care closing to reality. Patients predicted to be non-responders specific biomarkers that could provide novel therapeutic molecular targets to specific drug regimens can avoid ineffective drug treatments and their in this population. associated side-effects, and instead opt for novel treatments. Currently, no 5 MSI markers were investigated in tumor and normal tissues of 36 early- reliable tests exist for early prediction of response to chemotherapy in the- onset CRC patients whose expression profiles of 114 CRC associated ge- se patients. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in some genes have nes already examined using mRNA PCR arrays. Statistical analyses were previously been shown to be associated with differences in drug response. A performed to clarify the potential influence of MSI status and altered gene novel pathway-based approach was used to test potentially-functional SNPs expression to clinical features. Prognosis was estimated with Kaplan-Meier (pfSNPs) in candidate genes that may serve as predictive biomarkers of drug analysis. IMPDH2, CK20 MA P3
K8 response. Of >100 patients examined, three pfSNPs in strong LD with each The frequency of MSI tumors was 41.66 % and microsatPel lite stabile (MSS) other showed presence of the minor alleles only in non-responders. Their tumors wCeKr2e0 58.33 %. The expression levels of and P minor alleles are predicted to disrupt nonsense mediated decay, an exon- were up-regulated in MSS in compared tPo MSI patients ( < 0.05). Up-rePgu- splice enhancer site, and miRNA binding. These 3 SNPs could thus serve as a lation of was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis ( = u Ss.eSf.u Cl hboionmg:a Nrkoenre f. oJr. eWaarnlyg r: eNsopnoen. sSe. Yt.oK s. tOanndg:a rNdo naen.t iL-.CLR. CO odir:u Ngo rneeg.i Cm.eGn. s. Lee: None. 0.026), recurrence/distant metastasis ( = 0.0008) and short survival ( = 0.0137 )C iKn2 M0 SS. Although validations are required, our findings supported that over expres- sion of gene might provide novel therapeutic molecular target related with MSI status for treatment of early-onset CRC, as well as new directions fSor. Athke: Ndoenvee.l oBp. mTuennct ao:f N aonnteic.a Tn. cYeilrm darzulgars:. None. G. Tezcan: None. G. Cecener: None. U. Egeli: None. E. Ozturk: None. O. Yerci: None. E. Erturk: None. A. Zorluoglu: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 289ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.103  P11
.105 Carriership of pathogenic BLM alleles is associated with early-onset Investigation molecular and epidemiologic of polymorphisms colorectal cancer Tyr113His gene EPXH1 and DraI-CY P2
E1  in xenobiotics metabolism M. M. Hahn1,2, A. R. Mensenkamp1,2, R. M. de Voer1,2, W. A. van Zelst-Stams1, L. Spruijt1, for treating patients with sporadic colorectal cancer. C. Gilissen1, M. Tychon1, R. Derks1, N. Wieskamp1, L. Vreede1, I. D. Nagtegaal1, H. K. G. M. M. Fernandes1, A. Russo1, A. L. S. Galbiatti1, R. B. Lelis1, N. F. Gazola1, S. P. Santos1, Schackert3, A. Geurts van Kessel1, N. Hoogerbrugge1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, R. P. Kuiper1; M. A. Proença2, A. E. Silva2, G. S. Cunrath3, J. G. Netinho3, É. C. Pavarino1, E. M. Goloni- 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2These Authors Bertollo1; contributed equally to the presented work, Na, Netherlands, 3Universitätsklinikum Carl 1Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto – FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto-SP, Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany. Brazil, 2University Estadual Paulista – UNESP, São José do Rio Preto-SP, Brazil, 3Department of Surgery - Coloproctology Service, Base Hospital, University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto - FAMERP., São José do Rio Preto-SP, Brazil. Around 5% of all colorectal cancer (CRC) cases are caused by known mono- genic aberrations, but much of the genetic heritaBbiLliMty of CRC is still unex- plainWedR. TNh)e known genetic causes of CRC predisposition include rare reces- Colorectal cancer (CRC) is neoplasm malignancy that occurs in the large sive RecQ-helicase deficiency syndromesB: LBMloom (WRN) syndrome and Wer- intestine (colon) and rectum and has a high incidence among Brazilian pa- ner ( syndrome. Previous studies have led to coBnLfMlicting WcoRnNclusions tients. The etiology of colorectal cancer includes age over 60 years and life- as to whether carriership of pathogenic and alleles predispose to style habits (smoking and alcohol consumption). To analyze the frequency CRC. Here we assessed the carriership of pathogenic and alleles of polymorphism Tyr113His and DraI-CY
P2 E1
 and the association between in early-onset CRC (<45 years of age) patients. them and clinicopathological characteristics of the patients compared with By performing wBhLoMle exome sequencing in a cohort of 57 unexplaWinReNd ear- controls. The study included a total of 231 individuals (57 patients and 174 ly-onset mismatch-repair proficient CRC patients we detected two carriers controls) Coloproctology Service, Base Hospital, University Hospital, Faculty of a pathogenic mutation and one carrier of a pathogenic mu- of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto - FAMERP. The variables analyzed were tation. Screening of anB LaMdditional cohort of 183 young CRC paWtieRnNts from age, sex, primary site of occurrence. Molecular analysis was performed by the Netherlands and Germany resulted in 3 additional patients with a pa- Real Time. For the statistical analysis we used chi-square test, Hardy-Wein- thogenic mutation in and one patient with a pathogenic muta- berg and multiple logistic regression. Statistical analysis showed that there tion. A comparison with data from 1,302 exomes in our in-house databBaLsMe significant differences between patients and controls in relation to sex (p = (non-CRC) as well as with 6,503 exomes fWroRmN a public database (http://evs. 0.001; OR = 0.27; CI95%= 0.12 to 0.60) and age (p= 0.035; OR= 3.16; CI95%= gs.washington.edu/) revealed a significant enrichmenBtL oMf pathogenic 1.08 to 9.25). Also found relation for the DraI-CY P2
E1  polymorphism (p≥ mutations (both p-values <0.05), but not mutations, in our CRC cohort. 0.000; OR= 6.78; CI95%= 3.19-14.39D). rIan the present study we observed a Moreover, in 1 out of 2 analyzed tumor samples from BLMcarriers somatic high frequency of males and in the older age of patients group in the control loss of the wild-type allele was found. group. Only the polymorphic allele of I-CY
P2 E1
 appears to be associated In conclusion, we found that carriership of pathogenic alleles is enri- with susceptibility to CCR. According to preliminary results, male gender, ched in early-onset CRC patients suggesting that these alleles contribute to older age and the presence of the polymorphism DraI-CY P2
E1 *6 are being aMn. Min.c Hreaahsne:d N CoRneC. rAis.Rk.. Mensenkamp: None. R.M. de Voer: None. W.A. van ratified as a risk factor. Results led us to extend for further study of these po- Zelst-Stams: None. L. Spruijt: None. C. Gilissen: None. M. Tychon: None. R. l yGm.Mor.Mph. Fisemrnsa anndde so:t hBe. rRse tsoe aar bche tGterar nutn (pdreinrcsitpaanl dininvegs otifg RatCoCr, ccaorllcaibnooragteonr eosri s. Derks: None. N. Wieskamp: None. L. Vreede: None. I.D. Nagtegaal: None. H.K. consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Schackert: None. A. Geurts van Kessel: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. M.J.L. FAPESP. A. Russo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Ligtenberg: None. R.P. Kuiper: None. consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; CAPES. A.L.S. Galbiatti: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; FAPESP. R.B. Lelis: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or 
P11 .104 consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; The first mutations in the MYH gene reported in Moroccan colon IC - FAPESP. N.F. Gazola: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator cancer patients or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; F. Z. Laarabi1,2,3, I. Cherkaoui Jaouad1,2, S. Baert-Desurmont4, K. Ouldim1, A. Ibrahimi5, N. PIBIC - CAPES. S.P. Santos: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Kanouni6, T. Frebourg4, A. Sefiani1,2; collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); 1Institut National d‘hygiène, département de génétique médicale, Rabat, Morocco, Significant; TT3 - FAPESP. M.A. Proença: B. Research Grant (principal 2Centre de Génomique Humaine, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Mohammed V Souissi, Rabat, Morocco, 3Laboratoire de Génétique et Biométrie, already received); Significant; CAPES. A.E. Silva: B. Research Grant (principal Université Ibn Tofail, Faculté des sciences, Kenitra, Morocco, 4Department of Genetics, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants University Hospital, Institute for Medical Research and Innovation, Rouen, France, already received); Significant; CAPES e CNPq. G.S. Cunrath: None. J.G. 5Service d‘hépatogastroentérologie, CHU, Fes, Morocco, 6Hôpital Cheikh Zaid, Rabat, Netinho: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant Morocco. and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; BAP - CAPES. É.C. Pavarino: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator MYH or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; FAPESP, CAPES e CNPq. E.M. Goloni-Bertollo: B. Research Grant (principal Background: Biallelic germline mutations in the gene cause MYH-as- investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants sociated polyposis (MAP) disease, an autosomal recessive form of inherited already received); Significant; FAPESP, CAPES e CNPq. colorectal cancer. There have been many investigations into MAP that have been conducted in many different countries. Currently there is limited data on MAP in Morocco, 
P11 .106 and it is reasonable to think, that the prevalence of this form of genetic pre- K-ras gene - possible correlations of its mutational status with the disposition is as high as other autosomal recessive genetic diseases found in histopathological findings in metastatic colorectal carcinomas countries with high rates of consanguinity. F. F. Cionca1, G. Cardos2; The aim of this study is to examine the frequency of MYH mutations in colo- 1The National Institute for Research and Development in the Field of Pathology and rectal cancer and/or attenuated polyposis in Moroccan patients. Biomedical Sciences „Victor Babeş“, Bucharest, Romania, 2Personal Genetics - Medical Patients and methods: We carried out DNA analysis in 62 patients to screen Genetic Centre, Bucharest, Romania. for the three recurrent mutations c.494A>G, c.1145G>A and c.1185_1186dup, Background: whereas 40 subjects were screened for germline MYH mutations in the who- le coding sequence of the MYH gene by direct DNA sequencing. Gain-of-function K-ras point mutations, present in 30-50% Results: Three patients with colorectal cancer and attenuated polyposis car- of the metastatic colorectal carcinomas (CRC), maintain the active form of ried biallelic mutations in the MUTYH gene. One patient with 25 adenomas the ras p21 protein and lead to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) without colorectal cancer carried the c.1145 G>A mutation at a homozygo- independent activation of intracellular signaling pathways, making the anti- te state and one patient with 3 polyps was heterozygote for the mutation EGFR tumor therapy ineffective. c.1145 G>A. The aim of this study is to identify possible correlations between the muta- Conclusion: We report the first biallelic MYH mutations in four Moroccan tMioentahlo sdtast: us of the K-ras gene and the histopathological findings in patients patients with clinical criteria of MAP. Despite the relatively small sample size with CRC. of the current study, our findings suggest that the MAP is not a frequent We studied 45 patients with CRC, 39 primary tumors and 6 meta- c Fa.Zu.s eL aoafr caoblio: nN ocanne.c eI.r C ihne Mrkoarooucic Joa aosu wade: hNaodn ee.x Spe. cBtaeedr.t-Desurmont: None. K. stases. The formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples were analyzed Ouldim: None. A. Ibrahimi: None. N. Kanouni: None. T. Frebourg: None. A. using an indirect bistadial immunohistochemical (IHC) technique, perfor- Sefiani: None. med with a Dako EnVision+ Dual Link System-HRP, with antibodies for the 290 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FREAGFNRC aEnd | tWheW rasW p.rEoSteHinG. M.OutRatGions in exon 2, codons 12 and 13 of the K-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index rRaess guelntse: were detected by PCR-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism tors such as diet, and may result in pre-cancerous field defects. Lynch syn- analysis. drome (LS) is associated with inherited defects of the DNA mismatch repair K-ras mutations were present in 46, 66 % of the cases (21 cases), genes which together with other genetic and epigenetic changes accelerate 19 adenocarcinomas and 2 metastases. EGFR was positive in 10 cases in tumorigenesis. The aim of this project is to gain new insights to the molecu- tumor cells and in 11 cases in the vessels, with 3 cases of double positivi- lar mechanisms through which DNA methylation can affect colorectal carci- ty. Immunohistochemical overexpression of ras protein was detected in 14 nogenesis in predisposed LS mutation carriers and to define how CpG island samples. The relationship between the positivity of the K-ras mutation and methylation of CRC risk genes varies with age, mutation, CRC diagnosis and tChoen pcolusistiioven sim: munohistochemical reaction for EGFR and the ras protein did different colorectal regions. not reach statistical significance. Normal colonic mucosa biopsies from different colorectal regions were There were no significant correlations between the muta- gathered from 38 Finnish LS mutation carriers during regular surveillance tional status of the K-ras gene and the IHC reactions for EGFR and ras p21 in addition with 11 matching normal-polyp pairs. Patient information was protein, proving once more the major role of the molecular analyses in CRC obtained from a nation-wide registry. CpG island methylation was studied a Fn.Ft.i -CEiGoFnRca t:h Neoranpey. .G. Cardos: None. with the methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli- fication test (MS-MLPA) which detects CpG methylation of selected genes. Of 15 CRC risk genes tested so far at least two show increased methylation 
P11 .107 already in normal mucosa which further increases in the vicinity of polyps Delineating the PM
S2  cancer risk and in polyps themselves. Our preliminary findings suggest that increased M. Nielsen1, S. ten Broeke1, R. Brohet2, C. M. Tops1, H. Klift van der1, E. Gómez García3, DNA methylation in normal colonic mucosa may indicate higher risk for de- F. J. Hes1, N. Hoogerbrugge4, F. H. Menko5, R. C. Niessen6, T. A. van Os7, R. H. Sijmons6, L. vSe.l oVpailon:g N CoRnCe.. S. Kaur: None. L. Renkonen-Sinisalo: None. H. Järvinen: Spruijt8, S. Verhoef9, M. Velthuizen10, M. G. Ausems11, H. F. Vasen12, J. T. Wijnen1; None. J. Mecklin: None. M. Nyström: None. P. Peltomäki: None. 1Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Research center Linnaeus Institute Spaarne Hospital, Hoofddorp, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital;, Maastricht, Netherlands, 45Department of Human Genetics and Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Clinical Genetics and 
P11 .109 Human Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department Constitutional epimutation of MLH1 is linked to the variants c.-27C>A of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, and c.85G>T present on an ancestral haplotype 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, I. P. Vogelaar1, C. Kwok2, W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams1, A. R. Mensenkamp1, M. J. L. Netherlands, 8Department of Human Genetics and Hereditary Cancer Clinic, University Ligtenberg1, R. W. Rapkins2, R. L. Ward2, N. Chun3, W. C. McKinnon4, M. S. Greenblatt4, M. Medical Centre, Nijmegen,, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Family Cancer Clinic, Netherlands P. Hitchins2; Cancer Institute, Amsterda, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Department of Medical Genetics, 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of New South University Medical Centre, Utrecht, Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands, 11Department Wales, Sydney, Australia, 3Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, United of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Utrecht,, Utrecht, Netherlands, 12The States, 4University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, United States. Netherlands Foundation for the Detection of Hereditary Tumours, Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands. MLH1 MSH2 MSH6 PM
S2  Introduction LyncEhP CsyAnMdrome, caused by gMerSmHl2ine heterozygous mutations of the DNA mismatch repair genes , , and , or deletions affecting Lynch syndrome is an inheritable cancer syndrome caused by the gene upstream of , is characterized by a predispositMioLnH t1o mutations in one of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes. The clinical pheno- early-onset colorectal and additional extracolonic cancers. An alternative type for mutations in the MLH1, MSH2 or MSH6 is comprehensively descri- but rare cause of Lynch syndrome is a constitutional epimutation of , bed, but the consequences of a PM
S2  mutation are less well understood. We which is characterized by promoter methylation and transcriptional silen- aMimet htoo dess tablish the cancer risk for PM
S2  mutation carriers in the largest cing of a MsiLnHgl1e allele in normal tissues.MLH1 cohort reported so far. Worldwide, five families with autosomal dominant transmission of a consti- Data were used from 107 PM
S2  families, including approximately tutional epimutation linked to an haplotype with two single nu- 378 mutation carriers and more than 2500 family members, assembled by cleotide variants (c.-27C>A and c.85G>T) have been identified. To examine our centre in cooperation with Dutch university hospitals and several gene- whether these families share a common ancestry, we performed SNP array- tRice sculilntisc s in other European countries. A Kaplan Meier analysis calculating bMaLsHed1 genotyping in four of the families. The genotyping revealed a shared cancer risk in proven or obligated PM
S2  carriers will be done. haplotype across a ≤2.6 Mb region of chromosome 3p22 encompassing The result Kaplan Meier analysis will be shown during the presen- and additional surrounding genes, indicating common ancestry. tation. This finding has two important implications. First, the candidate region for In the 378 mutation carriers analyzed, CRC was most frequently diagnosed the genetic defect of this epimutation is now defined by the ≤2.6 Mb mi- (n=112). In 208 female mutation carriers endometrial (n=29) and breast nimal region of haplotype overlap between the four families. Furthermore, cDainscceursss i(onn= 11) (after CRC) were most frequent. Other cancers than the co- regardless of the exact underlying mechanism, which might be driven by lon or endometrium were reported in a total of 47 cases. either the c.-27C>A or c.85G>T variants, these variants can serve as markers In this study we analyze the cancer risks in a large cohort of for this disease-causing genetic haplotype. Additional carriers of this foun- PM
S2  mutation carriers. der haplotype could be spread across the globe. Our results can therefore The tumor spectrum in total group of family members is diverse and families improve the identification and diagnosis of (yet unexplained) Lynch syndro- seem less severely affected than other MMR deficient families, suggesting a mI.Pe. cVaosgeesl.aar: None. C. Kwok: None. W.A.G. van Zelst-Stams: None. A.R. l Mow. Nerie plseenne:t Nraonncee. Sfo. rt ePnM BSr2o mekuet:a Ntioonne .c aRr. rBierrosh.et: None. C.M. Tops: None. H. Mensenkamp: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. R.W. Rapkins: None. R.L. Ward: Klift van der: None. E. Gómez García: None. F.J. Hes: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. N. Chun: None. W.C. McKinnon: None. M.S. Greenblatt: None. M.P. None. F.H. Menko: None. R.C. Niessen: None. T.A. van Os: None. R.H. Hitchins: None. Sijmons: None. L. Spruijt: None. S. Verhoef: None. M. Velthuizen: None. M.G. Ausems: None. H.F. Vasen: None. J.T. Wijnen: None. 
P11 .110 Screening for constitutional MLH1 epimutation in the routine 
P11 .108 diagnosis of Lynch syndrome DNA methylation changes in Lynch syndrome associated normal J. Leclerc1,2,3, M. Crépin1, S. Baert-Desurmont4, J. Tinat4, F. Bonnet5,6, M. Guillaud-Bataille7, colonic mucosa S. Lejeune8, E. Barouk-Simonet5, C. Dugast9, D. Malka7, G. Morin10, M. Mathieu10, S. S. Valo1,2, S. Kaur2, L. Renkonen-Sinisalo3, H. Järvinen3, J. Mecklin4, M. Nyström1, P. Manouvrier8,3, T. Frébourg4, M. P. Buisine1,2,3; Peltomäki2; 1Lille University Hospital, Department of Molecular Oncology, Lille, France, 2UMR Inserm 1Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department 837, Lille, France, 3Lille North of France University, Lille, France, 4Rouen University of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Hospital, Department of Genetics, Rouen, France, 5Bergonie Institute, Bordeaux, France, 3Second Department of Surgery, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Inserm U916, Bordeaux, France, 7Gustave Roussy Institute, Department of Genetics, 4Department of Surgery, Jyväskylä Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland. Villejuif, France, 8Lille University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, Lille, France, 9Eugene Marquis Center, Rennes, France, 10Amiens University Hospital, Amiens, France. Colorectal cancer (CRC) develops via multiple steps which involve genetic changes, such as mutations in growth-regulatory genes, and epigenetic al- Lynch syndroMmLeH 1is MchSaHr2acMteSriHz6ed by PgMenSe2tic predisposition to colorectal, terations, such as CpG island hypermethylation. These changes accumulate endometrial and other cancers due to germline mutations of the mismatch over time in the normal tissue, for exampEleS dHueG t o2 m0a1n3y e| nPvAiroRnImSe, nFtRalA faNc-CEr |e pWaiWr gWene.Es SHG., ORG, and . In a subset of patients wi2th9ou1tABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MLH1 MLH1 genetic mutation, constitutional epimutations (i.e. germline from Clendenning et al, utilizing genomic LR-PCR enabled, and direct speci- promoter hypermethylation) have been identified as the cause of Lynch fic sequencing, of both PM
S2  and PM
S2 CL exons. syndromHue.m. Mutat. 2012; 33:180-8 The identification of LS in a panel of 30 patients, at risk of this disease by We first performed a retrospective study in a cohort of 134 unrelated pa- clinical history, was approached by examination of their tumour tissue/DNA tients ( ), and identified the epimutation in two (where available) using immunohistochemical analysis of the 4 MMR prote- probands, with transgenerational trManLsHm1ission of the epigenetic defect in ins, along with assessment of microsatellite instability of the tumour DNA. one case. MLH1 Using the PM
S2  technique outlined above on leukocyte-derived genomic Starting fall 2009, we implemented promoter methylation testing on DNA, PM
S2  gene mutations were identified in 6 unrelated individuals in the a systematic basis with gene analysis in our lab. Thus 160 patients panel of 30 patients: (c.736_741delins [four unrelated families], c.1882C>T, were screened for germline epimutation, and 119 additional DNA samp- and a deletion containing exons 5-7, i.e. 6/30). All 6 individuals demonstra- les from patients referred to other French institutions and tested negative ted isolated imunohistochemical loss of PM
S2 . No PM
S2  mutations were for genetic mutation were sent to our lab for methylation analysis. Altered identified in 2 further individuals also showing isolated imunohistochemi- MLH1 and/or PM
S2  protein expression was documented for 158 patients cal loss of PM
S2 , and no PM
S2  mutations were identified in any individuals without dMeLleHt1erious genetic mutation. An epimutation was found for 8 pati- (14) showing imunohistochemical loss of both MLH1 and PM
S2 . ents (5 %, 8/158). Immunohistochemical analysis of the MMR proteins followed by blending Somatic promoter hypermethylation is frequently observed in micro- MLPA with sequence analysis can effectively identify deleterious PM
S2  gene satellite unstable sporadic cancers and is commonly used to discriminate m J.uMt.a Ktieolnlys: i Nn oinned.i vCi.d Rueailtsh a: tN roisnke .o Af .LJS. .Stuart: None. D.K. Driman: None. P.J. sporadic from hereditary cancers. However it can also reveal the presence Ainsworth: None. of a germ line epimutation, emphasizing the importance of methylation ana- lysis in germline DNA, especially for patients with multiple or young-onset cancers.Additionally some patients with germline epimutation where not 
P11 .113 tested for somatic hypermethylation due to maintained MLH1 protein ex- Lynch syndrome due to PM
S2  mutations: one clinic‘s experience pression or lack of available tumor sample. Systematic constitutional epi- T. Graham1, J. Cohen1, L. Velsher2; m J.u Ltaetciloenrc t:e Nstoinneg. pMr.o Cverédp tion :b Neo unsee. fSu.l Bina ethrte-sDee scausrmeso.nt: None. J. Tinat: 1Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2North York General Hospital, None. F. Bonnet: None. M. Guillaud-Bataille: None. S. Lejeune: None. E. Toronto, ON, Canada. Barouk-Simonet: None. C. Dugast: None. D. Malka: None. G. Morin: None. M. Mathieu: None. S. Manouvrier: None. T. Frébourg: None. M.P. Buisine: None. PM
S2  is a mismatch repair gene that forms a dimer with MLH1. Whereas MLH1 mutations are found in almost 50% of Lynch syndrome cases, PM
S2  
P11 .111 mutations are a rare cause of this condition. Information regarding the spec- Functional identification of splicing mutations in the exon 10 of trum of disease due to PM
S2  mutations is limited. In our hereditary cancer MLH1, a gene implicated in hereditary colorectal cancer clinic we have 3 PM
S2  families from a total of 44 mutation-proven Lynch O. Soukarieh1, M. Hamieh1, P. Gaildrat1, S. Baert-Desurmont2, T. Frébourg1,2, M. Tosi1, A. families. We discuss each case to show the variability of presentation. These Martins1; cases add to the limited clinical information about Lynch due to PM
S2  muta- 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in tions. We also review some of the basic science evidence to support reduced Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, Case Proband’s cancer Criteria by pedigree PM
S2  mutation penetrance of heterozygous PM
S2  mutations. France. Ovary (endometrioid) 56 y.o. c.730C>T EC Amsterdam II Cecum adenoca 58 y.o p.Gln244X (exon 7) It’s currently known that sequence variations identified in patients can be KA Sigmoid adenoca 29 y.o. None c.1788delA p.lys593fs deleterious by affecting mRNA splicing: either by changing splice sites or c.132_134delAAA by modifying splicing reg ulaMtoLrHy 1e lements, . Here, w e analyzed the effect on ETS. GrahamE: nNdoonmee. tJr.i aCl o46h ey.no:. None. L. AVmelsstheerdr:a mN oIne. P.Glu44_Asn45delinsAsp splicing of all single-substitutions reported on Ethxe v iLveoiden Open Variation Database in the exon 10of (n=22) a geneimplicated in hereditary colorectal cancer (also called Lynch Syndrome). splicing assays with 
P11 .114 representative minigenes revealed that only 5 out of the 22 tested muta- Lynch Syndrome among Ashkenazi Jews tions had no effect on splicing. Among the splicing alterations induced by Y. Goldberg1, I. Kedar2, R. Kariv3, N. Halpern1, M. Plesser1, L. Kaduri1, M. Sagi4, I. Lerer4, the remaining 17 mutations, we detected the following events: (i) creation T. Hamburger1, A. Hubert1, E. Pikarsky5, D. Abeliovich4, I. Solar6, H. Strul3, G. Rosner3, H. of internal splice site, (ii) increased exon inclusion, and (iii) increased exon Baris2,7, Z. Levi8,7, T. Peretz1; skipping. Mutations located outside splice sites but inducing exon inclusion 1Sharret Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, or skipping were further analyzed by using a completely heterologous mi- Israel, 2The Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3Department of Gastroenterology, TASMC, Tel Aviv, nigene particularly sensitive to the presence of exonic splicing regulatory Israel, 4Department of Human Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, sequences. Results suggest that indeed those mutations alter splicing regu- Jerusalem, Israel, 5Department of Pathology, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical latory elements. We could confirm the drastic impact on splicing of one of School, Jerusalem, Israel, 6Department of Pathology, TASMC, Tel Aviv, Israel, 7Sackler these mutations by analyzing a RNA sample from a patient. InterMesLtHin1gly, School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 88Gastroenterology Division, in this case, we observed not only increased skipping of exon 10 but also Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel. of exons 9-10 and 10-11. Our results indicate that the exon 10 of is very sensitive to splicing mutations. Moreover, this study contributes to the m Oo. lSeocuuklaarr ideiha:g Nnoonseis. Mof. hHearmedieitha:r Nyo cnoel.o Pr.e Gctaaill dcraantc: eNro.ne. S. Baert- Lynch Syndrome (LS) is caused by mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes. Desurmont: None. T. Frébourg: None. M. Tosi: None. A. Martins: None. Diagnosis is not always trivial and may be costly. Knowledge of incidence, genotype-phenotype correlation, spectrum of mutations and genes involved in specific populations, facilitates the diagnostic process and contributes to 
P11 .112 clinical work-up. Aim: To report the unique features of LS, gene distribution, Elimination of pseudogene interference in a PM
S2  mutation screen. mutations detected and co-occurrence of related syndromes in Ashkenazi Validation in patients at risk for Lynch Syndrome in Ontario, Canada. Jews. METHODS: Patients were studied in high risk clinics. Diagnostics fol- J. M. Kelly1, C. Reith1, A. J. Stuart1, D. K. Driman2, P. J. Ainsworth2; lowed a multi-step process. It included testing for founder mutations, tumor 1London Health Sciences Centre, Mol Dx Lab., London, ON, Canada, 2Dept. Pathology, testing, gene sequencing and MLPA. LS was defined by positive tumor analy- LHSC/Western University., London, ON, Canada. sis and/or positive mutation testing. RESULTS: We descriMbeS Ha 2cohort of 120 carriers MfrSoHm6 75 Ashkenazi families wMithLH 
L1 S. Mutations were identified in 51/75 (68%) families. 36 families harbored mutations in , 9 had muta- Lynch Syndrome (LS) is characterized by mutations in the DNA mismatch tions in , and 6 had mutations in . 37/51 (73%) families carried repair genes MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, and PM
S2 . However the identification of one of the 3 ‚Ashkenazi‘ founder mutations in MSH2 or MSH6. Each of the PM
S2  specific mutations is challenged by a wealth of pseudogenes, along other 14 families carried a private mutation. 3 (6%) were large deletions. with the allelic diversity of the 3’ region of PM
S2 , a complexity which has Only 25/75 (33%) families were Amsterdam Criteria positive, 62 (83%) probably lead to under-reporting PM
S2  gene mutations as a cause of LS. We were Bethesda positive and 13 (17%) did not comply with any clinical cri- describe a technique to characterize the PM
S2  gene which combines MLPA teria. We report C-MMRD and co-occurrence of BRCA and LS in our cohort. a2n9al2ysis utilizing SNP-specific probes, along wiEthS mHeGth 2od0o1lo3gy |, PadAaRptIeSd, FRCAONNCCLUES |I OWNSW: MWut.aEtSioHn Gsp.eOctRruGm and gene distribution among AshkenaziABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .117 MSH2 MSH6 MLH1 Copy Number Alterations in Small Intestinal Neuroendocrine Jews are unique. Three founder mutations cause LS in 73% families with Neoplasms Determined by Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization known mutations. and cause the majority of cases, while J. Hashemi1, O. Foutohi1, L. Sulaiman1, M. Kjellman2,3, A. Höög1, J. Zedenius1,3, C. Larsson1; comes third. These features affect the phenotype, the diagnostic process, 1Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center Karolinska, rYis. kG oesldtbimeragt:i oNno,n aen. dI. gKeendeatri:c N coonuen. sRe. lKinagr.iv: None. N. Halpern: None. M. Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Molecular Medicine Plesser: None. L. Kaduri: None. M. Sagi: None. I. Lerer: None. T. Hamburger: and Surgery , Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska University None. A. Hubert: None. E. Pikarsky: None. D. Abeliovich: None. I. Solar: None. H. Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery , Karolinska Strul: None. G. Rosner: None. H. Baris: None. Z. Levi: None. T. Peretz: None. Institutet, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
P11 .115 Small intestinal neuroendocrine neoplasms (SI-NENs) are typically slow- One next generation sequencing panel for all patients suspected of growing neoplasms that have metastasized already at the time of diagnosis. hereditary cancer To further define regions of recurrent copy number (CN) alterations (CNA), Y. J. Vos, B. Sikkema-Raddatz, K. K. v. Dijk-Bos, P. v. Norel, L. F. Johansson, E. N. de Boer, H. we applied array CGH on SI-NENs including 18 primary tumors and 12 me- Westers, A. H. v.d. Hout, R. J. Sinke, R. H. Sijmons; tastases. The most frequent abnormality was loss on chromosome 18 obser- University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. ved in 70% of cases. CN losses were also frequently found on chromosomes 11 (23%), 16 (20%), and 9 (20%), with regions of recurrent CN loss identi- fied in 11q23.1-qter, 16q12.2-qter, 9pter-p13.2 and 9p13.1-11.2. Gains were Phenotypes of many hereditary tumour syndromes are known to overlap. In most frequently detected in chromosomes 14 (43%), 20 (37%), 4 (27%), addition, different genes may underlie one syndrome. Therefore the num- and 5 (23%) with recurrent regions of CN gain located to 14q11.2, 14q32.2- ber of genes to examine in a particular clinical case can be large. In current 32.31, 20pter-p11.21, 20q11.1-11.21, 20q12-qter, 4 and 5. Quantitative diagnostic and reimbursement settings, the number of genes that can be PCR analysis confirmed most CNAs detected by a-CGH as well as revealed analysed for one patient through Sanger sequencing is limited. Next genera- CNAs in an extended panel of SI-NENs. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering tion sequencing offers novel possibilitiesto analyse large numbers of genes of recurrent regions of CNAs revealed two important tumor groups and 5 in parallel at relatively low cost. We developed a kit based on Agilent Sure chromosomal clusters. Loss in chromosomes 20, 18, 16 and 11 were found Select Target Enrichment for simultaneous mutation detection in 73 genes in both tumor groups. Tumor group II was enriched for alterations in chro- that have previously been associated with tumour syndromes. The kit has mosome cluster D, including gain on chromosomes 4, 5, 7, 17 and gain on 20 been validated by two series of twelve patients with known variants identi- in chromosome cluster B. Gain on 20pter-p11.21 was associated with short fied through Sanger sequencing of the BRCA or the Lynch syndrome genes. survival. Statistically significant differences were observed between prima- In addition, a set of twelve breast or colorectal cancer patients was analysed ry tumors and metastases for loss on 16q and gain on 7.In conclusion, our anonymously for all 73 genes. results revealed several CNAs in recurrent candidate regions with a potenti- The samples were sequenced using 151 bp paired-end reads on an Illumi- al role in SI-NEN development. Distinct genetic alterations and pathways are na MiSeq sequencer and analysed using the Next gene software and Carta- involved in tumorigenesis of SI-NENs. genia. All pathogenic mutations, unclassified variants and polymorphisms J. Hashemi: None. O. Foutohi: None. L. Sulaiman: None. M. Kjellman: previously detected were identified. Furthermore, 40 novel variants that None. A. Höög: None. J. Zedenius: None. C. Larsson: None. were identified in twelve anonymous patients could be confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The Cartagenia software allows blocking the analysis of certain genes. For 
P11 .118 diagnostic purposes genes within the panel have been defined for filtering, Gallbladder Cancer Predisposition: A Multigenic Approach involving e.g. depending on the availability of preventive options. The genes to be ana- Inflammatory, Xenobiotic and Steroidal receptor genes l Yy.sJe.d V wosi:ll N boen dee. cBi.d Seidk kdeumrian-gR gaedndeattzic: cNoounnes. eKl.lKin. gv .p Driiojkr- Btoo ste: sNtionnge.. P. v. Norel: K. L. Sharma1, S. Misra2, A. Kumar1, B. Mittal1; None. L.F. Johansson: None. E.N. de Boer: None. H. Westers: None. A.H. v.d. 1Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India, Hout: None. R.J. Sinke: None. R.H. Sijmons: None. 2CSMMU, Lucknow, India. 
P11 .116 Introduction: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a multifactorial disease with Influence of VEGF polymorphism -634 G/C on VEGF mRNA expression complex interplay between multiple genetic variants. We analyzed 15 po- and susceptibility to sporadic colon cancer lymorphisms in 9 genes involved in inflammatory, xenobiotic and steroidal T. Cacev, J. Ponos, S. Kapitanovic; receptor pathways to find out combinations of genetic variants contributing Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia. to GBC risk. Methods: The genes included in the study were (MMP-2,7,9) TIMP-2, CY
P1 A1, CY
P1 B1, PLC
E1 , LXR-alpha and LXR-beta. Genotypes were deter- Angiogenesis is one of the six postulated hallmarks of cancer and VasVcuElGaFr mined by PCR-RFLP and Taqman probes. Statistical analysis was done by endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is one of the key mediators of this very SPSSver16. Multilocus analysis was performed by Classification and Regres- complex process. Thusfar no prognostic and predictive markers for sion Tree Analysis (CART) and MDR to identify genetic variants in modifying expression have been established and therefore the prediction of VEGF pro- GBC risk. In-silco analysis was performed using Bioinformatics tools (F-SNP, dVuEcGtFion based on individual genetic background might be useful in the pre- FAST-SNP). diction of disease progression and/or the efficacy of anti-cancer treatment. Results: Single locus analysis by logistic regression showed association of gene is highly polymorphic, with many single nucleotide polymorphis- MM
P2  (-735 C>T, -1306 C>T), MM
P7  -181 A>G, MMP-9 (
P574 R, R668Q), ms (SNPs) that may affect VEGF production aVnEdG/oFr activity and possibly TIM
P2 -418 G>C, CY
P1 A1-MspI, CY
P1 A1-Ile462Val, PLC
E1  (rs2274223 lead to inter-indiviVdEuGaFl d ifferences in tumor development and progression. A>G, rs7922612 T>C) and LXR-beta T>C (rs3546355 G>A, rs2695121 T>C) In this study we have examined the influence of -634 G/C (rs2010963) polymorphisms with GBC risk (pA, rs2695121 T>C), MMP-2 (-1306C>T) VpoElGyFmorphism on mRNA expression as well as susceptibility to spora- and MMP-9 (R668Q) and PLC
E1  rs2274223A>G to be key players in GBC dic colon cancer. causation (p<0.001, CVC=7/10). The results were further supported by in- mRNA expression analysis in tumour tissue was performed by real-ti- dependent CART analysis ((p<0.001). Sub-group analysis based on gender me RT-PCR. VEGF -634 G/C genotyping was performed in 250 patients with and gallstone status showed distinct subsets of genetic signatures in GBC sporadic colon cancer and 250 unrelated healVthEyG Fvolunteers by real-time susceptibility. Insilico analysis revealed variable change in splicing or tran- PVCERGF-SNP analysis. scriptional regulation. A statistically significant correlation betwVeEeGnF mRNA expression and Conclusion: The multigenic approach showed the importance of PLCE 1, -634 G/C genotypes was foundV (EpG=F0 .019). Genotypes carrying the G LXR-beta and MMPs genetic variants and their interactions in contributing allele (GG+CG) were associated with high mRNA VexEpGrFe ssion, while the to GBC risk. CC genotype was associated with low mRNA expression. However, the- G Kr.aLn. tS shuaprmpoar: tN: DonBeT., SD. SMTi sarnad: NICoMneR. A(I.N KDuImA)ar: None. B. Mittal: None. re was no statistically significant association between -634 G/C geno- types and susceptibility to sporadViEcG cFolon cancer. Finally, we can conclude that although in our study VEGF -634 G/C poly- morphism was associated with mRNA expression in sporadic colon t Tu.m Coaucersv :i tN wonaes. n Jo. tP aosnsoosc:i aNteodne w. Sit.h K saupsictaenpotivbiicl:i tNyo tnoe t.his type of cancer. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 293ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .119 Whole genome and whole exome sequencing of gastric cancer CDH1) samples The prognosis of gastric cancer (GC) is poor, the treatment ineffective, and D. Esser1, P. Rosenstiel1, J. Haag2, N. Holze2, S. Schreiber1,3, C. Röcken2; the molecular pathogenesis players vastly unknown. As E-cadherin ( 1Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany, deregulation and Microsatellite Instability (MSI) define two major paths 2Institute for Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany, 33 Department of involved in GC, we characterized and stratified 246 GC cases according to General Internal Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. alterations in these pathways. We systematicalClyD Han1alysed a GC series comprising distinct clinical settings (sporadic, familial) and tumour histological types (intestinal, diffuse), for Gastric cancer is diagnosed in 8% of all cancer cases and causes 10% of the the presence of CD sHtr1uctural alterations (mutations, LOH) and promoter cancer deaths worldwide (Jemal et al.,2011). To further analyze the genetic hypermethylation. Independently of clinical setting and histotype, ~30% of basis of gastric cancer, we sequenced the whole genome of a microsatellite all cCaDsHes1 displayed somatic alterations. Familial intestinal GC (FIGC) stable and a microsatellite unstable gastric carcinoma and the genome of and both histologCiDcaHl1 types of sporadic GC showed methylation and structu- the matched normal tissue samples on the Illumina HiSeq with an average ral alterations, whilst tumours from ChDerHe1ditary diffuse GC HDGC sho- coverage of 49x. In order to increase the read depth in the coding regions wed exclusively methylation. Importantly, the worst patient survival we performed whole exome capture using the Agilent SureSelect Human All rate was seen for FIGC patients carrying structural alterations. MSI Exon v2 kit followed by sequencing on the Solid 4 and received an additional phenotype was significantly different between sporadic (19%) and fami- average coverage of 55x. lial (39%) GC and between intestinal (31.2%) and diffuse (12.8%) GC. MSI Using a comprehensive filter strategy for single nucleotide variants (SNVs) phenotype ocCcDurHr1ed preferentially in FIGC families. Notably, among FIGC fa- and structural variants (SVs) we were able to identify a multitude of novel milies, we identified the group with the woCrDstH s1urvival who presented MSS potentially damaging mutations that are followed up by functional assays. tumours and structural alterations (85.7%), and the group presenting Recurrence is assessed in an independent cohort of gastric cancer patients. the best prognosis with tumours carrying epigenetic alterations and With help of the databases OMIM, HGMD and GWAS we could further de- MSI phenotype (77.8%). tect a great number of known cancer associated SNVs. Pathway (KEGG) and In conclusion, this work pinpointed a somCatDicH 1molecular landscape that functional (GO) analysis of SNVs and SVs were performed using 1087 samp- determines clinical outcome in GC patients. Particularly for FIGC families, les from the 1000 Genomes project as a normal variant matrix. stratification at diagnosis, based on somatic alterations and MSI phe- The results highlight a strategy of an exemplary tumor genome analysis that n Jo. tCyaprev,a mlhaoy: sNiognneif.i cGa.n Ctloyr simo:p Nroonvee. c Dli.n Micaarlr mellai:n Nagoenme. eCn.t V.indigni: None. B. combines both exome and whole genome sequence information with two Carvalho: None. R. Seruca: None. F. Roviello: None. C. Oliveira: None. different NGS platforms, uses population-based whole genome resources as a D n. oEvsesle pr:a Nthownea.y P-b. aRsoesde fnisltteierl :a nNdo nine.t eJg. rHaateasg :S NNoVn aes. Nw. eHllo alzse S: VN aonnea.l ySs.i s. Schreiber: None. C. Röcken: None. 
P11 .122 Molecular classification of gastric cancers using an extended panel of gene amplifications 
P11 .120 M. Minarik1, L. Dusek2, B. Belsanova1, P. Minarikova3, I. Tuckova4, M. Zavoral3, L. Gastric cancer as a part of BRCA1-related syndrome Benesova1; E. N. Suspitsin1,2, V. M. Moiseyenko1, N. M. Volkov1, G. A. Yanus1,2, A. G. Iyevleva1, A. V. 1Genomac Research Institute, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biostatistics and Kornilov1, E. N. Imyanitov1,2,3; Analyses, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Internal clinic, 1st Faculty of 1N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St.-Petersburg Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Military University Hospital, Prague, State Pediatric Medical University, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3I.I. Mechnikov Czech Republic, 4Department of pathology, Military University Hospital, Prague, Czech North-Western Medical University, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Republic. The risk of cancer disease in BRCA1 mutation carriers is believed to be re- Introduction: Gastric cancer represents the third most common malignan- stricted mainly to breasts and ovaries. We screened 65 patients with gastric cy of the gastrointestinal tract in the Czech Republic. Recent advances in cancer (GC) for Russian BRCA1 5382insC founder allele, and identified 2 biological anticancer therapy revealed importance of understanding of tu- (3%) heterozygotes. Both mutation-positive patients demonstrated unu- mor biology underlying its clinical behavior. The standard histopathology sually pronounced and durable response to platinum-containing therapy, categorization into intestinal or diffuse type (lauren classification) is useful and reported personal or family history of breast or ovarian cancer. Patient for assessing general prognosis, especially, uncovering hereditary origin of 1, 60 years old female, was treated by cisplatin/5-fluorouracil, and showed the tumor for subsequent CDH1 testing. It is clear, however, that in order to 66% reduction of tumor size with a time to progression 10.7 months; her estimate therapy response, further evaluation of molecular profiles is highly mother was affected by ovarian cancer. Patient 2, 62 years old female, was desirable. treated by doxorubicin/cisplatin/5-fluorouracil; the reduction of tumor size Aims: In this project we evaluated a large panel of gene amplifications in an was 93%, and the time to progression was 21.9 months; this patient had a attempt to classify gastric cancer tumors. personal history of successfully cured breast cancer at age 44. In accordance Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sections from a total of with the “two-hit” mechanism of inactivation of hereditary cancer gene, 85 patients were subjected to molecular analysis. Gene amplifications were both BRCA1-associated gastric carcinomas showed the somatic deletion of analyzed by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). The the wild-type BRCA1 allele. The involvement of BRCA1 germ-line mutations final panel consisted of a total of 70 common oncogenes and tumor supres- in GC development may be somewhat related to regional attitudes, which sors. The complex patterns were statistically processed by hierarchical data until recently included frequent use of strong alcohol, low intake of fresh clstering using Ward and farthest neighbor method. fruits and vegetables, excessive consumption of fat and salty food, etc. Thus, Results: The overall success rate of DNA extraction from the gastric FFPE based on (1) the elevated frequency of BRCA1 mutations in GC patients, (2) samples was at a level of 85%. Both statistical approaches delivered simi- the pronounced sensitivity of mutation-positive GC to platinum containing larities in data clustering. The resulting dendrograms revealed comparably therapy, and (3) the somatic loss of the wild-type BRCA1 allele in the tumor constituted subclusters of samples. As expected HER2, MYC, p16 and b-CAT tissue, we conclude that some cases of gastric carcinoma may be linked to genes were among the most frequently amplified. B ER.NC.A 
S1 u ssypnitdsrino:m Neo.ne. V.M. Moiseyenko: None. N.M. Volkov: None. G.A. Conclusions: Presence of specific gene amplification may indicate aberrant Yanus: None. A.G. Iyevleva: None. A.V. Kornilov: None. E.N. Imyanitov: None. activation of various signaling pathways, hence, define characteristic tumor behavior. A correlation to monitoring parameters such as progression-free survival or overall survival is ongoing. 
P11 .121 S Mu.p Mpoinrateridk :b Nyo tnhee. CLz. eDcuhs Meki:n Nisotnrye .o Bf .H Beeallstahn gorvaan:t N noon. eN. TP.1 M36in4a0rikova: None. I. Tuckova: None. M. Zavoral: None. L. Benesova: None. Somatic alterations of the E-Cadherin gene predict survival of gastric cancer patients mainly those presenting with familial history J. Carvalho1, G. Corso2, D. Marrelli2, C. Vindigni3, B. Carvalho4, R. Seruca1, F. Roviello2, C. Oliveira1; 
P11 .123 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto Abnormal methylation of tumor-related genes in biopsies of the (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, Unit of gastric mucosa from patients previously operated on gastric cancer. Surgical Oncology, University of Siena and Instituto Toscano Tumori (ITT), Siena, Italy, N. Checunova, T. Kchorobrich, D. Zaletaev, M. Nemtsova; 3Unit of Pathology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 4Department First Moscow Medical Sechenov University, Moscow, Russian Federation. of Pathology, VU University medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. 294 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in silico Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignant tumors in the world. tCioc nmcilsusseinosne: MGMT mutations in Exon 5, leading to 
S151 I, which according GC develops through the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations. to analysis reduced MGMT function. Epigenetic silencing of tumor-related genes, due to hypermethylation of the In summary, we found that there is variation in MGMT exon 5 CpG sites in the promoter regions, has emerged as one of the main genetic in neoplastic tissue which may lead to impaired DNA repair and contribu- alterations in cancer development. Aberrant methylation of tumor-related tTin.Ng. tPoa utenld: eNrolynein. gN m.Ao. lCehcuiklaanr :m Neocnhea.nisms in progression of cancer. genes is one of the early events in carcinogenesis, it can be determined before the clinical manifestation of the tumor. CDH1, RASSF1А, MLH1, N33, DAPK, WRUeN iXn,ve stigated the clinical and prognostic importance of CpG-island hyper- 
P11 .126 methylation in 6 tumor-related genes ( Chromogenic In Situ Hybridization, a viable alternative to FISH, for )for gastric cancer patients. We examined hypermethylation of 6 tumor- detection the HER2neu gene amplification in gastric cancer related genes in 35 frozen biopsies of the gastric mucoCsDa,H o1b, tRaiAnSeSdF d1uАr, iMngL Hen1-, M. Neagu; Ndo3s3c, oDpAicP rKe,s ReaUrNchX,3 f rom patients previously operated on gastric cancer. National Institute of Pathology Victor Babes, Bucharest, Romania. There was no hypermethylatiCoDnH o, fN t3h3e, CRpUGN Xsi3tes of genes in 29 biopsies. In 6/3CD5 Hs1a,m Np3le3s, RwUeN Xh3ave identi- fied aberrant methyClDatHio1n, No3f 3 genes, in 1 patient we hNa3v3e Gastric cancer is one of the most common solid tumours, being the second ideRnUtiNfiXed3 aberrant methylation of three genes ( ), in 2 pa- leading cause of cancer death worldwide, after lung cancer. tients - two genes ( ), in 3 patients - of one methylated gene ( Detection of Her 2 neu amplification, its useful to guide therapy for patients or ). with gastroesophageal cancer, as patients with HER2 amplification may be The current study shows that the hypermethylation of tumor-related genes candidates for Herceptin therapy and to confirm the presence of HER2 am- may be used as additional marker for postsurgical monitoring of gastric can- plification in cases with 2+ HER2 protein overexpression by immunohisto- cNe.r Cphaeticeunntos.va: None. T. Kchorobrich: None. D. Zaletaev: None. M. Nemtsova: chemistry. None. Methods: we collected 55 paraffin-embedded tissue sections of gastric can- cer, for which the HER2 status had been predetermined using immunohi- stochemistry, for this cases determined HER2 gene and chromosome 17 
P11 .124 copy numbers using the dual-color PathVysion HER2 DNA probe set (Abbott Foveolar cells phagocytose apoptotic neutrophils in chronic active Molecular), respectively CISH and the scoring system and interpretation of Helicobacter pylori gastritis. CISH was from - Zytovision. F. Pugliatti1, L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella1, F. Fedele2, V. Procopio1, S. Cara1, R. Caruso2; Immunohistochemistry alone is not sufficient, for determining HER2 status 1Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, Messina, Italy, 2Department of Human in gastric cancer, detection of Her 2 neu amplification it is a useful methodo- Pathology, Medical School, Messina, Italy. logy for confirming ambiguous immunohistochemistry results. CISH is a method for detection of gene amplification using a peroxidase re- action, is more practical alternative, due to lower cost, no requirement of The recognition and removal of apoptotic inflammatory cells by tissue ma- fluorescence microscope, use of existing bright-field microscopy, archivable crophages and non-professional phagocytes, in a process called efferocyto- and quantitative results, it s easy to observe both the tissue morphology and sis, is required for resolution of inflammation and is actively anti-inflamm- the gene amplification evaluation atory. Biopsy specimens from 28 subjects with or without H. pylori infection The CISH results were compared with dual-colour fluorescence in situ hybri- and active inflammation were examined and graded according to the up- disation (FISH) data, there was 98% concordance between CISH and FISH dated Sydney system. Light microscopy, electron microscopy, and Terminal The high concordance, indicates that CISH is a viable alternative to FISH, for Deoxynucleotidyltransferase-Mediated UTP End Labeling staining were d Me.t eNcetaiognu :o Nf HonEeR. 2 NEU gene amplification in gastric cancer. used to identify apoptosis. H. pylori infection was detected by histology and by molecular assay in 16 out of 28 cases. DNA from paraffin-embedded ga- stric biopsies was amplified using primers specific for cagA, for the cag „em- 
P11 .127 pty site“ as well as for the s and m alleles of vacA. The more virulent cagA- The correlation between polymorphism of Toll-Like Receptor 4 and positive strains were found in five out of nine patients with chronic active cytokines TNFα, TLR4, TGFβ, CD14 AND CCR2 and bacterial infections gastritis. The vacA s1/m1 and s2/m1 genotypes were more common in nine in patients with pancreatic cancer in Polish population. patients with chronic active gastritis, while the vacA s2/m2 genotype was M. Durlik1,2, M. Zagozda1,2, M. Fic1,2, M. Nowak-Niezgoda2, W. L. Olszewski1,2; more frequent in seven patients with chronic inactive gastritis. Apoptotic 1Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Science, Warsaw, Poland, neutrophils were also detected within the cytoplasmic vacuoles of the fo- 2Central Clinical Hospital, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Warsaw, Poland. veolar cells of nine cases with chronic active gastritis. Transmission electron micrographs revealed further apoptotic neutrophils within spacious phago- somes of foveolar cells in a similar manner to those described in late-phase Introduction: Toll-Like Receptors, antigen CD14, pro- and anti-inflamm- efferocytosis both in vivo and in vitro. These new observations expand the atory cytokines and chemokines with their receptors are involved in the morphological spectrum of gastritis in patients infected with more virulent mechanism of innate response during bacterial infections. Polymorphism H. pylori strains, compatible with an anti-inflammatory role for the gastric in these genes can cause that their products may be functionally inefficient epithelial cells in their removal of apoptotic neutrophils during active chro- and consequence of this may be tendency of some patient to the develop- n Fi.c P guagsltiraitttiis: .None. L. Rigoli: None. C. Di Bella: None. F. Fedele: None. V. ment of extensive inflammation and sepsis. The aim of study was to research Procopio: None. S. Cara: None. R. Caruso: None. markers of bacterial infections, surgical wound healing disorders or fistula anastomosis in patients operated on pancreatic cancer. Material and me- thods: Genetic polymorphisms was surveyed polymerase chain reactions - 
P11 .125 restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis technique in 62 patients O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase variant in gastric cancer with pancreatic cancer. A control group of 130 blood donors was ethnically samples from Kashmiri population matched to the study and randomly selected to comparing the study data. T. N. Patel, N. A. Chikan; Results: We did not note statistical importance of polymorphic genotypes VIT, Vellore, India. in TNFα (-308G/A), TLR4 (1363C/T), CCR2 (190G/A) and CD14 (-159C/T) Background and aims: genes. Compared with healthy volunteers we observed that polymorphis- ms of TLR4 (1063A/G) gene was statistically significant. Conclusions: Up The Kashmiri population under investigation is a to now we still searching for specific genetic marker for bacterial infection non-migrant population with special social, personal and dietary habits. during pancreatic cancer. Despite of this we are able to determine that TLR4 Gastric cancer along with esophageal cancer accounts more than 60% of ( M10. D63uArli/kG: )N goennee. Mis. cZraugcoiazld tao: pNaonncer. eMa.t iFci cb:a Nctoenreia. lM in. Nfeocwtiaokn-sN.iezgoda: all cancers in the region. O6-methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) the None. W.L. Olszewski: None. enzyme of our interest repairs, O6-Methylguanine (O6-meG), a DNA adduct. Genetic alterations and variants of MGMT gene impair the protein’s ability tMoe rtehmoodvse: alkyl groups from the O6-position of guanine, thereby raising the mutation rate and increasing the risk of cancer. Results: We have analyzed fresh frozen gastric cancer samples for MGMT variation using conventional method followed by PCR product sequencing. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 295 Out of 30 samples we studied, 13 neoplastic tissue harbored soma-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .128 Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency syndrome in Israel caused aPn. dB Socruienn: cNeo, nPeo.l aMn.d N, eglrkaen: tN nounme.b Ae.r N Ne4lk0e2:4 N3o1n4e3. 8P. Krokowicz: None. T. by founder mutations in the MMR genes Banasiewicz: None. D. Godlewski: None. M. Kaczmarek-Rys: None. J. I. Barnes-Kedar1, Z. Levi2,3, H. Toledano4,3, M. Halpern5, I. Lerer6, T. Peretz7, R. Kariv8, E. E. Walkowiak: None. M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska: None. A. Plawski: None. Half9, N. Magal1, K. Wimmer10, Y. Goldberg7, D. Berkovich11, H. N. Baris1,3; 1The Recanati Genetic Institute, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Gastroenterology Division, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 3Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Pediatric Oncology, 
P11 .130 Schneider Children‘s Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 5Department of Pathology, NCL/NPM and BRAF gene structure in metastatic cutaneous Rabin Medical Center, Hasharon Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 6Department of Human Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7Sharett melanoma(CM)patients Institute for Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, E. Zenit-Zhuravleva, A. Lushnikova, I. Tsyganova, I. Mikhailova, E. Cheremushkin, H. 8Department of Gastoenterology & Liver Disease, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Treshalina; Aviv, Israel, 9Gastroenterology Department, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, N.N.Blokhin Cancer Research Center RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. 10Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 11GGA- Galil Genetic Analysis, Kazerin, Israel. Background. Nucleolin/
C23  and nucleophosmin/B23 are major nucleolar MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 PM
S2  argyrophilic proteins involved in carcinogenesis and CM progression. There Heterozygous germline mutations in one of the four mismatch repair (MMR) are none data on 
C23 /B23 encoded genes NCL/NPM in CM. Material and genes, and , cause Lynch syndrome (LS) an auto- methods. DNA samples from 23 СM patient (CMP)metastatic nodes were somal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome conferring a high risk of analyzed by PCR for NCL and NPM genes. Alterations in NCL/NPM gene colorectal, endometrial and other cancers in adulthood (HNPCC). Offspring structure(23 СМ)and 2 human CM xenografts(X)+ BRAF mutations in exon of couples, both having LS, have a high risk to inherit biallelic MMR gene 15(7/23 CM)were studied. Results. Genetic alterations in NCL/NPM were mutations. These cause constitutional MMR deficiency (CMMRD), a severe grouped in several types: (1) two simultaneous nucleotide substitutions recessively inherited childhood cancer syndrome with a very broad tumor (NS) IV
S5 -31G/A+IV
S6 +42G/A in NPM gene - in 13/23 (56%) CMPs and 1/2 spectrum including mostly hematological malignancies, brain tumors and X; (2) NS IV
S8 -63A/G in NPM - in 9/23 (39%) CMPs + two NS from the group childhood colon cancer. Most of CMMRD children also present with café au (1); (3) germinal deletion p.D255delGAT (c. 763-765delGAT) + common po- lait spots and axillary freckling mimicking Neurofibromatosis type 1. lymorphism p.
E149 E in NCL gene + intron structure variant in 1 CMP with We describe our experience in Israel with five CMMRD families. The clinical 4 CM relapses; (4) 1 NS IV
S2 +31G/A in NCL gene. Somatic mutation V600E presentation included: brain tumors at ages 2-19 years, colon cancer at ages BRAF (70% in CM cases) and K600E BRAF + AGT/AAA BRAF were revealed 9-20 years and one patient with lymphoma at age 12 years. InM twSHo 2non-con- in 3/7 and 1/7 CMPs with 2-5 relapses, consequently. Mutation V600E BRAF sanguineous Ashkenazi families, the common founder Ashkenazi mutations in 1CMP was accompany by NS of the group (1) + group (2) in NPM gene; were detected: one familyM wSHa6s .h omozygous for c.1906G>C in and the V600E BRAF in other 1CMP was accompany by analogous NS, except IV
S6 - second family was compound heterozygous for c.3984_3987dupGTCA and 39A/G+-42G/A. Conclusion. Some certain types of NPM and/or NCL gene Pc.M39
S529 _3962delCAAG in In the three otherP cMoSn2sanguineous families, alterations, including NS in NPM and germinal deletion in NCL were found in dMiSffHer6ent homozygous mutations were identified: c.2192T>G (p.
L731 X) in 17/23 CMPs. The data obtained indicate that alterations in NPM/NCL/BRAF , a recurrent mutation among Iranian Jews, c.686_687delCT and g Ee.n Zeesn liitk-Zelhyu troa valsesvoac:i Natoen we.i Ath. Lnuusmhenriokouvs ar:e Nlaopnsee.s I .i nTs CyMgaPnso.va: None. I. 3606_3603 delAGTG were found in large pedigrees of Bedouin and Mikhailova: None. E. Cheremushkin: None. H. Treshalina: None. Arab ancestries, respectively. Given the prevalence of these mutations among the Israeli population, we want to raise the awareness of CMMRD syndrome and open a discussion 
P11 .131 regarding screening for MMR founder mutations among spouses of LS pati- A novel mutation in 3’-UTR of the growth factor independence 1 e I.n Btsa fronre sth-Kee pduarrp: oNsoen oe.f Zp.r eLnevait:a Nl doniaeg. nHo. sTios.ledano: None. M. Halpern: None. I. (Gfi-1) gene in the cutaneous T-cell lymphoma Lerer: None. T. Peretz: None. R. Kariv: None. E.E. Half: None. N. Magal: J. Bienertova Vasku1, V. Vasku2, A. Vasku1; None. K. Wimmer: None. Y. Goldberg: None. D. Berkovich: None. H.N. Baris: 1Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Department of Pathological Physiology, Brno, None. Czech Republic, 2University affiliated Hospital, Clinic of Dermatovenerology, Brno, Czech Republic. 
P11 .129 Increased frequency of allele C of rs7074064 in patients with Background: The growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1) has recently attrac- colorectal cancer. ted a lot of attention attention due to its pivotal effects in lymphopoiesis and P. Borun1, M. Nelke2, A. Nelke2, P. Krokowicz3, T. Banasiewicz4, D. Godlewski5, M. myelopoiesis. The aim of the study was to investigate possible associations Kaczmarek-Rys1, J. Walkowiak6, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, A. Plawski1; of variability in the Gfi-1 gene with cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL). 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of General and Methods: 63 patients with CTCL (30M/33F, median age 62y, 26-101y) dia- Gastroenterological Surgery, K. Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences,, Poznan, gnosed and treated at the 1st Department of Dermatology of the St Ann’s Poland, 3†Department of General and Colorectal Surgery, K. Marcinkowski University of Faculty Hospital Brno were sequenced for the Gfi-1 gene and the sequences Medical Sciences,, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of General Surgery, Gastroenterological were then compared to the database sequence and the sequency of sex- and Oncological Surgery and Plastic Surgery, K. Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences,, Poznan, Poland, 5Center of Cancer Prevention and Epidemiology, Poznan, age-matched controls (30M/33F, median age 58, age range 26-80y) without Poland, 6I Chair of Pediatrics, Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, K. personal or family history of skin diseases and without signs of malignancy. Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences,, Poznan, Poland. Results: A novel polymorphism 1765C/T in 3´-UTR region of the Gfi-1 gene was identified in several CTCL patients that was not present in the controls. No association of the identified polymorphisms with disease severity and/ Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth most common cancer in the world, or survival of the patients was observed. and it is also considered as the third most common cause of cancer-related Conclusion: Our study indicates that a novel polymorphism 1765 C/T in 3’- deaths. On average, it affects 5-6% of people, and the risk depends on both UTR of Gfi-1 gene might be involved in CTCL ethiopathogenesis, adding Gfi-1 factors related to heredity and lifestyle. to the short list of potential CTCL susceptibility genes. More research into It is assumed that in 20-30% of cases, it is potentially possible to define ge- the role of this variation as well as replication of the observations on larger netic background and 3-5% develop genetically determined bowel syndro- p Jo. pBuielanteiortnosv aw Vitahs dkuif:f eNroennet. eVt.h Vnaicsiktuy: i sN oimnep.e Ara. tViavsek.u: None. mes associated with a high risk of CRC. The search for new genetic factors that increase the risk of the disease is the subject of extensive research in many laboratories. In our study we analyzed the frequency of polymorphis- 
P11 .132 ms in the BMPR1A gene in 200 patients with sporadic colorectal cancer and Update of recent cytogenetic findings in the LeMon5 study we compared them with their frequency in the control group. Rs7074064 K. Shirneshan1, U. Platzbecker2, F. Nolte3, A. Giagounidis4, K. Götze5, F. Braulke1, J. showed a statistically significant increased frequency of allele C and geno- Schanz1, U. Germing6, D. Haase1; type CC in patients with CRC. The frequencies of genotypes for the group of 1Department of Hematology and Oncology, Goettingen, Germany, 2Medical Clinic I, patients and for the control group were respectively TT (31%), TC (62%), University Hospital Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3University Medicine Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany, 4St Johannes Hospital Duisburg, Duisburg, Germany, 5Tech. CC (7%) and TT (65%), TC (33%), CC (2%). The different distributions of University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, genotypes in both groups were statistically significant at P <0.0001. Odds Dresden, Germany. ratio for occurrence of the disease for people with variant C of rs7074064 w2a9s6 estimated at 2.621. The study was financed byE thSeH MGin i2st0ry1 o3f E| dPuAcaRtiIoSn, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Introduction: In the ongoing German multicenter Lemon5-study, the safety and 21 (cca 90% from all mutations) in NCSLC patients, in order to contribu- of lenalidomide monotherapy with special focus on leukemic transformati- te to the selection of patients for the anti-EGFR TKI therapy. oMne itnh IoPdSsS: low risk MDS patients with isolated 5q deletion is examined. Here DNA was extracted from formalin fixed, paraffin embedded lung adenocar- we report on the current cytogenetic results from this study. cinomas sampled from 139 patients. The EGFR mutational status was analy- Cytogenetic investigations were performed using chromosome zed by ARMS-PCR and sequencing. banding and FISH analyses of bone marrow aspirates and CD34+ peripheral Activating mutations were detected in the EGFR gene in 24 tumors (17,26%), bRleosoudl tcse:lls. FISH analyses on blood cells are carried out every 2 to 3 months of which 17 tumors with deletions in exon 19 (2 of them being less-common) using 8 to 13 DNA probes to detect cytogenetic changes during treatment. and 7 tumors with 
L858 R mutation in exon 21; the amount of tumor cells We have already analyzed 146 suspected MDS patients. Only 84 pa- was variable, between 90% and 1%. Patients were between 49 and 86 year tients could be enrolled in this study due to cytogenetic and/or morphologic old, sex distribution was 1:1,66 (9M:15F); 18 of them were non-smokers. screening failures in 62 patients. To date, follow-up data for 53 patients are Our results were in accordance with international data, contributing to an available. A complete cytogenetic response could be observed in 35 patients effective selection of patients with NSCLC forE GthFeR anti-EGFR personalized (66%) after a median follow-up of 15.5 (2-36) months. In eleven patients therapy. (20%) 5q- clone size did not show any changes. Cytogenetic response Further evaluation of the significance of some mutations is needed, in- cCoounlcdl ubesi oobns:e rved within a median of 6 (2-12) months after start of therapy, cluding assessment of the functional importance (clinical and/or predictive lasting for a median duration of 10 (2-25) months. sPig. Anipfoicsatnocl:e N) oonf eth. Ae .l eGsrsi-gcoorme:m Noonne a.c Mti.v Sattionicge ma:u Ntaotnioe.n Vs.. Celmare: None. G. FISH analysis on CD34+ pb cells allows a reliable frequent and Cardos: None. relevant genetic monitoring of treatment response to lenalidomide and to iKde. nSthiifryn ceysthoagne:n Neotince n. oUn. -Prleastpzboencskee or:r Nporoneg.r eFs. sNioonlte a:s N eoanrely. Aas. Gpioasgsoibulnei.dis: None. K. Götze: None. F. Braulke: None. J. Schanz: None. U. Germing: 
P11 .136 None. D. Haase: None. The importance of the 
P53 , 
P16 , CDH1 and PP
P2 R1A genes analysis in grade III endometrioid carcinomas C. Cieza-Borrella1, M. Fernández-Prieto1, M. Núñez-Casado1, V. Streinu1, M. Sancho-de- 
P11 .133 Salas2, V. Sancho-de-Salas3, Á. García-Iglesias3, R. González-Sarmiento1; Dog, a spontaneous model for human cancers: example of histiocytic 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Medicina. IBMCC-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Anatomía Patológica. Hospital Clínico Universitario de Salamanca, sarcomas Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia. Hospital Clínico Universitario B. Hedan1,2, E. Cadieu1,2, C. de Brito1,2, P. Devauchelle3, J. Abadie4, H. Parker5, A. Guillory1,2, de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. L. Lagoutte1,2, J. Donadieu6, F. Galibert1,2, E. Ostrander5, C. Andre1,2; 1Institut de Génétique et Développement, UMR 6290 CNRS, Rennes, France, 2Université de Rennes1, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France, 3MICEN VET 58 rue August Perret 94000, Creteil, France, 4Laboratoire d’Histopathologie Animale, ONIRIS, Ecole Nationale Endometrial carcinomas are classified in two groups based on clinical and Vétérinaire, Nantes, France, 5Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research pathologic characteristics: endometrioid (EC) (grade I, II and III) and no en- Institute, NIH,, Bethesda, MD, United States, 6Service Hemato-Immuno-Oncologie, dometrioid (NEC) (grade III). EC usually show mutations in PTEN (35-50%), Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. PIK3CA (36%), BRAF (5-20%), KRAS (15-30%) and CTNNB1 (20-40%) ge- nes whereas there are other genes more associated with NEC but sometimes mutated in EC as well: 
P53  (10-20%), 
P16  (10%), CDH1 (10-20%) and PP- Dogs spontaneously develop many cancer types presenting the advantage to 
P2 R1A (5%) genes. We have analyzed these genes in a group of ECs in order be homologous to human cancers, breed specific and frequent in the predis- to determine if the mutation frequency is associated to the tumor grade. posed breeds. These features reflect the fact that predisposing genes could We extracted DNA, RNA and total proteiinns sfírloicmo 53 ECs: 23 grade I, 23 grade be tracked in these genetic isolates more easily than in humans. Faced to II and 7 grade III. We analyzed these 9 genes by PCR, CSGE-heteroduplex and limitations in the use of classical rodent cancer models, Dog who offers a sequencing. Moreover, we performed analysis, allelic pertenence physiopathology closer to humans, gives the opportunity to decipher the and expression protein studies to characterize the novel mutations found. natural steps of tumorigenesis from genetic predispositions to acquired ab- Our results are showed in the annexed table. We found that 14.28% of grade normalities and to investigate new therapies. III EC cases carry 4 or more mutated genes and that all cases show at least We illustrate the power of this original model with the study of canine hi- one of these genes mutated. stiocytic sarcomas (HS). These tumours present striking breed specificity: In conclusion, we report that there is a correlation between the number of HS mainly affects Bernese Mountain dogs (> 25%), while in Human, HS are mutations and the kind of mutated genes and EC tumor grade. Therefore, we extremely rare and poorly known. suggest that 
P53 , 
P16 , CDH1 and PP
P2 R1A genes analysis could help in EC Thanks to the collection of over 3000 DNA samples, we proposed an oligoge- grade discrimination. nic transmission for this cancer (Abadie et al. 2009) and performed genome Funded by FIS PI 10/00219 wide association studies which allowed us to identify 2 major loci involved PTEN PIK3CA BRAF KRAS CTNNB1 
P53  
P16  CDH1 PP
P2 R1A in HS predisposition. These loci are under investigation: one of them is or- EC associated genes NEC associated genes thologous to the human region 9p21 (Shearin et al. 2012). To get a complete view of pathways involved in the tumorigenesis, CGH and RNA sequencing G. I 65.21% 34.38% 0% 17.39% 34.78% 8.69% 0% 0% 4.34% G. II 60.86% 4.34% 0% 21.73% 13.04% 17.39% 0% 0% 8.69% analyses are ongoing to identify tumour progression alterations. Recurrent GC. .I ICIie7z1a.-4B2o%rre2l8la.5: 7N %one. 0 M%. F2e8rn.5á7n%dez-
P0 r%ieto: 2N 8o .5n 7e %. M1.4 N.2ú8ñ%ez-0C%asad1o4: .28% alterations have been identified among which deletions of CDKN2a and None. V. Streinu: None. M. Sancho-de-Salas: None. V. Sancho-de-Salas: PTEN (Hedan et al 2011). None. Á. García-Iglesias: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. All together, these genetic analyses are thought to gain a better understan- d Bin. Hg eodf athn:e Npohnyes.i oEp. aCtahdoileoug:y N aonnde .g Cen. deeti cBsr iotof :H NSo inne d. oPg. sD bevuat uaclshoe lilne :h Nuomnaen. Js.. Abadie: None. H. Parker: None. A. Guillory: None. L. Lagoutte: None. J. 
P11 .137 Donadieu: None. F. Galibert: None. E. Ostrander: None. C. Andre: None. High-grade endometrial stromal sarcomas show distinct molecular features compared with the other subtypes of endometrial stromal tumors 
P11 .135 J. Przybyl1,2,3, M. Kowalewska1, E. Bakula-Zalewska4, B. Dewaele2, A. Quattrone2, V. Detecting mutations in the EGFR gene in lung adenocarcinomas in Vanspauwen2, A. Danska-Bidzinska5, P. Rutkowski6, J. A. Siedlecki1, M. Bidzinski7, M. order to guide personalized therapy with tyrosine-kinase inhibitors. Debiec-Rychter2; P. APOSTOL, A. Grigore, M. Stoicea, V. Celmare, G. Cardos; 1Department of Molecular Biology, The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Personal Genetics - Medical Genetics Center, BUCHAREST, Romania. Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Pathology, The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of The EGFR gene codifies the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor, a transmem- Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Warsaw Medical brane tirosine-kinase glycoprotein, involved in cell growth and differentia- University, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and Melanoma, tion. Mutations in exons 18-21 of the EGFR gene - identified in 10-30% of The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Caucasian patients with non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NCSLC) - trigger Warsaw, Poland, 7Faculty of Medicine, University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Poland. constitutive activation of the EGFR receptor, playing a crucial role in tumor progression. The EGFR mutational status is a predictor of benefit for the new personalized therapy with anti-EGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKI). Endometrial stromal tumors (ESTs) are the second most common mesen- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 297 The aim of our study was to analyse the EGFR mutational status in exons 19 chymal tumors of the uterus. The current classification of ESTs divides theseABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tumors into three modalities: the most benign endometrial stromal nodules, demonstrate the differences between samples from primary and metastatic low-grade endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) and undifferentiated uteri- tissues from one patient with ES. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used ne sarcomas (UES), which are characterized by the most aggressive clinical to analyze biological processes and to identify molecular mechanisms par- course. Over 50% of classical ESS cases carry characteristic chromosomal ticipating in the development of ES. We identified differentially expressed translocations that involve genes encoding polycomb group (PcG) proteins. isoforms (CAV1, STAT3) and highlighted their potential roles in tumor pro- On the other hand, UES do not show the evidence of specific chromosomal gression and/or metastatic processes. We identified contributors to tumo- aberrations. Recently, a new t(10;17)(q22;p13) which results in YWHAE- rigenesis, such as fatty acid metabolism and highlighted important enzymes FAM22A/B fusion formation has been reported in cases described as “high- in ES tumor progression (CDK1, AKT1). Subsequent IPA Upstream Regulator grade ESS”, due to clinicopathological features intermediate between classi- Analysis enabled prediction of the activity state of several other transcrip- cal low-grade ESS and UES. tion factors (such as SREBF1, PPARG
C1 B) as well as activity of cytokines In the present study, we performed gene expression microarray experiments (I
L1 RN, I
L6 , EDN1) and growth factors (BM
P4 , FGF10) that altogether may on 11 ESTs cases using the Agilent Technologies platform, in order to inve- contribute to the pathological context observed in this patient. We identified stigate the genetic profiles of distinct ESTs subtypes. Our cohort included 4 sets of connected upstream regulators (such as MBTP
S1  that connects to classical low-grade ESS cases with typical translocations, 4 UES cases and SREBF1 and SREBF2) that can work together to elicit the gene expression 3 cases which were classified as high-grade ESS based on the histological changes observed in this dataset and induce key molecular changes for me- features and the presence of YWHAE-FAM22A/B fusion. Hierarchical clu- tastasis. The data presented here is from one patient, therefore similar stu- stering analysis of our microarray data revealed that high-grade ESS formed dies are needed to understand if these insights are supported by data from a separate sub-cluster with a distinct molecular profile as compared with o Jth. eBri lElawudin: gA S. aErmcpolmoyam peantti e(fnutlls o. r part-time); Significant; Ingenuity Systems. S. the low-grade ESS and UES cases. High-grade ESS cases were characterized Tugendreich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ingenuity Systems. D. Toburen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ingenuity Systems. predominantly by decreased expression level of a subset of genes related to immune response and cell adhesion. Our results support the notion that the current ESTs classification should discriminate high-grade ESS as a distinct s Ju. bPtryzpyeb.yl: None. M. Kowalewska: None. E. Bakula-Zalewska: None. B. 
P11 .140 Dewaele: None. A. Quattrone: None. V. Vanspauwen: None. A. Danska- A novel full promoter 1B deletion of APC gene in Bulgarian Familial Bidzinska: None. P. Rutkowski: None. J.A. Siedlecki: None. M. Bidzinski: Adenomatous Polyposis Family None. M. Debiec-Rychter: None. T. K. Kadiyska1,2, T. Todorov2, S. Bichev3, R. Vazharova3, A. Nossikoff2, A. Savov3, V. Mitev1; 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemitry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital „Maichin Dom“, Sofia, Bulgaria. 
P11 .138 Refining the breakpoints in translocations including the 3q26-28 chromosomal region using Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes. D. Costa1, C. Muñoz1, A. Carrió1, C. Gómez1, A. Arias1, J. Grau2, S. Álvarez3, E. Campo1, B. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited condition causing Nomdedeu1; multiple intestinal polyps and predisposition to colorectal cancer. Most ca- 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 2Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Barcelona. ses are caused by mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Catalonia, Spain, 3Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid., Spain. Over 1500 mutations have already been identified, however routine genetic Background: testing fails to detect causative mutations in about 10% of classic FAP ca- ses. Recently, it has been shown that a proportion of mutation negative FAP Myelodysplastic SyMndDrSo1m/EeVs I(1MDS) and Acute Myeloid Leu- cases bear molecular changes in deep intronic and regulatory sequences, kaemia (AML) share common tranTslhoeca otibojnesc,t iinvveolving the 3q21-26 region, warranting targeted genetic testing of these regions. and suggesting that EVI1 and/or rearrangements may be asso- In this study, we used direct sequencing, followed by MLPA of genomic DNA ciated with an adverse prognosis. of our study was to reEfVinI1e from a proband and his father, referred for genetic testing as both of them the cMhDroSm1osomal breakpoints in the 3q26-28 regiMona tweritiha lt ahne du sMee otfh oBdacs- were affected by classic FAP. We found peak area decrease in two of the terial Artificial Chromosomes (BACs), and to determine whether the MLPA probes, corresponding to promoter 1B deletion in both patients. In and genes were included in the breakpoints. : order to determine the boundaries of the deletion, we conducted a whole- In 9 patients, with either AML(n=5), MDS (n=3) or chronic myelomonocy- genome oligonucleotide array and long range PCR. The exact breakpoints tic leukaemia (CMML)(n=1), the following translocations: t(2;3)(p21;q26) of the above deletion were identified by direct sequencing as follows - ge- (n=2), t(2;3)(p21;q27)(n=1), t(2;3) (p23;q26)(n=2), t(3;7)(q
E2 V6I;1q2M1)D, tS(3;8) nomic position: chr5: g.112,061,394_112,083,285del21,890 insTTGCTC- (MqY2N7N;q24), t(3;10)(q28;q23) ,t(3;12) (q26;p13) were observed. A set of 5 TATGACCAATT. We performed Real-time PCR assay and Allele specific ex- BRAesCus ltwse:re used to cover the 3q26.2 region, including the , and pression analysis to investigate the total APC expression levels. Thus, the genes, and the BAC R
P44 B17 to test the 2p21 region. APC promoter 1B deletion was associated with reduced expression of total The breakpoints were precisely established only for one translo- APC mRNA levels in the patient’s blood samples. cation, t(2;3)(p21;q27), within the BAC R
P11 -415B12 at the 3q26.2 region, In this family, we found a novel deletion affecting the full sequence of pro- including the MDS gene and within the BAC RP 44B17 at the 2p21region moter 1B. To the best of our knowledge such mutation has not been repor- with no genes described. The breakpoints in the 2p21 region for the other ted yet. Furthermore, the APC gene expression was clearly reduced, which 4 translocations were locatedM inD rSe1gions more centrMomYNerNic than the BAC RP i Tn.dKi.c Kataedsi ycsakuas:a Ntiovnee r.e Tla. tTioodnosrhoipv:. None. S. Bichev: None. R. Vazharova: 44B17.The breakpoints in the 3q26.2 region for the other 8 translocations None. A. Nossikoff: None. A. Savov: None. V. Mitev: None. included MBAYCNSN involving the Conclu gseionne :(n=2) the gene (n=1), regi- ons more centromEeVrIi1c than the EVI1 gene (n=2) and regions more telomeric than the genMe D(nS=13). BACs covering the 3q26.2 region 
P11 .141 revealed that the gene was not involved in any of the translocation bre- Identification and characterization of miRNAs and mRNA targets in a Dk.p Cooinsttsa,: wNhoinlee. tCh.e M uñoz :g Nenonee w. Aas. Cinavrorilóv:e Nd oinne 3. .C. Gómez: None. A. Arias: Glioblastoma multiforme None. J. Grau: None. S. Álvarez: None. E. Campo: None. B. Nomdedeu: None. L. Muñoz Hidalgo1, E. Serna2, T. San Miguel3, R. Gil Benso4, A. Andrés Bordería1, D. Monleón1, M. Cerdá Nicolás4, C. López Ginés5; 1Foundation for research HCU-INCLIVA,Valencia, Spain, Valencia, Spain, 2Central Unit of Medical Research, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 3Department of Pathology, 
P11 .139 University of Valencia ,Spain, Valencia, Spain, 4Department of Pathology ,University of Analysis of Ewing Sarcoma NGS Transcriptome Data Highlights Valencia, Spain, Valencia, Spain, 5Department of Pathology University of Valencia, Spain, Mechanisms of Cancer Valencia, Spain. J. Billaud, S. Tugendreich, D. Toburen; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, United States. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small 20-22 nucleotide-long members these act as regulators of gene expression, and have been implicated in the carcinoge- The Ewing Sarcoma family of tumors is a category of cancers that mostly nesis oncogenetics of a variety of cancers. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) affects adolescents of age 10 to 20. To understand the molecular mecha- is the most common and most aggressive malignant primary brain tumor in nisms of tumorigenesis and metastatic processes in Ewing Sarcoma (ES), humans. Molecular screening for gene amplification revealed frequent am- gene expression profiling of samples from Ewing Sarcoma patients was per- plification of the EGFR, observed in about 35-70% of glioblastomas. formed using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology. In this study In this study, we analyzed miRNAs and mRNAs expression in glioblastoma w2e9 p8resent the results of combined statistical anEd SbHiolGog 2ic0al1 a3na |l yPseAsR thISat, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG multiforme into different groups according the status of EGFR amplification.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index EGFR CD- EGFR KN2A RB1 Forty human biopsies (GBM) were analyzed histopathological, and inmuno- ficantly higher in cases with specific aberrations ( amplification, histochemical characteristics (GFAP, Ki-67, EGFR ) and the status of and deletion, monosomy 10 and trisomy 7) compared to patients amplification by FISH and differential PCR. We have used Genechip Human without these changes. In glioblastoma, monosomy 10 was linked to worse Gene Array containing 28.000 gene-level probe sets and Genechip miRNA clinical course and shorter OS (8.4 months). In oligodendroglial tumors, a Array containing 6703 miRNAs to profile mRNA and miRNA expression in combined deletion 1p36/19q13 was shown as a powerful favorable marker, tumors.Microarrays studies were obtained and normalized with the use of however prognosis was influenced by additional chromosomal aberrations Gene Chip Operating Software and miRNA QC Tool and analyzed using Par- (OS 80.6 vs. 60 months). tek Genomics Suite 6.4 software. Analyses of genomic aberrations significantly contributed to diagnosis and We determined the expression levels of 145 filtered miRNAs in 40 GBM (16 prognosis of the disease in our patients. Therefore, detailed molecular cy- GBM with amplification, 15 GBM with low amplification and 9 no amplifica- togenetic analysis of tumor cells is recommended and should be an integral tion) . El 46, 2 % of miRNAs showed up-regulation and 53,8% of miRNAs part of all gliomas examinations. were down-regulated in the relative analysis. Results indicate that miRNAs SSu.p Rpaonrsteddo rbfoyv NaT: N/1o3ne2.1 Z2.- Z4e amnadn PoRvVa:O NUoKn-eP.2 F7. /KLrFa1m/a1r.: None. L. Lizcova: expression profiles distinguish between GBM into different groups accor- None. Z. Krejcik: None. D. Bystricka: None. H. Buryova: None. P. Hrabal: None. K. Michalova: None. ding the status of EGFR amplification. Our findings indicate that miRNAs are deregulated and changed their levels expression in the different groups suggesting a potential role for these mole- c Lu.l eMsu iñno tzh He ipdaatlghoo:g eNnoensei.s E o. fS tehrins at:u Nmoonre.. T. San Miguel: None. R. Gil Benso: 
P11 .144 None. A. Andrés Bordería: None. D. Monleón: None. M. Cerdá Nicolás: Utility of OCT3/4, TSPY and β-catenin as biological markers None. C. López Ginés: None. for gonadoblastoma formation and malignant germ cell tumor development in dysgenetic gonads I. Palma1, G. Nayeli2, G. Aristi2, G. Queipo3; 
P11 .142 1Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Hospital General de México- Facultad de Medicina UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Hospital General de México, Mexico Exon wise deletion status of tumor suppressor 
P16  gene in high grade City, Mexico. glioma in the Indian population G. K. Chetan, M. K Sibin, C. h. Lavanya, M. Jeru Manoj, I. Dhananjay Bhat; National Institute of Mental Health and Neuroscinces, Bangalore, India. Gonadoblastoma (GB) is regarded as an in situ form of germ cell tumor in dysgenetic gonads (type II GCTs). This type of tumor is thought to be a pre- Since its discovery as a CDKI (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor) in 1993, cursor to seminoma/dysgerminoma tumors. It almost exclusively affects the tumor suppressor p16 (INK4A/CDKN2A) has gained widespread im- a subset of patients with disorders of sex differentiation (DSD). In 35% of portance in cancer. High frequency of p16 gene alterations were observed GB cases, overgrowth of the germinal component leads to dysgerminoma/ in many primary tumors. In human neoplasms, p16 is silenced in at least seminoma . The TSPY gene (testis-specific protein, Y encoded) localized three ways: homozygous deletion, methylation of the promoter, and point within the GBY locus (gonadoblastoma locus on the Y chromosome) has mutation. Gliomas are most common brain tumors occur in the central ner- been shown to be involved in the multistep transformation of germ cells to vous system. Homozygous deletion of p16 gene deletion has been observed GB. However, the precise role that TSPY plays in GB development and its in different grades of glioma especially in high grade glioma. But, the detail involvement in the malignant transformation are not clear . OCT3/4 has Exon wise analysis is not done in correlation with patient survival. been implicated in the GB oncogenic process, but the molecular details of Our study aimed to perform Multiplex PCR in 50 high grade glioma samples, OCT3/4 deregulation are still unknown. Analysis of OCT3/4, E-cadherin and to see status of homozygous deletion in Indian patients. 20% of the patients β-catenin showed that the proliferation of immature germ cells in GB may showed deletion of p16 as compared to world reports ( 33-74%) and in con- be due to the interaction between OCT3/4 and accumulated β-catenin in the sistent with Asian reports ( 17-46%). The exon wise deletions status for 1, 2 nuclei of the immature germ cells, leading to the development of invasive and 3 is 10, 4 and 8 percentage respectively. Exon 1 and 3 deletion is found behavior and the progression of GB into dysgerminoma/seminoma in dys- to be higher in the Indian patients, as compared to the world literature ( genetic gonads. In the present study, to determine whether TSPY participa- exon 2 deletion is predominant) . We recommend to screen all 3 exons of tes in the OCT3/4-β-catenin pathway in the dysgenetic gonad and whether p16 for Indian patients. The survival status of these patients in relation to OCT3/4 and β-catenin are expressed in the dysgenetic gonad, we analyzed the p16 deletions is underway to understand the prognostic value of our 18 dysgenetic gonads from DSD patients with mixed gonadal dysgenesis and f Gin.dKi.n Cghse.tan: None. M. K Sibin: None. C. h. Lavanya: None. M. Jeru Manoj: c Io. mPaplmarae:d N tohneem. G w. iNtha yGeBli :a Nnodn dey. sGg.e Armrisintio: mNoan/es.e Gm. iQnoumeipao t:u Nmoonres.. None. I. Dhananjay Bhat: None. 
P11 .145 
P11 .143 No association between gr/gr deletion and susceptibility to Testicular Genomic changes in 295 patients with diffuse gliomas Germ Cell Tumor in a Norwegian population S. Ransdorfova1, Z. Zemanova2, F. Kramar3, L. Lizcova4, Z. Krejcik1, D. Bystricka4, H. I. Holm1, S. Naderi2,1, K. L. Eiklid1, T. B. Haugen2, W. Kristiansen2; Buryova4, P. Hrabal3, K. Michalova1,4; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Oslo and 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of Akershus University College of Applied Sciences, Oslo, Norway. Oncocytogenetics,General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine,Charles Introduction: University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Central Military Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Center Testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) is the most common ma- of Oncocytogenetics, General University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles lignancy in young men, but the etiology is unclear. Development of TGCT is University, Prague, Czech Republic. most probably multi-factorial and an underlying genetic predisposition has been suggested by family studies. The current age-adjusted incidence rate of TGCT in Norway is 11:100 000 male persons per year, and is the highest Diffuse gliomas form a heterogenous group of primary neuroepithelial brain worldwide. In epidemiological studies male infertility has been shown to be tumors with non-random mutations, loss of heterozygosity, deletions and/ associated with TGCT. Nathanson et al. (2005) found that presence of gr/gr or amplifications of chromosomal regions found in glial tumor cells. Iden- deletion, a 1.6 Mb deletion on the Y chromosome strongly associated with tification of specific genomic changes by combination of I-FISH and SNP-A infertility, was associated with a twofold increased risk of TGCT. Our aim methods could help in assessment of diagnosis and predict of tumor pro- wMaast etroi ainl vaenstdi gmatee tah opdoss:s ible association with gr/gr deletion and TGCT in gression. our Norwegian dataset. During 2004-2012, we examined fresh non-fixed tissue specimeTnPs 5o3f 2
C9 D5- We investigated 616 Norwegian Caucasian men KpaNt2ieAn, tRsB w1ith histologically confirmed glialE tGuFmRors (WHO grade I-IV). For with TGCT, divided in 304 seminomas and 312 non-seminomas. 814 healthy detection of the most frequent cytogenetic changes (deletion of , blood donors were included as controls. Multiplex PCR with three different , 1p36/19q13.3, amplification of , trisomy 7 and monosomy mReasrukletrss: (SY1191, SY1206 and SY1291) in the AZFc- region were used to 10) we used I-FISH with specific DNA probes (Abbott Molecular). Unbalan- determine the presence of the gr/gr deletion. ced changes in 60 cases were specified by whole genome SNP-A (Human- Preliminary results show that the prevalence of gr/gr deletion in CytoSNP-12 BeadChip; Illumina). Results of molecular-cytogenetic analyses TGCT patients was 2.6% (3% seminoma and 2.2% non-seminoma) compa- were correlated with morphological and clinical findings. red to 2.9% in controls. No statistically significant difference in frequency of In WHO Grade II and III tumors, the risk oEf mSHaliGgn 2an0t 1pr3o g| rPesAsiRonIS w, aFsR siAgnNi-CEg |r /WgrW deWlet.iEoSn HbeGtw.OeeRn Gpatients and controls (OR=0.88, 95% CI=0.46-219.697,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index p S. Odent1; p p 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Rennes Sud University Hospital, Rennes, France, 2Molecular =0.69), or between seminoma and non-seminoma (OR=1.00, 95% CI=0.46- Genetic Department, Rennes University Hospital Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 
C2 .o1n9c, lu=si0o.9n9: and OR=0.76, 95%CI=0.32-1.77, =0.52, respectively) were 3Department of Pathology, Bicêtre University Hospital, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 4Department of Pediatric Surgery, Bicêtre University Hospital, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, found. France, 5Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Rennes Sud University Hospital, The presence of gr/gr deletion does not seem to influence risk Rennes, France. o I.f HToGlCmT: iNno an eN. oSr.w Neagdiearni: p Noopnuel.a Kti.oLn. .Eiklid: None. T.B. Haugen: None. W. Kristiansen: None. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an aggressive hepatic neoplasm that most commonly affects adults. In contrast to adults, most paediatric HCCs arise 
P11 .146 without liver abnormalities or pre-existing cirrhotic diseases. So extremely Ffrequency and spectrum of chromosome aberrations and rare, liver tumours such as HCC and also slightly more frequent hepatobla- micronuclei in peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with head stoma, could occur AinP Cfamilial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an inherited and neck tumors and relapse of breast cancer during the course of autosomal dominant disorder due to germline mutations in the adenoma- neutron therapy tous polyposis coli ( ) gene. To our knowledge, only 10 cases of HCC were A. Melnikov1, S. Vasilyev2, L. Musabaeva1, V. Velikaya1, O. Gribova1, L. Urazova1, I. sAoP fCa r reported in FAP patients. Because of its rarity, the pathogenesis of liver Lebedev2, E. Choynzonov1; 1Research Institute of Oncology SB RAMS, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of tumours in FAP patients remains undefined although biallelic inactivation of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. was already described unlike in sporadic cases. We report the case of a 16-year-old patient with an 18.5 cm encafprasumleasthedif tHACPCC occurring without underlying hepatic disease. Right hepatectomy was performed following by Neutron therapy is an effective treatment for patients with radioresistant tu- chemotherapy and sorafenib. A germline mutation (codon mors, however cytogenetic monitoring of cancer patients during the course 1280) was identified in the proband, actually inherited from his mother suf- have not been performed. Cytogenetic aberrations in peripheral blood lym- fering from a duodenal polyposis after coloproctectomy at 37 but with no phocytes were investigated in 17 patients with head and neck tumors and contact anymore. Whereas an activating beta-catenin soAmPaCtic mutation was 12 patients with relapse of breast cancer during the treatment by neutron found in the tumour, we discuss the role of APC/beta-catenin pathway in the therapy. The treatment course specified 5.5-8.4 Gy by 4 fractions with 1.3-2.4 hepatic caArPciCnogenesis in this patient after sequencing and LOH analy- Gy per first fraction for patients with head and neck tumors and 4.8-8.0 Gy sis in the tumour. This report revived the debate of the mutually exclusive nCa.t Aurbea doife : No naen.d B b. eGtear-yca: tNeonnine. mMu. tBaltaiyoanus:. None. C. Guettier: None. S. by 3-4 fractions with 1.4-1.6 Gy per first fraction for patients with relapse of Branchereau: None. V. Gandemer: None. C. Dugast: None. S. Odent: None. breast cancer. There were three time points: before treatment, 24 h after the first fraction and at the end of the neutron therapy. Chromosomal aberration analysis was performed according to standard protocol in the first mitosis of PHA-stimulated lymphocytes. Cytokinesis-blocked micronucleus test was 
P11 .149 performed in combination with FISH using a pancentromeric DNA probe. It Different pattern of RET proto-oncogene mutations in Iranian was shown that chromosome-type aberrations were prevalent among cyto- Patients with hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma genetic abnormalities both before and after neutron therapy. Level of chro- M. Hedayati, M. Zarif Yeganeh, S. Sheikholeslami, S. Kabiri, S. Farashi, G. Dehbashi; Cellular & Molecular Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid mosome aberrations and micronuclei significantly increased in lymphocytes Beheshti University of, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of patients from both groups during neutron therapy (p<0.05). This increase was mainly due to chromosome-type aberrations and centromere-negative Introduction: micronuclei. The prevalent types of aberrations are in agreement with ex- Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine cancer and pected results based on theoretical mechanisms of neutron effects on cells. Medullary thyroid carcinoma is one of the most malignant thyroid tumors This research is supported by the Federal Target Research Program «Scien- which occur in both hereditary (25%) and sporadic (75%) forms. Mutations tific and scientific-educational personnel of innovative Russia (2009-2013)» (grant N 14.132.21.1319), grant of President of Russia Federation (MK-6806 oMf athteer RiaElT a pnrdo tmo-eotnhcoodgse:ne in MTC development have been well demonstra- . 2A0. 1M3e.l4n)i kaonvd: gNroannet. fSo.r V yaosuilnyge vs:c iNeonnteis. tLs. o Mf u“OsaPbTaEeCv”a :c oNmonpea.n Vy.. Velikaya: ted. None. O. Gribova: None. L. Urazova: None. I. Lebedev: None. E. Choynzonov: To investigate the spectrum of the RET germline None. mutations in exons 3, 5, 10-16 in hereditary MTC in Iranian population, 319 participants were studied. Genomic DNAs were extracted from the leukocy- tReess uuslitnsg: the standard Salting Out/ProteinaseK method. Mutation detection was performed through direct DNA sequencing. 
P11 .147 Totally, from 319 participants (182Female, 137Male) 224individu- A Benign Vascular Tumor with a New Fusion Gene: EWSR1-NFAT
C1  in als were patients (179MTC, 5MEN2A, 3MEN2B, 2Pheochromocytoma) and Hemangioma of Bone E. Arbajian, L. Magnusson, K. H. Nord, F. Mertens; 95 individuals were their relatives. The germline RET mutations were found Lund University, Department of Clinical genetics, Lund, Sweden. in 83.4% of participants (58.4%patients and 25% relatives), including exon 10, exon 11, exon 13, exon14, exon 15, and exon 16. The most common Abstract: EWSR1 mutation in our population was 
C634 Y (4.1%) on the other hand, 
C618 R, The genein chromosome band 22q12 is a promEisWcuSoRu1s- 
C618 S, 
C620 G, 
L887 L (0.3%) had rare allele frequency. Also the allele fre- NfuFsAioTnC 1partner involved in a vast array of tumors characterized by gene quency of G691S/
S904 S haplotype was 36% in patients and 16.6% in their fusions. In this study, we report the finding of a new fusion gene, relatives. Moreover, a novel germline mutation R886Q was detected in exon , in a hemangioma of bone; genetic rearrangements have not pre- 15 in two members of a family affected with MTC: 0.62%. The most frequent viously been described in this tumor type. Chromosome banding analysis mutation in our population is haplotype G691S/
S904 S, and 
C634 Y, whereas showeEdW a StR(118-N;2F2A)T(Cq123;q12) as tNheF AsToCle1 change. FISH mapping suggested in the most population the frequent mutation is 
C634 R. Altogether, further the involvement of each of the two partner NgFeAnTeCs 2and RT-PCR revealed an in analysis needs to demonstrate the disease progress in individuals harboring frame transcript. has not previously beeEnW shSoRw1n to m KM au. lH it rie ip :d l Nea y ora nist eik .: SNal .o l Fenl aee r.s aM. s. Z i:a Nri of nY ee .g Ga .n Deh e: N bao sn he i. S N. oS nh ee .ikholeslami: None. S. b h h : be involved in a fusion chimera. However, , encoding another mem- ber of the same protein family, is knEoWwSnR a1s a fusion partner for in a subgroup of Ewing sarcoma. Thus, our findings further broaden the spec- trum of neoplasms associated with fusion genes, add a new partner 
P11 .150 to the growing list of EWSR1 chimeras, and suggest that chromosomal rear- Whole-exome sequencing of four patients with criteria of familial rangements of pathogenetic, and possibly also diagnostic, significance can hyperplastic polyposis b Ee. pArrebsaejinatn i:n N boennei. gLn. Mvaasgcnuulasrs obno:n Ne otunem. oKr.sH.. Nord: None. F. Mertens: None. C. Garrec1, S. Küry1, P. Lindenbaum2, V. Vidal3, F. Airaud1, J. Chetritt4, E. Cauchin5, J. Mosnier5, S. Bézieau1; 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 2IRT-UN, Institut du thorax, INSERM UMR 1087, Nantes, France, 3Imaxio, Saint-Beauzire, France, 4Institut 
P11 .148 d’Histo-Pathologie, Nantes, France, 5EA 4273 Biométadys, Faculté de médecine, Nantes, Hepatocellular carcinoma in a 16-year-old patient associated with France. familial adenomatous polyposis Background C. Abadie1, B. Gery1, M. Blayau2, C. Guettier3, S. Branchereau4, V. Gandemer5, C. Dugast1, : Hyperplastic polyposis (HP) is a rare condition characterized 300 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG by multiple or large hyperplastic polyps in the large intestine, typically withABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .152 via Modulation of CDX2 expression by the RNA-binding protein MEX3A: proximal localization, and associated with increased risk of colorectal can- impact on intestinal differentiation and stemness cer the evolution of lesions through the serrated pathway of carcinoge- B. Pereira1, S. Sousa1, R. Barros1, L. Carreto2, P. Oliveira1, C. Oliveira1,3, N. T. Chartier4, M. nPeusrips.o Ssoeme cases of familial hyperplastic polyposis have been described, Plateroti5, J. Rouault6, J. Freund7, M. Billaud4, R. Almeida1,3; but the familial transmission of this entity has not been elucidated by now. 1IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Methods: We sought genes potentially responsible for familial transmission Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Biology and CESAM, RNA Biology Laboratory, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal, 3FMUP - Faculty of Medicine, University of of HP using whole-exome sequencing strategy. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4INSERM-UJF U823, Institut Albert Bonniot, Grenoble, France, : Four patients were selected, who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria 5Centre de Génétique et de Physiologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Claude of hyperplastic polyposis according to the WHO Classification of digestive Bernard Lyon 1, UMR5534, Villeurbanne, France, 6Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle tumours (2000). They showed either family history of HP and/or colorectal de Lyon, UMR5242 CNRS/INRA/UCBL/ENS Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, cancer, or early onset at disease. We assessed the carcinogenesis pathway France, 7INSERM UMR_
S1113 , Université de Strasbourg, Fédération de Médecine involved by morphological characterization and molecular biology analy- Translationnelle, Strasbourg, France. sis. Whole-exome sequencing was conducted on DNA derived from blood Introduction: samples. Genomic DNA was enriched for coding region using SureSelectXT Human All Exon v4 (Agilent technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, USA), and paired- The homeobox transcription factor CDX2 is the key mole- eRneds usletqsuencing was realized with Genome Analyzer IIX (Illumina, Inc., San cular mediator of intestinal development and homeostasis. Furthermore, diego, USA). multiple evidences substantiate its involvement in tumorigenic processes : We used KGGSeq software, that integrate pathways involved in di- oMf attheer idailgse &st Mivee tthroacdts :e ncompassing intestinal reprogramming. The CDX2 seases and pubmed references as filters. This analysis selected more than regulatory network is intricate and it has not yet been fully uncovered. 300 genes, including 13 genes mutated in one patient only, which are in tight Through genome-wide screening of a 3D culture sy- relation with the pathways of APC, STK11, MUTYH and BMPR1A, previously stem, the RNA-binding protein MEX3A was identified as putatively involvReed- associated with forms of familial polyposis. This study enabled us to identify sinu lCtDs:X 2 regulation, so its biological relevance was addressed by setting up 13 candidate genes in the familial hyperplastic polyposis, and suggested a cell-based assays together with expression studies in murine intestine. p Co.s Gsiabrlree cg:e Nneotniec. hSe.t Kerüorgye: nNeointye. i Pn. tLhiinsd seynnbdaruomm:e N.one. V. Vidal: None. F. We demonstrate that MEX3A has a translational repressive function Airaud: None. J. Chetritt: None. E. Cauchin: None. J. Mosnier: None. S. by CcoDnXt2r olling CDX2 levels in gastric and colorectal cellular models. This is Bézieau: None. dependent on the interaction with a specific binding determinant present in mRNA 3`untranslated region. We have further determined that MEX3A impairs intestLinGaRl5 diBffMerIe1n tiation and cellular polarization, affects 
P11 .151 cell cycle progression and promotes increased expression of intestinal stem Exome sequencing characterise the somatic mutation spectrum of cell markers, namely , aCnodn cMluSsI1io. nF:i nally, we show that MEX3A early serrated lesions in a patient with BRAF negative hyperplastic is expressed in mouse intestine in a pattern that correlates with CDX2 mo- polyposis syndrome dulation and stem cell properties. The recent identification of S. Horpaopan1, J. Altmüller2, R. Hüneburg3, P. Kahl4, I. Spier1, D. Drichel5, H. Thiele2, M. MEX3A as being part of an intestinal stem cell signature, together with our Odenthal4, M. M. Nöthen1,6, P. Hoffmann1,6,7, S. Strassburg3, H. Fröhlich8, P. Nürnberg2, R. observations, support an association of MEX3A with the intestinal stem cell Büttner4, S. Aretz1; phenotype and a role in fine-tuning CDX2 expression. We describe a novel 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Cologne Center for CDX2 post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism, through the RNA-binding Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Pathology, University of protein MEX3A, with a major impact in intestinal differentiation, polarity Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), and stemness, likely contributing to gastrointestinal homeostasis and car- Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, c Bin. oPgeereniersai:s N.one. S. Sousa: None. R. Barros: None. L. Carreto: None. P. Germany, 7Division of Medical Genetics, University Children‘s Hospital and Department Oliveira: None. C. Oliveira: None. N.T. Chartier: None. M. Plateroti: None. J. of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 8Department of Bonn-Aachen Rouault: None. J. Freund: None. M. Billaud: None. R. Almeida: None. International Center for IT (B-IT), Algorithmic Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 
P11 .153 Coexistence of inv(16) and Cryptic BCR/AB
L1  rearrangement in the Background. Hyperplastic polyposis syndrome (HPS) is a yet poorly defined patient with AML colorectal cancer (CRC) predisposition characterised by the occurrence of J. Y. Sohn, J. H. Jang, S. Lee, S. Kim; multiple and/or large serrated lesions throughout the colon. A serrated po- Samsung Medical Center, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. lyp-CRC sequence (serrated pathway) of CRC formation has been postulated, however, to date only few molecular signatures of serrated neoplasia (BRAF, KRAS mutations, CpG Island Methylation, MSI) were described in a subset Coexistence of inv(16)B aCnRd/ AtB(9L:122) has been described in chronic myelo- of HPS patients and neither the etiology of the syndrome nor the distinct genous leukemia in blast phase (CML-BP) and de novo acute myleoid leu- genetic alterations during tumorigenesis have been identified. Methods. kemia (AML). Cryptic rearrangements were reported in 5% of To describe the mutational landscape of serrated polyps and the involved CML patients, which are not visible under conventional cytogenetic analysis pathways we sequenced the exomes (Illumina HiSeq platform) of 11 early and so are detectable only with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) hyperplastic polyps without the BRAF V600E mutation obtained from a 41 oBrC Rre/vAeBrLs1e transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Here we re- year-old female patient with clinically confirmed HPS. For data analysis the port the case with this rare coincidence of coexistence of inv(16) and cryptic VARBANK pipeline was used. Somatic mutations were identified by compa- 9 rearrangement. A 65-year-old man presented with leukocytosis rison with leukocyte DNA and are currently validated by Sanger sequencing. (18.2×10/L) with 72% blasts. Bone marrow blast cells showed cyCtoBgFeBnetic Results. We identified 25 unique rare somatic alterations of 25 different ge- abnoBrCmR/aAlitByL w1ith 46,XY,inv(16)(p13.1q22)[15]/46,XY[5], and Philadelphia nes in the 11 serrated tumours. All variants are single basepair substituti- chromosoBmCeRs AwBeLr1e nAoStS found. Metaphase FISH detected both the and ons; all but two variants are present in one tumour only. The predominant the rearrangements, located on chromosome 9. AdditiBoCnRa/l AFBISLH1 mutation type are missense mutations (92%) caused by G>T transversions study for - - gene showed no apparent deletion of flanking ma- (75%). No known cancer genes are affected. Conclusions. Somatic mutati- terBiaClR of ASS gene on chromosome 9. These resultsA pBrLo1ve that ons seem to be rare events in early hyperplastic lesions of HPS patients wit- fusion sigCnBaFlB r/eMsuYlHte1d1 from an insertional traBnCsRlo/AcaBtLio1n from the small part hout BRAF mutation. No frequently affected genes or enrichment of specific of gene on chromosome 22, to the proximal of gene on chromo- pathways have been observed. Thus, other alterations such as epigenetic some 9. (A type) and minor (e1a2, 
P190 ) fusion c Sh.a Hnogrepsa mopigahnt: bNeo nthee. Jm. Aajlotmr üdlrleivri:n Ngo fnoer.c Re .o Hf ütunmebouurrg p: Nroognree.s Ps.i oKna.hl: None. I. transcripts were both detected by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The pati- Spier: None. D. Drichel: None. H. Thiele: None. M. Odenthal: None. M.M. ent was treated with standard AML chemotherapy. Molecular remission was Nöthen: None. P. Hoffmann: None. S. Strassburg: None. H. Fröhlich: None. P. Nürnberg: None. R. Büttner: None. S. Aretz: None. achieved at the end of the first chemotherapy and he remained in remissi- on until the last follow-up (6 months after diagnosis). He wBasCnR’t/ AreBcLe1ived imatinib and stem cell transplantation. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of de novo AML with inv(16) that has cryptic re- aJr.rYa. nSgoehmn:e nNto.ne. J.H. Jang: None. S. Lee: None. S. Kim: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 301ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .154 
P11 .156 The efficacy of Anagrelide and Antiplatelets Agents in TE JAK2-V617F Analysis of HOX genes in patients with laryngeal squamous cell positive patients with major thromboembolic events carcinoma R. Mihaescu1, G. Borzak2, R. Buzas1, C. Gug3, C. Serban4; R. de Barros e Lima Bueno1,2, D. Guariz Pinheiro1, D. L. Zanette1,2, R. C. Martins 12Department of Medical Semiology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes” Mamede3, W. Araújo de Silva Junior1,2; Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Oncomed, Timisoara, Romania, 33Department of Medical 1Departament of Genetics - Medical School of Ribeirão Preto - University of São Paulo, Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes” Timisoara, Timisoara, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell Romania, 44Department of Functional Sciences, University of Medicine and Pharmacy and Cell Therapy - Regional Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, „Victor Babes” Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania. 3Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery - Medical School of Ribeirão Preto - University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. Background: All non-CML MPN’s have in common the presence of JAK2-V617F mObujteacttiiovnes. This is associated with leucocytosis, elevated platelet count and hig- Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is one of the most aggressive her risk for thromboembolic events. neoplasms among head and neck cell carcinoma (HNCC). Besides advances Patients an: dT oT hdeermapoynstrate the efficacy of Anagrelide and Antiplatelets Agents in therapeutic treatment, the survival of HNCC patients wasn’t significantly in TE JAK2-V617F positive patients with major thromboembolic events. improved. Therefore, understanding of the molecular mechanisms invol- : 40 patients, ages between 33 and 45 years, no cardio-vas- ved in LSCC is important to identify predictive biomarkers. We investigated cular risk, followed between 2010-2013; 26 (65%) women and 14 (35%) men; global gene expression patterns of 32 laryngeal HNSCC patients versus 13 24patients (60%) were JAK2-V617F positive. 8 patients(20%) arrived with samples of normal tissues surrounding tumors, using the Agilent microar- major thromboembolic event: 3 patients(37,5%) had portal vein thrombosis,3 ray platform. The comparison of norm-7al versus tumor tissues, revealed 81 patients (37,5%) had ischemic stroke and 2 patients(25%) had acute myocar- HdiOffXerentially exprHesOsXed genes (p≤ 10 ), among these, 35 genes were over- dRieaslu ilntsf:arction. They started Anagrelide (1,5-3 mg) +75mg Acetylsalicylic acid expressed in tumor tissues and, within these; eight genes belonged to the and they were followed monthly; 3 patients also received VKA’s. HOX gene family. genes arHe OeXxApr1e0sseAd1 1d-uArSi1ng Ce8mbCr9yogCe1n0esiCs1, 3butD 1it0s Conclusi oDnusring follow up-3 years, no other thromboembolic event occurred re-expDr1e1ssion has been reported to be associated witHhO sXome tumors. The and the platelet count became in normal ranges. No bleeding events also. genes overexpressed were , - , - , - , - , - , - : The association between Anagrelide and Antiplatelets agents is and - . The qPCR confirmed the overexpression of H gOeXnCes in tumors aC ovmermye enftfective treatment in TE- JAK2+ patients with major thromboembolic samples and their almost absent expression in the normal tissue. We also events. investigated HOTAIR expression, a lincRNA located within locus asso- : Too few cases and too little follow up period; it needs to be studied ciated with metastatic tumors. HOTAIR has an increased expression in tu- f Rur. tMhiehra mesocrue:. None. G. Borzak: None. R. Buzas: None. C. Gug: None. C. Serban: mHOoXrsC 1a3s coCm10pared tCo9 normal tissue. Also, there was a significant correlation None. (SpearmHanO Xtest) between the expression of HOTAIR and the expression of , - and – . There was noH sOiXgnificant difference in the expression of these genes between the twHoO dXifferent cancer stages, although there 
P11 .155 is trend for a higher expression of genes in the early stage. These fin- Profile of DHFR gene expression in laryngeal carcinoma cell line dRin. dgse sBuagrgroesst e a Lni mimap Bourteannot: rNoolen eo.f D . Gu faarmiz iPlyi ninh eLirSoC:C N tounme.o Dri.gLe. nZeasniest.te: None. R.C. Martins Mamede: None. W. Araújo de Silva Junior: None. (HEP-2) administered with different MTX chemoterapy doses A. L. S. Galbiatti1, H. C. Caldas2, R. Castro1, J. Padovani Junior3, É. C. Pavarino1, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo1; 1Genetics and Molecular Biology Research Unit - UPGEM, São José do Rio Preto 
P11 .157 Medical School - FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2Laboratory of Experimental Exome Sequencing Identifies Recurring FLT3 N676K Mutations in Core Immunology and Transplantation / LITEX, São José do Rio Preto Medical School - Binding Factor Leukemia FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 3Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck S. Opatz1,2,3, H. Polzer1,4, T. Herold1, N. P. Konstandin1, B. Ksienzyk1, E. Zellmeier1, S. Surgery Department of University São José do Rio Preto Medical School - FAMERP, São Vosberg1,4, A. Graf5, S. Krebs5, H. Blum5, K. Hopfner5, P. M. Kakadia6, S. Schneider1, A. José do Rio Preto, Brazil. Dufour1, J. Braess7, M. C. Sauerland8, W. E. Berdel8, T. Büchner8, B. J. Woermann9, W. Introduction: Hiddemann1,3,4, K. Spiekermann1,3,4, S. K. Bohlander6,4, P. A. Greif1,2,3; 1Klinikum LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), Studies have found varying degrees of success in patients Heidelberg, Germany, 3German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Munich, Germany, with laryngeal cancer treated with methotrexate (MTX) chemotherapy. The 4Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 5Gene Center LMU Munich, Munich, varying degree depends on the dose received by patients and may lead to Germany, 6Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 7St. John-of-God Hospital resistance mechanismOs bajnedc tcivoellsa:t eral effects. MTDXH aFcRts inhibiting dihydro- Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 8Universität Münster, Münster, Germany, 9German Society of Hematology and Oncology, Berlin, Germany. folate reductase (DHFR), key enzyme that is codified by DHFR gene involved in folate metabolism. To investiMgaetteh ods gene expression for MTX response in laryngeal cancer cell line (HEP-2) treated with three diffe- Tdeh en ot(v8o; 21) and inv(16)/t(16;16) rearrangements affecting the core-bin- rent concentrations of MTX chemotherapy. : The 0.25 μM, 25 μM, ding factors, RUNX1 and CBFB, resCpBeFcBtivMelYy,H a1r1e fouRnUdN iXn1 1R5U-2N0X%1T o1f adult and 75 μM concentrations of MTX chemotherapy were added separately in AML cases and are associated with a favourable prognosis. Since HEP-2 cell line plated in six-well culture plates for 24 hRoeusrus latst :37 °C. The the expression of the fusion genes / or / alone Real-time quantitative PCR technique was performed for quantification of is not sufficient to cause leukemia, we performed exome sequencing of an gene expression with TaqMan Gene Expression Assay. We found AML sample with an inversion 16 to identify mutations, which mfamys c-orelllaabteod- tDhHaFt Rexpression level for DHFR gene was higher in cells treated with 75 μM tryarteo swiniet hk itnhaes eC B3 FBF/LTM3YH11 fusion during leukedme ongoevnoe sis. We discovered of MTX chemotherapy. There were significant effects of the expression in gene between control DgHroFuRp and the three different concentrations anC BNF6B7/6MKY mHu11ta tion in the ATP-binding domain (TKD1) oRfU tNhXe 1/RUNX1T1 ( FLT)3 gene. In a cohort of 84 AML patients with eCvoanluclautesido. nTsh:e re was significant association between the control group and a rearrangement and in 36 patients with a increased expression of the gene in 75 μM MTX applicaDtiHonF Rg roup. rearrangement, the N676K mutation was identified in 5 and 1 patients, Chemotherapy treatment for laryngeal cancer with higher respectively (5/84, 6%; 1/36, 3%). The FLT3-N676K mutant aloFnLeT l3eads to MTX dose may be associated with increased expression level of gene. factor-indpendent growth in Ba/F3 cells and confers resistance to the FLT3 These results on the mechanisms involved in the generation of drug resi- PTK inhibitors PK
C412  and A
C2 F2LT03 t ogether with a concurrent inter- sFtiannacnec biayl g seunpep eoxrptr:ession opening new perspectives in pharmacologic regi- nal tandem duplication (ITD). Genes differentially expressed in AML patient mens to the chemotherapy treatment. samples with an inv(16) and a N676K mutation are signficantly enri- Fapesp, CNPq F AA.ML.ESR. PG/aFlbUiNatFtiA: RBM. REesearch Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or cFhLTed3 for genes involved in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, adherence junc- consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; tion and the JAK/STAT signFaLlTin3g pathway. Ours is the first report of recurring FAPESP. H.C. Caldas: None. R. Castro: B. Research Grant (principal N676 mutations in CBF leFuLkTe3m ias and suggests a defined subgroup of investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants CBF leukemias. Although is a well known mutational target in AML, it already received); Modest; FAPESP. J. Padovani Junior: None. É.C. Pavarino: appears that the spectrum of mutations is still not fully understood. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending Unbiased mutation screening by exome sequencing allows the detection of grants as well as grants already received); Significant; FAPESP, CNPq. E.M. Goloni-Bertollo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or n So. vOepl asetzq:u Neonncee. vHa.r Piaotlizoenr:s Nevoenne. iTn. eHxetreonldsi:v Neloyn set.u Nd.iPe. dK goennsetasn.din: None. B. Ksienzyk: None. E. Zellmeier: None. S. Vosberg: None. A. Graf: None. S. consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Krebs: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert FAPESP, CNPq. witness); Modest; Illumina. H. Blum: None. K. Hopfner: None. P.M. Kakadia: 302 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index None. S. Schneider: None. A. Dufour: None. J. Braess: None. M.C. Sauerland: None. W.E. Berdel: None. T. Büchner: None. B.J. Woermann: None. W. Hiddemann: None. K. Spiekermann: None. S.K. Bohlander: None. P.A. Greif: ne of +8 in Philadelphia negative cells. In one patient, diagnosed as CML de D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); novo, del(7q) and der(20) were detected in the unrelated Ph negative clone. Modest; Illumina. Karyotypically unrelated clones are rare events and may originate from the common malignant clone which could be revealed by molecular methods, nMe.eSd. eDde tnoc iicd eFnetkiefyte h: iNdodneen. pJr. iJmoavrayn oavbiecr:r Natoinoen.s V.. Djordjevic: None. A. Bogdanovic: None. M. Gotic: None. 
P11 .158 ERG deletion exerts a CD2-dependent positive prognostic impact on IKZF1-deleted childhood ALL M. Zaliova1, O. Zimmermanova1, P. Dörge2, C. Eckert3, A. Möricke2, M. Zimmermann4, 
P11 .160 J. Stuchly1, A. Teigler-Schlegel5, C. R. Bartram6, R. Koehler6, L. Karawajew7, P. Rhein7, G. SPRED1, the gene involved in a neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous Cario2, J. Zuna1, M. Schrappe2, M. Stanulla2; syndrome, Legius syndrome, is a leukemia predisposing gene 1CLIP—Childhood Leukemia Investigation Prague, Department of Pediatric Hematology B. GILBERT-DUSSARDIER1,2, F. Brizard3, P. Vabres4, F. Millot5, D. Vidaud6,7, E. Pasmant6,7; and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital 1CHU, Poitiers, France, 2Génétique, Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig- Ouest, Poitiers, France, 3Hématoloigie CHU, Poitiers, France, 4Dermatologie, CHU, Dijon, Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 3Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Charité University France, 5Hématologie Pédiatrique, CHU, Poitiers, France, 6UMR745 INSERM, PRES Hospital, Berlin, Germany, 4Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques School, Hannover, Germany, 5Oncogenetic laboratory, Pediatric Hematology and et Biologiques, Paris, France, 7Service de Biochimie et de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Oncology, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics, Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris ), Paris, France. University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 7Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology, HELIOS-Clinic Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany. Germline loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1 located on chromosome 15q14, have been reported to originate Legius syndrome, belonging to the B-cell precursor (BCP) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a heteroge- overlapping neuro-cardio-facial-cutaneous (NCFC) syndromes, all caused neous disease consisting of subgroups with different and partly unknown by germline mutations in the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) genetic background as well as heterogeneous prognosis. pathway and are associated with predisposition to cancer in children, no- Deletions of ERG (ERGdel) were recently described as a recurrent abnorma- tably leukemia. lity in childhood ALL. However, a systematic evaluation of this aberration Until now, only one case of an 11-month-old boy with a SPRED1 germline in the context of large clinical trials is missing. Therefore, we designed a mutation who developed an acute myeloblastic leukemia, had been repor- multiplex PCR assay to screen ERGdel in 1323 childhood ALL patients en- ted. rolled into trial ALL-BFM 2000 and analyzed clinical/biological features of Here, we present a girl who had multiple café-au-lait spots since the age of positive patients. 2 years and developed an acute lymphoblastic leukemia at age of 3 years. We identified 60 cases with ERGdel, exclusively within BCP-ALL. In more Other members of the family in her paternal lineage had multiple café-au- than 1/3 of cases the deletion was bi-/oligoclonal. The deletion was signi- lait spots too, but none of them developed any cancer. The patient was shown ficantly associated with higher age, CD2-positivity and deletion of the IKZF1 to have a germline loss-of-function frameshift mutation in the SPRED1 gene gene. We found only a weak association of ERGdel alone with prognosis. (c.395dupA NM_152591.2; p.Asn133fs 
P010194 ), when she was 11 years However, when combined with CD2 status, the ERGdel/CD-positive patients old. Going back to her hematologic file, we could find result of a medullar demonstrated superior outcome. This effect was significant even within karyotype she had as part of the leukemia diagnosis : a somatic mosaicism of IKZF1-deleted cases, known to have a poor prognosis on ALL-BFM 2000. In a heterozygous deletion on chromosome 15q was found in medullar leuke- addition, we analyzed the stability of ERGdel from diagnosis to relapse in all mia blasts [46,XX(30)/45,XX,der(5),del(15)(q11q25),-20(3)] including the six ERGdel/CD2-negative patients. In 3/6 cases the ERG deletions were lost SPRED1 locus. At the time of remission, a normal karyotype was observed. and in 3 cases the relapse deletions differed from those found at diagnosis. This is the first case where a loss of heterozygozity of SPRED1 is shown in In summary, we describe a high incidence of ERGdel in BCP ALL, suggesting leukemia, supporting the hypothesis of the involvement of this gene in a few that the ERG locus is prone to deletion in childhood ALL. However, the dele- forms of leukemia, as a tumor suppressor. tion does not seem to play a major driving role here. Nevertheless, combined Furthermore, this observation highlights the usefulness of cancer cells ka- with CD2-positivity, ERGdel confers superior prognosis overcoming the ne- r By.o Gtyiplbienrgt -tdou dsestaercdti esro: mNaotniec. cFh. rBormizoarsdo:m Naoln aen. oPm. Vaalbierse.s: None. F. Millot: gative impact of IKZF1 deletions. None. D. Vidaud: None. E. Pasmant: None. S Mu.p Zpaolriot:v Pa:3 N02on/e1.2 O/G. Z1i0m1m; UerNmCaEn2o0v4a0: 1N2one. P. Dörge: None. C. Eckert: None. A. Möricke: None. M. Zimmermann: None. J. Stuchly: None. A. Teigler- Schlegel: None. C.R. Bartram: None. R. Koehler: None. L. Karawajew: None. P. Rhein: None. G. Cario: None. J. Zuna: None. M. Schrappe: None. M. Stanulla: 
P11 .161 None. Polymorphisms in microRNA-binding sites and risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and myeloid leukemias in adults A. Dzikiewicz-Krawczyk1, E. Mały2, M. Fichna1, M. Mosor1, E. Strauss1, D. 
P11 .159 Januszkiewicz1,3, J. Nowak1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Medical Diagnostics, Cytogenetically unrelated clones in hematologic malignancies: ten Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Oncology, Hematology and Bone Marrow years of experiences in a single institution. Transplantation, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. M. S. Dencic Fekete, J. Jovanovic, V. Djordjevic, A. Bogdanovic, M. Gotic; Clinic of hematology, Belgrade, Serbia. microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate diverse cellular processes by binding to the 3’ untranslated regions (3’UTRs) of messenger RNAs. Polymorphisms in We evaluated the frequency and clinical significance of cytogenetic polyclo- miRNA-binding sites (miRSNPs) may alter the strength of miRNA interac- nality in patients with various hematologic malignancies. The study inclu- tion with target transcripts thereby deregulating gene expression. des 2683 patients who had been diagnosed with: Acute myeloid leukemia In this study we analysed with specialized algorithms (PITA, Partocles, po- (AML), Acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL), Myelodisplastic syndrome (MDS), lymiRTS, dbSMR, miRANDA) the 3’UTRs of 138 leukemia-associated genes Myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) and Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). and identified 111 putative miRSNPs. For further investigation 11 miRSN- During the past ten years, karyotypically unrelated clones were found in Ps were chosen based on the accordance of at least three algorithms. Using 20 patients (0.75%): 1.11% (7/631) of AML, 1.01% (2/195) of ALL, 1.16% TaqMan allelic discrimination and PCR-RFLP we genotyped patients with (3/257) of MDS, 0.25% (3/1200) of MPD and 1.25% (5/400) of CML. In four childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL, n=101), acute myeloid leu- AML and one MDS patient, the presence of unrelated clones was confirmed kemia (AML, n=86), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML, n=153) and healthy by FISH analysis. Patients diagnosed with AML, ALL and MPD had various controls (n=471). Variant alleles of ETV6_rs1573613 and TLX1_rs2742038 structural and numerical aberrations of which the most common were tri- were associated with increased ALL risk in recessive model (OR=1.9264, somies, affecting chromosomes 8, 9, 12, 18 and 22. Translocations [t(8;21), 95% CI=1.1762-3.1551 and OR=3.9893, 95% CI=1.4377-11.0692, respec- t(15;17), t(2;5), t(14;16)] and monosomies (-Y,-7, -15, -17) were observed tively), while the PML_rs9479 variant allele was linked to decreased ALL in 4 patients, each, while deletions (del(6q), del(7q) and del(11q)) were de- risk in dominant model (OR=0.5470, 95% CI=0.3464-0.8639). In adult mye- tected in 3 patients. Del(5q) and +8 were detected in unrelated clones of loid leukemias we found significant associations between variant alleles of one MDS patient, del(5q) and del(8q) were present in the other one, while PML_rs9479 and BC
L11 B_rs1152781 and decreased AML risk (OR=0.6010, the third patient with MDS had unrelated clones with del(20q) and t(7;20). 95% CI=0.3669-0.9846, dominant model and OR=0.2557, 95% CI=0.0781- Four patients with CML, treated with imaEtSinHibG m e2s0yl1at3e, |h PadA uRnIrSel,a FteRd AclNo-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 303 0.8371, recessive model, respectively) and between the variant allele of IRF8_ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index rs10514611 and increased CML risk in recessive model (OR=2.8128, 95% analysis of transcriptomes with Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) showed CI=1.3470-5.8735). Differential allelic expression (DAE) showed that the va- differences in the genes expression in particular cells exposed on couma- riant alleles of ETV6_rs1573613, PML_rs9479, and BC
L11 B_rs1152781 are rins. There were some changes found in genes expression in the cells which expressed at a significantly lower level than the wild-type alleles, while the were exposed on these coumarins. The genes with the highest coefficient of variant allele of IRF8_rs10514611 is expressed at a higher level compared to P were functionally classified as tumor markers, cell death, cell cycle and cell the wild-type allele. The results suggest that these miRSNPs are a potential growth regulators and were associated with the cell organization. r Ais. kD fzaicktieowr iicnz l-eKurkaewmcziaysk.: None. E. Mały: None. M. Fichna: None. M. Mosor: The transcriptomes analyses revealed some specific features of the thera- None. E. Strauss: None. D. Januszkiewicz: None. J. Nowak: None. py responses depending on the exposition agents, which has increased our knowledge on leukemogenesis. This work was funded by the Polish State Committee for Scientific Research 
P11 .162 (Project No: NN405162639) and was developed using the equipment Novel somatic mutations in large granular lymphocyte leukemia purchased within the Project „The equipment of innovative laboratories E. I. Andersson1, H. L. M. Rajala1, S. Eldfors2, P. Ellonen2, T. Olson3, A. Jerez4, M. J. doing research on new medicines used in the therapy of civilization and Clemente4, O. Kallioniemi2, K. Porkka1, C. Heckman2, J. P. Maciejewski4, T. P. Loughran Jr.3, neoplastic diseases“ within the Operational Program Development of Ea- S. Mustjoki1; stern Poland 2007 - 2013, Priority Axis I Modern Economy, Operations I.3 1Hematology Research Unit, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki University Central Hospital IJn.n Koovcaktiio: nN oPnreo.m Mo. tCioionc.h: None. A. Bogucka-Kocka: None. (HUCH), Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Penn State Hershey College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, United States, 4Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States. 
P11 .164 Cytogenetic analysis of human liposarcomas by array-based comparative genomic hybridization Large granular lymphocyte (LGL) leukemia is a clonal disease characteri- M. Koczkowska1, M. Iliszko1, J. Ryś2, J. Limon1; zed by expansion of mature cytotoxic T-cells. Our recent findings suggest 1Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, that 40% of LGL-leukemia patients harbor mutations in STAT3 (Koskela et 2Department of Tumor Pathology, Center of Oncology, Krakow, Poland. al. NEJM 2012). To identify additional novel somatic mutations in STAT3- mutation negative LGL-leukemia patients, we performed exome sequencing from leukemic cells of three untreated patients. Liposarcomas are the most common soft tissue sarcomas accounting for Patient 1 harbored a missense mutation in PTPRT with a variant frequency 20% of all mesenchymal malignancies. Morphologically, WHO classifies li- of 14%. PTPRT has previously been found to reverse Tyr705 phosphorylati- posarcomas into four main subtypes consisting of: myxoid/round cell (M/ on on STAT3, a modification associated with STAT3 deactivation. This novel RLPS), dedifferentiated (DDLPS), well-differentiated (WDLPS) andd opulbeloe-- V995M mutation occurs within the tyrosine-protein phosphatase 1 domain mmionrupthei cch lirpoomsoasrocommesas (PLPS). Characteristic cytogenetic features of WDLPS and may thereby affect STAT3 activity by reducing dephosphorylation of and DDLPS are supernumerary ring giant chromosomes and dmin ( Tyr705, thus increasing the expression of STAT3 target genes. ), while MLPS are characterised by the presence of spe- Patient 2 had a missense mutation in ANGPT2 (variant frequency 34%). cific translocation: t(12;16)(q13;p11). K436E occurs within the TI
E2 -binding domain and is likely to affect the bin- The aim of the study was to analyse genomic profile of 65 lipNoismarbcloeGmeans, ding of TI
E2  by ANGPT2. Over-expression of ANGPT2 has previously been (RWocDhLePS n=21, DDLPS=24 and MLPS n=20) using array-based comparative shown to confer an adverse prognostic factor in other forms of leukemia. genomic hybridization at unprecedented resolution of ~10kb ( Exome sequencing of patient 3 revealed a H126R mutation in BC
L11 b (vari- ). Additionally we analysed genomic profile of subsequent samples of ant frequency 51%). BC
L11 B is required for T-cell survival and overexpres- tumors resected from an individual patient during disease progression. sion could effectively increase T-cell activation and proliferation. DNA copy number aberrations were found in 60 tumors (92%). Loss of chro- While these mutations appear biologically relevant and exciting, they have mosomal segments was observed in 29% of WDLPS (n=6), 60% of MLPS not been found to be recurrent in the screening of large cohort of LGL-leu- (n=12) and in 71% of DDLPS (n=17). In MLPS the most frequently involved kemia patients (n=170). chromosomal region was 1q (30%) with minimal overlapping region of gain Somatic mutations in PTPRT, ANGPT2 and BC
L11 b may represent rare ge- 1q25.1-q32.2 (34 Mbp). 42 (93%) of WDLPS and DDLPS had 12q gain, with netic causes for LGL-leukemia. Inactivating mutations in PTPRT may have minimal common region at 12q14.1-q21.1. In WDLPS, the other common the same functional consequence as activating mutations of STAT3 in LGL- aberration was gain at chromosome 5 with minimal common region of over- l Eeu.Ik. Aemndiae rpsastoienn: tNso.ne. H.L.M. Rajala: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers lap 5p15.2-p14.1. In contrary to WDLPS, in DDLPS we identified aberrations bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; BMS, Novartis, Janssen- at chromosome 13q. Cilag. S. Eldfors: None. P. Ellonen: None. T. Olson: None. A. Jerez: None. M.J. The observed patterns of genomic aberrations in particular liposarcoma Clemente: None. O. Kallioniemi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, s Mu.b Ktyopcezsk orewfslekcat: bNioonloeg. iMca. lI ldisifzfkeore: nNcoense b. Je.t wRyeśe:n N thoneese. Jt.u Lmimorosn.: None. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; TEKES-FiDiPro. K. Porkka: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; BMS, Novartis. C. Heckman: None. J.P. Maciejewski: B. Research 
P11 .166 Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as Influences of Mitochondrial Uncoupling Protein 2 Variants on Lung well as grants already received); Modest; Aplastic Anemia & MDS International Cancer Risk Foundation, NIH. T.P. Loughran Jr.: None. S. Mustjoki: B. Research Grant S. Oguzkan Balci1, I. Nacak2, M. Nacak3, M. Sanli4, S. Pehlivan1; (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and grants already received); Modest; BMS, Novartis. Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Sani Konukoglu Hospital, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Gaziantep, Turkey. 
P11 .163 Expression profiling with microarrays method in human leukemic cells after coumarins and furanocoumarins exposition J. Kocki1, M. Cioch2, A. Bogucka-Kocka3; Objectives: Lung cancer is often a multistep, multifactorial disease involving 1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Medical University, Lublin, Poland, 2Dept. Haematology, Medical both genetic and environmental components. Mitochondrial uncoupling University, Lublin, Poland, 3Dept. Pharmaceutical Botany, Medical University, Lublin, protein 2 (UC
P2 ), a negative regulator of mitochondrial reactive oxygen spe- Poland. cies (ROS) generation, was observed to be abundantly expressed in compo- nents of the immune system such as spleen, lung, and isolated macrophages. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between the Coumarins are chemical compounds which can be found naturally in some UC
P2  gene variants and lung cancer susceptibility. plants. The subject of the study was to find the coumarin inhibitors of the Methods: Seventy five lung cancer patients and 75 healthy controls were pathogenetic mechanisms of human leukemic cells. We used Affymetrix included in the study. The UC
P2  gene variants (-866G>A and 45 bp inserti- GeneChips and quantitative RT-PCR technologies for the genes expression on/deletion (I/D)) were determined by polymerase chain reaction and/or profiling in J45.01 human leukemic cells exposed on coumarins in Scan’R restriction fragment length polymorphism method. system. The apoptotic and cytotoxic effects of coumarins on leukemic cells Results: Distribution of genotype and allelic frequency of UC
P2  45 bp I/D were observed in FlowSight flow cytometer. variant were significantly different between lung cancer and control groups. M3o0r4eover, we selected two coumarins with the EloSwHeGst 2I
C0510  3v a|l uPeAs. RTIhSe, FRTAheN dCisEtr i|b WutiWonW of. EIIS gHenGot.yOpeR Gwas found significantly higher in the lungABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .169 The analysis of genetic alterations in the NSCLC patients using cancer group (54.7%) than in the control group (8%) (p< 0.0001). In addi- hybridization with diagnostic biochips tion, the I allele frequency (68%) was higher than in controls (23.3%) (p< M. A. Emelyanova1, I. S. Abramov1, K. A. Arkhipova2, I. B. Zborovskaya2, L. N. 0.0001). On the other hand, no statistically significant difference was found Lyubchenko2, N. N. Mazurenko2, T. V. Nasedkina1; between UC
P2  -866G>A variant and lung cancer susceptibility. 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Conclusion: We suggest that both I allele and II genotype of UC
P2  45 bp I/D Russian Federation, 2N. N. Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. variant are risk factors for susceptibility to lung cancer. Additional studies a Sr.e O ngeuezdkeadn t Bo aclocni:f iNromn eth. Ie. Nexaaccatk r:o Nleo noef .U MC.P N2a vcaarki:a Nnotsn eo.n M lu. nSga nclai:n Nceorn.e. S. Pehlivan: None. Specific epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors (gefitinib and erlotinib) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor (crizotinib) are used for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Somatic 
P11 .167 mutations in EGFR gene and key effectors along EGFR signaling pathway EGFR mutation analysis in non-small cell lung cancer Z. A. Hammoudeh1, V. Koleva2, P. Dakova2, K. Oreshkov2, C. Minchev2, A. Penev2, A. (KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA), as well as ALK rearrangements are associated with Benova2, A. Radinov2, D. Toncheva1; sensitivity to these drugs. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Tokuda A biochip has been developed which allows detecting 13 mutations in 12, 13 Hospital Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. and 61 codons of KRAS; 5 mutations in 858, 719, 790 codons and 13 dele- tions in exon 19 of EGFR; V600E of BRAF; 5 mutations in 542, 545, 546 and 1047 codons of PIK3CA gene. The technique of LNA (locked nucleic acid)- Background: Lung cancer is a leading cause of death in Bulgaria. Somatic clamp PCR was used to increase the sensitivity of the assay followed by alle- gain-of- function mutation in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) le-specific hybridization of fluorescently labeled target on biochip. To deter- detected in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has significance mine the ALK rearrangements a biochip analyzing 11 breakpoint variants of for assigning optimal disease treatment. 29 EGFR somatic mutations are asso- EM
L4 -ALK translocations has been designed. The reverse transcription PCR ciated with either sensitivity or resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib treatment. with chimeric EM
L4 -ALK mRNA was used prior to hybridization. Methods: We performed DNA analysis on 98 patients with NSCLC. All cases To prove the feasibility of the method clinical samples from 84 unselected are histologically confirmed as NSCLC. Tumor sample materials are extracted patients with NSCLC were analyzed. We identified EGFR mutations in 13 from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded NSCLC samples. DNA extraction was (15%), KRAS mutations in 14 (17%), PIK3CA mutations in 8 (10%) and performed by QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit for genomic DNA purification. EM
L4 -ALK translocations in 2 (2%) of patients. The data on mutation ana- The samples are analysed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), using EGFR lysis were verified by direct sequencing. We consider the biochip-based ap- RGQ Kit on Rotor-Gene Q instrument, and the results were processed by Ro- proach to be simple and useful diagnostic tool for identification of NSCLC tor-Gene Q Series Software. patients which will respond to target therapy. Results: Analyses were processed according to manufacturer’s recommenda- The work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research tion. EGFR-mutations were discovered in 10% of samples. The two most com- ( Mgr.Aan. tE #m1e1ly-a0n4o-0v1a:9 N50on).e. I.S. Abramov: None. K.A. Arkhipova: None. I.B. mon EGFR somatic mutations are deletions in exon 19 (8 patients, 8.16%) Zborovskaya: None. L.N. Lyubchenko: None. N.N. Mazurenko: None. T.V. Nasedkina: None. and 
L858 R point mutation on exon 21 (2 patients, 2.0%). These two muta- tions define NSCLC as sensitive to treatment with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKI) gefitinib and erlotinib. Conclusion: Our results are in accord with data for European populations. 
P11 .170 Patients with NSCLC and EGFR mutation, either exon 19 deletions or 
L858 R, Analysis of Mannose Binding Lectin and Macrophage Inhibitory Factor have a longer survival following treatment with gefitinib or erlotinib. Gene Variants in Lung Cancer Patients A Zc.Akn. oHwamlemdgoeumdeehn:t sN:o Anset.r Va.Z Kenoleecvaa: None. P. Dakova: None. K. Oreshkov: M. Nacak1, I. Nacak2, S. Pehlivan3, S. Oguzkan Balci3, M. Sanli4; None. C. Minchev: None. A. Penev: None. A. Benova: None. A. Radinov: 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, None. D. Toncheva: None. Turkey, 2Sani Konukoglu Hospital, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Gaziantep, Turkey. 
P11 .168 Allelic imbalance in non-small cell lung cancer. A. Shikeeva1, T. Kekeeva1,2, L. Zavalishina1, Y. Andreeva1, G. Frank1; Objectives: Lung cancer is caused by genetic and epigenetic changes leading 1Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M.Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. to uncontrolled cell growth and metastasis. Macrophage migration inhibi- tory factor (MIF) and mannose-binding lectin2 (MB
L2 ) implicated in the pathogenesis of several pathological disorders including cancer. The aim of this study was to examine the relationship between the MB
L2  and MIF gene Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Non-small cell variants and lung cancer risk. lung cancer (NSCLC) comprises 80% of all lung cancers and is characterized Methods: Eighty six lung cancer patients and 100 healthy controls were by multiple genetic alterations such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and mi- recruited in the study. Codon 54 A/B variant in MB
L2  gene and -173 G/C crosatellite instability (MSI). variant in MIF gene were analysed by PCR-RFLP method. We performed analysis of molecular-genetic alterations in tumor and in sur- Results: In the MB
L2  variant, BB genotype was found significantly more fre- rounding tissue in different histological types. quent in lung cancer than controls (p<0.0010). Conversely, AB genotype was The study group included 70 patients with NSCLC. From each patient 3 found significantly more frequent in controls than lung cancer (p<0.0098). samples were analyzed: tumor, 2 samples from surrounding normal lung The allele frequency of A and B was 0.779, 0.221 in cases compared with tissue at 2 cm and 5 cm from tumor. Microsatellite analysis was evaluated by 0.815, 0.185 in controls. On the other hand, the distribution of G/G, G/C and PCR using 7 polymorphic markers of chromosomal regions: 12p23.3, 2q35, C/C genotypes for MIF variant was 55.8%, 43% and 1.2% for cases and 55%, 3p14.2, 3p22.2, 3p26.3, 9p22.1 and 17p13.3. 41% and 4% for the controls. The allele frequency of G and C was 0.773, Our results demonstrated allelic imbalance (AI) in NSCLC samples with 0.227 in cases compared with 0.755, 0.244 in controls. No significant dif- the following frequencies: D2
S405  32/65 (47%), D2
S164  - 26/60 (43%), ferences in allele/genotype distribution of the MIF variant were found bet- D3
S1300  - 40/67 (60%), D3
S1768  - 33/63 (52%), D3
S1539  - 34/65 (52%), ween patients and controls. D9
S925  - 30/64 (47%), D17
S938  - 31/63 (49%). LOH and/or MSI in sur- Conclusion: Our data show that homozygousvariant B allele of the MB
L2  rounding tissue were not detected. AI in D9
S925  (p = 0.005), D17
S938  (p = codon 54 polymorphism may be a risk factor for susceptibility to lung can- 0.002) was strongly associated with squamous cell lung cancer. LOH and/or cer. Further studies are required to confirm the exact role of MB
L2  and MIF MSI in D3
S1768  (p = 0.004) and D17
S938  (p = 0.03) were linked to smoking v Mar. iNaanctsa ko:n N lounneg. cI.a Nnaccear.k: None. S. Pehlivan: None. S. Oguzkan Balci: status. Frequent genetic alterations in D2
S405  (p = 0.01) correlated with None. M. Sanli: None. early stage cancer (I-II), whereas alterations in D3
S1300  (p = 0.0197) were associated with advanced stages of disease (III-IV). Observed genetic alterations can be used as molecular markers of squamous cell lung cancer in difficult diagnostic cases and can be considered as pro- g An.o Sshtiick emeavrak: eNrosn.e. T. Kekeeva: None. L. Zavalishina: None. Y. Andreeva: None. G. Frank: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 305ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P11 .171 de Pathologie, CHU Bordeaux and Université Bordeaux Segalen, Bordeaux, France, Common Genomic Variations Identified in Maffucci Syndrome Tissues 4Centre de Cancérologie Vétérinaire, ENVA, Maisons Alfort, France, 56 Laboratoire d’Anatomie Pathologique Vétérinaire du Sud-Ouest LAPVSO, Toulouse, France. by Molecular Karyotyping M. Amyere1, V. Wouters1, A. Dompmartin2, O. Enjolras3, I. Kaitila4, J. B. Mulliken5, J. Rombouts6, L. L.M. Boon1, M. Vikkula1; 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique Melanomas spontaneously occur in dogs, as in humans, due to genetic and de Louvain,, Brussels, Belgium, 2Université de Caen Basse Normandie, CHU Caen, environmental factors. Department of Dermatology, Caen, France, 3Consultation des Angiomes, Hôpital To characterize the homologies and differences between dog and human Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central melanomas, we analyzed epidemiological data from 2350 melanocytic tu- Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Plastic Surgery, Children’s Hospital and mours and we analyzed in depth epidemiological, clinical and histopatholo- Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 6Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. gical data from 150 canine melanocytic tumours. We found that melanomas occur in the same anatomical locations than humans and interestingly, spe- cific dog breeds present higher risk to develop oral or cutaneous melanoma, Maffucci syndrome (MS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by mul- strongly reflecting genetic predispositions. tiple central cartilaginous tumors (enchondromas) that are accompanied by To tentatively propose a histogenetic classification, the analysis of genes cutaneous spindle-cell hemangiomas. These patients have a high incidence presenting frequent somatic alterations in human melanoma, was perfor- of malignant transformation. No familial case is known and the ethiopatho- med in dogs. genic cause remains to be unraveled. In enchondromatosis (Ollier’s disease, To decipher the genetic causes of melanoma in dogs, we set up, through the OD), which is comprised of enchondromas only, four mutations in the PTHR1 Cani-DNA dedicated canine biobank, a collection of cases and controls in gene have been identified in four patients; three were somatic and one was high risk breeds. We collected over 500 blood samples and 200 melanoma germline. No PTHR1 mutation has been detected in MS. On the other hand, tumour samples in different breeds. We first performed a genome wide in 77% of patients with MS and 81% of patients with OD, somatic IDH1, and association study, using DNA samples from 80 affected and 100 healthy more rarely IDH2, mutations have been observed. These changes are shared poodles, a breed nearly exclusively affected by oral melanomas. Finally, an with other tumors, including glioblastomas, leukemias and thyroid cancers, RNAseq analysis of matched healthy/tumour samples had been undertook and may thus be markers of cellular transformation. on 20 melanoma cases. To search for underlying somatic genomic causes, we screened MS tissues Canine melanomas thus appear good naturally occurring models for stu- using Affymetrix SNP-chips. We looked for copy number variations (CNV), dying human mucosal melanoma, and for melanoma of dermal origin and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and uniparental (iso)disomy (UPD) by perfor- constitute specific models to investigate the non-UV pathways, otherwise ming pairwise analyses between allele intensities in tumoral DNA versus the poorly studied. In conclusion, predisposed dog breeds are invaluable mo- corresponding blood-extracted DNA. While common chromosomal anoma- dels to identify novel genes and pathways in order to develop new therapies lies were absent in constitutional DNA, several shared CNVs were identified t Ch.a At wndilrle b: eN boneen.e Efi.c Ciaal dbioeuth: Nfoorn deo. Mgs. aGnildla hrdu:m Naonnse.. C. De Brito: None. J. Abadie: None. B. Vergier: None. A. Guillory: None. P. Devauchelle: None. F. in tumors. The most frequently observed is a large somatic alterations not Degorce: None. L. Lagoutte: None. B. Hedan: None. M. Galibert: None. present in CNV databases was a gain of 14q11.2. In the single chondrosar- coma, large chromosomal amplifications /deletions were observed in chro- mosomes 3, 6, 9, 10, 12 and 13. No loss of heterozygosity was observed in 
P11 .174 any Maffucci tissue. In conclusion, this study suggests new candidate gene f Mor. AMmafyfeurcec:i Nsyonned.r oV.m Weo loucteartse:d N.one. A. Dompmartin: None. O. Enjolras: Genetic variation in immuno-modulatory genes as markers of None. I. Kaitila: None. J.B. Mulliken: None. J. Rombouts: None. L. L.M. Boon: melanoma recurrence-free and overall survival. None. M. Vikkula: None. J. Rendleman, S. Shang, J. Shields, C. Adaniel, N. Fleming, R. Shapiro, R. Berman, A. Pavlick, D. Polsky, Y. Shao, I. Osman, T. Kirchhoff; New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. 
P11 .172 Over-Expression of FAT10 causes Malignant Transformation The involvement of immune-related genes in melanoma progression has C. G. Lee1,2,3, Y. Gao1, S. S. Theng2, W. B. Teo2, J. Zhuo1; been demonstrated, suggesting the potential of these pathways in the pre- 1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. diction of disease susceptibility and prognosis. In this study, we performed an analysis of germline variants in immuno-modulatory genes for their The FAT10 gene association with melanoma survival in a well-characterized cohort of 817 is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and melanoma patients. Germline DNA was genotyped for 94 SNPs tagging 55 other cancers. High levels of FAT10 protein lead to increased mitotic nondis- immuno-modulatory genes using Sequenom iPLEX. Cox models were used junction and chromosomeF AinTs1t0ability (CIN). Here, we demonstrate that when to test associations between each SNP and recurrence-free and overall sur- NehepLxHT, an immortalized non-tumorigenic liver cell line, is stably trans- vival (RFS, OS), with adjustments for age, gender, subtype, thickness, ulce- fected with high levels of , these cells not only demonstrate higher cell ration, and anatomic site. ROC curves were constructed combining SNPs proliferation rate and increased resistance against camptothecin-induced with clinical covariates and the area under the curve (AUC) was used to as- apoptosis, it also exhibits transformation potential by its ability to grow on sess their utility in the classification of 3-year melanoma recurrence. The soft agar. Its role in malignant transformatFioAnT 1is0 evident from anchorage in- SNP rs2796817 in TGFB2 had strong associations with both RFS (HR=3.8, dependent growth, increased adhesion to collagen IV, increased cell migra- CI 95%: 1.3-11, p=0.02) and OS (HR=5.5, CI 95%: 1.6-19, p=0.029). Other tion and invasion in cells over-expressing . Through genome-wide ex- interesting associations with OS came from IRF8 (rs4843861, HR=0.62, CI pression analyseFsA, gTe1n0es involved in proliferation, transformation, migFraAtTio1n0 95%: 0.39-0.99, p=0.017) and CD8A (rs3810831, HR=2.4, CI 95%: 0.91-6.2, as well as invasion were found to be significantly differentially expressed in p=0.048). A multivariate model including stage, subtype and rs3810831 cells expressing . The most significant network associated with from CD8A was shown to improve the AUC when compared to a model in- over-expression was found to be F“ACTe1ll0 Death, Inflammatory Response and cluding only stage and subtype in classifying 3-year recurrence (0.77 vs. Cancer” where the deregulated genes converge on the NFκB complex CaXsC tRh4e 0.79). The findings in this study provide evidence that the genetic variants in key nCoXdCaRl7 hub. Overexpression of leads to downregulation of IκB pro- immuno-modulatory genes may represent novel biomarkers of melanoma tein and actiFvAaTti1o0n of NFκB activity with consequent upregulation of prognosis. The validation analysis is currently underway with an expanded and expression which was found play a role in facilitating the invasive set of immune target genes as well as an additional independent cohort of p Cr.oGp.e Lretye :o Nf one. Y. -Gexapor: eNsosnineg. Sce.Sll.s T.heng: None. W.B. Teo: None. J. Zhuo: m J.e Rlaennodmleam paant:i eNnotnse.. S. Shang: None. J. Shields: None. C. Adaniel: None. N. None. Fleming: None. R. Shapiro: None. R. Berman: None. A. Pavlick: None. D. Polsky: None. Y. Shao: None. I. Osman: None. T. Kirchhoff: None. 
P11 .173 
P11 .175 Melanoma in dogs: spontaneously occurring models for genetics and Prevalence of the MITF p.Glu318Lys germline mutation in the EPIC therapies of human melanoma C. ANDR
E1 , E. Cadieu1, M. Gillard1, C. De Brito1, J. Abadie2, B. Vergier3, A. Guillory1, P. and 
E3 N prospective cohorts Devauchelle4, F. Degorce5, L. Lagoutte1, B. Hedan1, M. Galibert1; M. Pertesi1, M. Kvaskoff2, N. Forey1, A. Chabrier1, A. Bijon2, L. Barjhoux3, F. Le Calvez- 1CNRS - UMR6290 - Université Rennes1 - IGDR, Rennes, France, 2Laboratoire Kelm1, F. Clavel-Chapelon2, D. Palli4, ,. EPI
C5 , J. McKay1, F. Lesueur1,6; d’Histopathologie Animale, Oniris, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire, Nantes, France, 3Service 1Genetic Cancer Susceptibility Group, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 2Inserm U1018, Centre for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health, 306 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 3Inserm U1052, Cancer Research Centre of Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 4ISPO Cancer Prevention and Research Institute, Florence, Italy, 5International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 6Inserm clinical malignancy is mainly predicted by histological grading based on U900, Mines ParisTech, Biostatistics, Institut Curie, Paris, France. World Health Organization (WHO) criteria, being grades II-III biologically more aggressive than grade I. However, an important problem in these tu- mors is that as grade I meningiomas are the most frequent, in absolute num- A recently identified recurrent germline mutation in the MITF gene, bers they are also the most recurrent. In this work we study copy-number p.
E318 K (rs149617956), was shown to increase the risk of melanoma in changes and methylation status of a set of tumor suppressor genes (TSG) highly-predisposed patients ascertained through the clinics. MITF encodes in order to establish a relationship between genetic status and biological for the micropthalmia-associated transcription factor that plays a key role behavior. in the pigmentation pathway and acts as a melanoma oncogene. Codon 318 Samples studied were 40 tumors, surgically removed and diagnosed in the is located in a small-ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) consensus site and this Clinic University Hospital of Valencia. Formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded missense substitution severely impairs the SUMOylation of MITF and leads tissue tumor samples were available and representative areas of each were to differential regulation of downstream targets. In the studied populations selected and punched for DNA extraction. Methylation-Specific Multiplex- (France, England, Australia), the frequency of the mutation was less than 1% ligation Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) with M
E001 -
C1  kit was performed and 2-5 times more frequent in patients with a family history of melanoma according to manufacturer instructions, PCR products were separated by and/or multiple malignant melanomas. capillary electrophoresis and data was analyzed with Excel-based software. To further investigate the importance of the p.
E318 K mutation in European All cases showed deletions in at least one TSG. Most frequently deleted ge- populations, we determined its frequency in 1,177 melanoma cases and nes were ER
S1  and T
P73 . Promoter hypermethylation was detected in T
P73 , 1,584 controls from two population-based prospective cohorts, EPIC (Eu- PTEN, RASSF1 and HI
C1  genes. Grade I tumors showed more frequently de- ropean Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition) and the French letions, while in higher grade tumors hypermethylation was more patent. 
E3 N (Etude Epidémiologique auprès de femmes de la Mutuelle Générale de These results suggest that both mechanisms are implicated in meningioma l‘Education Nationale). biology and that a relationship may exist between an increased hyperme- The frequency of p.
E318 K was significantly higher among cases (0.5% vs. thylation pattern and a more aggressive behavior in human meningiomas. 0.2% in controls; Fisher Exact test p-value 0.04; OR 2.98; 95% confidence Supported by PROMETEO 2011-11/83. Generalitat Valenciana and TS by V interval (CI), 0.95-10.96). These findings from two large population-based STe. gSleasn--UMVigEuGe lg: rNaonnt.e. L. Navarro: None. L. Muñoz-Hidalgo: None. J. González- cohorts confirm an increased risk of melanoma in carriers of the MITF Darder: None. C. López-Ginés: None. M. Cerdá-Nicolás: None. R. Gil-Benso: None. p.
E318 K mutation in European populations. We are now carrying out a full mutation screening of the coding sequence of MITF to investigate the possibility of other rare, likely deleterious mutations within this melanoma s Mu.s cPeeprtteibsiil:i tNyo gneen. eM.. Kvaskoff: None. N. Forey: None. A. Chabrier: None. A. 
P11 .178 Bijon: None. L. Barjhoux: None. F. Le Calvez-Kelm: None. F. Clavel-Chapelon: O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) is a surgery- None. D. Palli: None. ,. Epic: None. J. McKay: None. F. Lesueur: None. activated gene E. A. Alekseeva1,2, A. S. Tanas1,2, E. V. Prozorenko3, D. V. Zaletaev1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First 
P11 .176 Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3N.N. Blockin Russian Detection of EGFR, 1p36, 14q32 genomic copy alterations in Research Center for Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation. Meningiomas I. G. Bedir1, M. Ozdemir1, S. Işıksoy2, E. Çiftçi2, B. Durak Aras1, O. Çilingir1, S. Artan1, A. Arslantaş3; Genetic status of the MGMT gene encoding the DNA repair protein O6-me- 1Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Eskisehir, thylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase is among the most important progno- Turkey, 2Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Eskisehir, stic factors for glioblastoma patients and predicts response to treatment with Turkey, 3Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Neurosurgery, Eskisehir, alkylating agent temozolomide. It is shown that using temozolomide impro- Turkey. ves both overall and progression-free survival. Currently in clinical practice assessment of genetic status of MGMT is most commonly performed either as a study of the MGMT promoter methylation, or the determination of its Meningiomas are mostly benign, slow-growing tumors of the CNS that ori- mRNA expression level. It is known that surgical manipulations can lead to ginate from arachmnoeridlianl cap cells and account for about 30% of all primary an increased expression of a number of so-called ‘surgery-activated’ genes. brain tumours. Chromosome 22q12.2 deletion, a region encoding the tumor Since the current standard of treatment for glioblastoma patients includes suppressor gene , represent the most common genetic alterations in maximal feasible surgical resection followed by radiotherapy and chemo- early meningioma formation. Malignant meningioma progression, however, therapy, the objective of this study was to investigate the effect of surgical is associated with increased genetic instability and complex genetic altera- procedures on the MGMT expression level in the blood of patients operated tions, including numerous genomic losses, gains, and amplifications. For the for glioblastoma. Peripheral blood samples taken 1 hour before surgery, du- detection of genomic copy number aberrations of EGFR gene, 1p36/1q25 ring or within 1 hour after surgery and 8 days after surgery, were obtained and IGH (14q32.3) loci, we conducted fluorescence in situ hybridization from 10 glioblastoma patients. The assessment of the MGMT expression, (FISH) analysis on histopathologically analysed fresh meningioma tissues performed by real-time PCR, has shown that all patients had in average a from 30 cases (23 females and 7 males). Of all analysed tumors, 26 were 2 times increased MGMT expression level in the first hours after the opera- benign whereas the remainings were atypical meningiomas. EGFR/CE
P7  tion and a more than 5 times increase in 8 days after surgery. Thus, we can polysomy was detected in 26,9% of benign tumors while polysomy and assume that MGMT is a surgery-activated gene. Obtained results may raise EGFR gene amplification were seen in all atypical meningiomas. Chromo- the question about adequacy of using of investigation the MGMT expression some 1p36 locus deletions were detected in 84.4% and 50% of benign and l Eev.Ae.l Afoler kdseeteevrma: iNnoinnge .g Aen.Se.t Tica nstaast:u Ns oonf et.h Eis.V g.e Pnreo zino rcelninkioc:a lN pornaec.t Dic.eV.. atypical meningiomas, respectively. The IGH locus deletions were seen in Zaletaev: None. V.V. Strelnikov: None. both benign (92,3%) and atypical (50%) tumors. Our data also confirmed the involvement of chromosomes 1p36 and 14q32 deletions in malignant m I.Gen. iBnegdioirm: Nao pnreo. gMre. sOsziodnemir: None. S. Işıksoy: None. E. Çiftçi: None. B. Durak Aras: None. O. Çilingir: None. S. Artan: None. A. Arslantaş: None. 
P11 .179 First experience with array-CGH in 19 monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) patients A. Mikulasova1,2,3, V. Vallova1,4, J. Smetana1,2, H. Greslikova2, R. Kupska2, L. Rihova2,3, A. 
P11 .177 Potacova2, V. Sandecka5, L. Pour5, R. Hajek2,3,6, P. Kuglik1,2,4; Copy number changes and hypermethylation of tumor suppressor 1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of genes in meningiomas Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Babak Myeloma Group, Department T. San-Miguel1, L. Navarro1, L. Muñoz-Hidalgo2, J. González-Darder3, C. López-Ginés1, M. of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Cerdá-Nicolás1, R. Gil-Benso1; Republic, 3Department of Clinical Hematology, University Hospital, Brno, Czech 1Department of Pathology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 2Fundation for Republic, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, Research HCU-INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, 3Department of Neurosurgery. Clinic University 5Department of Internal Medicine – Hematooncology, University Hospital, Brno, Hospital, Valencia, Spain. Czech Republic, 6Institute of Clinical Haematology, University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic. Meningiomas are the second most common intracranial tumors. They arise from the leptomeningeal brain and spinE alS -cH orG d c2 o0 ve1 ri3 n g| . P InA mR eI nS i, n F giR omA aN s, CET |h We iWnciWde.nEcSe HofG cl.oOnRal Gchromosomal aberrations in plasma cells (P
C3 s0) 7isABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index considered as one of the most important and independent prognostic fac- MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are post-transcriptional gene regulators involved in a tors in patients with myeloma. Also in the premalignancy MGUS, there are wide range of biological processes including tumorigenesis. Although dere- chromosomal changes in PCs f.e. del(13)(q14), IGH translocation, 1q21 gulation of miRNA pathways has been associated with cancer, their genetic gain and hyperdiploidy, but it is not known much about them and their contribution to this complex disorder is still unravelled. We used logistic significance in relation to malignant transformation. Unfortunately, MGUS regression and gene-based permutation tests to analyse the genetic associa- research is complicated by small amount of malignant cells that can be ob- tion of gastric cancer (GC) and its anatomical localization (cardia/noncar- tained from patients. dia) and histological subtypes (intestinal/diffuse), with 133 SNPs tagging We analysed 19 MGUS (13M/6F; median age 64) using array-CGH, Agi- 11 individual miRNAs and 26 miRNA clusters potentially involved in cancer, lent platforms “Human Genome CGH, 4×44K” (N=12) and “SurePrint G3 in 365 incident GC cases and 1284 matched controls (European Prospective CGH+SNP, 4×180K” (N=7). DNA was isolated from separated PCs (using Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) cohort). Various SNPs signi- CD138, CD19 and CD56 markers) and amplified by MDA whole genome am- ficantly associated with different subtypes of GC under the log-additive mo- plification. del, being the most significant ones those in two miRNA clusters on chromo- We found chromosomal abnormalities in 58% (11/19) MGUS. In 26% some 7: three tagSNPs of the miR-29a/miR-29b-1 cluster associated with the (5/19) cases we found hyperdiploidy, thus gains of minimally two of follo- diffuse phenotype (minimum p-value=1.7x10-4; OR(95% cl):1.72(1.3-2.3)) wing chromosomes: 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21. The most frequent and one tagSNP of the miR-25/miR-93/miR-106b cluster associated with were gains of chromosomes 9 (32%; 6/19) and 11 (26%; 5/19). Moreover, the cardia localization (OR(95% cl):0.56(0.37-0.86), p-value=5.378x10-3). gains were found at 1q, 3q22.3-q29, 6p, 11q13.3-q25, 16p, Xq23-q28 and We predicted several target genes for these miRNAs, some of which have losses were found at 6q, 6q23.3, 8q24.21-q24.22, 13q13.3-q34, 16p11.2- been functionally validated and are implicated in cancer-related processes p11.1, 16q11.2-q13, 16q21-q24.3, 16q23.1-q23.2. such as methylation (DNMT3A, DNMT3B), cell cycle (
E2 F1, CDKN1A, CDK- In our study we optimized protocol of array-CGH from amplify DNA and we KN1C) and apoptosis (BC
L2 L11
, VEGFA). Furthermore, we identified signi- use it in first MGUS patients. We found there are various chromosomal chan- ficant interactions between variants in some of these genes and in the chro- ges in more then half of patients, mainly gains of whole odd chromosomes, mosome 7 miRNA clusters. Deregulation of the expression of these miRNAs what is also typical for myeloma, in which MGUS often develops. in gastric tumours also supports our findings, altogether suggesting that Support: NT13492, NT13190, NT11154, OPVK CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0183, genetic variation in MIR29, MIR25, MIR93 and MIR106b genes may have a M AS. MMi0k0u2la1s6o2v2a4: 3N4o,n GeA. VP.3 V0a4ll/o1v0a/: 1N3o9n5e. J. Smetana: None. H. Greslikova: critical role in the genetic susceptibility to GC, probably through modificati- None. R. Kupska: None. L. Rihova: None. A. Potacova: None. V. Sandecka: on of their expression. None. L. Pour: None. R. Hajek: None. P. Kuglik: None. A Yc. kEnsopwinloesdag-mPaernrtilsla: :E NPIoCn-eG. CX-.W MGuñoz: None. C. Bonet: None. N. Garcia: None. A. Venceslá: None. E. Riboli: None. C. Gonzalez: None. N. Sala: None.  P11
.180 TaqMan-based miRNA profiles classify expression in breast cancer  P11
.182 and leukemia Detection of miRNA Expression in Glial Tumors L. Wong, N. Mulakken, D. Ridzon, P. Brzoska; S. Yilmaz Susluer1, C. Biray Avcı1, Z. Dogan Sigva1, T. Akalin2, T. Dalbasti3, N. Oktar3, C. Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. Gunduz1; 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pathology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University MicroRNAs are small endogenous RNA molecules that play an important Faculty of Medicine Department of Neurosurgery, Izmir, Turkey. role in the regulation of developmental and physiological processes. Studies indicate that microRNAs are involved in the multilevel regulation of gene expression targeting a battery of mRNA genes. Researchers have discovered MicroRNAs (miRNA) are single strand, non-coding RNA molecules with the that microRNAs are efficacious biomarkers for the classification of tumors length of 18-25 nucleotides and play major roles in the regulation of gene and prediction of outcome for many diseases because of their evolutiona- expression. Mature miRNA molecules are partially complementary to one ry conservation, unique expression signatures, relative stability, and abun- or more messenger RNAs and cause tumor suppressor or oncogenic mRNA dance. To identify potential candidates involved in tumor progression in degradation or inhibition of the protein translation. humans, we examined the expression of 750 microRNAs using Applied Bio- In this study it is aimed to investigate the expression profiles of miRNAs in systems TaqMan® MicroRNA Assays in five human breast cancer cell lines, 50 cases diagnosed with brain tumor (32 glioblastoma cases (GBM)-grade- and two human leukemia cell lines. Data from leukemia cell lines were com- IV, 10 diffuse astrocytoma cases (DA)-grade-II, 8 anaplastic oligodendro- pared to two cell lines of normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and glioma cases (AO)-grade-III) and in brain tumor cell lines as control group breast cancer cell lines were compared to normal breast tissue. In addition, (U-87MG, U-118MG and LN18). Expression profiles of miRNAs were studied the two groups of cancer samples were examined relative to the expression by microarray method. Putative target genes of miRNAs that showed signi- levels of 38 different normal tissues. We confirmed several microRNAs that ficant changes were identified by using 7 databases. were previously identified to be associated with cancer. We also determined In GBM cases, miR-495 and miR-432 expression showed significant 2-fold a group of microRNAs that were consistently differentially expressed rela- increase and miR-708-3p, mir-339-5p and miR-4286 expressions 4-fold, tive to the normal samples in all cancer cell lines. In addition, we identified mir-331-3p, miR-625-3p, and miR-20a-3p showed 5-fold reduction com- microRNAs that are uniquely expressed in breast cancer but not in Leuke- pared to control group. mir-204 expression was significantly decreased 6 mia cell lines. Further, microRNA families that are represented frequently in times in AO cases compared to control group. There was a significant increa- the list of significant microRNAs in both types of cancers were determined. se in 18 miRNAs and decrease in 7 miRNAs in DA cases compared to control These findings provide insight into possible common and distinct pathways group. When miRNA expressions of DA, AO and GBM cases compared with between breast cancer and leukemia and the role of microRNAs in human each other, significant differences were found in 29 miRNA. In all cases miR- c La.n Wceorn.g: None. N. Mulakken: None. D. Ridzon: None. P. Brzoska: None. 21 expression level was high and no mir-124 expression was detected. Ultimately, novel genes could be effective in tumor development supposed to be regulated by miRNAs. Regulation of miRNA expression may affect spe- c Sif.i Yc iglmenaez tSaursgleutesr i:n N bornaei.n C t.u Bmiroarys .Avcı: None. Z. Dogan Sigva: None. T.  P11
.181 Akalin: None. T. Dalbasti: None. N. Oktar: None. C. Gunduz: None. miRNA clusters in cromosome 7 including MIR29, MIR25, MIR93 and MIR106 genes associate with gastric cancer in Europeans: Results from the EPIC-EURGAST study Y. Espinosa-Parrilla1,2, X. Muñoz3,4, C. Bonet4,5, N. Garcia4,5, A. Venceslá4,5, E. Riboli6, C.  P11
.183 Gonzalez4,5, N. Sala4,5; Identification by next-generation sequencing of an unexpected 1Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Barcelona, Spain, nonsense mutation in the MSH2 gene in a family suspected to have a 2ICBM, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 3Hereditary BRCA mutation. Cancer Program, Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology C. Dugast1, C. Abadie1, B. Gery1, J. Tinat2, A. de Lajarte-Thirouard3, A. Mosser4, D. Vaur5,6, –IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 4Molecular Epidemiology Group, Translational Research S. Odent1; Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology –IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 5Unit of 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Rennes Sud University Hospital, Rennes, France, 2Rouen Nutrition, Environment and Cancer, Cancer Epidemiology Research Program, Catalan University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Rouen, France, 3Atalante pathologie, Institute of Oncology –IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 6Department of Epidemiology and cabinet of Pathology, Rennes, France, 4Molecular Genetic Department, Rennes University Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. Hospital Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 5Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics 308 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CLRCC François Baclesse, Caen, France, 6Inserm UMR 1079, Caen, France. France, 9Chirurgie orthopédique_Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 10Platform of biological ressources_Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, France. The new generation of sequencing strategies technologies is changing gene- tic diagnosis because of its huge sequencing capacity and decreasing cost. BACKGROUND: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common dominant Using this new approach, challenge for physicians will be to apprehend tumor predisposition syndrome affecting 1 in 3,500 individuals. The hall- clinical uses of the genetic data generated, even in gene panels. So far ge- marks of NF1 are the development of peripheral nerve sheath tumors either netic testing in inherited diseases is targeted, relying on recognition of a benign (dermal and plexiform neurofibromas) or malignant (MPNSTs). well-known clinical presentation evocative of a targeted predisposition. As METHODS: To comprehensively characterize the role of microRNAs in NF1 an ethical issue, patients will have to be counselled about potentials of the tumorigenesis, we analyzed 377 miRNAs expression using the 384-wells mi- technology to reveal other genBeRtiCc Aalterations than those initially searched, crofluidic TaqMan human microRNA Low Density Array in a large panel of 9 that may be relevant for their risk of future disease. We report the case of dermal and 41 plexiform neurofibromas, and 15 MPNSTs. a woman suspected to have a mutation because of the occurrence of RPTEESUNLTS: The most sPiTgEnNifi cantly upregulated miRNA in plexiform neuro- an ovarian sBeRroCpAapillar adenocarcinoma at age 62 and breast cancer iMn ShHe2r fibromas was miR-486-3p that targets the major tumor suppressor gene, sister at age 62. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis reveal no muta- . We confirmed downregulation at mRNA level. In plexiform tion for the genes but an unexpected nonsense mutation in the neurofibromas, we also report aberrant expression of four miRPNTAEsN involved gene further confirmed by direct Sanger sequencing method. Although Am- in the RAS-MAPK pathway (miR-370, miR-143, miR-181a, and miR-145). sterdam II criteria were not fulfilled, pedigree data had noted two cases of In MPNSTs, significant deregulated miRNAs were involved in repres- colon cancer respectively in a paternal aunt (age 69) and cousin (age 54), sion (miR-301a, miR-19a, and miR-H1O0X6 b), RAS-MAPK pathway regulation but among a large family. Intriguingly, neither microsatellite instability nor (Let-7b, miR-195, and miR-10b), mesenchymal transition (miR-200c, let-7b, loss of MMR protein expression were observed in the ovarian tumour. Given miR-135a, miR-135b, and miR-9), genes expression (miR-210, miR- the paucity of data on ovarian tumour in Lynch syndrome, classically descri- 196b, miR-10a, miR-10b, and miR-9), and cell PcyTcEleN progression (miR-195, bed as non serous and at a younger age, we discuss such unplanned results. let-7b, miR-20a, miR-210, miR-129-3p, miR-449a, and miR-106b). This report highlights importance of anticipation of such unexpected results CONCLUSION: We confirmed the implication of in genesis of plexiform wCi.t Dh uNgGaSs ti:n Ntroondeu. cCt.i oAnb aind icel:i nNiocanle d. Bai.l yG perrya:c Ntiocen.e. J. Tinat: None. A. de neurofibromas and MPNSTs in NF1. Markedly deregulated miRNAs may Lajarte-Thirouard: None. A. Mosser: None. D. Vaur: None. S. Odent: None. serve for the basis of potential diagnostic and predictive biomarkers and could represent novel strategies for effective pharmacological therapies of N I.F B1i ètuchmeo: rNso.ne. J. Masliah-Planchon: None. A. Luscan: None. I. Laurendeau: None. N. Ortonne: None. M. Hivelin: None. J. Varin: None. L. Valeyrie-Allanore:  P11
.184 None. V. Dumaine: None. L. Lantieri: None. K. Leroy: None. B. Parfait: None. P. Somatic cancer mutations and NGS panel diagnostics - translation to Wolkenstein: None. M. Vidaud: None. D. Vidaud: None. E. Pasmant: None. the clinic. C. Schroeder1, M. Sturm1, S. Junker1, M. Bitzer2, N. Malek2, B. Sipos3, H. Rammensee4, O. Rieß1, P. Bauer1; 1Department of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany,  P11
.187 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Department of Pathology, Mother-to-offspring inheritance of MLH1 promoter hypermethylation Tuebingen, Germany, 4Department of Immunology, Tuebingen, Germany. A. T. Hoejland1, H. Okkels2, P. H. Madsen2, T. D. Jensen1, M. B. Petersen1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Department of Biochemistry, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. Knowledge of tumor biology and especially cancer genetics is growing fast. Novel therapeutic strategies are continuously being developed (notably monoclonal antibodies and small molecules). This process was highly ac- MLH1 promoter methylation aMnaLlyHs1is is a relatively inexpensive test used to celerated with the advent of Next-Generation-Sequencing. So-called panel help distinguish between sporadic and non-sporadic colon cancers with loss analyses allow parallel examination of multiple genes on DNA-level within of expression of the proteins and PM S2
 by immunohistochemistry. days including detection of low level mutation mosaicism by deep sequen- However, in a subset of Lynch Syndrome (LS) cases a constitutional MLH1 cing. The results were proven to be of prognostic value and may predict epimutation has been identified. Until recently, constitutional MLH1 epimu- drug response. We used a commercially available hotspot panel (48 genes, tations were thought not to be passed on to the next generations, but cases Illumina) to analyze a total of 43 different tumor samples. The analysis en- of mother-to- offspring inheritance of constitutional MLH1 epimutations compassed both FFPE material and native tissue. Sequencing quality and have been reported a few times in the literature. results were comparable for both tissue types with an average number of We present a case that regards a deceased female suspected constitutional reads above 1000000 and a depth at 100x of above 97 %. Each mutation MLH1 epimutation carrier with three LS- associated cancers (endometrial was validated by a second method and proven to be somatic by compari- cancer age 60, colon cancer age 61 and rectal cancer age 75). There are no son to a reference sample (e.g. blood, normal tissue). A total of 24 somatic other LS-associated cancers in the pedigree. All cancers and a dermal lipo- mutations were identified in 19 different samples (19/43 = 0.44). We found fibroma from the deceased female were found to be hypermethylated in the well-known mutations in important cancer genes like KRAS, T P53
, CTNNB1, C-region of the MLH1 promoter. Screening of the MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PIK3CA and ERBB2, some of them of therapeutic relevance. An interdiscipli- PM S2
 genes in the three children of the proband revealed no pathogenic nary oncogenetic tumor board discussed the results. In addition two germ- mutations. Preliminary studies suggest the presence of hypermethylation of line variants were found and classified as variants of unknown significance the C-region of the MLH1 promoter in blood lymphocytes of all three child- (APC, MET). These two findings may be relevant for the families and genetic ren. Further investigation is ongoing and includes searching for a second hit counseling was offered to both patients. On the basis of our current results in the proband’s three LS-associated tumors and testing of the offspring and w Ce. Sacreh reoxetdenerd:i Nngo noeu. rM g.e Snteu rpman: eNlo tnoe a. Ss.e Jt uonf k~e r1:8 N0o gneen. Mes.. Bitzer: None. N. proband for epigenetic changes in other parts of the genome. Malek: None. B. Sipos: None. H. Rammensee: None. O. Rieß: None. P. Bauer: Hypermethylation is the most plausible cause of LS in the proband. None. T Ah.Te. aHbooevjela inndd:i cNaotnees. tHh.a Ot aknk eelps:i mNuontaet.i Po.nH c. aMna bdsee tnra: nNsofneerr. eTd.D t.o J tehnes eonff:s pring. None. M.B. Petersen: None.  P11
.185 MicroRNAome profiling in benign and malignant neurofibromatosis  P11
.188 type 1-associated nerve sheath tumors: evidences of PTEN pathway Involvement of the MLL gene in adult T-lymphoblastic leukemia alterations in early NF1 tumorigenesis S. Türkmen1,2, B. Timmermann3, G. Bartels4, C. Meyer5, S. Schwartz6, C. Haferlach7, H. I. Bièche1,2, J. Masliah-Planchon3,2, A. Luscan4,2, I. Laurendeau4,2, N. Ortonne5, M. Hivelin6,7, Rieder8, N. Goekbuget9, T. Burmeister10; J. Varin2, L. Valeyrie-Allanore8, V. Dumaine9, L. Lantieri6,7, K. Leroy10, B. Parfait4,2, P. 1Labor Berlin Charité Vivantes, Berlin, Germany, 2Universitätsmedizin Charité Berlin, Wolkenstein8, M. Vidaud4,2, D. Vidaud4,2, E. Pasmant4,2; Berlin, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 1Service de génétique_Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2UMR745 Inserm_Université Paris 4Medizinische Klinik fuer Haematologie,Onkologie und Tumorimmunologie Charite Descartes_Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris, France, 3Genetic CBF, Berlin, Germany, 5Institut fuer Pharmazeutische Biologie,Diagnostikzentrum department_Robert-Debré hospital, Paris, France, 4Biochimie et génétique moléculaire_ fuer akute Leukaemie (DCAL),Goethe-Universitaet,Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 5Département d‘anatomo-cytopathologie_Hôpital Henri- 6Medizinische Klinik fuer Haematologie,Onkologie und Tumorimmunologie,Charite,CBF, Mondor, Créteil, France, 6Chirurgie plastique et reconstructive_Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Berlin, Germany, 7MLLMuenchner Leukaemie Labor, Muenchen, Germany, 8Institut fuer Créteil, France, 7Department of plastic and reconstructive surgery_Hôpital Européen Humangenetikund Anthropologie,Heinrich-Heine-Universitaet, Duesseldorf, Germany, Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 8Dermatologie_Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Créteil, 9Medizinische Klinik II,Goethe-Universitaet, Frankfurt, Germany, 10Medizinische Klinik fˇr ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 309ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Haematologie,Onkologie und Tumorimmunologie,Charite CBF, Berlin, Germany. MLL tic abnormalities at diagnosis, with an important role on prognosis and While the ‘‘recombinome’’ is relatively well characterized in B-cell pre- tailored therapy. Conventional cytogenetics (CC) with fluorescence in cursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCPM ALLLL ), available data for adult situ hybridization (FISH) are performed to detect chromosome abnor- acute T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) are scarce. We performed fluo- malities. MLPA assay simultaneously detect 40 different chromosomal rescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for an split signal on 223 adult T- rearrangements(deletions/duplications) in a single reaction. The study aim ALL samples obtained within the framework of the German Multicenter ALL was to validate the MLPA assay in MDS samples comparing the results with 07/2003 therapy trial. Three biphenotypMicL Ll eukemias (T-ALL/AML) were the CC approach. Cell cultures and total DNA were obtained by bone marrow also included in the analysis. Samples showing any alteration by FISH were samples from 62 MDS patients (M:40, F:22, median age 73 years, range: 44- further investigated to characterizMe LthL e aberration. In addition, they 88 years). For each sample at least 20 metaphases were examined according were investigated for common genetic lesions known in T-ALL. Twenty-two G-banding protocol and two MLPA reactions were performed according to cases (9.5%) showed an abnMoLrLm al signal by FISH analysis. Most of the- the manufacturer‘s recommendations (MRC-Holland). Our study revealed se appeared to be deletions or gains but in five cases (2.1%) a chromosomal a good correlation between CC and MLPA, since 46 cases (74.2%) showed translocation invMoLlvLi-nAgF 6the gene was identified. The translocation part- identical results with both techniques. For the other 16 cases (25.8%), we nMeLrLs- aEnLdL chromosomal breakpoints were molecularly characterizMedL.L T-AhFre6e found different results. T-ALLs had an /t(6;11) and two bipheMnoLtLy pic leukemias had an In 5/16 samples (8%) CC analysis failed while the MLPA assay showed in /t(11;19). The chromosomal breakpoints in twoM oLfL the - one sample three chromosome deletions and no anomalies in the other positive cases were located outside the classical major breakpoint clu- samples. In the remaining 11/16 samples (17.8%) we found discrepancies. ster known from BCP ALL. In conclusionM, tLhLe spectrum of translocation First group included three samples (4.9%) in which MLPA detected sepa- partners in adult T-ALL much more resembles that of AML than that of BCP rately two different deletions and one trisomy, while CC did not show any ALL and thus the mechanisms byM wLhLi ch contributes to leukemogenesis alteration. The second group included 8 samples (12.9%) in which MLPA in adult T-ALL appear to differ from those in BCP ALL. Proposals are made did not identify any rearrangement. Our data suggest that MLPA, used in fSor. Tthüerk dmiaegnn: oNsotnice .a Bss. eTsismmmeenrtm oaf nn: Nofunsei.o Gn. gBeanretesl isn: Nadounelt. TC-.A MLLeyer: conjunction with CC, can improve diagnostic and prognostic assessment, None. S. Schwartz: None. C. Haferlach: None. H. Rieder: None. N. Goekbuget: particularly in MDS cases with karyotype failure or with small rearrange- None. T. Burmeister: None. mRe.An.t sC.ifarelli: None. O. Scarciolla: None. C. Dininno: None. L. Russo: None. A. Dell‘Acqua: None. G. Lauria: None. E. Vitullo: None. A. Ciancio: None. C. Mannarella: None. A. Fragasso: None.  P11
.189 The partial tandem duplication of MLL gene in patients with AML and cytogenetic abnormality of chromosome 11  P11
.191 I. Sarova1,2, J. Brezinova1, O. Fuchs1, A. Kostecka1, M. Vostry1, J. Filkukova1, S. Epigenetic changes in relation to asbestos exposure in malignant Ransdorfova1, S. Izakova2, J. Cermak1, Z. Zemanova2, K. Michalova1,2; pleural mesothelioma 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Center S. Guarrera1, E. Casalone1,2, G. Fiorito1, M. Betti3, D. Ferrante3, C. Digaetano1,2, F. Rosa1, A. of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Russo1,2, S. Tunesi3, M. Padoan3, A. Aspesi3, C. Casadio3, F. Ardissone2, E. Ruffini2, P. Betta4, General Faculty Hospital and 1 st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, Prague, R. Libener4, R. Guaschino4, E. Piccolini5, D. Mirabelli6,2, C. Magnani3,2, I. Dianzani3,2, G. Czech Republic. Matullo1,2; 1Human Genetics Foundation, Turin, Italy, 2University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 3University of MLL Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, 4Azienda Ospedaliera Nazionale SS, Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy, 5Santo Spirito Hospital, Casale Monferrato, Italy, The partial tandem duplication of the gene (PTD) has been described 6CPO-Piemonte and University of Turin, Turin, Italy. in bone marrow cells of 6 - 10% of adult patients with acute myeloid leu- kemia (AML) with normal karMyoLtLype and in most cases with trisomy 11 as a sole cytogenetic abnormality. We investigated 210 patients with AML at Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare and aggressive tumor diagnosis by RT-PCR and the PTD was proved and confirmed by DMNLAL strongly associated with asbestos exposure. Only 5-17% of individuals ex- sequencing in 50M oLfL them (23%). All 210 patients were examined by con- posed to asbestos develop MPM, suggesting the involvement of other envi- ventional cytogenetics and FISH with a locus-specific probe for the ronmental, genetic or epigenetic risk factors. gene (11q23.3). PTD were detected with: normal karyotype (n=21), 0 DNA methylation is an important mechanism of gene silencing in human mitosis (n=3), t(8;21)(q22;q22)/inv(16)(p13q22) (n=4), complex karyoty- malignancies. The relationship between aberrant DNA methylation and in- pe (n=5), and with other chromosome changes (n=17). Duplication of the flammation has been documented in many types of cancers, including MPM. exones 2 to 6 was the most frequent ones. Chromosome 11 abnormMaLliLty was Asbestos exposure may contribute to MPM onset through this relationship. identified in 12 patients: trisomy 11 (n=2), partial trisomy 11q (n=1), altera- We conducted an epigenome-wide scan searching for differentially me- tion of 11p (n=1), balanced reaMrLraLngement of 11p/11q (MnL= L1
), and gene thylated regions (DMR) in 40 MPM cases and 40 controls and high-exposed rearrangement (n=7; mostly t(9;11)(p22;q23)). versus low-exposed. Methylation status was measured for ~470k CpG sites In conclusion, patients with rearrangements or PTD constit ute in DNAs from lymphocytes, using the HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Il- the groups of AML patientsM wLLith specific clinical and biological features. lumina, S. Diego, CA). We pMroLvLed that these two different disrupting mechanisms can co-existto- Logistic regression analysis after adjustment for age, gender, center of re- gether. It is not clear, if one gene allele is carrier of both mutations or cruitment showed no significant methylation change of single CpG site asso- two alleles are affected or if they originated simultaneously or conse- ciated with MPM. However, a regional analByLsiCsA sPh owed multiple significant quently. Therefore, further analyses on the larger cohort of patients focused signaNlsN iAnT s evera-7l genomic regions. In particular, a significant decreased me- on molecular, biological and clinical relationship of these rearrangements in thylation (P<10 ) has been identified for (tumor suppressor gene) malignant processes are needed. and (expressed in non-small cell lung carcinoma) genes in exposed Supported by MHCR for conceptual development of research organization 0 I.0  S0
a2r3o7v3a6: N, RoVnOe.- VJ.F BNr6e4zi1n6o5v/a2: 0N1o2n,e G. OAC. FRu-Pc3h0s:2 N/1o2ne/.G A1.5 K7o.stecka: None. M. subjects compared with non exposed, whereas no significant difference has Vostry: None. J. Filkukova: None. S. Ransdorfova: None. S. Izakova: None. J. been found between in the overall cases and controls at the regional analy- Cermak: None. Z. Zemanova: None. K. Michalova: None. sis. These results suggest that different DNA methylation profiles can rela- ted to asbestos exposure induced tumorigenesis of MPM and that epigenetic cSh.a Gnugaersr aerrae: d Neotencet. aEb.l Ce aaslsaolo inne b: lNooonde D. GN.A F.iorito: None. M. Betti: None. D. Ferrante: None. C. Digaetano: None. F. Rosa: None. A. Russo: None. S.  P11
.190 Tunesi: None. M. Padoan: None. A. Aspesi: None. C. Casadio: None. F. Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) assay as a Ardissone: None. E. Ruffini: None. P. Betta: None. R. Libener: None. R. diagnostic tool to detect genomic rearrangements in myelodysplastic Guaschino: None. E. Piccolini: None. D. Mirabelli: None. C. Magnani: None. I. syndromes (MDS). Dianzani: None. G. Matullo: None. R. A. Cifarelli1, O. Scarciolla2, C. Dininno1, L. Russo3, A. Dell‘Acqua3, G. Lauria1, E. Vitullo4, A. Ciancio3, C. Mannarella3, A. Fragasso3; 1X-life, Centro Ricerche e Diagnosi, ASM-ARPAB, Matera, Italy, 2Medical Genetics – Hematology Unit, Matera Hospital, Matera, Italy, 3Hematology Unit, Matera Hospital, Italy, Matera, Italy, 4Clinical Pathology Unit, Matera Hospital, Italy, Matera, Italy. A 3p 1p 0roximately 50% of MDS patients present EbSonHe Gm 2ar0ro1w3 |c yPtAogRenISe-, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.192 Introduction First case of Muir-Torre syndrome caused by a germline mutation in PM S2
 A. Bier1, M. Jatzwauk1, J. Plaschke1, S. Reif1, F. R. Kreuz1, M. Kinzel2, S. Krüger1; Multiple myeloma (MM) is a clonal bone marrow disease characterized by 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Praxis für Medizinische the neoplastic transformation of differentiated B cells. In many newly dia- Genetik, Berlin, Germany. gnosed patients, the abnormal clones have a low proliferative activity and, therefore, most of the analyzable metaphase cells are derivine dsi tfurom normal hematopoiesis. As a result, only 30-40% of the new patients have an abnor- The autosomal dominant inherited Muir-Torre syndrome (MRTES, OMIM mal karyotype by conventional cytogenetics. Fluorescence hybridiza- #158320) is defined by the co-occurrence of internal malignancies with se- tMioant e(rFiIaSlH a)n idn cmreeatsheosd dsetection rate to 90%. Both numerical and structural baceous gland tumours or keratoacanthomas. The most common internal abnormalities are found and complex karyotypes are common. malignancies are gastrointestinal and genitourinary cancers. MRTES is a clinicaMl vLaHri1an Mt SoHf t2h eM LSyHn6ch syPnMdSr2ome (HNPCC, hereditary nonpolyposis co- The authors reviewed the cytogenetic results of 128 samples, referred to lorectal cancer) which is causedM bSyH m2u MtaLtHio1n,s in o MneS Hof6 the mismatch repair the Cytogenetic Laboratory of Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes and Alto genes , , or . MSH2 Douro, with a presumptive diagnosis of MM, between January 2008 and Fe- To date, germline mutations in , anMdLH1 have been reported bruary 2013. for MRTMESS.H  C6
ontradictory studies exist about the predominanc eP MofS 2 Cytogenetic and G-banding analysis were performed according to standard mutations in comparison to the frequency of mutations. Only a few tReecshunlitqsu aens.d I nd sisocmues sciaosnes, FISH technique was applied, with probe panel for cases of mutations have been published so far, whereas no mu- del(13)(q14), del(17)(p13), t(4;14) and t(11;14) (Vysis). tation in MRTES has been described. The patient presented here was diagnosed with right-sided colon cancer Metaphases were obtained in 95% cases. Of these, 44 cases had chromoso- and nasal sebaceous gland adenoma at the age of 34. Her sister was also mal abnormalities, mostly associated with MM [aneuploidies, del (13q), del diagnosed with a nasal sebaceous gland adenoma at the age of 37, however (17p)]. FISH technique allowed confirming the results obtained by conven- she had no pathological findings in colonoscopy. The parents of the siblings tional cytogenetics and enhancing detection rate in 3% of cases. were apparently MheLaHl1th yM. TShHe2 broth MerS rHe6fused any examination. The mPaMteSr2- Despite the small number of cases, the results obtained are consistent with nal grandmother suffered from breast cancer. those described in the literature and revealed the importance of conventio- No mutation in , and was iind esinlitcifoied. Analysis of n Pa. lB coytteolgheon: eNtoicnse i. nM t.h Seo suttuod: yN oofn Me. MM.. Guerra: None. M. Costa: None. A. revealed the heterozygous missense mutation c.53T>C, p.Ile18Thr in exon Carvalho: None. M. Cunha: None. O. Moutinho: None. R. Pinto Leite: None. 2, which has not been described yet. All four prediction programs applied (SIFT, PolyPhen-2, AGVGDP, MMSu2tationTaster) classified the mutPaMtioSn2 as pathogenic with highest scores.  P11
.195 As this is the first description of a mutation in a MRTES patient, Expression of copy number-dependent genes in patients with m Au. Btaiteiro: nNso snheo. uMld. J aaltszow baeu kc:o Nnsoindee. rJe.d P ilna stchhisk eco: nNdointeio. nS.. Reif: None. F.R. Multiple Myeloma Kreuz: None. M. Kinzel: None. S. Krüger: None. P. Nemec1, F. Kryukov1, E. Dementyeva1, J. Smetana1, I. Ihnatova1, L. Pour2, P. Kuglik1, R. Hajek3; 1Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2The University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital Ostrava, Brno, Czech Republic.  P11
.193 Changes of multidrug resistance genes expression in human leukemic and myeloma cells after exposure to resveratrol derivatives A. Bogucka-Kocka1, M. Cioch2, J. Kocki3; Whole genomic methods represents effective tool for studying genomic 1Dept. Pharmaceutical Botany, Lublin, Poland, 2Dept. Haematology, Medical University, changes in cancer cells. Aim of this study was to find and describe genes Lublin, Poland, 3Dept. Clinical Genetics, Medical University, Lublin, Poland. whose expression is dependent on the DNA copy number (gene dosage) in patients with multiple myeloma. Total of 57 patients with MM were simul- taneously examined by arrayCGH for DNA copy number variations (gain/ Multidrug resistance is a mechanism in which many of cancers develop the losses) utilizing Agilent Human Genome CGH Microarray 4x44K Arrays and chemotherapy resistance. The phenomenon of multidrug resistance (MDR) for gene expression utilizing Affymetrix GeneChip Human Gene 1.0 ST. Gene is the ability to actively pump in chemotherapeutics through the membrane dosage-dependent genes were defined by Spearman correlation [R>0.5, transport proteins in the cellular and nuclear membranes. p(FDR)<0.05] of CNV status and expression level and analysed using DAVID The aim of this study was to determine some genes expression levels chan- Bioinformatics software. ges regulating the process of multidrug resistance that occured in the leuke- Total of 852 from all 27391 transcripts were strongly and significantly de- mic cells under the influence of resveratrol and six derivatives (stilbenes). pendent on gene dosage. Cytogeneticaly, majority (25%) of all 852 genes Quantitative RT-PCR analysis demonstrated some significant differences in were located on chromosome 1 (with 19 genes mapped to 1q21 locus). the gene expression levels regulation. All the stilbenes caused a very high Other involved genes were mostly located on chromosomes 15 (8.7%), 19 MDR1 gene expression level reduction in the H9 lymphocytes. (8.7%), and chromosome 13 (8.6%). Pathway analysis showed most genes The MR P1
 gene expression was the lowest one in 1301 and J45.01 cell lines to be involved in PDGF pathway, ubiquitin proteasome pathway, Ras pa- after the exposure to some stilbenes. The MDR1 gene expression was the lo- thway and TNFR1 signaling pathway. west one in the EO L1
 cell lines after exposure to one stilbene. Two stilbenes Although almost all chromosomes have been at least once affected by either decreased MVP gene expression level in J45.01 cell line. gain or loss of genetic material, number of genes with affected exrrpession Our results have provided some preliminary data suggesting that the res- is relatively low. We anticipate two mechanism for expression level compen- veratrol and derivatives play an important part in the leukemia chemothe- sations: i) increase of related supressors activity in case of gains ii) impact rapy. of second allele in case of losses. This work was funded by the Polish State Committee for Scientific Research T Ph. iNse wmoerck: wNoans es.u Fp. pKorrytuekdo bvy: NIGoAne g. rEa.n Dtse mNTen 1ty1e1v5a4: aNnodn eN. TJ. 1 S3
m1e9t0a.na: None. I. Ihnatova: None. L. Pour: None. P. Kuglik: None. R. Hajek: None. (Project No: NN405162639) and was developed using the equipment purchased within the Project „The equipment of innovative laboratories doing research on new medicines used in the therapy of civilization and neoplastic diseases“ within the Operational Program Development of Ea-  P11
.196 stern Poland 2007 - 2013, Priority Axis I Modern Economy, Operations I.3 Comprehensive screening of the incidence of LOH/UPD and copy I An.n Bovoagtuiocnka P-Kroomckoat:i oNno.ne. M. Cioch: None. J. Kocki: None. number abnormalities in cohort of newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients from Czech centers: first results J. Smetana1,2, M. Wayhelova1, A. Mikulasova1,2, H. Greslikova2, R. Kupska2, M. Almasi3, R. Hajek2,3, P. Kuglik1;  P11
.194 1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty Multiple myeloma: importance of cytogenetic study of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic;, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Babak P. Botelho1, M. Souto1, M. Guerra2, M. Costa2, A. Carvalho2, M. Cunha2, O. Moutinho1,3, R. Myeloma Group, Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk Pinto Leite1; University, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Internal 1Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Hematooncology, University Hospital Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Republic. Portugal, 2Serviço de Hematologia, Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 3Serviço de Ginecologia/Obstetricia, Vila Real, Portugal. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEM | uWltiWpleW m.yEeSloHmGa .(OMMR)G is the second most common hematological m 3a 1li 1g-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.198 Identification of a patient with atypical MUTYH-associated polyposis nancy. It is characterized by malignant transformation of clonal proliferati- through detection of the KRAS c.34G>T mutation in liver metastasis on of B-lymphocytes and their accumulation in bone marrow. Our previous M. P. Buisine1,2,3, S. Cattan1, J. Leclerc1,2,3, V. Nicolas1, A. Wacrenier1, S. Lejeune1; results showed large genetic heterogeneity among MM patients when geno- 1University Hospital, Lille, France, 2UMR Inserm 837, Lille, France, 3Lille North of France me-wide analyses were done. In order to obtain more detailed description of University, Lille, France. genetic lesions in MM we utilized novel high-density CGH+SNP microarrays for detection of LOH/UPD regions and copy number abnormalities (CNAs) and in cohort of 48 MM patients. Overall, we found 16 regions affected with MUTMYUHT-aYsHsociated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal recessive colorectal LOH/UPD in 23% (11/48) of cases. The most frequently was affected chro- adenomatous polyposis syndrome due to bi-allelic germ line mutations in mosome 6p in 8.3% (4/48); other regions in single cases were found in the gene that encodesA PaC DNA gKlRycAoSsylase involved in base excision chromosome 4, 7, 9, 11, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20 and 22. repair. A deficiency of MUTYH function results in somatic G:C>T:A transver- The most common observed genetic lesions were trisomies of odd-number- sions that can be observed inK RAS and genes. ded chrmosomes (3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 15, 19 and 21), gain 1q, and monosomy 13. We report the case of a 33-year-old woman with atypical MAP, diagnosed We observed loss of genetic material in loci for genes associated with ad- via detection of the somatic c.34G>T mutation. The patient was admit- verse prognosis for MM patients in 1p32.3 (FAF1, CDKN2C), 11q22 (BIR C2
, ted to our institution with stercoral peritonitis and liver nodules diagnosed BIR C3
), 14q32.32 (TRAF3, AMN) and 16q12.1 (CYLD), which are associated initially as abscesses upon imagery. Further investigation revealed hepatic with deregulations of important signaling pathways such as NF-κB (TRAF3, metastasis of an occult colonic cancer. Given her young age, she was sent to CYLD, BIR C2
, BIR C3
), or essential for cell cycle (CDKN2C, RB1) and apopto- the Oncogenetics Unit even if family history was negative. The hypothesis of sis (WWOX, FAF1). Lynch syndrome was excluded by the tumor phenotype (microsatellite stab- This study was supported by research by grants N S10207
, NT11154, lKeR pAhSenotype and maintenance of expression MofU MTYMHR proteins). Rather, the NT13190, NT12130, NT13190 and NT13492 from the Internal Grant Agency diagnosis of MAP was suspected on the basis of the presence of the somatic of the Ministry of Health, Czech Ministry of Health for conceptual develop- c.34G>T mutation in liver metastasis. gene sequence analy- ment of research organization 65269705 and OP VK CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0183 sis identified two germ line mutations: c.[494A>G];[1395_1397delGGA] p Jr.o Sjemcet.tana: None. M. Wayhelova: None. A. Mikulasova: None. H. Greslikova: (p.[Tyr165Cys];[Glu466del]) (refseq NM_001048171.1) confirming the dia- None. R. Kupska: None. M. Almasi: None. R. Hajek: None. P. Kuglik: None. gnosis of MAP. Twelve months later, total colectomy was finally performed, which showed the presence of an adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon and more than 30 adenomatous polyps.  P11
.197 This case was interesting in view of the unusual presentationK oRfA MSAP, with Multiple primary malignant tumours: Clinical comparison of stercoral peritonitis revealing metastatic colon cancer in a 33-year-old wo- patients with and without detected germline mutations in cancer man. Moreover, it highlights the potential value of the somatic c.34G>T susceptibility genes. m Mu.Pt.a Btiuoins ifnoer: i Ndeonntei.f ySi.n Cga pttaatnie: nNtosn we.i tJh. aLteycpleicrca:l MNoAnPe.. V. Nicolas: None. A. Wacrenier: None. S. Lejeune: None. J. Whitworth, E. Maher; Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom.  P11
.199 Multiple primary malignancies (MPM) represent a significant proportion of The t(2;11)(p21;q23) without MLL rearrangement - a possible overall cancer diagnoses. Individuals diagnosed with a primary cancer are marker of good prognosis in MDS patients more likely to develop a (second) malignancy than the general population, P. Dvorak1, D. Lysak2, S. Vokurka2, K. Michalova3, I. Sarova3, A. Jonasova4, M. Hruba1, A. which can be explained in part by inherited genetic predisposition. In addi- Rykovska1, I. Subrt5; tion to MPM in itself, predisposition can be suggested by clinical factors such 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 2Department of Haematology and Oncology, University Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech as positive family history and early age of diagnosis. Republic, 3Cytogenetic Department, Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion; Individuals diagnosed with two or more malignancies at a relatively young Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory age (≤60) may be more likely to harbour germline mutations in cancer sus- Diagnostics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles Univ., Prague, ceptibility genes. 210 such patients were identified among referrals to a UK Czech Republic, 41st Department of Internal Medicine, General Faculty Hospital and 1st cancer genetics service, 157 of whom had no demonstrated mutation despi- Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute te undergoing germline genetic testing in 71 cases. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Pilsen;Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles Clinical parameters including tumour diagnosis age, Manchester score and University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. revised Bethesda criteria (cases involving breast and colorectal cancers re- spectively) were compared between groups with and without detected mu- de novo tations. A multiple tumour score based on Manchester score but incorpora- Chromosomal abnormalities are detected in approximately 50% of patients ting all malignancies in a single lineage was also applied. with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and are of great value for Results are shown in the table. Of note was the similarity in tumour diagno- the diagdneo nsoisv,o classification and prognostic stratification. However, some sis age and the fact that around a fifth of patients without mutations had a non-random chromosomal changes, which can be found in approximately multiple tumour or Manchester score higher than the mutation group medi- 10% of MDS patients, still don’t have clearly defined prognostic va- an. These data suggest that any MPM might be a useful clinical indicator of lue. dTeh en ot(v2o;11)(p21;q23) translocation has an overall frequency of approxi- germline mutations in established or novel cancer susceptibility genes. mately 1% and belongs to the group of abnormalities that are characteristic Comparison of clinical measuMreust baetitowne egnro gurpou Npso mutation group for MDS. Patients with the t(2;11)(p21;q23) have been shown to All cases with and without detected mNu =t a5t3ion N = 157 share some common clinicopathological features like lower age compared to the median age of MDS patients at diagnosis (mostly under 60) and strong male predominance (3M:1F). Cytological or histological assessment of bone Mean age of tumour diagnosis 44 46 mMLaLrrow usually reveals only mildly presented MDS with marked dysplasia Mean multiple tumour score 20.7 13.2 in megakaryopoiesis. Recently, it was proved that t(2;11)(p21;q23) without Median multiple tumour score 17 12 gene rearrangement results not in direct oncogene activation but in % cases with multiple tumour score higher tChaasne sm iuntvaotilovnin ggr oburepa mste cdaianncers NN =/ 2A 5 N =2 11 07 up-regulJaUtiNonS ToAf Tm3iR-125BbA-1K.1 The over-expression of miR-125b has been shown to target several important genes for hematopoietic developmMeLnLt such as , , and . However, most of the clinical data dealing Mean Manchester score 25.3 13.9 with the t(2;11)(p21;q23) has been collected without knMoLwLn status of . Median Manchester score 20 14 Contrary to other studies, this is the first report with evaluation of the clini- % cases with Manchester score ≥ 15 80 38.3 cal outcome of patients with the translocation without being affected. % cases with Manchester score higher than N/A 20.5 Despite the low number of cases in our study (7 patients), our results indi- Cmausteasti ionnv gorlvoiunpg m coedloiarnectal cancers N = 25 N = 41 cate that the t(2;11)(p21;q23) could be associated with a good prognosis for MDS patients. S Pu. pDpvoorrtaekd: bNyo nger.a Dnt. LRyVsOa-kV: FNNo6n4e.1  S6
.5 V/o2k0u1r2ka: None. K. Michalova: None. I. % fJo.r c W Mas hSe Iis t t ww esoi tt rih nth g≥ : 1 N R oe nv ei .s e Ed . B Me at hhe es rd : a N c or nit ee .ria 84 58.5 S Sa ur bo rv t:a N: oN no en .e. A. Jonasova: None. M. Hruba: None. A. Rykovska: None. I. 312 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.200 Oncologic phenotype of Peripheral neuroblastic tumours associated PHOX2B with PHOX2B mutations. Luciferase activity has revealed several molecules effective in down-regula- S. Heide1, F. Bourdeaut2,3, J. Amiel4, G. Pierron5, O. Delattre2, C. Jeanne-Pasquier6, O. ting gene expression, actually under investigation to identify regu- Kerdraon7, O. Minckes8, M. Peuchmaur1; lEat. oDriy Z paantnhiw: Nayosn eth. Rro. uRgahv awzhzoiclho :t Nheoyn ea.c It. oCne cthchee PrHinOi:X N2oBn ep.r To.m Boatcehre.tti: None. 1Service de pathologie, APHP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2INSERM U830, Génétique et Biologie des cancers, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 3Service d‘oncologie pédiatrique, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 4INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Unité de Génétique Somatique, Institut Curie, Paris, France,  P11
.202 6Service d‘Anatomie pathologique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen, Transduction of Neurofibromin corrects the mechanosensoric France, 7Institut de Pathologie, Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire de Lille, blindness in cultured NF1 haploinsufficient fibroblasts Lille, France, 8Unité d‘onco-hématologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen, Caen, K. Mellert1, S. Lechner2, M. Lamla3, K. Scheffzek2, D. Kaufmann1; France. 1University of Ulm, Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Division of Biological Chemistry, Biocenter Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Organic Chemistry III, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. PHOX2B gene encodes for a homeobox transcription factor involved in auto- nomic neuron development, and regulates the transcription of key enzymes of the catecholamine synthesis, including the Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). Recently, we found a new function of neurofibromin in the sensoric mecha- Germline mutations in PHOX2B predispose to peripheral neuroblastic tu- nism to submicron topographies. In cultured NF1 (Neurofibromatosis type mors (PNT), frequently in association with other neurocristopathies such as 1) haploinsufficient fibroblasts a partial mechanosensoric blindness was Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) or congenital central hypoventilation syndro- characterized. Here, we investigated whether transduction of neurofibro- me (CCHS). These syndromic presentations are commonly thought to have a min corrects the mechanosensoric blindness in NF1 haploinsufficient fibro- good prognosis. Although some in vitro data suggest PHOX2B mutations im- blasts. The partial mechanosensoric blindness was measured as reduced pair neuronal differentiation, their physiopathological role in PNT remains orientation of the cells on defined submicron topographies. To overcome the speculative. common problem of endosomal entrapment of transduced proteins, com- We have analysed eight patients from six different families presenting with bination treatments of transduction and endosomolytic treatments were peripheral neuroblastic tumors associated with non-polyalanine expansion performed. In these experiments, the orientation of NF1 haploinsufficient mutations in PHOX2B. We describe clinical features, somatic arrayCGH pro- fibroblasts increased by inducing an uptake of functional recombinant neu- files, and histological pattern including INPC (International Neuroblastoma rofibromin. The partial mechanosensoric blindness is reduced by these Pathology Classification) and immunohistochemistry with PHOX2B and TH treatments. These data suggest that dysregulations in cultured NF1 cells can antibodies. b Ke. cMoerlrleecrtt:e Nd obnye .a S c.e Llleuclahrn reer:p Nlaocneem. Men. tL oafm tlhae: Nlaocnkein. gK .p Sroctheeifnfz.ek: None. D. Kaufmann: None. Four patients had hypoventilation syndrome and/or HSCR, four had no neurocristopathy. We found three ganglioneuromas and two ganglioneu- roblastomas, hence illustrating that PHOX2B mutations are found in pre- dominantly differentiated tumors. All tumours showed a retained nuclear  P11
.204 expression of PHOX2B protein, while TH was variably expressed. Among New markers of susceptibility to osteosarcoma: microRNAs the syndromic forms, we report two patients with stage 4 disease and one N. Bilbao-Aldaiturriaga1, E. López-López1, I. Martin-Guerrero1, A. Gutierrez-Camino1, A. Patiño-García1, M. Zalacain-Diez2, A. Garcia-Orad1; patient with stage 3 disease. Segmental chromosomal rearrangements, as- 1Basque Country University, Leioa, Spain, 2University Clinic of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. sociated with aggressive disease, were found in four tumours by arrayCGH profiling. One patient died of the tumour, one died of hypoventilation and six patients were alive, with a median 14 months follow-up. Purpose Our series finally suggests that PHOX2B mutations preclude neither tumour Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone cancer in children and differentiation nor TH expression, but may be associated with aggressive g Se.n Hoemidice :p Naottneer.n Fs.. Bourdeaut: None. J. Amiel: None. G. Pierron: None. O. young adults. Susceptibility to osteosarcoma is due, at least in part, to com- Delattre: None. C. Jeanne-Pasquier: None. O. Kerdraon: None. O. Minckes: plex and multiple genetic factors. None. M. Peuchmaur: None. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding RNAs that act as negative regulators of the expression of other genes. Deregulated miRNAs have been reported in osteosarcoma, showing their importance in the disease. Recent studies have provided evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in  P11
.201 miRNA-related genes can affect miRNA levels and function. These SNPs have PHOX2B over-expression as a pathogenic mechanism in been associated to risk in different cancers, but such studies are lacking in neuroblastoma E. Di Zanni1, R. Ravazzolo1,2, I. Ceccherini1, T. Bachetti1; osteosarcoma. 1Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare/U.O.C. Genetica Medica Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of miRNA-related SNPs in sus- Italy, 2DINOGMI, Università di Genova e CEBR, Genova, Italy. ceptibility to osteosarcoma. Materials and Methods We analyzed 99 blood samples from osteosarcoma patients and 387 healthy Neuroblastoma (NB) is an embryonic tumor derived from impaired neural controls. We studied 118 SNPs in pre-miRNAs and in miRNA biogenesis pa- crest cells differentiation. The heterogeneous genetic etiology is suggested thway genes. by the identification of gain of function mutations of genes encoding for the Results receptor tyrosine kinase Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) and the tran- For the first time, six polymorphisms in miRNA related genes were signi- scription faPcHtoOrX  P2
aBired-like Homeobox 2B (PHOX2B) in a limited proportion ficantly associated (p<0.05) with osteosarcoma risk. Of them, 3 were located of NB patients. in genes involved in miRNAs biogenesis (CNOT1, CNOT4 and SND1) and 3 in A rPoHleO Xfo2rB in NB is strengthened also by the following observati- miRNA genes (mir-585, mir-612 and mir-499). ons: ALK Conclusion 1. and ALK genes over-expression in NB cell lines and samples; Our results suggest that SNPs in miRNAs and miRNA biogenesis pathway 2. PHOX2B-mediated transcriptional regulation. PHOX2B may affect osteosarcoma susceptibility. For all these reasons, and in particular for the early role of PHOX2B in de- This project was supported by RETICS (RD/06/0020/0048), UPV/EHU (UFI velopment, we are investigating mechanisms that may underlie 11/35) Basque Government (GI C10
/71). Support by SGIker (UPV/EHU) is expression. g Nr.a Bteiflbualloy- aAcldkaniotuwrlreiadggae:d N.one. E. López-López: None. I. Martin-Guerrero: None. A. Gutierrez-Camino: None. A. Patiño-García: None. M. Zalacain-Diez: We have planned to perform a drug repositioning approach to PidHeOnXti2fBy pa- None. A. Garcia-Orad: None. thways responsible for driving such ovPeHrO-eXx2pBression. Luci- Wferea sheave produced IMR32 NB cell line (characterized by high ex- pression) stably transfected with the promoter upstream the gene and have performed the following studies: 1P.H BOyX 2aB cell-based approach, a little set of molecules, selected on the basis of their effects in other diseases models, has been tested for their role on promoter activity, gene expression and protein amount; 2. By a high throughput PaHppOrXo2aBch, a library of 43 molecules specifically ac- ting on epigenetics mechanisms has been added to the NB cell line and ana- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 313 lyzed for their effects of transcription.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.205  P11
.207 Could triaging family history of cancer during palliative care enable Gain-of-function HIF2A mutations in patients with paraganglioma or earlier genetic counselling intervention? pheochromocytoma N. S. Lakhani1,2, J. Weir3, A. Allford4, J. Kai5, J. G. Barwell1,6,7; A. BUFFET1,2, S. SMATI3, L. MANSUY4, M. MENARA1, C. SIMIAN2, N. ABERMI L2
,5, J. 1Leicester Royal Infirmary - UHL NHS trust, Department of Clinical Genetics, Leicester, FAVIER1,5, P. PLOUIN1,5,6, A. MURAT3, B. CARIOU3, A. GIMENEZ-ROQUEPLO1,2,5; United Kingdom, 2University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 3Leicester Royal 1INSERM, UMR970, PARCC-HEGP, Paris, France, 2Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Infirmary - UHL NHS trust, Leicester, United Kingdom, 4Genetic Alliance - UK, London, Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Génétique, Paris, France, 3Clinique United Kingdom, 5University of Nottingham, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, d‘Endocrinologie, l‘Insitut du Thorax, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 4Département Nottingham, United Kingdom, 6LNR-CLAHRC, Leicester, United Kingdom, 7GENIE, d‘Oncologie et d‘Hématologie Pédiatriques et de Thérapie Cellulaire, Centre Hospitalier Leicester, United Kingdom. Universitaire de Nancy, Hôpital d‘Enfants, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 5Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, Paris Cité Sorbonne, Paris, Background. France, 6Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Médecine Vasculaire et Hypertension Artérielle, Paris, France. Patients are commonly referred to cancer genetics services when all affected family members are deceased. This makes genetic testing HIF2A HIF2A aMnedth roisdks .a ssessment more difficult, reducing the benefit from screening and germline mutations cause polycythemia but recently HIFs2oAmatic prophylactic treatment. mutations were described in several patients with polycythemia and para- Observational, retrospective, cohort study of 508 randomly selec- ganglioma (PGL) or pheochromocytoma (PH). Herein, we report mu- ted patients referred to a regional cancer genetics unit, using review of case tations in three different patients with PH or PGL. Patient 1 was a woman notes to explore whether a simple ctlhinrieceal ‘3, 2, 1’ family history rule could suffering from congenital polycythemia diagnosed at 16 years, operated on have been used to improvet wtiomely and appropriate referornaels for genetic as- for a PH at 45 years and for abdominal PGL at 64 years. She was also dia- sessment. The ‘3, 2, 1’ criteria are: affected relatives with the same/ gnosed for a somatostatinoma. Patient 2 was operated on PH at 24 years aRsessoucltisated cancers, across generations, with at least person affected and was then lost to follow-up. Patient 3 was a child suffering from polycy- aged under the age of 50 years. tPhHeDm2ia from infancy and operated on for non-funHcIFti2oAnal adrenal PGL at 11 . Most (71% [362]) genetic risk assessment referrals were in unaffec- years. No germline mutations on the main PGL susceptibility genes nor in ted individuals and 22% (80) of these were referred after all affected family geneH IwFe2rAe identified. We then sequenced gene in the DNA ex- members had died, including 24% (19) who lost their last remaining affec- tracted from paraffin-embedded tumors of the three patients. We identified ted relative in the previous year. Most (59% [301]) referrals met all ‘3, 2, 1’ a somatic heterozygous mutation in PH, PGL and somatostatinoma of cCrointecrluias,i oann.d 67% of these could have been made earlier in clinical practice. patient 1 (c.1586T>C; p.Leu529PHroIF)2 aAnd in the PH of patient 2 (c.1591C>T; A further 23% (115) met two of the three criteria. p.Pro531Ser) but both mutations were absent in the corresponding germli- Using a simple clinical ‘3, 2, 13, 2, 1’ family history rule in cancer ne DNA. In patient 3, we found a heterozygous mutation (c.1625T>C; care and particularly in palliative care could enable earlier cancer genetic p.Leu542Pro) at somatic level while the mutation was also pHreIFse2nAt- at mo- risk assessment for unaffected relatives, improving the potential to benefit f Nro.Sm. Ltaarkgheatneid: Nscorneee.n Ji.n Wg eainr:d N inotneer. vAe.n Atilolfno.rd: None. J. Kai: None. J.G. saic stage at germline level. All mutations disrupt the hydroxylation domain Barwell: None. of HIF-2α protein. Altogether, these reports demonstrate that related syndrome is due to a postzygotic genetic event occurring at an early de- velopmental stage that can affect males or females. A germline mosaicism should always be considered during the genetic counseling of a newly iden-  P11
.206 tAif.i eBdu pffaetti:e Nnot.ne. S. Smati: None. L. Mansuy: None. M. Menara: None. C. Altered interphase FISH profiles of chromosomes 4, 8q24 and 9q34 Simian: None. N. Abermil: None. J. Favier: None. P. Plouin: None. A. Murat: in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma are associated with a poorer None. B. Cariou: None. A. Gimenez-roqueplo: None. patient outcome. M. L. Gutiérrez1, D. G. Hernández-Mejía1, O. Bengoechea2, M. González-González1, M. E. Sarasquete1,2, M. M. Abad2, L. Corchete1,2, E. Fonseca2, M. Gonzalez-Diaz2, L. Muñoz- Bellvis2, A. Orfao1, J. M. Sayagués1;  P11
.208 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario de Next generation sequencing (NGS) for pheochromocytoma/ Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. paraganglioma genetic testing Introduction. E. KHALIFA1,2, C. Leschi1, C. Simian1, L. Mansour-Hendili1,2, N. Abermil1,2, A. Venisse1, V. Nau1, F. Le Quellec1, X. Jeunemaitre1,2, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1,2; Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a fatal disea- 1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Génétique, PARIS, France, 2Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, Paris Cité se with an overall survival (OS) of almost 5-years. Currently, no consistent Sorbonne, Paris, France. tumor markers exist which contribute to predict patient prognosis and/or sPuartvieivnatls. Haenrde wMee tahnoadlysz:e the cytogenetic profile of PDAC tumors and its act on patient survival. BACKGROUND: Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGL) are rare The frequency and prognostic impact of the copy sporadic or familial eSnDdHocBriSnDe HtuDmVoHrsL. CRuErTrenSDtlHy, Cgermline mNuFt1atiToMnsE Mat1 d2i7f- number alterations of chromosomes 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 17, 18, 20 and Y, were ana- MferAeXntS gDeHnAesS hDaHveA bF2een ideHnIFti2fiAed in around 35% of the cases. The major sus- lyzed by iFISH (n=21probes) in 55 PDAC patients. The prognostic value ceptibility genSeDsH aBreS DHD,S DHC , V,H L , whereas , , of chromosomal alterations showing an impact on OS were validated in a , , and are mutated in <10% of the cases. Germline eRxetseurnltasl: cohort of PDAC patients analyzed by comparative-genomic arrays mutations in , , and explain more than 80% of inheri- from public databases (n=44 cases). ted PPGL. Overall, for all alterations identified only alterations of chromoso- OBJECTIVE: To develop and implement a NGS-based workflow for a one- mes 4 and 9q34 as well gains of chromosome 8q24 (p=.04; p=.01and p=.01, step assay PPGL genetic screening. SDHB respectively) were associated with a shorter patient OS. The prognostic MSDEHTDHOSTDDMSH:C TogethVeHrL with Multiplicom, we designed and optimized the SDH impact of 8q24 chromosome gains and changes at chromosome 9q34 were MASTR assay, enabling the amplification of the coding regions of , confirmed in the external dataset (p=.05 and p=.03, respectively). Based on , and (step 1) and then to incorporate molecular barcodes these cytogenetic variables a scoring system was built and patients were (Multiplex Identifiers - MIDs) in each amplified product (step 2). NGS was classified into 3 different risk groups: low-(no adverse cytogenetic features), performed on a Roche GS Junior system. Twenty-eight DNA samples contai- iCnotnercmluesdioiante: -(one adverse feature) and high-risk (>1 adverse features) with ning various variants and mutations, previously identified by Sanger method OS rates at 4-years of: 80%, 16% and 0%, respectively (p<.001). or MLPA, were used. The sequencing data were analysed with AVA (Ampli- Here we show that alterations of chromosomes 4, 8q24 and con Variant Analyzer, Roche) and SeqNext software (JSI Medical Systems). 9q34 in PDAC tumors are associated with a poorer patient outcome. Addi- RESULTS: All the variants previously identified by Sanger sequencing of the tional prospective studies in larger series of patients are necessary to con- f Mir.mL. tGhue tciélirnreicza: lN uotnileit.y D o.Gf t. hHee nrneáwn dperzo-gMneojsíat:i cN monaer.k Oer. sB heenrgeo iedcehnetaif:i eNdo.ne. M. 28 patients were found with the new NGS PPGL workflow. The validation is González-González: None. M.E. Sarasquete: None. M.M. Abad: None. L. yet ongoing on a set of new patients blindly analysed in comparison with Corchete: None. E. Fonseca: None. M. Gonzalez-Diaz: None. L. Muñoz- our routine direct Sanger sequenRcEinTgM stArXategy.TMEM127 Bellvis: None. A. Orfao: None. J.M. Sayagués: None. CONCLUSION: Our first results suggest that this strategy is a cost-effective option for PPGL genetic testing. , and will be further ad- ded in the assay in order to test seven PPGL susceptibility genes in a single rEu.n K.halifa: None. C. Leschi: None. C. Simian: None. L. Mansour-Hendili: None. N. Abermil: None. A. Venisse: None. V. Nau: None. F. Le Quellec: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. A. Gimenez-Roqueplo: None. 314 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.209  P11
.211 Preliminary data on AIP and AHR genotyping in apparently sporadic Molecular-genetic investgation of hereditary predisposition to acromegalic patients. different forms of large intestine`s polyposis P. D. Romeo1,2, M. Ragonese1, S. Puglisi1, M. L. Torre1, F. Ferraù1, A. Albani1, O. R. Cotta1, C. A. S. Tsukanov, Y. A. Shelygin, V. N. Kashnikov, A. M. Kuzminov, I. Y. Sachkov, S. V. Salpietro2, C. Rigoli2, F. Trimarchi1, S. Cannavò1; Zavadskiy, V. P. Shubin, N. I. Pospekhova; 1Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine – Endocrinology; University of Ministry of Health / State Scientific Center of Coloproctology, Moscow, Russian Messina, Messina, Italy, 2Department of Pediatric, Gynecological, Microbiological and Federation. Biomedical Sciences – Genetics and Immunology Pediatrics; University of Messina, Messina, Italy. Context: AIP Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) - is an important inherited CRC sAynPdCrome. It is caused by a germline mutation in the adenomatous polypo- Germline mutations of the (aryl-hydrocarbon receptor in- sis coli MYH teracting protein) gene are associated with a predisposition to pituitary ( ) gene and it is most often MYH aOdbejneoctmivaes. Such mutations are found in about half of patients with familial inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Inherited mutations in acromegaly, but penetrance is incomplete. gene can also provide these diseases. Biallelic mutations are the gene- : This is a preliminary study concerning genotyping of AIP and tic reason of anM aYuHtosomal APaHtRie gnetnse as nind aM semtahlol dgrso: up of acromegalic patients with sporaAdIPic pituiAtaHrRy recessive mode of inheritance but we also observed risk of developing FAP adenoma. in monoallelic gene mutation carriers of some populations. The object The entire coding sequence of the and of our APC genes were screened for germline mutations in 18 patients (M= 8, age reseaMrYchH is to investigate 5R7e.s5u±l1ts2:. 8 yrs±SD) with diagnosis of acromegaly in adult age. Genotyping germline mutation in specific gene-supressor was performed by direct automated sequencing. and genes as well. We study DNA A missense AIP mutation, R304Q, whose pathogenic role has al- of 17 patients with classic form of FAP and 5 patients with attenuAaPtCed FAP. ready been confirmed, was found in 1 (5.5%) of 18 patients. Furthermore, We found in all patients we found 2 polymorphic AIP variants, rs641081 (c.682C>A) 11M mYuHtations (5 nonsense, 4 deletions and 2 splice acceptor) in and 1 and rs4930199 (c.920A>G) in homozygosity, with uncertain pathological heterozygous missense mutation MYH role. Concerning AHR gene, 15 (83%) out of the 18 patients showed a ma- in genes in 17 jor polymorphic variant rs2066853 in heterozygous state, 1 (5.5%) showed patients with classic form of FAP (70,5%). Also2 heterozygous mis- the rs2066853 (c.1661G>A) and the rs4986826 (c.1708G>A) variants in sense compound heterozygosity and in 1 patient (5.5%) showed both variants in mutations has been found at attenuated form in 5 patients (40%). 5 of all 14 hCoomncolzuysgioosni:t y and heterozygosity state, respectively. The pathogenic role of mutations (35,7%) have been found for the first AHR gene variants is still unconfirmed. tAim.Se.. Tsukanov: None. Y.A. Shelygin: None. V.N. Kashnikov: None. A.M. On the basis of this preliminary data, we can conclude that AIP Kuzminov: None. I.Y. Sachkov: None. S.V. Zavadskiy: None. V.P. Shubin: mutations with potential pathogenetic role are present in 5.5% of subjects None. N.I. Pospekhova: None. with adult onset acromegaly due to apparen tly sporadic GH-secreting pitui- tary adenoma. On the contrary, no AHR gene mutations have been detected i Pn. Dth. iRs osmmeaoll: gNroonuep. oMf. aRcargoomneegsael:i cN poantei.e Sn.t sP.uglisi: None. M.L. Torre: None. F.  P11
.213 Ferraù: None. A. Albani: None. O.R. Cotta: None. C. Salpietro: None. C. Rigoli: The interaction network of the ARLT S1
 gene and risk for prostate None. F. Trimarchi: None. S. Cannavò: None. cancer S. Siltanen1,2, T. Rantapero1,2, D. Fischer1, V. Laitinen1,2, J. MPindi3, O. Kallioniemi3, T. Wahlfors1, J. Schleutker4,1,2;  P11
.210 1Institute of Biomedical Technology/BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere, New Gene Tests for Familial Colorectal Cancer Patients; POLE, POLD1 Finland, 2Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland, 3Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Medical Biochemistry and GREM1 Analysis. and Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. T. Bedenham1, T. Cranston1, I. Tomlinson2,3, A. Seller1; 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics and Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Oxford Regional Genetics Service, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Prostate cancer (PCa) is a complex trait and several susceptibility genes Kingdom. have been implicated by genome-wide linkage or association studies. The genomic region 13q14 is frequently deleted in sporadic and familial PCa. It is widely recognized as a possible lAocRuLsT So1f tumor suppressor gene(s) as Many colorectal cancer patients wheot auln dergo geneetti ca lt esting for mutations it has been found to be deletedA RalLs1o1 in other cancers. We have previously in known colorectal cancer susceptibility genes do not have a pathogenic shown that homozygous carriers for (ADP-ribosylation factor-like variant identified. Recently Jaeger and Palles reported variants in tumor suppressor protein 1 or , located at 13q14) T442C variant are three geetn aels associated with an inherited polyposis / adenoma phenotype in associated with an increased risk for unselected and familial PCa. The role colorectal casneccerert poagtriaennitns-.5 SCG5) Gremlin1 GREM1). of the variant was further stArReLnTgSth1ened with the observation of greater Jaeger identified a 40kb duplication at 15q13.3 encompassing the regi- frequency aAmRoLnTgS 1m alignant tissue samples, PCa cell linAeRs LaTnSd1 xenografts. on 3‘ of the ( gene to upstream of ( In this study we performed interaction studies, as the functional The duplication is located on a specific haplotype and has only been found network of is poorly known. First dAiRffLeTreSn1ces of expression in Ashkenazi Jewish patients to date. The phenotype associated with this status between PCa cases (n=84) and controls (n=15) was studied. Statisti- variant is hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome type 1, characterised by cally significant (p=0.003c7i)s difference in ARLTS e1xpression between the multipelet aplolyps of different types including; serrated, juvenile, Peuptozl-yJemgehrear-, groups encouraged to eQTL analysis to detect regulatory variaPnHtsF. 1A1ltog- ased eDn1omPaOsL aDn1d) carcipnoolmymaesr.ase E POLE) SePthReYrD fo7urteen significant -eQTLs affecting expression levels were Palles identified variants in the proof reading domains of the found. Interestingly, two of the most significant eSANRPLTs Slo1cated in and ( and ( genes. The variants are associated genes, which are functioning in immune system processes. This is in with Pa OpLhDe1notype similar to MutYH associated polyposis (multiple adeno- concordance with our previous results in which co-expressSioEnT DwBa2s mas) or Lynch syndrome (large adenoma / early onset carcinoma). Patients highly connected to expression of genes functioning in immune system pro- with mutations are also at risk of developing endometrial tumours cesses. Two additional eQTLs located in histone methAyRltLrTaSn1sferase and brain tumours. gene which modulates the expression of its target genes epigenetically. In WeP OhaLvDe1 screePnOeLdE a cohorSt CoGf 5p-aGtRieEnMts1 who have previously had no variants conclusion, this study identifies novel regulators for gene expressi- identified in appropriate colorectal cancer susceptibility genes, for variants o Sn. aSnildta PneCna: r Nisokn.e. T. Rantapero: None. D. Fischer: None. V. Laitinen: None. J. in and or the duplication, as dictated by their phe- MPindi: None. O. Kallioniemi: None. T. Wahlfors: None. J. Schleutker: None. notype. We present our results and discuss whether these molecular analyses should be considered as a routine reflex test for patients who have no mutation iTd.e Bnetidfieendh ianm t:h Ne opnoel.y Tp. pCrreadnisstpoons: iNngo noer. mI. Tisommalitncsho rne:p Naiorn gee. nAe. sS.eller: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 315ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.214  P11
.216 Fine-mapping of chromosomal region 11q13.5 in Finnish prostate Association analysis of polymorphisms in candidate genes on 11p15 cancer locus with prostate cancer in Bulgarian patients R. Nurminen1,2, R. Lehtonen3, T. L. Tammela1,4, T. Wahlfors1,2, J. Schleutker1,2,5; D. L. Kachakova1, E. Popov2, A. Mitkova1, A. Vlahova3, T. Dikov3, S. Christova3, C. Slavov2, 1University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 2Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland, V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1; 3University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, 1Molecular medicine centre, MU- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Urology, Finland, 5University of Turku, Turku, Finland. MU –Sofia, Clinic of Urology, Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of General and Clinical Pathology, MU–Sofia, General and Clinical Pathology Clinic , Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. The identified prostate cancer (PrCa) associated single-nucEleMotSiYde polymor- Introduction phisms (SNPs) explain only a part of PrCa heritability. Chromosomal region 11q13-14 is associated with PrCa. Previously we screened at 11q13.5 More than 70 susceptibility loci associated with prostate cancer for mutations in Finnish PrCa patients and identified a rare intronic muta- (PC) have been identified. PRACTICAL consortium has recently found asso- tion IV S6
-43A>G that increases risk of aggressive PrCa and associates with ciation of 11р15 locus with PC. T IoG iFn2v, eINstSig-IaGteF 2in, T dHe tail t AhSeC rLe2g,i on associated familial PrCa. No causal factor(s) predisposing to PrCa has been identified with PC in the Bulgarian sub-sample we analyzed polymorphisms in several from 11q13-14. oMfa ttheer ipallasu asnibdl eMceatnhdoiddsa te genes and located in the The aim of the study was to characterize the genetic structure of 11q13.5 vicinity of the most strongly associated marker rs7127900. and to asses if there are additional PrCa risk variants. The study included a IGF2 Using TaqMINanS®-IG mF2ethod 176 PC sTaHmples and 169 total of 4034 PrCa patients and 908 controls of Finnish origin. We imputed controls were genotyped for polAySmCoLr2phic variants rs11603378, rs2239681, SNPs and structural variants on 0.9 Mb at 11q13.5 and validated the associa- rs10770125 in , rs3842756 in , rs2070762 in , rs11564710, tions by genotyping. Imputation was performed with IMPUT E2
 using 1000 rRse7s1ul2t7s 900 and rs55930300 in located on locus 11p15. We have pre- Genomes reference popEuMlaStiYon. Haplotype analysis was conducted to study formed allele, genotype and haplotype analysis. haplotype blocks, linkage disequilibrium and haplotype assocEiaMtiSoYns. Allele and genotype frequencies of the variants rs11603378, Two correlated SNPs at were associated with PrCa. SNPs were located rs10770125, rs3842756 and rs55930300 did not show significant diffe- in consecutive introns in close approximation to IV S6
-43A>G. variants rences between PC patients and controls. In contrast, the following ge- formed a common predisposing haplotype and a rare protective haplotype. notypes and alleles were more common in patients than in controls: GG In addition, five correlated intergenic SNPs and a one-nucleotide insertion (OR=1.69, p=0.041) for rs2070762, CA (OR=2.12, p=0.0007) and A allele associated with PrCa. Both a predisposing and protective haplotype was for rs11564710, GA (OR=1.7, p=0.018) and A allele for rs7127900. Associa- identified. The findings indicate that two regions at 11q13.5 contribute to tion with aggressive disease showed the genotype CA (OR=3.76, p=0.003) PrCa predisposition with complex genetic structure. Further studies are of rs11564710. The haplotype T-G-G-C-G-C-G-A (rs11603378-rs2239681- needed to determine the genetic mechanism of susceptibility and functio- rCso1n0c7lu7s0io1n2s5 -rs3842756-rs2070762-rs11564710-rs7127900-rs55930300) n Ra.l iNtyu romf itnheen r:e Ngoionnes. .R. Lehtonen: None. T.L. Tammela: None. T. Wahlfors: was more common in patients with high Gleason score (p=0.026). None. J. Schleutker: None. In Bulgarian patients markers rs11564710 and rs2070762 sho- wed stronger association with PC than the initial finding with rs7127900. One of the variants (rs11564710) showed correlation with aggressive PC. Additional study in larger cohort and different approach is needed to elu-  P11
.215 cidate the association and the potential causal variants on 11p15 related to Determination of GADD45γ methylation level in prostate cancer pDr.oLs. tKataec hcaarkcoivnao:g Nenoneesi. sE.. Popov: None. A. Mitkova: None. A. Vlahova: with high resolution melting analysis and evaluation of the possible None. T. Dikov: None. S. Christova: None. C. Slavov: None. V. Mitev: None. R. correlation with apoptosis Kaneva: None. O. Can1, V. Caner1, N. Sen Turk2, L. Tuncay3, S. Eskicorapci3, E. Tepeli4, O. Cetin4, C. Baris1, G. Bagci1; 1Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, Turkey, 2Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Pathology,  P11
.217 Denizli, Turkey, 3Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Urology, Epistatic interactions between prostate cancer susceptibility loci: Denizli, Turkey, 4Pamukkale University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical evidence from Serbian population Genetics, Denizli, Turkey. Z. Nikolic1, G. Brajuskovic1, V. Vukotic2, N. Filipovic2, S. Cerovic3, D. Savic Pavicevic1, S. Romac1; 1Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer type worldwide University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia. in men. It is believed that deregulation of important cellular mechanisms is involved in the pathogenesis of PCa although the exact mechanism of its pathogenesis has not been clearly elucidated. “Growth Arrest DNA Damage- Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common non-skin cancer among males in Inducible 45’’ (GADD45) is one of the most important gene family in these western populations and the sixth leading cause of cancer death worldwide. mechanisms and consists of 3 members: GADD45α, GADD45β, GADD45γ. Still, molecular factors involved in PCa etiology remain largely unknown. Stu- The aims of this study are to detect the protein expression and methylation dies of genetic association of PCa have identified over 30 PCa susceptibility profile of GADD45γ in benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) (60 patients) and loci. To date, no conclusive evidence of epistasis between these loci in PCa PCa (56 patients), to examine the correlation between protein expression has been obtained. The aim of this study was to test for epistasis between and methylation profile, and to evaluate whether apoptosis is related to the- genes at 8q24, 17q12, 7q36 and 19p13. The study population included 175 se two parameters. PCa patients, 161 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and 115 We found that the methylation frequency for GADD45γ was quite low in PCa healthy controls derived from general population. Genotyping of ten selec- compared with BPH (p=0.000). This was consistent with the literature with ted single nucleotide po®lymorphisms (SNPs) was performed by PCR-RFLP the reported frequency of the gene in solid tumors was lower than in hema- method and by Taqman SNP genotyping assay, while PLINK software was tological malignencies. In both groups, there was no correlation between used for statistical analysis of obtained data. Case-only analysis of epista- GADD45γ methylation and protein expression, but there was a significant sis in PCa showed interaction between rs3918226 (7q36) and rs7501939 difference between Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL expressions in both groups (p=0.000 (17q12) (P=0.023). Case-control analysis of epistasis, in which BPH patients and p=0.003, respectively). A statistically significant relation between were considered as a control group, also showed interaction between the- GADD45γ expression and apoptosis was not found although GADD45γ ex- se two loci (P=0.038; OR=2.875). This analysis yielded evidence of epistatic pression was higher in PCa than that in BPH. interaction between rs1799983 (7q36) and rs3787016 (19p13) (P=0.042), In summary, we found that the methylation of GADD45γ was not common as well as between rs6983287 (8q24) and rs3760511 (17q12) (P=0.021). in PCa, the regulation of apoptotic pathways is more complex than we ex- Case-control analysis of epistasis in the dataset that included 10 SNPs in pected and GADD45γ is not the only key factor for the cells to direct into the PCa patients and controls derived from general population showed epistatic a Op.o Cpatont:i Nc opnreo.c Ve.s sC.aner: None. N. Sen Turk: None. L. Tuncay: None. S. interaction between rs2070744 (7q36) and rs7837688 (8q24) (P=0.045), Eskicorapci: None. E. Tepeli: None. O. Cetin: None. C. Baris: None. G. Bagci: as well as between rs7501939 (17q12) and rs6983287 (8q24) (P=0.032). None. These results suggest possible epistatic interactions between genes located aZt. 8Nqik2o4l,i c1:7 Nqo1n2e, .7 Gq.3 B6r aanjuds 1ko9vpi1c3: Nino nPeC. aV.. Vukotic: None. N. Filipovic: None. S. Cerovic: None. D. Savic Pavicevic: None. S. Romac: None. 316 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.218  P11
.220 Simultaneous interpretation of combinative molecular analysis with Differential expression of glycolysis pathway genes in renal and lung histological and clinical data in prostate cancer patients cancer A. Tsvetkova1,2, A. Todorova1,2, G. Georgiev3, V. Mitev1; A. Kudryavtseva, &. DMITRIEV, A. SNEZHKINA, G. KRASNOV, A. SADRITDINOVA, N. 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory MELNIKOVA, L. UROSHLEV, M. DARII, N. OPARINA; Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Military Medical Academy Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. EIMB RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Early detection of prostate cancer (PCa) can increase the chances of patients Glycolysis is the major pathway of glucose catabolism accompanied by a syn- for a favorable outcome in the fight with this social significant disease. The thesis of ATP. There are more than 30 genes in the glycolysis pathway that aim of the study was to interpret simultaneously the results of DD3 marker, can be considered as housekeeping genes because of the high conservatism the TMPRS S2
-ERG gene fusions, hypermethylation of GST P1
 gene promoter and the evolutionary antiquity of the process. Using bioinformatic analysis and to use this data for early diagnosis of PCa patients. An attempt to cor- of transcriptomic databases and methods of quantitative real time PCR, we relate the molecular data with histology (Gleason score and Tumor Node investigated the expression of these genes in papillary renal cell carcinoma Metastasis, TNM) is made. Altogether, 16 individuals with PCa, 14 benign and squamous cell lung cancer. Quantitative analysis HofK m1,R ANDAP GleKv,e GlsP sI,h PoGwKe1d, prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and 6 suspected for a prostate malignancy are tPhKaMt o2n,ly some of the glycolytic pathway genes remained relativeAlyD sPtGabKl,e A; Lin- studied. The following specific biological samples are used: 20 “tru-cut” pDaOpAi,l lGaAryP DreHn, aPlG cKel1l ,c BaPrcGiMno, mENaO, t1h, ePsKeM ge2nes included prostate biopsies; 8 prostate tissues from radical prostatectomy; 17 blood and in squamous cell lung cancerP tFhKePs,e AgLeDnOesA includGeAdP DH samples, 6 urinary sediments, obtained after DRE (digital rectal examinati- GPI . For the first time we found frequent on). Patients with aggressive PCa were found to be positive for DD3 marker, increases of mRNA expression of genes and in renal for GST P1
 gene promoter hypermethylation and for TMPRS S2
-ERG fusion, cancer, as well as gene in lung cancer using qPCR. For the remaining which correlates with Gleason score (5-7 moderate-differentiated tumors) genes, differential expression was shown - we found both gains and losses of and Gleason score (8-10 low-differentiated tumors). The molecular testing mRNA levels. Thus, we identified several genes that can be used as reference might help to clarify invasive, fast progressive, androgen-independent sub- for qPCR transcriptome analysis in renal and lung cancer, and a number of type cancer with high potential to form metastases. Our results suggest that dAif. fKeruednrtyiaavlltys eevxap:r eNsosneed. &ge. nDems itthriaetv :c oNuolnde b. Ae .p Sonteenzhtikailn oan: cNoomnea.r Gke. rKsr.asnov: positive molecular status in patients with borderline histological result None. A. Sadritdinova: None. N. Melnikova: None. L. Uroshlev: None. M. Darii: None. N. Oparina: None. might help for better estimation of high risk for development of PCa and strict monitoring. A combinative study of DD3, TMPRR S2
-ERG fusions and the GST P1
 promoter hypermethylation provides a useful molecular arsenal in monitoring of PCa by the achievement of greater sensitivity and accura-  P11
.221 cy. The development of clear cell renal cancer prognostic markers based Acknowledgements: the study was supported by the grants №4-D/2011 on gene co-expression. a An.d T 2sv6e-Dtk/o2v0a1: 2N,o Mnee.d Aic. aTlo Udnoirvoevras:i tNyo Snoef.i aG,. B Guelogargriieav.: None. V. Mitev: None. N. V. Apanovich1, S. V. Poyrkov1, A. A. Korotaeva1, A. S. Markova2, A. S. Bavykin1, V. P. Shubin1, N. I. Pospekhova1, B. S. Kamolov2, V. B. Matveev2, A. V. Karpukhin1; 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,  P11
.219 Moscow, Russian Federation. Increased fitness in PTEN mutation carriers due to increased cancer survival is rationale for childhood PTEN testing. L. H. Sunde1, G. Evans2, I. Blanco3, R. Susman4, C. Herlofson1, N. Clarke1, G. Capella3, L. Despite of a number of microchip expression data, there are no recognized Mæhle1, P. Møller1; prognostic gene expression profile for clear cell renal cancer (CCRC) at the 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2St Marys Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Catalan Institute Of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 4Royal Brisbane and present time. We used an approach consisting in bioinformatics analysis of Women‘s Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. accumulated data followed by quantitative investigation of gene expressi- on. Several databases (Oncomine: www.oncomine.org, GEO: www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/geo, CGED: http://lifesciencedb.jp/cged/) and 4000 publications, de-novo PTEN mutation carriers may develop cancer from early childhood onwards. selected by keywords in PubMed, were screened. There were 200 genes Mutation carriers are rare, mutation carrying families are small, and selected with expression two times more than in normal renal tissue obser- mutations have been demonstrated. All these observatiodnes- nfiot vtohe model of ved in more than 50% of CCRC samples. Expression profiles of these genes an early-onset autosomally dominantly inherited disorder being infrequent were determined in CCRC in comparison with normal renal tissue by quan- due to reduced fitness, and prevalence maintained by mutations titative RT-PCR. Near 130 genes were expressed two times above normal in (Lynch et al. Am J Hum Gen 1997, 1254). 40% of samples. The cluster of 22 co-expressed genes was found. Analysis We have examined the filed data from PTEN mutation carriers in four clini- of transcriptional regulation showed that most of the genes in the cluster cal genetic centres. Fifty-nine mutation carriers were identified, of whom are regulated by a single gene - HIF1A. This may explain their co-expression. 27 (46%) had developed cancer, 14 (52%) of whom had had two or more The grade score of anaplasia was correlated with a number of highly ex- cancers. Total survival years after cancer was 403 years (mean 14.9). After pressed genes of the cluster. The relationship of a number of co-expressed inclusion, patients with cancer were followed for 199 observation years. genes with the TNM classification was identified. One died 64 years old from breast cancer (annual death rate cancer pati- In summary, the identified genes, on their function and role in the develop- ents after inclusion = 0.5%). Four had had thyroid cancer before 20 years. ment of cancer, can be markers of prognosis, reflecting the propensity for Youngest age at diagnosis of breast cancer was 24 years. She was alive and a Ng.gVr. eAspsiavneo bveichha:v Nioorn oe.f Sth.Ve. tPuomyorkr.ov: None. A.A. Korotaeva: None. A.S. Markova: None. A.S. Bavykin: None. V.P. Shubin: None. N.I. Pospekhova: 54 years at end of study. No patient less than 20 years had been subjected None. B.S. Kamolov: None. V.B. Matveev: None. A.V. Karpukhin: None. to genetic testing due to cancer. Mutation carriers had an average number of children. The results were that all early onset cancers associated with PTEN muta- tions had been cured in the last generation, and through that the cause of  P11
.222 previous reduced fitness probably removed. Young patients with thyroid or Gene-gene interactions of GSTM1, CY P1
A1, I L4
, I L16
, VDR, PON1, VEGF breast cancer should be offered PTEN mutation testing. Children in PTEN genes contribute to renal cell carcinoma susceptibility in populations mutation carrying families are at risk for curable childhood cancer and of Bashkortostan Republic of Russia sLh.oHu. lSdu bned eo:f fNeroende .p Gre. dEivcatnivse: gNeonneet.i Ic. tBelsatnincgo.: None. R. Susman: None. C. L. R. Kutlyeva1, I. Gilyazova1, A. Zagidullin2, V. Pavlov2, A. Khaliullin2, E. Klimentova3, A. Herlofson: None. N. Clarke: None. G. Capella: None. L. Mæhle: None. P. Shafigina3, E. Khusnutdinova1; Møller: None. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Unraveling the nature of genetic interactions is crucial to obtaining a com- plete picture of complex diseases. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm affecting the adult kidney. It‘s known that a predispo- sition to RCC due to a number of polymorphisms of genes involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics, anti-tumor immunity, angiogenesis and tran- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 317 scription.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PRPF8 The goal was to investigate the association of SNPs in seven genes with RCC on 17p13.3, coding for an essential protein in the spliceosPoRmPaFl 8core. Germ- and to evaluate gene-gene interactions in the development of RCC. A case- line mutations in have been shown to cause the autosomal dominant control association study of twelve SNPs in the genes GSTM1,CY P1
A1,I L4
,I retinitis pigmentosa type 13. More than 80% of mutated cases sho-  L16
,VDR,PON1,VEGF included 200 RCC patients from Bashkortostan Repu- wed presence of ring sideroblasts in their pathologies. FurthermPRoPreF,8 when blic of Russia and 250 controls. Statistical analysis was held using logistic we analyzed additional 23 cases using SNP arrays that had 17p deletion, regression model and GMDR method. 65% of cases contained ring sideroblasts. The knockdown of sho- The analysis showed genotype rs662*T/T and allele rs662*T of rs662 in wed increased colony formation. Since PRPF8 is extremely well conserved PON1 gene (OR=3,23(95%CI 1,40-7,65);OR=1,49(95%CI 1,07-2,08), re- between humans and yeast, we created homologous mutants in yeast. All spectively) and genotype rs731236*G/G of the VDR gene(OR=2,42(95%CI mutants showed the same phenotype--defect in the second step of splicing. 1,07-5,77)) to be markers of the increased risk for RCC development. The These results suggest that the mutant PRPF8 might activate incorrect spli- genotype rs2228570*T/T of rs2228570 in VDR was the marker of low risk ce PsiRtPesF 8leading to frame shifted mRNAs. To understand the global effects for RCC (OR=0,61(95%CI 0,39-0,93)). We identified the most informative of PRPF8 splicing defects, we analyzed RNA-seq data for 2 mutant cases model of gene-gene interactions for RCC development in population of Rus- of and 17 cases of del17p or low PRPF8 expression. Misspliced ge- sians (rs2243259(IL-4))-rs4778889(IL-16)). The combination of genotypes nes included genes involved in progression, metabolism, and retinitis pig- rs4778889*C/C(I L16
)-rs2243250*T/C(I L4
) was the marker of the de- mentosa. Novel somatic mutations of PRPF8 are associated with myeloid creased risk for RCC in Russians (OR=0,47(95%CI 0,22-1,01)), whereas the malignancies with increased ring sideroblasts, followed by the evidence of combination of genotypes rs4778889*T/C(I L16
)-rs2243250*T/C(I L4
) was similar pathogenesis by haploinsufficiency. Somatic events constitute loss of the marker of the increased risk for RCC(OR=4,50(95%CI 1,33-16,78)). The function, resulting in the change of splice site recognition function which is analysis gene-gene interactions in Tatar ethnic origin found the statistically associated with proliferating potential and could be a considered as a new significant model (rs2243259(IL-4))-rs22432250(VDR)-rs731236(VDR)) t Ah.e Kraupretouvtiicc- tKaorzgaerti.c: None. H. Makishima: None. B. Przychodzen: None. J. predisposing to RCC development. Detecting interactions among disease Singh: None. M. Konarska: None. R.A. Padgett: None. J.P. Maciejewski: None. associated SNPs may reveal basic biological mechanisms critical for the di- s Le.aRs.e K duetvlyeelvoap:m Neonnte.. I. Gilyazova: None. A. Zagidullin: None. V. Pavlov: None. A. Khaliullin: None. E. Klimentova: None. A. Shafigina: None. E.  P11
.225 Khusnutdinova: None. High Resolution Melting analysis as a rapid and efficient method for molecular diagnostics of patients with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome P. Borun1, P. Krokowicz2, T. Banasiewicz3, J. Hoppe-Golebiewska1, J. Walkowiak4, W.  P11
.223 Cichy4, D. Nowakowska5, J. Lubinski6, B. Niedoszytko7, J. Limon8, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, Clinical evaluation of Myelodysplasia using a SNP microarray A. Plawski1; S. Schwartz, P. Papenhausen, S. Anderson; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of General and Laboratory Corporation of America, Raleigh, NC, United States. Gastroenterological Surgery, K. Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences,, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of General Surgery, Gastroenterological Oncological Surgery and Plastic Surgery, K. Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences,, Poznan, Poland, 4I Chair of Pediatrics, Department of Gastroenterology and Metabolism, K. Marcinkowski Over the past 1½ years we have evaluated over 1000 patients, to delineate University of Medical Sciences,, Poznan, Poland, 5Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial the utility of a SNP microarray (Affymetrix Cytoscan HD) approach for the Cancer Centre and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 6International Hereditary study of myelodysplasia. Results have shown that: (1) Over 23% of chromo- Cancer Center, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, somally normal patients with myelodysplasia were found to have an abnor- Szczecin, Poland, 7Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology Allergology, mality detectable by the SNP array; (2) Approximately 120 different cases Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, 8Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland. of segmental aUPD were observed, representing approximately 15% of the patients; (3) This technology has been especially useful in cases equivocal for MDS, where in approximately 25% of cases the SNP array was informa- Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare, hereditary predisposition charac- tive when flow cytometry and pathology studies could not provide a defini- terized by the occurrence of hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal tive diagnosis; (4) Even when cytogenetics and/or FISH demonstrated an tract, mucocutaneous pigmentation and increased risk of cancer in multiple abnormality, the array provided additional results in 59% of patients; (5) In internal organs. The incidence of the syndrome, depending on the studied addition to the abnormalities routinely detected by cytogenetics and FISH, population, has been estimated to range from 1:300 000 even up to 1:25 000 the array detected numerous abnormalities including: deletions and aUPD births. PJS is an autosomal dominant disease and, in most of the cases, it is of 4q (TET2); 21q (RUX1); 11q (Cbl); 17p (T P53
), 9p (JAK2), 17q (NF1), caused by mutations in the STK11 gene. 1p (likely MPL or NRAS) and aUPD of 7q (EZH2); (6) Of these alterations, The majority of causative DNA changes identified in patients with PJS are involvement of TET2 and RUNX1 are the most commonly detected; (7) The small mutations and, therefore, developing a method of their detection is a precision and breakpoint analysis suggest two different genes on 7q may key aspect in the advancement of genetic diagnostics of patients suffering be important, not only EZH2 (distal), but also SERPIN E1
 which has been from PJS. In our study, we designed 13 pairs of primers which amplify in implicated in several submicroscopic 7q22.1 deletions and also when ASX L1
 the same temperature and enable the examination of all coding exons of the was included in the 20q deletion; (8) Overall this work clearly illustrates the STK11 gene by the HRM analysis. additional important diagnostic and prognostic information detected by a In our group of 41 families with PJS, small mutations of the STK11 gene were SNP array analysis and the involvement of significant genes not detectable b Sy .r Socuhtiwnaer atzn:a Aly. sEims.ployment (full or part-time); Significant; Laboratory detected in 22 families (54%). In the remaining cases all of the coding exons Corporation of America. P. Papenhausen: A. Employment (full or part-time); were sequenced. However, this did not allow detection of any additional mu- Significant; Laboratory Corporation of America. S. Anderson: A. Employment (full tations. Therefore, the developed methodology is a rapid and cost-effective or part-time); Significant; Laboratory Corporation of America. tool of searching for small mutations in PJS patients and made it possible to detect all the STK11 gene sequence changes occurring in our group. The study was financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, Poland,  P11
.224 g Pr.a Bnot rnuunm: Nboenr eN. 4 P0
. K2 r4o8k1o5w3ic7z: None. T. Banasiewicz: None. J. Hoppe- Golebiewska: None. J. Walkowiak: None. W. Cichy: None. D. Nowakowska: Novel mutations in spliceosomal gene PRPF8 show ring sideroblast, None. J. Lubinski: None. B. Niedoszytko: None. J. Limon: None. M. proliferative, and missplicing phenotype in patients with myeloid Skrzypczak-Zielinska: None. A. Plawski: None. neoplasms A. Kurtovic-Kozaric1, H. Makishima1, B. Przychodzen1, J. Singh2, M. Konarska3, R. A. Padgett2, J. P. Maciejewski1; 1Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer  P11
.226 Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, 2Department of Molecular Comprehensive genetic characterisation of pediatric T-cell acute Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, lymphoblastic leukaemia 3Rockefeller University, New York, NY, United States. K. Karrman1, A. Castor2, M. Behrendtz3, L. Olsson1, M. Ehinger4, A. Biloglav1, K. Paulsson1, B. Johansson1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Department of Pediatrics, Lund, The pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes is complex and associated Sweden, 3Department of Pediatrics, Linköping, Sweden, 4Department of Pathology, Lund, with vast heterogeneity in histomorphology and molecular somPRaPtiFc8 lesions. Sweden. To understand the molecular somatic lesions in MDS, we applied whole exo- m 3e 1 s 8equencing in 352 patients. Commonly mutateEdS gHenGe w2a0s1 3 | P,A foRuInSd, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG Several genetic events need to accumulate in a single cell in order for clo-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index nal expansion of a malignant T-lymphoblast to occur. To einlu scitiduate further to tumor stages were: 1.63 in stage I (25%), 1.37 in stage II (28%), 2.45 the genetic aberrations resulting in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in stage III (28%), and 1.67 in stage IV (19%). Also, mean telomere length (T-ALL) conventional chromosome banding, fluorescence hybridiza- values of adjacent mucosa in correlation to lymph node status were as fol- tion (FISH), single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, expression, and lows: 1.67 and 2.12, in cases with negative (68%) and positive (32%) local large scale sequencing analyses were preformed in a consecutive series of invasion, respectively. 47 pediatric T-ALL patients. Cytogenetic analyses were informativeT RinA @41/ Overall, a statistically significant increasing of telomere length in free mar- cTaRsDe@s, displaying a noTrmRBa@l karyotype in 54% of cases. Recurrent cytogene- gins of patients with advanced stages was observed (p=0.032). The same tic aberrations comprised T-cell receptor (TCR) rearrangements ( trend toward longer telomeres in cases with lymph node metastasis was at 14q11 and at 7q34) and deletions of 6q and 9p. FISH for found, but there was no a significant association. However, our data indi- TCR rearrangements resulted in aberrant hybridization patterns in 26% of cate that telomere length in tumor adjacent, histopathologically confirmed investigated cases of which 25% were cytogenetically cryptic. The median as free of neoplastic cells, might be a valuable tool in prognosis of oral car- copy nCuDmKbNe2rA a/ltCeDraKtNio2nB dSisTpILlayPeTdE bNy LSNEF P1
 array RwBaIs 3 (range 0-10), with the cBin. oPmopao.vic: None. J. Carkic: None. D. Jelovac: None. N. Nikolic: None. J. majority being less than 10 Mb. Six genes were recurrently targeted by dele- Milasin: None. tions: , , , , and . Eight paired diagnostic- relapse samples were analysed with SNP array; two samples displayed the same aberrations at diagnosis and relapse, three cases harboured additional  P11
.229 changes in the relapse, two cases shared some aberrations but also harbou- A novel case of TEL/AM L1
-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia red unique aberrations, and one sample had completely different aberrati- with t(2;12;21): Is translocation involving 2p13 the secondary genetic ons between diagnosis and relapse. The expression and sequencing data are change for leukemogenesis in TEL/AM L1
-positive acute leukemia? currently being analysed. Taken together, the presented data illustrate the J. Yun, S. Lee, S. Kim; m Ku. Kltiasrtrempa gne: nNeotnice .p Aro. cCeassst orer:q Nuiorneed. fMo.r BTe-AhLreLn tdot zo:c Ncuonr.e. L. Olsson: None. M. Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Ehinger: None. A. Biloglav: None. K. Paulsson: None. B. Johansson: None. Republic of.  P11
.227 TEL-AM L1
 (ETV6-RUNX1) fusion is the most common in childhood B-cell Effect of siTRF2 knockdown, a shelterin protein, on the progenitor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL) and is related with fa- radiosensitivity of telomerase-immortalised human mesenchymal vorable prognosis. Complex chromosomal translocations, involving three stem cells or more different chromosomes, have been rarely observed in leukemia O. Orun1, P. Mega Tiber1, T. Cankaya2, N. Serakinci3; with t(12;21)(p13;q22), and to our knowledge, only three cases involving 1marmara univ, istanbul, Turkey, 2dokuz eylul university, izmir, Turkey, 3Near East chromosome 2 were reported with different breakpoints. This is the first University, Lefkosa, Cyprus. TEL/AM L1
 positive BCP-ALL case with novel three-way molecular variant involving 2p13. The patient was 3-year-old female with lethargy and seve- re leukocytosis at the time of onset. The leukemic cells were CD34 nega- Imperfect capping of telomeres can lead to tumor formation. The cap struc- tive immature B cells. Cytogenetic analysis showed that 45,X,-X,t(2;12;21) ture is preserved by shelterin complex where TRF2 is an important member (p13;p13;q22) on chromosome study and one TEL-AM L1
 fusion signal with of it. Telomerase-induced bone-marrow derived human mesenchymal stem a single TEL signal on FISH analysis. The patient is alive with complete re- cells (hMSC-telo1) were used to assess the role of TRF2 knockdown in radio- mission for 14 months although she had histories of invasive fungal and sensitivity. Radiation response and transformation efficiencies of these cells bacterial infections after induction chemotherapy. TEL-AM L1
 fusion inter- were previously well documented (Serakinci et al. 2008). feres with normal function of the transcription factor RUNX1 and has been siTRF2 knockdown efficiency was found to be 78.53% vs 81.8% for non- considered as necessary but not sufficient for the developmenet of leuke- radiated (NR) and radiated (R) groups (vectors was kindly provided by Drs mia. Many researchers suggest that secondary genetic event in addition to Zaffaroni & Marco) respectively, in time point of 48 hours after application TEL-AM L1
 fusion is necessary for leukemogenesis. Regarding 2p13, several of radiation, whereas they were 72% vs 62% after 72 hours (2.5 Gray). cases of acute or chronic B cell leukemia with t(2;14)(p13;q32) were repor- The siTRF2 knockdown cells at 48th time point showed a significant in- ted as sole chromosomal abnormality. Furthermore some authors suggested crease in the levels of SA-β-gal (senescence) after exposure to IR, but that that t(2;14)(p13;q32) could be recurrent genetic abnomality with mention difference diminished in 72 hours. Previously we have shown that SA-β-gal of BC L11
A gene on 2p13 as a strong candidate for leukemogenesis. This ratio was 30% and 76% before and ten days after irradiation, for hMSC- case contributes to further delineate the role of 2p13 rearrangement in leu- telo1(Serakinci 2007). In this study siTRF2 was found to be highly toxic after kemogenesis and the clnical course of BCP-ALL with this rare chromosomal 96 hours and senescence difference was much less pronounced in NR and R a Jb. eYrurna:n Ncyo.ne. S. Lee: None. S. Kim: None. groups (22% vs 33%). Colony forming efficiency was found to be decreased in siTRF2 knockdowns following 48 hour incubation, but this difference also did not extend to 72  P11
.230 hours. New germline JAK2 mutations resistant to current JAK2 and HS P90
 Conclusion: We found that knockdown of TRF2 increase the short time cel- inhibitors are responsible of a hereditary thrombocytosis in two lular effect of irradiation, thus, our data suggest that knockdown of TRF2 pedigrees might a tool for increasing radiation induced senescence and radiosensitivi- C. MARTY1, C. SAINT MARTIN2, S. GROSJEAN2, J. SALIBA1, C. PECQUET3, E. LEROY3, t Oy .o Of rcuenll:s Nfoorn eth. ePr. aMpeeguat iTci bpeurr:p Noosnees.. T. Cankaya: None. N. Serakinci: None. A. HARUTYUNYAN4, J. ABGRAL L5
, C. LEGRAND1, E. SOLARY1, R. KRALOVIC S6
, S. CONSTANTINESCU3, A. NAJMAN7, W. VAINCHENKER1, I. PLO1, C. BELLANNE- CHANTELOT2; 1Institut Gustave Roussy, INSERM U1009, Villejuif, France, 2Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière,  P11
.228 Department of Genetics, Paris, France, 3Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, de Duve Telomere length in histologically free margins of oral squamous cell Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 4CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine, Vienna, carcinoma Austria, 5CHU de Brest, Service d‘Hématologie, Brest, France, 6CeMM Research Center for B. Popovic1, J. Carkic1, D. Jelovac2, N. Nikolic1, J. Milasin1; Molecular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine I, Vienna, Austria, 7Hôpital Saint- 1Institute of Human genetics, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinic for Antoine, Service des Maladies du Sang et de Thérapie Cellulaire, Paris, France. Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia. Thrombocytosis are rare entities characterized by an abnormal proliferation Telomere shortening over a critical length leads to chromosomal instabili- of the megakaryocytic lineage resulting in overproduction of platelets. The ty, which might be a key event in the initiation of carcinogenesis. Telomere majority oJAf Kth2r Vo6m1b7oFcytosis are sporadic essential thrombocythemia classi- length as well as different genetic alterations that could be found in tumor fied as myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) due in half cases to mutations free margins of oral carcinoma may be of great importance for estimation of in JAK2 ( ) or in molecules affecting the thrombopoietin recep- oral pathogenesis. tor (MPL)/JAK2 axis. Familial cases of thrombocytosis exist and are usually The aim of this study, was to measure relative telomere length (RTL) in hi- transmitted by autosomal dominant inheritance. They are subdivided as stologically free tumor margins of patients with oral squamous cell carcino- MPN-like disorders with incomplete penetrance or as pure thrombocytosis ma (OSCC), using real-time PCR. RTL was evaluated by comparing telomere/ with a complete penetrance of hematologicJaAlK a2bnormalities. JAK2 single copy gene (T/S) ratio in 36 samples of tumor margins and T/S value We identified two families with hereditary thrombocytosis presenting three ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 319 in reference cell line (293T). The estimated RTL values in margins according novel heterozygous germline mutations of . One family carries theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index R867Q mutation locatJeAdK 2in S t7h5e5 kRi/nRa9s3e8 dQomain, while the second family re- frequently in a variety of tumors and may contribute to tumorigenesis. vealed double mutations in cis, one in the pseudokinase and the other in We examined common CCND1 gene polymorphisms in cohort of Polish pa- the kinase domains ( ). These substitutions are gain-of- tients with differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) and Polish population. Ana- function mutations exhibiting spontaneous cell growth and constitutive lysis concerned the CCND1 c.723G>A polymorphism (rs9344; p.Pro241=), signaling in Ba/F3-MPL cell models. Moreover, these mutations required which is located in exon 4, and increases the frequency of alternate splicing MPL to be in active dimeric orientations to signal. In contrast to JAK2 V617F, and c.669C>T (rs3862792; p.Phe223=). both JAK2 R867Q and  S755
R/R938Q half-lives were significantly increased DNA was extracted from whole blood lymphocytes of 652 patients dia- which correlated with an increased ceJAllK s2u Vrf6a1c7eF expression of MPL. Conse- gnosed with differentiated thyroid cancer. The population group included quently, these mutations conferred a resistance to classical JAK2 inhibitors 824 subjects. To perform genotyping we used the pyrosequencing technique and HS P90
 inhibitors compared with . (PSQ96). These results suggest that mutations in the kinase domain of JAK2 might We observed statistically higher frequency of allele A in rs9344 locus in thy- confer only a weak activation of oncogenic signaling specifically dependent roid cancer patients (p=0,0173). We observed also statistically significant on MPL, indicating that their identification in familial cases of thrombocyto- differences between genotypes in subjected group. Genotypes AA and GA s Cis. mMaigrthyt: bNeo unen.d Ce.r eSsatiinmt amteadrt.in: None. S. Grosjean: None. J. Saliba: None. C. occurs more frequently in patients with DTC (p=0,0467) than in population Pecquet: None. E. Leroy: None. A. Harutyunyan: None. J. Abgrall: None. C. group. Legrand: None. E. Solary: None. R. Kralovics: None. S. Constantinescu: We did not observed any statistically important differences in frequencies of None. A. Najman: None. W. Vainchenker: None. I. Plo: None. C. Bellanne- chantelot: None. genotypes or alleles in rs3862792 locus in subjected groups. Our findings indicates that A allele in locus rs9344 in homozygotes and heterozygotes as well, may be a risk allele in the development of differen- tiated thyroid cancer in Polish population. Research funded by grant no. N  P11
.231 NM4. 0K2a2c8z7m4a3re6k.-Ryś: None. K. Ziemnicka: None. J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska: The prevalence of polymorphic variants I157T (c.470T> C, None. S.T. Hryhorowicz: None. A. Pławski: None. A. Woźniak: None. A. rs17879961) and R145W (c.433C> T, rs137853007) in CHEK2 gene Barańska: None. M. Gołąb: None. M. Szkudlarek: None. M. Ruchała: None. R. and its putative correlation with the risk of differentiated thyroid Słomski: None. cancer in Polish population. S. Hryhorowicz1, K. Ziemnicka2, M. Kaczmarek-Ryś3, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska3, A. Woźniak1, B. Sobiak4, M. Gołąb2, M. Szkudlarek2, M. Ruchała2, R. Słomski3,4;  P11
.233 1The NanoBioMedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, 2Department TNF siRNA as modulators of apoptosis and angiogenesis, in cell of Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, migration and invasion in triple negative breast cancer cells (TNBC) 4Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, Poznań, I. Berindan-Neagoe1,2,3, V. Pileczki3,4, R. Cojocneanu Petric3,5, L. Pop6, C. Braicu1,3; Poland. 1Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, Oncological Institute Ion Chiricuta, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Department of Immunology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3Research Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and translational Medicine Iuliu Hatieganu Thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of endocrine system. University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 4of Pharmacy, Iuliu Most often occurs papillary and follicular thyroid cancer: tumors with well Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 5Faculty prognosis, low benignity and slow progress but often giving recurrences of Biology and Geology, Babeş-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 6Research and regional or remote metastasis and as well progression from well diffe- Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of rentiated thyroid cancer to malignant anaplastic carcinoma. Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu,, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. The aim of this study was to analyze the prevalence of polymorphic vari- ants I157T (c.470T> C, rs17879961) and R145W (c.433C> T, rs137853007) CHEK2 gene and its putative correlation with the risk of causing differen- Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) is a proinflammatory cytokine that has tiated thyroid cancer (DTC). been linked to breast cancer development. Estrogen metabolic pathway is Group of 623 patients 574 females and 49 males) with differentiated thyroid also involved in breast carcino-genesis and DNA adducts formation. A parti- cancer and 500 individuals (297 females and 203 males) from population cular case is the TNF- α modulation in TNBC ( triple negative breast cancer). group were examined. The analysis of gene variants, using the method of Currently there are several TNF-α antagonists applied in clinical use and pyrosequencing, showed no variation in response to changes in R145W, these agents have provided significant benefits for a variety of cancers. In and confirmed diversity of the I157T in both group of patients with DTC the last years a special interest have received triple negative breast cancer in 4,36% and 2,6% in population. Performed statistical analysis allowed to which is a highly aggressive subtypei nth vaittr oobserved particularly in young pa- demonstrate the relationship between the presence of the I157T variant tients with a poor overall survival rate and no target therapy. and the occurrence of thyroid cancer. Odds ratio for the rare allele C against In our experiments, we used as an model for triple negative breast the wild one T, amounted 0,5855 at P = 0,0310. Obtained data proved as cancer - the cell line Hs578T - for evaluation of gene expression profiling of well correlation between the C allele and higher risk of DTC morbidity for signaling networks involved in apoptosis using PCR-array genes. Treatment women in Polish population. There has been also observed the increasing with special designed siRNA molecules to target TNF-α mRNA has been impact of age on disease morbidity in Polish population. Project supported done for angiogTeNnFe-sαis modulation and most relevant genes were evaluated b Sy. PHorylihsohr Mowiniciszt:r Ny oonfe S. cKie. nZcieem annidc kHai:g Nheorn eE.d Mu.c Kataicoznm garraenkt- RNy Nś:4 N02on 2e8. 7J4. 36. by qRT-PCR Hoppe-Gołębiewska: None. A. Woźniak: None. B. Sobiak: None. M. Gołąb: Knockdown of gene was connectiend v iwtrioth activation of apoptosis pro- None. M. Szkudlarek: None. M. Ruchała: None. R. Słomski: None. cesses and inhibition of cell migration and invasion, as monitored using the xCELLigence RTCA System and by matrigel angiogenesis assay. There are down-regulated genes involved in cell survival and angiogenesis,  P11
.232 whereas the up-regulated ones with pro-apoptotic role. Variant c.723A in cyclin D1 gene (CCND1) as a risk allele in TFN-α represents a central molecule in the modulation of processes, apo- differentiated thyroid cancer occurring. ptosis and angiogenesis. TFN-α gene silencing offers an alternative thera- M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, K. Ziemnicka2, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, S. T. Hryhorowicz3, A. p Ie. uBteicr isntdraante-Ngye aing otrei:p Ble. Rneesgeaatirvceh bGrreaanst t( pcrainncciepra.l investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Pławski1, A. Woźniak3, A. Barańska4, M. Gołąb2, M. Szkudlarek2, M. Ruchała2, R. Słomski1,5; 1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2The Romanian Government. V. Pileczki: None. R. Cojocneanu Petric: None. L. Pop: Department of Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical None. C. Braicu: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Roche. Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3The Nanobiomedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, 4The Department of Toxicology, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5The Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland.  P11
.234 The association of apoptotic protein expressions SAG, p73 and p53 with prognosis in cervical carcinoma Polymorphisms in the genes critical to cell cycle control are strong candi- P. Mega Tiber1, L. Baloglu2, S. Ozden3, O. Orun1; dates for association with elevated risk of cancer. The CCND1 gene (11q13) 1Marmara univ, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Dr.Lutfi encodes the cyclin D1, playing an important role in the transition from G1 to Kirdar Kartal Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. S phase of cell cycle during cell division. Mutations, amplification and over e 3x 2pr 0ession of this gene, which alters cell cycle pEroSgHreGss i2on0, 1a3re |o PbAseRrvIeSd, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index T P53
 Radiotherapy, applied on advanced stage cervical carcinoma, can only be related individuals with no personal history of malignancy. mutation effective in low resistance cells. Thereby the tumor response and survival carriers and population controls will undergo conventional and diffusion rates are highly variable among individuals with different tumor radiosen- weighted MRI, reported independently by two radiologists blinded to their sitivity. mutation status. An intersite virtual MDT will be held at regular intervals Tumor growth is intimately associated with apoptosis in tissues and apo- to discuss the diagnosis and management of incidental findings. A series of ptosis seems as a likely candidate to estimate prognosis of a treatment. questionnaires will be used from time of recruitment up to a year after the To further elucidate the roles of apoptotic factors, we determined mRNA ex- MRI scan to assess the psychological impact of screening. Initial results will pression levels of proteins which are important in apoptotic pathways, espe- bEe. sKhiloliwckn:. None. E. Bancroft: None. M. Leach: None. R. Eeles: None. cially focusing on a recently identified sensitive-to-apoptosis protein (SAG). In this study, pairwise comparison of expression levels for SAG / Bcl-XL, Bcl- XL / Bak and p73 / p53 showed significant correlation with each other. Bak  P11
.237 expressions were far from significance in all analyses, probably as a result of T P53
 p.R337H is a conditional cancer-predisposing mutation: further joint action of Bax and Bak. evidence from a homozygous patient Patients with high levels of SAG expression had a low spontaneous apoptotic J. Giacomazzi1, S. G. d. Selistre2, J. Duarte3, J. Pinto-Ribeiro4, P. J. Vieira5, G. d. Macedo6, C. index, as expected. Besides, these two factors were clear indicative of better Rossi7, M. Czepielewski8, C. B. d. Netto9, P. Hainaut10, P. Ashton-Prolla11,9; survival rates. Local free, disease free and overall survival have all indicated 1Laboratório de Medicina Genômica, Experimental Research Center (LMG-CPE), Hospital a higher profile in patients who had lower levels of expressions for both SAG de Clinicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Pediatric Oncology Service, and Bcl-XL proteins. Overall survival rates after five-years follow-up period HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Radiology Service, HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Exercise have indicated to a better survival in group with low SAG and low Bcl-XL Pathophysiology Research Laboratory and Cardiology Division, HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 5Exercise Pathophysiology Research Laboratory and Cardiology Division, Porto expressions (P =0.014 and 0.002 respectively). Alegre, Brazil, 6Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7School of Conclusion: Our findings approves that SAG is a strong candidate to estimate Medicine, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil, survival in cervical cancers and shows signifcant correlation with apoptosis 8Endocrinology Service, HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 9Medical Genetics Service, HCPA, and better survival. However we have not observed such a correlation neit- Porto Alegre, Brazil, 10International Prevention Research Institute, Lyon, France, 11LMG- h Pe. rM wegitah Tpi5b3er n: oNro pne7.3 L e. xBparleosgsliuo:n Nso.ne. S. Ozden: None. O. Orun: None. CPE, HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil. BACKGROUND: Adrenocortical carcinomas (ACCs) are among the most com-  P11
.235 mon cancers in children affected with the Li-Fraumeni/Li-Fraumeni-like The T P53
 gene Arg72Pro polymorphism is associated with the (LFS/LFL) syndromes, caused by germline mutations in the T P53
 gene. In increased risk of cervical cancer in Russians Brazil, a particular common mutation, T P53
 p.R337H, is due to a founder N. A. Nigmatullina, A. A. Arkhipova, B. G. Begiev, I. I. Ahmetov; Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. effect and is strongly associated with ACC. We describe for the first time, the molecular and clinical follow-up of a patient diagnosed with ACC and homo- zygous for p.R337H. CASE PRESENTATION: At age 11 months, the female The  P53
 tumour-suppressor protein (encoded by the T P53
 gene) has been child was diagnosed with a virilising anaplastic ACC, which was completely called the guardian of human cells against cancer. Recent studies have excised without disturbing the adrenal capsule. Family history was consi- shown that the heterozygosity for T P53
 gene Arg72Pro polymorphism is stent with LFL. Genotyping identified the p.R337H mutation in homozygo- protective against different types of cancers. The current consensus is that sity in genomic DNA from lymphocytes and fibroblasts. Haplotype analysis T P53
 Arg72 allele is more effective at inducing apoptosis and protecting confirmed the occurrence of the mutation in the Brazilian founder haploty- stressed cells from neoplastic development while 72Pro allele is more effec- pe previously described. No other T P53
 germline or somatic or rearrange- tive at inducing cell cycle arrest and senescence. The aim of the study was to ments were identified. At age 9 years, the child was asymptomatic and had examine the association of the T P53
 genotypes with the odds ratio (OR) for no evidence of endocrine derangements. Full body and brain magnetic reso- cervical cancer among women. T P53
 gene variants were determined in 123 nance imaging failed to detect any suspicious lesions, and cardiopulmonary women with cervical cancer (all Caucasians and citizens of Russia). Cases exercise testing results were within the normal reference for the child’s age, were then compared with ethnically matched healthy controls (n=467). The ruling out a major exercise capacity deficiency. CONCLUSION: Our results T P53
 Arg72 allele frequency was not different between cases and controls support the hypothesis that p.R337H, the most common T P53
 mutation (67.5% vs. 69.8%). However, those women with homozygous genotypes ever described in any population, is a conditional mutant. Observations over (Arg/Arg, Pro/Pro) were at 2.6 times the risk for cervical cancer [OR, 2.587; a long period of clinical follow-up suggest that p.R337H homozygotes don’t 95% CI, 1.595-4.195] compared to women with the heterozygous (Arg/Pro) have a more severe disease phenotype than heterozygotes. Homozygotes for genotype (frequency of Arg/Pro genotype: 19.5% vs. 38.5%; P<0.0001). In p.R337H will require careful surveillance for lifetime cancer risk and for ef- conclusion, the heterozygosity for T P53
 gene Arg72Pro polymorphism is f Je.c Gtsi aocno mmeatzazbi:o Nliocn cea.p Sa.cGit.Dy .l aSteelris itnre l:i fNe.one. J. Duarte: None. J. Pinto-Ribeiro: None. P.J. Vieira: None. G.D. Macedo: None. C. Rossi: None. M. Czepielewski: p Nr.oAt.e Nctiigvme aatgualliinnsat: cNeornveic. aAl .cAa.n Acrekrh iinp oRvuas:s Niaonn ew. oBm.Ge.n B.egiev: None. I.I. None. C.B.D. Netto: None. P. Hainaut: None. P. Ashton-Prolla: None. Ahmetov: None.  P11
.238  P11
.236 Impact of polymorphisms in genes of p53 pathway on clinical Magnetic resonance imaging screening in Li Fraumeni Syndrome: An manifestations of the Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome exploratory whole body MRI study (the SIGNIFY study) G. Macedo1,2, I. Araujo Vieira1, J. Giacomazzi1, D. Paskulin1,2, A. Brandalize1, P. Ashton- E. Killick1, E. Bancroft2, M. Leach1,2, R. Eeles1,2; Prolla1,2,3; 1Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2Royal Marsden Hospital NHS 1Laboratório de Medicina Genômica, CPE, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. Porto Alegre, Brazil, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Serviço de Genética Médica, HCPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil. Li Fraumeni Syndrome predisposes individuals to a range of malignancies with a lifetime cancer risk of up to 90% in women and 70% in men. Cur- rent UK national screening recommendations are for breast screening with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) and its variant, Li-Fraumeni-like Syndrome mammography and MRI in women. Some centres employ family specific (LFL), TarPe5 3a utosomal dominant disorders characterized by increased pre- screening tailored to malignancies found within a family, most centres have disposition to multiple early-onset cancers, caused by a germline mutation an “open-door” policy. Recent evidence suggests there may be a survival be- in the tumor suppressor. The core tumors of the synTdPro5m3e are soft nefit for more intensive screening, including whole body MRI, but there are tissue and bone sarcomas, brain tumors, breast cancer, and adrenocortical no published data on the psycholToPg5ic3al impact of such screening program- carcinoma (ACC). In Southern Brazil, a germline mutation ( p.R337H) mes. The primary end-point of this study is to assess incidence of malignan- with incomplete penetrance is present in 0.3% of the general population cies diagnosed in asymptomatic mutation carriers using whole body and has been associated with a broader cancer spectrum than that ob- MRI without contrast, against general population controls. The secondary served in LFS. The environmental and genetic factors underlying cMaDncMe2r end-points are to evaluate any incidentalT fPin5d3ings and assess the psycholo- risk and tumor patterns inM LDFM S4
/LFL patients are not comple tely uHnAdUeSrP- gical impact of whole body MRI screening. Recruits must be aged between stood. In this study, the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 18 and 60. Cases must carry a germline ESH Gm u 2ta 0t 1io 3n a | n Pd A m Ru Is St ,n Fot R h Aav Ne CES |N W P3
W09WT>.GE S(rHs2G27.O97R4G4), C>T variation (rs1563828) and 321 been diagnosed with a malignancy in the last 5 years; controls must be non-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index T P53
 T P53
 T P53
 G>A (rs15299H16A)U wSPere genotyped using TaqMan assays Pin 59 p.R337H array CGH, we evaluated the presence of rare germline CNVs in 64 patients mutation carriers with different tumors and 100 wild-type healthy fulfilling the Chompret criteria for LFS, but without any detectable al- controls. The SNP showed a borderline effect ( =0.051) as genetic teration. In 15 unrelated patienKtDs,M w1eA ,d MetTeAct3e, dT 2R0R AnPew CSNIVRsT 3absent in 600 modifier of tumor type in cancer affected mutation carriers. The genotype controls. Remarkably, in 4 patients who had developed each brain tumour, in heterozygosity was observed in 7/9 (77.8%) mutation carriers with ACC the detecteSdI RCTN3V overlap the oSrI RT3 genes enco- aMsD cMom2pareMd DtoM 64/21 (28.6%) of those diagnosed with breast cancer. In con- ding p53 partners involved in histone methylation or acetylation. Focused trast, we did not observe anyH AstUaStiPstically significant association between analysis of showed that the CNV encompassing leads to SIRT3 and SNPsT aPn5d3 clinical manifestations. Our results suggest that overexpression and that in vitro SIRT3 overexpression prevents apoptosis, there may be an effect of the polymoHrApUhSisPm rs1529916 on the type increases G2/M and results in a hypermethylation of a subset of genes invol- of tumor developed by p.R337H carriers. Further studies with a larger ved in cancer. This study supports the causal role of germline alterations of sample size and possibly, other SNPs in the gene should be underta- genes involved in chromatin remodelling in genetic predisposition to cancer kGe.n M toac ceodnof:i rNmo nthe.i sI. o Abrsaeurjvoa Vtiioenir.a: None. J. Giacomazzi: None. D. Paskulin: aJn.Md,. iFnl apmaratnic: uNloanr,e t.o J b. rAauinry t-uLmanoduarss:. None. G. Bougeard: None. H. Castel: None. A. Brandalize: None. P. Ashton-Prolla: None. None. H. Hernandez-Vargas: None. A. Drouet: None. J. Latouche: None. C. Férec: None. D. Leroux: None. C. Lasset: None. I. Coupier: None. Z. Herceg: None. T. Frebourg: None.  P11
.239 20 years of Li-Fraumeni syndrome in France G. Bougeard1, S. Baert-Desurmont2, R. Sesboüé1, M. Renaux-Petel2, V. Bonadona3, C.  P11
.241 Bonaïti-Pellié4, T. Frebourg2, &. The French LFS working group5; Mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau gene, a graduate tuning on the 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in way to cancer Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research S. Couvé1, B. Gardie2, C. Lardoue1, E. Laine3, K. Mahtouk1, J. Guégan4, S. Gad1, H. Le Jeune1, and Innovation in Biomedicine and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3UMR M. Le Gentil4, G. Nuel5, S. Lee6, B. Lecomte7, J. Pagès8, C. Collin8, F. Lasne9, B. Bressac-de UCBL/CNRS 5558, centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 4Inserm and Paul Brousse Hospital, Paillerets10, J. Feunteun11, P. Dessen4, V. Lazar4, N. Mazure12, L. Tchertanov3, D. Mole13, W. Villejuif, France, 5-, -, France. Kealin14, P. Ratcliffe13, S. Richard15; 1EPHE-INSERM U753, Villejuif, France, 2EPHE-INSERM U753 Villejuif and INSERM U892 Nantes, -, France, 3LBPA, CNRS-ENS Cachan, Cachan, France, 4Plate-forme de Génomique The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) represents a remarkable genetic predis- IGR, Villejuif, France, 5MA P5
-UMR CNRS 8145, Paris, France, 6Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institut, Boston, MA, United States, 7Médecin Générale, position to cancer characterized by a wide tumour spectrum including sar- Couvin, Belgium, 8INSERM U966, Tours, France, 9Département des analyses, AFLD, comas, premenopausal breast cancers, brain tumours and adrenocortical Chatenay-Malabry, France, 10Service de Génétique-IGR, Villejuif, France, 11UMR CNRS carcinomas. Twenty-three years after the demonstration that LFS results 8200, Villejuif, France, 12IRCAN, UMR CNRS 7284-INSERM U1081-UNS, Nice, France, from T P53
 germline mutations, we have identified 188 unrelated French 13University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 14Howard Hughes Medical Institute, LFS families harbouring T P53
 alterations, thanks to the Chompret criteria Chevy Chase, MD, United States, 15EPHE-INSERM U753 Villejuif and PREDIR and Réseau elaborated by the French LFS working group to facilitate the clinical reco- National INCa Kremlin-Bicêtre, -, France. gnition of the syndrome. The update of clinical data performed in 280 af- fected mutation carriers who had developed 478 tumours revealed that the median age of first tumour onset was 27 years (17y in males versus 28y in Over the past 30 years, the genetics of inherited cancer syndromes asso- females), that 44% of patients developed 2 to 6 multiple primary tumours, ciated with germline mutations in tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) has and that at least 20 of secondary tumours developed within the radiothe- been dominated by Knudson’s two-hit model. This model implied that on- rapy field of a previous tumour. The most frequent tumours observed were set of malignant transformation resulted from full inactivation of the TSG. breast carcinoma (110), soft-tissue sarcoma (85+7 breast sarcoma), osteo/ Recently, a new “continuum model” has been proposed, which introduces chondrosarcoma (52), brain tumours (40) and adrenocortical carcinomas more versatile concepts such as gene dosage-sensitivity, specific phenotype (35). Among 102 patients with adrenocortical carcinoma referred for T P53
 of heterozygote cells and tissue specificity. Mutations in the von Hippel-Lin- testing, 51% of children and 22% of adults carried a T P53
 mutation. Germ- dau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene are associated with a complex spectrum line T P53
 alterations were in 61% missense mutations and in 5% genomic of conditions from no symptoms or polycythemia to predisposition to seve- rearrangements. Patients harbouring dominant negative missense mutati- ral types of tumor. We report here an atypical family bearing two VHL gene ons developed first tumour 16 years earlier than patients with null muta- mutations in cis (R200W and R161Q), together with structural modeling, tions (22y versus 38y). We found that T P53
 mutation carriers harbouring functional and transcriptomic studies of these mutants. We demonstrate the MDM2 285-309 G-G haplotype developed tumours 5 years earlier than that the complex pattern of clinical manifestations related to distinct VHL patients harbouring other haplotypes (p=0.043), indicating that the MDM2 mutations is perfectly correlated with a gradient of VHL dysfunction in hyp- 285-309 G-G is a higher risk haplotype in patients with germline T P53
 mu- oxia signalling pathways, which supports the new quantitative “continuum t Gat.i Bonosu.geard: None. S. Baert-Desurmont: None. R. Sesboüé: None. M. m S.o Cdeolu”v oéf: tNuomnoer. Bsu. pGparredsies:i oNno.ne. C. Lardoue: None. E. Laine: None. K. Renaux-Petel: None. V. Bonadona: None. C. Bonaïti-Pellié: None. T. Frebourg: Mahtouk: None. J. Guégan: None. S. Gad: None. H. Le Jeune: None. M. Le None. &. The French LFS working group: None. Gentil: None. G. Nuel: None. S. Lee: None. B. Lecomte: None. J. Pagès: None. C. Collin: None. F. Lasne: None. B. Bressac-de Paillerets: None. J. Feunteun: None. P. Dessen: None. V. Lazar: None. N. Mazure: None. L. Tchertanov: None. D. Mole: None. W. Kealin: None. P. Ratcliffe: None. S.  P11
.240 Richard: None. Germline copy number variation of genes involved in chromatin remodelling in families suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome with brain tumours  P11
.242 J. M. Flaman1, J. Aury-Landas1, G. Bougeard1, H. Castel2, H. Hernandez-Vargas3, A. A synonymous mutation on VHL gene causes a pheochromocytoma Drouet1, J. Latouche1, C. Férec4, D. Leroux5, C. Lasset6, I. Coupier7, Z. Herceg3, T. Frebourg1; 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in and paraganglioma history through three generations Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Inserm U982, University of Rouen, Institute for Research C. SIMIAN1, L. HEIDET2, K. BOUCHIREB3, N. ABERMI L1
, V. NAU1, M. MENARA4, J. FAVIER5, and Innovation in Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 3Epigenetics Group, International S. IRTAN6, J. MAZZELLA1, K. LAHLOU-LAFORET1, A. GIMENEZ-ROQUEPLO1; Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 4Inserm, U1078, Brest, France, 5University 1Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, PARIS, Hospital, Department of Genetics, Grenoble, France, 6Cancer Genetics, CRLCC Léon France, 2Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris Hôpital NECKER Enfants-Malades, Bérard, Lyon, France, 7Department of Genetics, CRLCC Val d‘Aurelle Paul Lamarque, PARIS, France, 3Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Montpellier, France. PARIS, France, 4INSERM U970 Centre de recherche cardiovasculaire de l‘HEGP, PARIS, France, 5INSERM U970 Centre de recherche cardiovasculaire de l’HEGP, PARIS, France, T P53
 6Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, Paris Cité Sorbonne, PARIS, France. Germline alterations of the tumour suppressor gene are detected approximately in 25% of the families suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome The index-case was a 12-years old girl, operated on for a pheochromocy- (LFS) characterised by a genetic predisposition to a wide tumour spectrum, toma (PH). Her father and grandfather were also affected by PH or para- including soft-tissue sarcomas, osteosarcomas, premenopausal breast can- gangliomas (PGL) several years ago. Genetic counselling was organized in a cers, brain tumours, adrenocortical tumours, plexus choroid tumours, leu- specialized oncogenetic multidisciplinary consultation, including systema- kaemia, and lung cancer. The aim of this study was to determine the contri- tic psychological approach. In this family, the diagnosis of PH was delayed bution of germline copy number variations (CNVs) to LFS in families wit- for the child, although her father and grandfather were aware of their me- h3o2u2t detectable T P53
 mutation. Using a custom-EdSesHigGne d2 0hi1gh3- r|e PsoAluRtiIoSn, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG dical history, illustrating the denial as a defensive mechanism against guiltABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index BRCA1 BRCA2 oVfH dLisReaEsTe tSrDaHnsBmSisDsHioDn. SInD HthCis McoAnXtext, teTsMtiEnMg 1th2r7ee generations required previously been screeBnReCdA a1nd foBunRdC At2o be negative for and reflexion about the temporality of the test. coding region mutations. Targeted next-generation paired-end sequencing , , , VHL, , and were first investigated of regions containing and was performed using Illumina GAI- in the index-case. A single neutral variation of unknown significance (UV) Ix. Genetic differences in the form of single nucleotide variants and inserti- was identified on gene (c.4V1H4LA>G; p.Pro138Pro). That UV was inhe- ons/deletions were identified in most individuals tested in regions that had rited from the paternal branVcHhL and was present on tumor DNA VaHssLoΔc2ia ted previously remained unexplored, such as the non-coding regions of BRCA1 with loss of heterozygosity. The gene is composed of 3 exons encoding and BRCA2, the 5’UTR, 3’UTR and promoter siteBsR. CVAar1iants iBnR tChAes2e sites are a 4.7 kb mRNA and a minor transcript deleted from exon 2 ( iso- being further analysed for effect on expression of transcript. form). The UV was absent in Exome Variant Server but ESEfinder analysis This study has comprehensively investigated and and sur- suggested the creation of a new cryptic splicing site. Further investigations rounding genomic regions in a mutation-negative inherited breast cancer onV RHNLAΔ 2ex tracted from leucocytes of each patient and from the tumVHorL, com- p Mo.pWu.l aWtoionng.-Brown: None. S. Li: None. M. Wilkins: None. K.A. Avery-Kiejda: pared with RNA from similar samples of controls showed a high expression None. N.A. Bowden: None. R.J. Scott: None. of isoform in patients’ leucocytes and the absence of main tran- script in the PH. The diagnosis of von Hippel Lindau disease was made on those biological data and this family now benefits from a specific follow-up  P12
.01 oCf .t Sheim diiasne:a Nseo.ne. L. Heidet: None. K. Bouchireb: None. N. Abermil: None. V. Discrepancies between prenatal aCGH on cell cultures and postnatal Nau: None. M. Menara: None. J. Favier: None. S. Irtan: None. J. Mazzella: aCGH on blood DNA: two case reports. None. K. Lahlou-laforet: None. A. Gimenez-roqueplo: None. a. guichet, E. Colin, A. Ziegler, D. Bonneau; service de genetique, angers, France.  P11
.243 Mutational analysis of the Wilms’ tumor gene (WT1) in Greek patients Chromosomal microarray (CGHa) is becoming the first-tier diagnosis test presenting with nephroblastoma for prenatal diagnosis allowing detection of small chromosomal rearrange- I. Fylaktou1, S. Megremis1, A. Mitsioni2, F. Komianou3, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, C. J. Stefanidis2, E. ment. We report two cases of discrepancies between aCGH performed using Kanavakis1, J. Traeger Synodinos1; DNA obtained either from chorionic villus culture or from amniotic fluid cell 1Medical Genetics, Athens University,“Aghia Sofia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, culture and aCGH performed using DNA obtained from blood after birth. 2Departement of Pediatric Nephrology, “P. A. Kyriakou” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Case 1: Greece, 3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, “Aghia Sofia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, aCGH, performed on a chorionic villus culture performed because of nuchal Greece. translucency at ultrasound examination, evidenced two duplications (95Mb 6q11q25 duplication and 1,5Mb 15q21 duplication). Both of these abnor- malities were absent on aCGH performed on DNA obtained after birth. Wilms’ tumor (WT) or nephroblastoma is a childhood tumor of the kidney. It Case 2 affects children below the age of 5 and has an incidence of 1 in 10000 child- aCGH, performed on amniotic fluid culture at 33weeks of gestation becau- ren. Most cases are sporadic, unilateral and not associated with other sym- se of abnormalities of foetal corpus callosum at ultrasound, evidenced two ptoms of systemic disease. The average age of diagnosis is 42-47 months for duplications (54Mb 1q22q32 duplication and 4,8Mb 11q24q25 duplication) cWhTil1d,r βe-nc awteitnhi nu,n WilaTtXe,r TaPl 5tu3mors CaTnNdN 3B01-33 months for children with bilate- and associated with one deletion (38Mb 1q32q44 deletion). None of the- ral tumors. WT WdiTs1plays a high h eterogeneity. Mutations in genes such as se abnormalities were present on aCGH performed on DNA obtained from and WT1 as well as deletions in the chromo- blood after birth. somal region of (chr11p.13)are implicated in the pathogenesis or pro- Discrepancies between aCGH performed using DNA obtained from culture gression of the WT. Heterozygous WT m1utations account for 20% of WT. In cells and DNA directly extracted from tissue have been reported in few cases this study, we examined 8 sporadic cases and 1 familial case with nephro- in the literature. blastoma. Mutation analysis of the gene (exons 2-9) in patients (and We discuss the reasons of such discrepancies and we recommend caution their parents) revealed alterations in 5/8 sporadic cases. De novo mutations in the interpretation of copy number variation evidenced on prenatal cell were found in exon 8 (the novel p.Q374P and p.R362X), exon 9 (p.R390X cultures. Finally, we recommend when possible to perform aCGH using DNA and p.R394W/N) and intron 9 c.1432+4C>T. Polyphen-2 (http://genetics. d Air. egcutilcyh eextt: rNaoctneed. Ea.n Cdo nliont: DNNoAne o. bAt.a Zinieegdl efrr:o Nmo nceel. lD c.u Bltounrense.au: None. bwh.harWvaTr1d .edu/pph2/) indicated that the p.Q374P (legacy name) is pro- bably damaging with a score of 0.992. Thus, 5/8 cases presented with muta- tions in indicating that molecular investigation of thisW geTn1e is useful to support the definitive diagnosis. Concerning the non-characterised patients’  P12
.02 mutational analysis will be continued in the other exons of as well as in A whole-genome reference panel enriched in Italian lower-frequency tIh. eF yoltahketor ug:e Nneosn eim. Sp.l Micaetgerdem tois b: eN ionnveo. lAve. dM iints tiohnei :p Nreosneen. tFa.t Kioonm oifa nWoTu.: variants. None. S. Kitsiou-Tzeli: None. C.J. Stefanidis: None. E. Kanavakis: None. J. M. Cocca1,2, M. Traglia1,2, Y. Memari3, K. Walter3, C. Sala2, L. Bomba3, G. Girotto1, C. Traeger Synodinos: None. Masciullo2, C. Barbieri2, P. D’Adamo1, P. Gasparini1, N. Soranzo3, D. Toniolo2; 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy, 2Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Research Institute, Milano, Italy, 3Human Genetics Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Genome Campus, Hinxton, CB10 1HH,  P11
.244 United Kingdom. Targeted resequencing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in familial breast cancer M. W. Wong-Brown1, S. Li2, M. Wilkins2, K. A. Avery-Kiejda1, N. A. Bowden1, R. J. Scott1; 1University of Newcastle, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, Genetically isolated population cohorts have contributed to large-scale dis- Australia, 2University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. covery efforts of genetic loci associated with complex traits shared between different European populations. Additional opportunities for novel discove- BRCA1 BRCA2 ries of complex trait loci arise from exploiting the population specific en- Breast cancer affects about 13,000 women every year in Australia. Inherited richment in low frequency variants characteristic of these populations. loss-of-functBioRnC Am1utatioBnRsC iAn2 and predispose to high risk of The Italian Network of Genetics Isolates (INGI) has collected up to 3000 breast and/or ovarian cancer. Since the discovery of breast cancer suscepti- individuals sampled for a large set of phenotypes from several isolated po- bility genes and , there have not been any other genes identi- pulations along Italy. We sequenced a subset of 110 individuals randomly fiedB tRhCaAt play a significant role in predisposition to inherited breast cancer. selected from the Val Borbera cohort (VBI), and a second subset of 250 indi- A large proportion of individuals with inherited breast cancer are negative viduals from Friuli Venezia Giulia (FVGI) maximally representative of ance- for mutations and despite numerous research effortsB, fRuCrAth1er breBaRst- stral chromosomes, using low-coverage whole-genome sequencing. CcaAn2cer susceptibility genes still remain elusive. After genotype calling and refinement, accurate quality controls steps were We hypothesize that genetic anomalies are present in the and applied to obtain a reliable set of rare and common variants.Through com- genes in a subset of individuals with BfaRmCAili1a l breBaRstC Aca2ncer where no parison between1 INGI cohorts, with other Italian (e.g. the Tuscany popula- genetic anomalies where identifieBdR uCsAi1ng SanBgReCrA 2sequencing. This study tion from 10002G) and European populations (in 1000G or in the WTSI-led aims were to identify genetic anomalies in and by completely UK10K project) we have produced a full catalog of genetic variation, com- re-sequencing 200kb surrounding and using next-generation mon and rare, in each population. sequencing. With this approach we expect to produce an imputation reference panel This pilot study involves 10 individualsE wSHithG f a2m0il1ia3l b| rPeAasRt IcSan, cFeRr, AhaNd CEs |p WeciWfic Wfor. EItSalHiaGn/.SOouRtGhern European populations, containing a com3p2le3teABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index set of genome-wide low frequency and rare variants that could be exploited resequencing. to search for causative variants for a large set of phenotypes. Our results indicate that Sss and Sds sensitivities were similar with required 1. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, NAbaetucraesis, G. R., Auton, A., Brooks, L. conditions of quality. Improvement of our methods by quality standards and D., DePristo, M. A., Durbin, R. M., et al. (2012). An integrated map of genetic rAe.s eRqeumeennciienrga sa:l lNoownse u. Vs .t Bo ouusred Sosns: iNnosnteea. dT .o Nf oSgdusc fhoir: dNioangen.o Hs.i sS.obol: None. variation from 1, 092 human genomes. 491, 56-65. 2 M. .w Cwowcc.uak: 1N0okn.eo.r Mg. Traglia: None. Y. Memari: None. K. Walter: None. C. Sala: None. L. Bomba: None. G. Girotto: None. C. Masciullo: None. C. Barbieri:  P12
.05 None. P. D’Adamo: None. P. Gasparini: None. N. Soranzo: None. D. Toniolo: None. Presence and potential of cell free DNA in forensic casework M. Vandewoestyne, D. Van Hoofstat, A. Franssen, F. Van Nieuwerburgh, D. Deforce; Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.  P12
.03 Array CGH and fetal pathology : pitfalls of cell culture. Cell free nucleic acids (CNAs) have been found to exist in many biological C. Schluth-Bolard1,2, E. Alix1, J. Michel1, A. Labalme1, M. Cordier1, S. Collardeau-Frachon3, media, including blood, saliva, semen and urine, and have been subject of re- I. Rouvet4, A. Vasiljevic3, M. Zabot4, M. Till1, D. Sanlaville1,2; search in oncology and non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. The origin of CNAs 1HCL, Service de Génétique, BRON Cedex, France, 2CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, Lyon, France, 3HCL, Service d‘Anatomie remains obscure, although necrosis, apoptosis and active secretion have Pathologie, BRON Cedex, France, 4HCL, Service de Biotechnologie Cellulaire, BRON Cedex, been suggested as potential mechanisms by which CNAs are released. France. To date, several studies have been performed on the potential of extracel- lular mRNA profiling in forensic science to identify the biological origin of forensic stains. Less is known about the potential value of cell free DNA in aCGH has proven its usefulness to detect Copy Number Variation (CNV) in forensic casework. Recent studies suggest that this cell free DNA is a contri- malformed fetuses. Currently, this technique is either performed on DNA ex- buting factor to DNA recovered from touched items and state that it is likely tracted from fetal tissue or cell cultures. Here, we report two fetuses with that a substantial proportion of cell free DNA is being discarded with the discordant pathogenic CNV depending on the nature of the sample studied. supernatant during standard extraction processes. This would imply that The first fetus presented a spina bifida and termination of pregnancy (TOP) potentially valuable information would be discarded as well. was performed at 21 weeks of gestation (WG). aCGH, performed from DNA To investigate the presence and potential of cell free DNA in forensic ca- extracted from fibroblast culture after 3 passages highlighted three patho- sework, DNA profiles of cell pellet and concentrated supernatant from 30 genic CNV: 2q12.3 duplication, 22q11.2 deletion and a 14q12-q21.3 mosaic artificial case like samples and from 100 real forensic samples were compa- deletion (50%). Interstitial 14q deletion wasn’t confirmed by FISH in the red. Presence of cell free DNA was shown in all investigated sample types. subculture. Given this discrepancy, a second aCGH was performed from DNA Moreover, in some samples additional alleles, not detected during analysis extracted from frozen liver of the fetus showing only the 2q duplication and of the cell pellet, were detected. In 16% of the samples, the cell free DNA had 22q deletion. an added value. For the second polymalformed fetus a TOP was performed at 25 WG. aCGH The results presented here indicate that cell free DNA deserves further con- was performed on DNA extracted from amniocytes culture (9 passages), sideration since it has the potential to increase the DNA yield in forensic highlighted three CNV : 7p22.3-p22.1 duplication, 2q23.3q31.1 and 16q24.3 c Mas. eVwanodrkew soamesptylense.: None. D. Van Hoofstat: None. A. Franssen: None. F. Van Nieuwerburgh: None. D. Deforce: None. deletions. FISH studies on frozen thymus only confirm the interstitial 2q de- letion, while the three anomalies were confirmed on amniocytes subculture. A second aCGH performed on the DNA extracted from the thymus only con- firmed the 2q deletion.  P12
.06 These observations emphasize the possibility of occurrence of unbalanced Metabochip-based copy number variants (CNVs) calling and chromosomal rearrangements in cultured cells possibly favoured by hyper association with body mass index (BMI) in adults: benchmarking and stimulation and chromosome abnormality. These observations emphasize meta-analysis the importance to check identified CNV on fetal tissue. Also, we proposed to A. Macé1,2, K. Männik3, R. Mägi4, S. Jacquemont5, J. S. Beckmann2, A. Metspalu4, A. p Ce.r Sfocrhmlu tahC-GBHol afrrodm: N DoNneA. Eex. tArlaixc:t eNdo fnreo.m J. fMetiaclh teils:s Nuoen.e. A. Labalme: None. M. Reymond3, Z. Kutalik1,2; Cordier: None. S. Collardeau-Frachon: None. I. Rouvet: None. A. Vasiljevic: 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss None. M. Zabot: None. M. Till: None. D. Sanlaville: None. Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Center of Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.  P12
.04 Comparative study between single strand sequencing and double strand sequencing in breast cancer predisposition. Many single nucleotide polymorphisms influence common disease suscep- A. REMENIERAS, V. BOURDON, T. NOGUCHI, H. SOBOL; tibility but, to date even cumulatively, they explain only part of the heritabi- INSTITUT PAOLI CALMETTES, MARSEILLE, France. lity. As large and rare CNVs were also found to be associated with common diseases/traits, it was suggested that part of the missing heritability could be accounted for by rare variants with intermediate penetrance. The extent Currently, next generation sequencers are of the top of sequencing technolo- of this contribution remains however largely unknown. To address this que- gies. But Sanger sequencing is still keeping as reference method for genetic stion, we are collecting cohorts genotyped on Metabochip and other Illumi- testing in clinical. However, there’s no consensus on methodology as many na platforms to identify new rare or short CNVs associated with BMI and publications validated this method without evaluating the analytical sensi- other complex traits. tivity between sequencing with double strand as matrix versus sequencing We assessed CNV detection sensitivity, specificity and optimal filtering para- single strand. meters of PennCNV calls on 300 unrelated adults genotyped on both Meta- The aim of this study was to compare sensitivity between sequencing single bochip and OmniExpress. Assuming that CNVs called in high probe-density strand (Sss) and sequencing double stranBdR C(ASd1/s)B RfoCrA e2vocative patients of regions of the Metabochip are genuine, we examined the concordance with breast cancer and ovary predisposition. results of the OmniExpress platform. We assessed how different filtering pa- We took runs of 50 patients for whom genes were tested rameters, such as length, number of probes, confidence score, influence true using 3130/3500 (ABi) sequencers and Sds for diagnosis to have routine positive and false discovery rates (TPR, FDR). We then defined thresholds variation detection rate. Analysis was done by Seqscape V.2.7 (ABi). For our that gave an optimized CNV call reliability. TPR and FDR typically decreased study reading was done by one biologist who analyzed once only one strand as the minimum length threshold increased, revealing the difficulty in de- (forward or reverse) and several months later two strands together. tecting CNVs smaller than 20kb (TPR=0.034, FDR=0.775) on OmniExpress 656 variations were identified for our 50 patients: chip. -34 were missed in Sss (27) even in Sds (7): respectively, detection rate We performeSdH 2a Bp1reliminary genome-wide CNV association meta-analysis was about 95% for Sss and 99% for Sds but after verification of differences (N=8295) based on our filtering. As a proof-of-concept we confirmed the between the 2 methods in Seqscape we realized that errors were only dues well-known -BMI CNV association and found several promising hits to operator reading and not technologies. Lacks appeared when quality se- to be replicated in additional Metabochip-genotyped cohorts. To the best quences wasn’t good enough. of our knowledge, this is the first effort to discover small CNVs associated - 33 2 w 4ere identified in Sss whereas they were only aErStiHfacGts 2no0t1 c3on |f iPrmAeRd IbSy, FRwAitNh aCdEu l|t BWMWI. W.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index A. Macé: None. K. Männik: None. R. Mägi: None. S. Jacquemont: None. J.S.  P12
.09 Beckmann: None. A. Metspalu: None. A. Reymond: None. Z. Kutalik: None. Evaluating laboratories’ interpretation of genetic test results through a EuroGentest External Quality Assessment survey E. Girodon1,2, S. Berwouts3, M. Rodriguez de Alba Freiria4, A. Roux5, D. E. Barton6, L. Hoefsloot7, S. Gardner8, O. Kamarainen8, B. Fowler9, M. A. Morris10, E. Dequeker3, R. J.  P12
.07 Hastings11; Key elements for implementation of NGS-based diagnostics - it is the 1APHP, GH Henri Mondor, Genetics department, Creteil, France, 2INSERM U955 equipe people, not the machines 11, Creteil, France, 3University of Leuven, Biomedical Quality Assurance Research Unit, T. Vrijenhoek1, C. G. D. Centre for Genome Diagnostics2; Leuven, Belgium, 4Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Genetics department, Madrid, Spain, 5CHU 1University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Centre for Genome de Montpellier et IURC, Molecular genetics, Montpellier, France, 6National Centre for Diagnostics, Utrecht, Netherlands. Medical Genetics, University College of Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 7Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8St Mary‘s hospital, Genetic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9University Children‘s Hospital, Paediatrics, Basel, Switzerland, 10HUG, Genetics department, Genève, The scope of next-generation DNA sequencing (NGS) is transitioning from Switzerland, 11John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Women‘s research to diagnostics (and beyond), but the conditions for routine clinical Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom. application have not been clearly defined. Well-defined technical standards and guidelines are obvious prerequisites, but the clinical genetics centres in the Netherlands went beyond performance criteria; they auto-assessed the Interpretation of test results is a key component of a genetic laboratory re- performance of NGS as a diagnostic tool in their laboratories. All centres par- port, with potential implications for the patient and the family. In order to ticipated in a pilot project to analyse the internal organisation and process of evaluate laboratory performance in this area, a EuroGentest survey among NGS-based diagnostics, from sample intake to reporting. We sent a request External Quality Assessment (EQA) programmes, from four European pro- to all laboratories to provide an NGS-based diagnosis for the same patients viders (CEQA, CF Network, EMQN & ERNDIM) was undertaken, with the aim with cardiomyopathy. Instead of identifying a ‘winner’, we constructed a sy- of determining the interpretation elements that were missing in reports, in stematic overview of the key elements for transition of NGS from research to regard to existing guidelines and recommendations. diagnostics. Despite the variety in approaches (targeted, exome; WES, whole EQA reports from 2011 representing 519 participations in six programmes: genome; WGS) and performance criteria, the laboratories produced high- cystic fibrosis, Friedreich ataxia, hereditary deafness at the DFNB1 locus, quality data and generally identified the same known clinically relevant va- postnatal microarray, prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities on riants. Subsequent steps – uniformly interpreting results, exchange of data, amniotic fluid and metabolic diseases, were evaluated using criteria derived reporting the diagnosis – appeared more challenging. Although some of the from the OECD Guidelines. bottlenecks are due to technological barriers – e.g. transfer speed for data Mean interpretation scores varied between cases, ranging from 1.61/2 to exchange – the major limitations are inherent to the general organisation of 1.98/2. Despite heterogeneity among schemes in the scoring systems and diagnostic care. We present the practical outcomes of the pilot, along with in assessment, the data analysis revealed the following: 1) although the proposals for dealing with the emerging role of research in a diagnostic con- answer to the clinical question was provided in most reports, the survey text, for responsibly managing patient data, and for appropriately informing emphasized the need to clearly restate the indication of testing; 2) items re- physicians and patients. We thereby provide a practical contribution to the d Te. bVaritjee nahbooeukt :t Nheo nreo.l eC o.Gf .NDG. CS einn tfruet uforre G deiangonmoes tDicisa.gnostics: None. lated to follow-up testing were the most often omitted, e.g. recommendation to search for a second mutation or to test the parents. 26-36% of molecular genetics and 29% of cytogenetics reports did not mention the recurrence risk of disease and/or the possibility of prenatal diagnosis for future preg-  P12
.08 nancies. Sequencing of sodium bisulfite converted DNA as a method to This first and preliminary survey emphasizes the need to find effective trai- discriminate different patterns of methylation in human genome ning and communication processes, including harmonization of assessment M. Lukova1,2, A. Todorova1,2, T. Todorov2, V. Mitev1; between EQA programmes, so that laboratories can improve the interpreta- 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory t Eio. nG ciroondtoenn:t Noof nthee. iSr. rBeeprowrotsu.ts: None. M. Rodriguez de Alba Freiria: None. A. Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria. Roux: None. D.E. Barton: None. L. Hoefsloot: None. S. Gardner: None. O. Kamarainen: None. B. Fowler: None. M.A. Morris: None. E. Dequeker: None. R.J. Hastings: None. Many regions in human genome are differentially methylated (DMRs) on maternal or paternal copy and this helps genes to work properly. Methyla- tion changes along these DMRs are associated with different pathologies.  P12
.10 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth disorder, mainly FISH probes expiration date in constitutional cytogenetic laboratories caused by epigenetic alterations in one of the two imprinting control regions M. Doco-Fenzy1,2,3, P. Vago4, C. Missirian5, C. Schluth-Bolard6, V. Adouard7, N. Douet- (ICR1 and ICR2) on chromosome 11p15. The most common defect in ~50% Gilbert8, F. Vialard9, E. Landais1, L. Gouas4, D. Sanlaville6,3, B. De Freminville10, M. of BWS cases is loss of methylation at KvDMR (ICR2). Here, we introduce Valduga11, L. El Khattabi12, A. Moncla5,3, P. Lochu13, P. Kleinfinger14,3, J. Dupont12,3; sequencing of sodium bisulfite converted DNA as an alternative technique 1CHU-Reims, Reims, France, 2EA3801 SFR CAP santé, Reims, France, 3Board ACLF, for determining the methylation status of KvDMR in BWS patients. In order Paris, France, 4CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 5CHU La Timone, Marseilles, France, 6Centre Biologie Et Pathologie Est; Sce Cytogenetique Constitutionnelle, Bron, to be able to compare the results with those, obtained by MS-MLPA (me- France, 7laboratoire de Cytogénétique, St Etienne, France, 8CHU-Brest, Brest, France, thylation specific-multiplex ligation probe amplification), PCR primers were 9laboratoire de cytogenetique, Poissy, France, 10CHU St Etienne Nord, St Etienne Nord, designed over the region to cover two of the MS-MLPA specific probes. Al- France, 11CHU-Nancy, Nancy, France, 12CHU-Cochin, Paris, France, 13GEN-BIO, Clermont- together, 4 patients with KvDMR demethylation showed loss of methylation Ferrand, France, 14Laboratoire CERBA, Saint Ouen L‘Aumone, France. in the analyzed by sequencing CpG sites. The obtained sequencing results in Background patients and normal controls are totally in accordance with the MS-MLPA data. : the use of FISH probes with expired validity date is a recur- The same technique was applied to analyze methylation status in the FMR1 rent dilemma in cytogenetic diagnostic laboratories and became more com- gene promoter, hypermethylated in Fragile X syndrome. The results sho- plex with accreditation process. wed very good discrimination between the normal unmethylated promoter Some companies provide FISH probes with very short expiration date (6 in healthy males and hypermethylated promoter in Fragile X full mutated months) but the procedure used for the determination of the expiration boys. date of commercial probes is not clear. Many laboratories are impacted by In conclusion, sequencing of bisulfite converted DNA can be applied to study this short “expiration date” as FISH probes are expensive and their use is other DMRs, as for example H19DMR (ICR1) locus in Beckwith-Wiedemann/ not predictable since cytogenetic abnormalities are rare and various. When Silver-Russell syndromes. pMreotdhuocding home-made probes the problem is similar: how to establish the Acknowledgements: the study was supported by the grant №7-D/2012, Me- expiration date after labelling, required for accreditation ISO 15189 ? d Mic. aLlu Uknoivvae:r Nsiotyn eS.o Afi.a T, oBduolrgoavraia: .None. T. Todorov: None. V. Mitev: None. : We did a pilot studies in 10 cytogenetic laboratories. All Labora- tories tested their oldest home-made and commercial FISH probes in order to obtain an overview of the possible longevity of probes. The commercial probes originated from various providers, with various dyes. Home-made probes had been labelled by different protocols mostly by nick translation. TRhees uhlytbsriCdoismatmioenr cwiaasl pcoronsbiedsered satisfactory when observed in at least 20 metaphases and 50 nuclei. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW: .ESHG.ORG : 31 probes expiring between 1998 and 3202152ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index wHoerme et-emstaedd ef rpormo boecstober 2012 to 2013 and gave satisfactory signals in all This study presents data on key performance characteristics of the novel cases except one. genomic DNA ScreenTape, like molecular weight size range, accuracy and : 45 probes labelled from 2002 to 2011 were tested re- reproducibility of sizing and quantification results, as well as detection sen- cently, 44 showed visible satisfactory signal. The four oldest probes labelled sitivity. In addition the genomic DNA ScreenTape was used to characterize 10 years ago gave perfect signal. gAe.n Roumeifce rD: NNAon per.e Dp.a MrecdD waditeh-W daiflfkeerre:n Nto enxet.r aMc.t Gioans psmroatnonco: lNs.one. A. This pilot studies shows that the labelled probes have longer validity period Padmanaban: None. t Mha. nD oecxop-eFcetendzy, o: vNeorn 1e.0 P y. eVaargso f:o Nr osnoem. eC .o Mf tihsseimria wnh: eNno ntees. tCe.d S.chluth-Bolard: None. V. Adouard: None. N. Douet-Gilbert: None. F. Vialard: None. E. Landais: None. L. Gouas: None. D. Sanlaville: None. B. De Freminville: None. M.  P12
.13 Valduga: None. L. El Khattabi: None. A. Moncla: None. P. Lochu: None. P. Kleinfinger: None. J. Dupont: None. Recurrent chromosomal abnormalities in human pluripotent stem cells and their derivatives C. Varela1, C. Fonseca-Bernardo2, M. Peschanski2, A. L. Perrier2, N. Lefort2; 1CECS / ISTEM, evry, France, 2INSERM U861 / ISTEM, evry, France.  P12
.11 Comparison between standard and novel PCR-based method for the detection of mutation in the FMR1 gene Due to their original properties, human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) and N. Teran, H. Jaklič, A. Šmerc, B. Peterlin; their progenies are highly valuable not only for regenerative medicine but University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of also as tools to study development and pathologies or as cellular substrates Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. to screen and test new drugs. However, their unlimited self-renewal pro- perty bears the risk of tumor formation, which could potentially be exacer- bated by the presence of genomic abnormalities. Quality control of hPSC is, Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited form of mental retarda- therefore, essential for the reproducibility of research experiments and for tion. Fragile X carriers are known to be associated with premature ovarian the safety of clinical applications based on these cells. As hPSC are often failure in females and fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome in males. propagated for extended period of time, these necessary controls include The pathogenic mutation is mostly caused by CGG repeat expansion in the monitoring and controlling of the integrity of the genome of these cells. FMR1 gene. Normal allels contains from 6-50 CGG repeats. Premutated alle- Chromosomal abnormalities such as gain of chromosomes 12, 17 and X oc- les have expansions between 55 and 200 repeats, but CGG repeats over 200 cur non-randomly and quite commonly in hPSC lines. Using high-resolution are indentified as full mutations. analysis we identified a region of the genome that is highly unstable in hPSC, Rutine testing for FMR1 mutation rely on conventional PCR and Southern located on chromosome 20 (20q11.21). We have also identified a systematic blotting (PCR/SB), however, analysis is costly and time-consuming, requires abnormality that affects neural derivatives of hPSCs namely jumping trans- large amounts of DNA sample and may have poor sensitivity to detection of location of chromosome arm 1q. All these genomic aberrations may have lower abundance mosaic alleles. negative consequences on all stem cell applications. Aim of this study was to compare the novel FMR1 PCR-based method to the These chromosomal defects, observed in culture, reflect tumorigenic events previously used PCR/SB method. that occur in vivo, particularly in testicular germ cell tumors (trisomies 12 DNA samples were extracted from different specimen sources: whole blood, and 17), in early stage of cervical cancer (20q11.21) and in pediatric brain culture of amniotic fluid and chorionic villi. Additionaly, bucal swab, uncul- tumors with poor clinical outcome (duplication 1q). tured chorionic villi and amniotic fluid samples were tested using FMR1 These results raise the importance of understanding structural variations PCR-based method. Cohort of 50 samples contained 12 full mutations, 1 of chromosomes in hPSC, as they will have a significant impact on future premutation/full mutation, 23 premutations, and 14 normal samples (PCR/ m Ce. dViacraell aa:p Npolincea.t iCo.n Fso.nseca-Bernardo: None. M. Peschanski: None. A.L. SB results). Perrier: None. N. Lefort: None. Novel FMR1 PCR-based metod identified normal alleles within 0-3 repeats of previously reported allele sizes. Results have shown a mosaic premutati- on pattern in 8/23 samples previously recognized as non-mosaic premutati-  P12
.14 on. In one sample previously reported as premutation, mosaic premutation/ Selection of reliable housekeeping gene for qRT-PCR analysis on head full mutation pattern was identified. and neck squamose cell carcinomas (HNSCC) We concluded that the novel FMR1 PCR-based method is more sensitive, A. Kalayci1, T. Cora1, H. Acar1, E. Kurar2, S. Kayis3, A. Guzeloglu2, B. Colpan4, K. Ozturk4, compatible with uncultured chorionic villi and amniotic fluid as well signi- M. Hitit1,2; f Nic.a Tnetrlayn r:e Nduoncien. gH t. eJsatkinligč :t iNmoen.e. A. Šmerc: None. B. Peterlin: None. 1Department of Medical Genetics Faculty of Medicine, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Genetics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 3Biometry-Genetics Unit, Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of  P12
.12 Medicine, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey. A novel assay for automated electrophoretic analysis of genomic DNA A. Ruefer1, D. McDade-Walker2, M. Gassmann1, A. Padmanaban3; 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Agilent Technologies, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Agilent Technologies, Life Sciences Application Center, Bangalore, India. Quantitative real time reverse transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR) is used in the study of gene expression of cancer researches. Selection of reliable reference genes as an internal control has a critical importance. The objective of this The success of any study in the field of genomics depends primarily on the study was to evaluate a set of housekeeping genes (HKGs) to be used in the quality of starting material available, like genomic DNA. The integrity and normalization of gene expression in HNSCC. Malignant and non-malignant quantity of genomic DNA clearly affects experimental workflows such as tissue samples were obtained from 12 patients with primary untreated la- aCGH microarrays or next generation sequencing library construction. With rynx and tongue squamose cell carcinoma. Reference genes used were glyce- these experiments being expensive in time, effort and reagent consumption, raldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), actin beta (ACTB), tubulin an initial quality control (QC) check of genomic DNA is recommended. alpha 1 (TUBA1), 18S rRNA (18S), and 28S rRNA (28S). Widely used soft- The novel Agilent genomic DNA ScreenTape has been developed specifical- wares, geNorm and NormFinder, were utilized in the evaluation of the data. ly for the electrophoretic separation, sizing and quantification of genomic Results from geNorm showed that average expression stability values (M) of DNA samples. This ready-to-use device, which runs on the Agilent 2200 all candidate genes were smaller than 1.5 (accepted M value for geNorm) in- TapeStation instrument, provides a reproducible QC method for analyzing dicating that all the evaluated genes can be used as HKGs although 18S and the integrity and quantity of genomic DNA combined with the convenience 28S were found to be the most stable HKG (followed by ACTB, TUBA1, and of an automated system. The genomic DNA ScreenTape requires only one GAPDH). Based on NormFinder, 28S was the most stable and GAPDH and microliter of sample, minimizes sample preparation efforts, and suits va- 28S were considered to be the best combination in the studies evaluating riable throughput needs with individually contained separation channels. t Ah.e K sapleacyicfiic: Ngeonnee. e Tx. pCroersas:i oNno nine .t iHs.s Auecsa ro:b Ntoaninee. dE .f rKoumra vr:a rNioonues. HSN. KSCayCi.s: None. A. Guzeloglu: None. B. Colpan: None. K. Ozturk: None. M. Hitit: None. The TapeStation system provides automated, reproducible sample loading and returns digital electrophoretic data in less than 2 minutes per sample. Results are presented as gel image, data tables and in an electropherogram view. The ability to overlap and compare electropherograms enables a clear discrimination of sample quality across different degradation states, sample t3yp2e6s and concentrations. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.15 Comparison of different DNA binding fluorescent dyes for applications of high-resolution melting analysis monitoring of cancer biomarkerisn. Tvihterose control materials are produced as M. Surovy1, J. Radvanszky2, G. Minarik1,3, L. Kadasi1,2; either CE-marked reference materials or World Health Organization inter- 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, national sBtaCnRd-AaBrdLs, suitable for diagnostic use in Europe or world- Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of wide, respectively. In 2009, the 1st WHO International Genetic Reference Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Panel for Translocation Quantitation for the monitoring of chronic Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. myeloid leukaemia established NIBSJCA’Ks 2role in improving the quality of can- cer molecular monJAitKo2ring. In 2013, production began on the V617F Tumour Genotyping Refe- High-resolution melting (HRM) analysis of PCR amplicons is a flexible tool rence Panel. The V617F mutation (c.1849G>T) is commonly present adaptable for a wide range of applications, such as mutation screening, ge- in chronic myeloproliferative disorder patients, making the JAK2 protein an notyping and methylation studies. As several commercial HRM chemistries obvious candidate for drug-targeting. It is therefore important to identify have been released, together with chemistries used for other applications, V6J1A7KF2-positive patients and to monitor treatment response by mutant clone we have decided to test twelve different green fluorescent DNA binding dyes quantitation. The panel of sensitivity controls will comprise a dilution series for their suitability to use in HRM based mutation screening, genotyping of of V617F genomic DNA (UKE-1 cell line-derived) in a wildtype geno- single nucleotide changes (through both unlabelled probes and small am- mic DNA background (MRC-5 cell line-derived) at 10, 5, 1, 0.1 and 0%. The plicons) and genotyping of a large in/del polymorphism. We also compared samples will be stored at ambient temperature in the highly stable matrix of some basic properties of the dyes, such as fluorescence intensity enhance- GenTegra tubes. Dilutions will be confirmine dvi tbryo deep sequencing and mJAatKe2- ment in the presence of dsDNA, general applicability in melting curve ana- rial performance independently verified with commonly used techniques. lysis, effect on dsDNA melting temperature (Tm) and PCR inhibitory effect. The panel is intended as a CE-marked diagnBoRsAtiFc dKeRvAiSce for PIK3- The studied dyes were LCGreen Plus (LC), EvaGreen (EG), ResoLight (RL), VCA617F assay validation, including specificity and sensitivity determination. SYBR Green I (SG) and eight different green fluorescent dyes from the SYTO Tumour genotyping standards are also proposed for , and family ( S11
,  S12
,  S13
,  S14
,  S16
,  S21
,  S24
 and  S25
). In general, the dyes desi- . NIBSC seeks input from clinicians and scientists worldwide to ensure gned for HRM applications (LC, EG and RL) performed very well in our study, t Jh.e B doeyvlee:lo Npoinneg. nCe.e Ldosc okfi ec:a Nnocenre .g Men. eHtaicw dkiinagsn: Nosotnices. Ea.r eG mraeyt: .None. P. as it was expected. SG,  S12
,  S21
,  S24
 and  S25
 had less suitable properties Metcalfe: None. J. Hawkins: None. for HRM applications.  S11
,  S13
,  S14
 and  S16
 allowed us to obtain results of similar quality (especially  S13
 and  S16
) as the HRM dyes, with some proper- ties even exceeding them. Our results suggest, that some, but not all of the  P12
.18 SYTO family members, may represent suitable tools for a variety of different Implementation of a Diagnostic Pipeline for Marfan und Long QT H MR. MSu arpopvyli:c aNtoionen.s J.. Radvanszky: None. G. Minarik: None. L. Kadasi: None. Syndrome with Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) using Illumina TruSeq Custom Amplicon Panels I. Vogl, S. Eck, S. Eck, C. Heberle, S. Küçük, C. Marschall, K. Mayer, H. Klein;  P12
.16 Center of Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany. Indian Hedgehog (IHH) and LRBA: New genes for Hirschsprung disease Y. Sribudiani1, R. K. Chauhan1, M. M. Alves1, C. Kockx2, T. van Essen2, R. Brouwer2, M. van Amplicon panels for Marfan syndrome (MFS, FBN1) and LongQT syndro- den Hout2, W. van Ijcken2, I. T. Shepherd33, A. Brooks1, R. M. W. Hofstra1; me (LQTS, KCN E1
, KCNH2, SCN5A, KCNQ1 and KCN E2
) were designed using 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Illumina’s TSCA design studio. To evaluate a diagnostic pipeline based on 2Center for Biomics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of NGS, we analyzed a total of 53 patients whose Sanger sequencing data were Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States. already available. Using a single Illumina MiSeq run we sequenced 25 samp- les for MFS and 28 samples for LQTS. Bioinformatic data analysis was car- ried out using CLC Genomics Workbench 6.0. A first variant call was perfor- Hirschsprung is characterized by the absence of enteric ganglia in a variable med by using the following parameters in the CLC software: A probability of length of intestinal tract. A large, multi-generational Dutch family with five 70% that the variant is true and a coverage cut-off of 20 reads. Broken pairs affected family members with HSCR, revealed linkage to 4q31.3-q32.3. As the and non-specific matches were ignored. family shows an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with incomplete Results: All true positive variants were observed with an average per base penetrance, we assume that the mutation in the linkage region is necessary quality of more than 20. Using these criteria, all point mutations from San- but not sufficient to cause disease development. To identify the mutation in ger sequencing could also be detected in the MiSeq data. 8 of 11 deletions tLhReB lAinkage region, but also mutations elsewhere in the genome, we exome (3 exons were not covered in all samples), all indels and 3 of 5 insertions seqRuEeTnced two patieIHntHs. One variant rs140666848 (T > C) in exon 20 of the were detected. gene was found in the linkage region. In addition, missense mutations Based on these results the filters were refined for causal mutation detection: in ( P398
L) and (Q50K) were identifieLdR iBnA each patient, respectively. Variants which were found in more than 20% of the samples were filtered FunctionalM aAnBa2ly1sLis2 of the RET and IHH variants showed that both mutati- out. Variants which showed an average quality lower than 20 and a frequen- ons give rise to a non-functional protein. The variant is located down- cy lower than 5% were sorted out. Variants were annotated with special stream of , a gene which plays a role in the prolMifAerBa2t1ioLn2 of enteric created tracks for each subpanel (gene names, exon numbers, and amino neural crest cells during enteric nervous system (ENS) development in Ze- a I.c iVdo cghl:a Nnognees.) ,S H. GEMckD: Nboionbea. sSe. Eanckn:o Ntaotnioen. C a.n Hde dbbeSrlNe:P .None. S. Küçük: brafish. We hypothesize that this variant might regulate expressi- None. C. Marschall: None. K. Mayer: None. H. Klein: None. on in ENS. Luciferase assays showed that the region containing the variant does show enhancer activity. Currently we are testing whether the variant, when compared to wild type sequence, show significant differences on gene  P12
.19 expression level, using luciferase assays. Our data showsI HthHat combination Microarray testing for urgent paediatric referrals: audit of six years of mutations, as expected, cause autosomal dominant disease with reduces clinical experience penetrance. Furthermore, we show for the first time that mutations can c Yo.n Strriibbuudteia tnoi: H Niornsceh. sRp.Kru. nCgh aduisheaans:e N.one. M.M. Alves: None. C. Kockx: J. J. Waters, L. Platts, R. Wang, D. Morrogh, N. Lench; None. T. van Essen: None. R. Brouwer: None. M. van den Hout: None. W. van Great Ormond St Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom. Ijcken: None. I.T. Shepherd3: None. A. Brooks: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. Rapid reporting of urgent results for babies up to three months of age forms a clinically important part of our service. Rapid FISH (for 13, 18 and 21 aneu-  P12
.17 ploidy testing/confirmation of chromosomal sex) and karyotyping +/- tar- Production of CE-marked reference materials and WHO international geted FISH is now complemented by microrray. In April 2010, chromosomal standards for in vitro genetic diagnoses: quantitative controls for microarray (Roche-Nimbelegen, 12x135K) was introduced as a first line test JAK2 V617F and beyond for all appropriate referral categories at Great Ormond St Hospital for Child- J. Boyle, C. Lockie, M. Hawkins, E. Gray, P. Metcalfe, J. Hawkins; NIBSC, South Mimms, United Kingdom. ren an in January 2011 for all users.We have audited the last six calendar years for this patient referral group (babies =< 3 months) (n=3163) and the results are tabulated below by test typRea speildec Atende.Tuaprlgoeitd ytu (r1n3ar,1o8u nadn dti m21es)// sSuecxciensgs rates/mean days to report/perceUnrtaggeen rt eKpoarrtyeodt ywpiitnhgin +tu/r- nFaIrSoHund NIBSC produces reference materials for human nucleic acid-based diagno- time for the above test categories are: stics where there is strong evidence of neEedS, HinGcre 2as0in1g3ly |i nP tAheR qIuSa,n FtiRtaAtivNe CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 327 : 1 day; 100%; 1.1 days; 100%; : 7ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Urgent Microarray days; 94.8%; 5.7 days; 94.9% and :7 days; 100%; 7.6 nervous system. The incidence of these pathologies among the population days; 86.1%. (2011-12 financial year audit data). is not negligible and it is estimated that diseases such as Parkinson affects Rates of clearly significant abnormalities (details will be presented) were ~ 0.3% of the E.E.U.U. population. The Diagnosis of neurological diseases is comparable across the audited period, probably reflecting the fact that ba- not straightforward, mainly due to the presence of nonspecific overlapping bies with overt dysmorphic features are more likely to be tested at this time. clinical symptoms, and genetic testing becomes essential to confirm clini- Ordering and selection of the appropriate test continues to involve educa- cal diagnosis. Nevertheless, conventional techniques have been insufficient tion of clinicians, sample availability and clinical judgement on the part of to provide a comprehensive molecular diagnosis, given the high number of laboratory staff. genes implicated. Sample numbers by test category We designed a NGS targeted re-sequencing panel for 200 genes associated 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 with neurological diseases, including: i) syndromic and non-syndromic ata- Rapid anaeuploidy/ 149 153 148 116 111 131 xias (>80 genes) ii) Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (34g) iii) syndromic and sexing (interphase FISH) non-syndromic myasthenia (40g) iv) syndromic and non-syndromic para- Urgent Karyotyping +/- FISH 383 349 351 315 240 127 UJr.Jg.e nWt amteicrrso:a Nrroanye. L. Platts: None. R. W0ang: N6one. D1. 1Morro4g8h: No2n3e6. N. 289 plegia (28g). The panel includes a total of 1.3 Mb comprising coding exons, Lench: None. splice sites and 5’ and 3‘ untranslated regions (UTR) of these 200 genes. To test this panel, all these regions were fully sequenced in 7 control pa- tients witShu krneSoewlenc tm Euntraictihomnse natn Sdy sitne mtwo HapMap ceSllO lLiniDes 5 (5N0A0 12144 and  P12
.20 NA12813). Enrichment of the exonic regions and sequencing were carried Simplifying diagnostic mitochondrial genome analysis with out using (Agilent) and (Life Tech- HaploGrep and Mitomaster online algorithms nologies), respectively. S. L. Hume, B. Elyas, R. Kelln, L. Vicen, L. Podemski, S. Taylor, M. Somerville; Here, we present the results obtained during the validation of our panel, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. showing its high level of efficiency. Our targeted re-sequencing system of- fers massive analysis of 200 genes involved in Neurological diseases, making t Ah.e R coommeprrae hLeónpseizv:e N monoele. cVu. lVaorl pdiinaig: nNoosnise .o Af .t hMeasteil ldai:s Norodneer. sC f.e Caosilblaldeo.: None. R. Rodríguez-De Pablos: None. V. Fernández-Pedrosa: None. D. Mitochondrial genome analysis is complicated by the abundance of poly- Cantalapiedra: None. L. Pérez-Cabornero: None. J.M. Rosa-Rosa: None. J.C. morphisms as every individual carries, on average, 30 sequence variants Triviño: None. S. Zúñiga-Trejos: None. R. Miñambres: None. M. Gil: None. S. when compared to the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS). Ad- Santillán: None. ditionally, haplogroup-specific variant frequencies are lacking, thus making the assignment of variant pathogenicity problematic. To simplify our lab analysis time we chose to implement two online .algorithms: HaploGrep,  P12
.23 and Mitomaster, following sequence analysis with both Seqscape™ (Life Personalised clopidogrel therapy by teststrip-based CY P2
C19  Technologies)and Seqpilot™ (JSI Medical Systems) Using our new process, genotyping those variants that do not fall into the patient’s predicted haplogroup, are H. Puehringer, B. Rauscher, C. Oberkanins; further examined by Mitomaster to obtain frequencies, species conservation ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria. and general variant information relevant to assigning pathogenicity. These algorithms were validated using 40 full mitochondrial genomes of various haplotypes and permitted successful identification of likely pathogenic va- Introduction: Clopidogrel (Plavix™) is widely prescribed to reduce recur- riants. Therefore, this new mitochondrial variant analysis workflow has re- rent ischaemic complications in patients with acute coronary syndromes duced our overall analysis time and improves specificity by permitting the and/or post-percutaneous interventions. High interindividual variations cSa.tLe.g Hourimzaet:i oNno nteh.o Bse. Evlayraias:n Ntso tnhea. tR a.r Ke emllno:r eN olinkee.l yL .t oV ibcee np:a Nthoongee. nLi.c . Podemski: None. S. Taylor: None. M. Somerville: None. in and non-responsiveness to clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition often complicate the treatment. Genetic polymorphisms in the CY
P2 C19
 gene, which encodes the principle enzyme responsible for the bioactivation of this prodrug, lead to reduced enzyme activity and reduced levels of clopidogrel’s  P12
.21 active metabolite. Patients carrying defective CY P2
C19  variants have a hig- The MLPA-dHPLC procedure for NF1 gene analysis. her risk for major adverse cardiovascular events than noncarriers, whereas S. PINSON1,2, P. Combemale3, S. Giraud1, A. Calender1; individuals with increased enzyme activity are more at risk for developing 1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2NF rhone Alpes Auvergne, Lyon, France, 3CLB, bleeding. Lyon, France. Methods: A genetic test (StripAssay) was developed for the detection of the CY
P2 C19
 loss-of-function alleles *2, *3, *4, *5, *6, *7 and *8, as well as for the gain-of function allele *17. The StripAssay is based on multiplex PCR, The identification of mutations in the NF1 gene causing neurofibromato- followed by reverse-hybridisation of biotin-labeled amplification products sis type 1 (NF1) is still presenting a considerable amount of work mainly to a parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotides immobilised on mem- because of the large size of the gene (350 kb - 60 exons) and the restricted brane teststrips. number of recurent mutations. The high frequency of NF1 which is affec- Results: Genotyping for functionally enhanced (*17) or defective (*2 - *8) ting 1 in 3500 individuals lead us to choose two complementary methods to CY P2
C19  variants allow the classification of patients into ultrarapid, ex- perform NF1 gene analysis : the multiplex ligation-dependant probe ampli- tensive and poor metabolisers for clopidogrel. Favourable properties, such fication (MLPA) first and then the automated denaturing high performance as the rapid DNA extraction protocol, ready-to-use reagents and teststrips, liquid (dHPLC) screening method. as well as the potential for automation of the hybridisation/detection step, The sensitivity was evaluated in a MLPA-dHPLC analysis of a panel of unre- make the StripAssay convenient and easy to perform within less than six lated french NF1 patients with at least two consensus diagnostic criterias hours. (global mutation detection rate to 96%). Conclusion: A simple and reliable diagnostic tool was developed for predic- Our results and the high detection rate confirm that the association of the ting the response of patients to clopidogrel treatment. The CY
P2 C19
 Stri- MLPA and dHPLC techniques provides an accurate, fast and automatizable m S.e Pthinosdo fno:r Nthoen eid. Pe.n Ctiofimcabteiomna olef: NNFo1n em. Sut. aGtiiroanusd.: None. A. Calender: None. pAssay will assist clinicians to achieve a more individualised antiplatelet t Hh.e Praupeyh.ringer: None. B. Rauscher: None. C. Oberkanins: None.  P12
.22  P12
.24 Massive targeted re-sequencing for the diagnosis of neurological Evaluation of GWAS chip-genotyping of fetal DNA extracted from diseases: a 200-gene panel umbilical cord tissue and WGA-DNA extracted from filter paper A. Romera López1, V. Volpini2, A. Matilla3, C. Collado1, R. Rodríguez-De Pablos1, V. Fernández-Pedrosa1, D. Cantalapiedra1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, J. M. Rosa-Rosa1, J. C. bloodspots Triviño1, S. Zúñiga-Trejos1, R. Miñambres1, M. Gil1, S. Santillán1; S. Chappell1, W. K. Lee2, S. Shooter3, R. McGinnis3, L. Morgan1; 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Bellvitge, 1University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2University of Glasgow, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain. Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Today, neurological diseases have become a major health concern worldwi- d3e2, w8ith more than 600 pathologies affecting theE cS eH ntG ra l2 - a0 n1 d3 p e| rP ipA hR erI aS l-, FRTAheN ICntEe r|P WregWGeWn .cEoSnHsoGrti.uOmR iGs searching for maternal and fetal pre-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.26 Using Lean Six Sigma tools to improve the clinical genetic laboratory eclampsia susceptibility genes by genome-wide association screening T. L. Stockley1,2; (MGeWthAoSd).s W:e examined suitability for chip-genotyping of fetal DNA extracted 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, from umbilical cord tissue and filter paper (Guthrie) blood spots. ON, Canada. Cord-DNA was extracted from 50-100mg of umbilical cord. DNA extracted from Guthrie spots was whole genome amplified (WGA) using Illustra Ge- Clinical genetic laboratories are under increasing pressure to provide ra- nomePhi-V2. pid results on increasingly complex tests, while maintaining low test costs DNA quality was assessed by agarose electrophoresis and Sequenom geno- and high levels of quality. In 2012 the Division of Molecular Genetics at the typing. 36 cord-DNA samples and 18 WGA-DNA samples were genotyped Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, Canada began a multi-part project to using Illumina HumanOmniExpress BeadChips. Genotyping quality was apply Lean Six Sigma methodology to improve efficiency of the hospital’s assessed by subject call rate (CR) and heterozygosity (HET) and by com- divisional clinical Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetic laboratory operations. paring fetal GWAS P-value distributions with distributions for case-control Lean Six Sigma methods are continuous improvement tools based on the aRsessouclitast:ion (ASSOC) and Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) in 2000 pre- scientific method to solve chronic process and quality problems. Molecu- eclamptic mothers and 5000 controls already rigorously QCed. lar Genetic and Cytogenetic laboratory operations were analyzed to define highest needs for initial Lean Six Sigma projects, which included 1) Lean ASSOC and HWE distributions for cord- and WGA-DNAs with CR>95% were facility design for merger of separate Molecular and Cytogenetic laboratory similar to corresponding maternal-case distributions implying absence of services into a combined Genome Diagnostic laboratory, 2) Process impro- frequent, widespread errors in genotypes of cord or WGA subjects. Howe- vement methods to increase throughput of genomic sequence variant repor- ver, CR<95% occurred in 22% of WGA- versus 11% of cord-DNAs and lower ting and 3) Definition of metrics to manage laboratory workflow and turna- CRs were associated with lower HET which was significantly lower in WGA- round time. Methods used include Value Stream Mapping to define current DNA (0.277; SD0.010) than cord-DNA (0.289; SD0.007) (P<0.0001). Lower and future states, defining wastes and use of 5S to standardize work areas, CR was also associated with higher genotyping error (lower genotype con- defining key performance measures for current state and impact of chan- cCoorndcalnucseio) nins :6 DNA replicates genotyped twice. Cord-DNAs with CR <0.95 ges, and use of DMAIC (define, measure, analyze, improve, control) cycles had passed initial QC checks; only 1/18 degraded samples had CR <0.99. as a data drive strategy to solving operational problems. To date the project has achieved improved turnaround time for variant reporting (Molecular Cord- and WGA-DNA are suitable for GWAS when CR>95%. However, WGA- Genetics, 20% improvement), and better utilization of space and personnel DNA yields more samples with CR<95%, lower HETs and likely higher m T.aLt.c Shteodc ktole sya: mNopnlee .flow in the new Genomic Laboratory. genotyping error. Checks of cord-DNA quality are poor predictors of chip- g Se.n Cohtyappipnegll :s uNcocnees.s W. .K. Lee: None. S. Shooter: None. R. McGinnis: None. L. Morgan: None.  P12
.27 Ten year experience with the use of real-time PCR in the detection of ΔF508  P12
.25 B. Nagy, R. G. Nagy, J. Rigo Jr., L. Lazar; Higher quality standards should be aimed for: feedback from EQA for 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. KRAS mutation testing in colorectal cancer Objective L. Tembuyser1, M. Ligtenberg2, N. Normanno3, S. Delen4, H. van Krieken2, E. Dequeker1; 1University of Leuven, Biomedical Quality Assurance Research Unit, Leuven, Belgium, : Cystic fibrosis is the most common autosomal recessive genetic 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Pathology, Nijmegen, disorder in the Caucasian population. About 1400 different genetic mutati- Netherlands, 3Istituto Nazionale Tumori – Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy, 4University on, deletion, etc. were detected until now in the cystic fibrosis transmem- of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. brane regulator gene (CFTR). This makes the molecular diagnosis difficult, KRAS wMhaitleer aiablosu at n6d0 M%e othf tohdes cases is caused by ΔF508 in Hungary. We started to KRAS use the real-time PCR in the clinical genetic practice 10 years ago. mutational staKtuRsA hSas become an essential biomarker in personalized : We isolated the DNA from 188 samples (High Pure medicine. KSiRnAcSe 2009 the ESP EQA Scheme evaluates the reliability PCR Template Preparation kit; Roche, Germany) from different tissues (97 and accurateness of testing on a yearly basis. blood, 14 amnioticfliud cells and 77 CVS). Quantitative real-time PCR with In the ESP EQA Scheme 2012, 105 laboratories from 26 different coun- mReesltuinltgs curve analysis was performed to detect ΔF508 by using hybridizati- tries participated. Participants were asked to test samples from eight invasi- on probe system (TIB MolBiol, Germany). ve colorectal carcinomas and two external quality controls, using routine te- : We detected 112 normal healthy, 65 heterozygous and 9 ΔF508 sting procedures and submitting results within 14 days after sample receipt. hCoomncolzuysgiootne: samples. We observed recognizable difference in the melting Performance was evaluated on both genotype results and written reports. point in the normal (56ºC) and ΔF508 (49ºC) PCR products. Only seventy-five out of 105 participants made no genotyping errors (71%). Based on our ten years experience it seems that real-time PCR Nineteen laboratories genotyped one out of 10 samples wrong (18%), 11 and melting curve analysis is a reliable and sensitve method for the detec- laboratories made two or more errors (10%). Both false positives and ne- tion of ΔF508. The source of the sample does not have effect on the results. gatives occurred, as well as incorrectly genotyped mutations and technical The applied primer and probe set design gives additional information for failures. One sample, mimicking a tumor cell content of 10%, resulted in t Bh.e N pargeyse: nNcoen eo.f Ro.tGhe. rN maguyt:a Ntioonnes. iJn. Rthige oΔ JFr5.:0 N8o rneeg.i oLn. L.azar: None. a high number of false negative results, which uncovers weakness in test performance for samples with less optimal characteristics. The errors and genotyping scores will be studied over the years. Written reports were  P12
.28 evaluated for the presence and correctness of 29 elements, of which nine Flexible Throughput RNA Sample QC using the Agilent 2200 were marked to determine a reporting score. Results indicate that several TapeStation system essential elements are frequently missing, including clinical interpretation, M. T. Connelly1, A. Inche1, D. Boland1, A. Padmanaban2, E. Graf3, C. Tissott3; method sKeRnAsSitivity, and use of a reference sequence. Correct nomenclaKtRuAreS 1Agilent Technologies UK Ltd., Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Agilent Technologies UK according to HGVS guidelines is not sufficiently integrated. Ltd., Bangalore, India, 3Agilent Technologies UK Ltd., Waldbronn, Germany. The ESP EQA Scheme is an important tool in assessing quality in testing. Results indicate that performance can be improved, both in mutati- o Ln. Taenmalbyusiyss aenr:d N roenseu.l tM r.e Lpiogrtetinnbge.rg: None. N. Normanno: None. S. Delen: None. H. van Krieken: None. E. Dequeker: None. The Agilent TapeStation system provides a flexible solution for automated analysis of up to 96 samples using pre-packaged reagents and minimal ma- nual handling. Here we present a new assay - the RNA ScreenTape assay - to enable robust quantification and quality analysis of Total RNA samples from both eukaryotic and prokaryotic sources from 100 pg/µl to 500 ng/µl. The new assay additionally benefits from the ability to provide separation of contaminant genomic DNA allowing more accurate purity assessment of sample material. This study compares the performance of the RNA ScreenTape and High Sen- sitivity RNA ScreenTape assays against the “gold standard” Agilent 2100 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEB |i oWanWalyWze.rE aSnHd NGa.nOoRDrGop for RNA quality and quantity determinatio 3n. 2 W 9e conclude that the new RNA ScreenTape and High Sensitivity assays provideABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index correlated data to these existing technologies, as well as exceeding these transcriptome variation and generated an unprecedented resource of novel t eMc.hTn. oCloongnieesll yin: Ate. rEmmsp olofy fmleexnibt (ifluitlly o or rp qarut-atlimitye )o; fS digantiafi cgaennt;e Aragtileedn.t tPr.aAn.s ‚ct rHipotesn a: nNdo neeQ.T ML.sR.. Friedländer: None. J. Almlöf: None. M. Sammeth: Technologies. A. Inche: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent None. I. Pulyakhina: None. S.Y. Anvar: None. J.F.J. Laros: None. O. Karlberg: Technologies. D. Boland: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent None. J.T. den Dunnen: None. G.J.B. van Ommen: None. I.G. Gut: None. R. Technologies. A. Padmanaban: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Guigó: None. X. Estivill: None. A.C. Syvänen: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: None. T. Agilent Technologies. E. Graf: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Lappalainen: None. Agilent Technologies. C. Tissott: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Technologies.  P12
.31 High-throughput sample identification and tracking for exome and  P12
.29 custom targeted sequencing projects Transcriptome Analysis on the Ion Proton™ System E. Souche1, J. K. J. Van Houdt1,2, K. Herten2, S. Jackmaert2, G. Matthijs1, J. R. Vermeesch1,2; K. Bramlett1, Y. Sun2, J. Schageman1, L. Qu1, C. Hinahon1, B. Setterquist1; 1Center for Human Genetics, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Genomics Core, UZ Leuven, 1Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States, 2Life Technologies, San Francisco, CA, Leuven, Belgium. United States. New sequencing technologies combined with capture-enrichments methods RNA-Seq technology has become widely utilized as a tool to understand the enable large-scale re-sequencing of whole exomes or targeted gene panels. transcriptome of a given experimental system. This method utilizes next ge- To ensure quality and traceability in these sequencing efforts we developed neration sequencing platforms to sequence a cDNA library in order to gain a custom SNP panel. It includes 32 highly informative SNPs across European, information about the RNA content and transcriptional status of a sample of Asian, and African populations. Most SNPs have a minimum allele frequency interest. Profiling the transcriptome of a system in this way has become an of at least 0.3, and are distributed across the genome with one or two SNPs invaluable tool in many genomic studies. per chromosome. In the latter case we selected one SNP on the P arm and The newly launched Proton™ system utilizes the same simplified chemistry one on the Q arm. The SNPs were selected from regions that are well covered first introduced with the Personal Genome Machine (PGM™). The increased by the different exome capture chemistries and can be reliably genotyped sequencing depth of the Proton™ instrument and the Ion PI™ chip now lends from exome sequencing data. The Sequenom® MassArray® iPlex® Gold - this simplified sequencing technology to true whole transcriptome evaluati- SNP genotyping platform was used for genotyping around 200 samples that on including sequencing analysis of polyadenylated RNAs, long non-coding have been exome sequenced. Our custom panel allowed the identification of RNAs, and non-adenylated transcripts. samples swaps and the retrieval of the right samples. Parents-siblings could Here we report transcriptome sequencing of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) deple- be easily discriminated, sharing only 50% of genotypes. Our panel provides ted control RNAs analyzed on the Proton™ instrument with the Ion PI™ chip. a highly accurate and robust method for sample tracking and identification. The transcriptome profiles of two well-studied RNAs utilized in the historic By including the SNP loci in new designs of gene panels, this iPLEX assay can Microarray Quality Consortium (MAQC) were analyzed by Proton™ sequen- b Ee. uSsoeudc hfoer: aNlol ntaer. gJe.Kte.Jd. rVea-nse Hqouuedntc:i nNgo nsea.m Kp. lHese.rten: None. S. Jackmaert: cing. External RNA Control Consortium transcripts (ERCCs) were spiked None. G. Matthijs: None. J.R. Vermeesch: None. into the control RNAs to provide a known set of RNA sequences useful in monitoring sample preparation, sequencing and data analysis. Differential expression profiles between two control RNAs generated from transcripto-  P12
.32 me sequencing on the Proton™ compare well to profiles generated during About sequence quality: impact on clinical applications the MAQC study. This study demonstrating over 50M mapped reads from T. Noguchi, V. Bourdon, H. SOBOL; each Proton™ transcriptome sequencing run and good sensititivity and dy- Laboratoire d’oncogénétique moléculaire, Marseille, France. namic range, solidifies the Proton™ sequencing system as a viable platform f oKr. cBormamplleextt :t rAa. nEsmcrpilpotyommenet a (nfualll yosr ipsa.rt-time); Significant; Life Technologies. Y. Sun: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technoloies. J. Advance of sequencing technologies is accelerating with a surprisingly fast Schageman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. L. Qu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. C. Hinahon: rhythm, and several new sequencing platforms aimed at small laboratories A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. B. Setterquist: A. and the clinical diagnostic market are released. Some of laboratories are al- Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. ready started to test these machines in clinical situations. Nevertheless, it doesn’t necessary mean the end of Sanger sequencing: comparative studies show that performance of next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms varies considerably and they produce different types of  P12
.30 errors. Most annoyingly these machines are based on very dissimilar tech- Reproducible mRNA and small RNA sequencing across different nologies (a semiconductor technology for the Ion Torrent PGM, a sequen- laboratories P. A. ‚t Hoen1, M. R. Friedländer2, J. Almlöf3, M. Sammeth4, I. Pulyakhina1, S. Y. Anvar1,5, J. cing-by-synthesis technology for Illumina MiSeq) and it makes practically F. J. Laros1,5, O. Karlberg3, J. T. den Dunnen1,5, G. J. B. van Ommen1, I. G. Gut4, R. Guigó2, X. impossible to conceive a standardized clinical platform. Estivill2, A. C. Syvänen3, E. T. Dermitzakis6,7,8, T. Lappalainen6,7,8; Therefore Sanger sequencing remains the sequencing “gold-standard” for 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, the accreditation of clinical laboratories according to the major internatio- 2Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Medical Sciences, nal standard ISO 15189. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico, Barcelona, However, even in Sanger sequencing the sequence quality definition re- Spain, 5Leiden Genome Technology Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 6Department of Genetic mains fuzzy and too empirical for clinical applications. Available guidelines Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Institute for Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iG3), University of Geneva, Geneva, describing all important parameters to insure the sequence quality didn’t Switzerland, 8Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland. give clear advices on how to use them. We realized a heuristic analysis of more than 31 000 sequence traces gene- rated in the clinical diagnosis and demonstrated that the sequence traces RNA-sequencing is an increasingly popular technology for genome-wide qualities are inherently variable in routine practices and the most common- analysis of transcript structure and abundance. However, the sources of tech- ly used criterion “average quality value” alone is too inaccurate and not suf- nical and inter-laboratory variation have not been assessed in a systematic ficient for clinical uses. manner. To address this, seven centers of the GEUVADIS consortium sequen- We demonstrated that with a combination of three parameters (average ced mRNAs and small RNAs of 465 HapMap lymphoblastoid cell lines (incl. quality value, relative sequence intensity and electropherogram profile) and large numbers of replicates). The variation between laboratories appeared applying our decision making diagram, it is possible to determine accurately to be considerably smaller than the already limited biological variation. La- t Th.e N qougaulcithyi :o Nf oanney. sVe.q Buoeunrcdeo.n: None. H. Sobol: None. boratory differences mainly manifested in differences in insert size and GC content. The randomized study design allowed nearly full correction of the- se laboratory effects. In small RNA sequencing, the miRNA content differed widely between samples due to competitive sequencing of rRNA fragments. This did not affect relative quantification of the miRNAs. We conclude dis- tributed RNA-sequencing is well feasible when proper standardization and randomization procedures are used. The combined sequencing data from t3h3is 0project significantly extended our understandE inS gH oG f th 2 e 0 ge1 n3 e t| ic P bA asR isI S of, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.33 Rapid genotyping for the prevalent mutation of XPC gene: a useful tool for genetic counseling in biliary phosphatidylcholine excretion. Several phenotypes have been de- C. M. Ged1,2, S. Bensenouci3, H. Rezvani1, H. de Verneuil1, A. Taieb2, K. Ezzedine2; scribed in association with ABCB4 mutations mostly 1) Progressive Familial 1INSERM U1035-Université Bordeaux Segalen, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de Bordeaux Intrahepatic Cholestasis 3, a severe liver disease of childhood; 2) Intrahepa- Centre des maladies rares de la peau, Bordeaux, France, 3CHU d‘Oran, Oran, Algeria. tic Cholestasis of Pregnancy; 3) “Low Phospholipid Associated Cholelithia- sis” syndrome. So far, the genotyping of ABCB4 gene was performed by San- ger technology in all French laboratories involved in this genotyping. Due to Xeroderma Pigmentosum (XP) has a higher prevalence in countries where a considerable increase of patients to test, Sanger sequencing technology is consanguinity is frequent such as North Africa, where the disease repre- no longer adapted. Therefore, the aim of the study was to genotype at least sents a major health concern. Among the 8 defective NER subtypes XP-A to 32 patients at the same time using Next Generation Sequencing technolo- XP-G, type C is the most frequent, with a common frame shift mutation of gy and to compare the most accurate data with those of Sanger technology. XPC gene present in more than 90% of the patients. We set up a simple assay Patients were diagnosed with these ABCB4 - related diseases. DNA was ex- based on fragment size analysis which permitted accurate determination of tracted from blood using the Puregene kit (Qiagen). Specific PCR of 27 exons the 3 possible genotypes on an automatic sequencer. Compared to classical and junction introns were performed. Pooling of all PCR was done for each sequencing, the method allows substantial lower cost, higher throughput, patient and a second PCR was run using multiplexing tag primers (one by improved resolution and time saving. We tested 50 DNA samples from 20 patient). After purification of the tag mixture amplification of 32 patients, a unrelated families from Algeria and quickly confirmed the presence of the pool of the 32 template DNAs was prepared. The library was then submitted common frame shift at the homozygous or heterozygous state in affected to emulsion PCR and pyrosequencing in a picotiter-plate in the 454 Instru- children and obligate carriers, respectively: 17 unrelated patients (85 %) ment GS Junior (Roche). Several softwares were used to analyze the data. We were accurately diagnosed as XP type C; 3 patients did not harbor the com- ran 290 DNAs. The vast majority of sequence variations were confirmed by mon mutation of XPC gene, 2 had the common nonsense mutation descri- Sanger technology indicating that this new technology is reliable and time- bed in XPA gene, and the last one was investigated for XPV gene. Sequen- eVf.fDic.i eBnatr bfour: tNhoen sec. rEe.e Mnuinngd owfi lAleBr:C NBo4n vea. rEia. nFtesr noann ldaerzg:e N socanlee. .L. Muller: cing needs were drastically reduced by using the new assay as a screening None. C. Corpechot: None. O. Chazouillères: None. C. Housset: None. Y. Marie: None. test. This work describes a genetic test readily available for screening and diagnostic purposes in XP which may greatly facilitate genetic counseling in exposed families from low-income countries, and help promoting early management of this severely cancer prone and devastating photosensitive  P13
.03 d Cis.Mea. sGee.d: None. S. Bensenouci: None. H. Rezvani: None. H. de Verneuil: Next Generation Sequencing analysis of CO L4
A3, CO L4
A4 and None. A. Taieb: None. K. Ezzedine: None. CO L4
A5 genes in 100 unrelated Alport syndrome patients: diagnostic implications and identification of 41 novel mutations. C. Fallerini1, L. Dosa1,2, R. Tita1, M. Baldassarri1, D. Del Prete3, S. Feriozzi4, G. Gai5, M.  P13
.01 Clementi6, A. La Manna7, N. Miglietti8, R. Mancini2, G. Mandrile9, R. Artuso1, G. Ghiggeri10, G. Piaggio10, F. Brancati11, L. Diano11, E. Frate12, A. Pinciaroli13, M. Giani14, P. Castorina14, Diagnostic Whole Exome Sequencing in patients with clinically E. Bresin15, D. Giachino9, D. Giachino9, M. De Marchi9, M. Seri16, C. Izzi17, S. Briuglia18, F. suspected, genetically heterogeneous syndromes Mari1,2, M. Bruttini1,2, A. Renieri1,2, F. Ariani1; P. Joset, D. Niedrist, C. Otte, I. Sudholt, K. Steindl, A. Baumer, A. Rauch; 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Azienda Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland. Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Department of Medicine, Nephrology Clinic, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 4Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Hospital Belcolle,, Viterbo, Italy, 5S.C. Medical Genetics A.O. City of Health and Science, Torino, Identification of disease causing mutations in genetically heterogeneous Italy, 6Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University of Padova, Padova, conditions by Sanger sequencing is time-consuming, costly and often unsuc- Italy, 7Department of Pediatrics, Second University of Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 8Nephrology DH, Pediatric Clinic of the University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 9San Luigi Medical cessful. Targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques of limited di- Genetics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 10Nephrology Dialysis and Transplantation sease specific gene panels enable very deep sequencing likely ensuring low Unit, Insitute „G.Gaslini“, Genova, Italy, 11Medical Genetics, University Hospital “Tor false negative results for the genes investigated, but is not useful if the clini- Vergata”, Roma, Italy, 12Medical Genetics, Azienda Unita Locale Socio-Sanitaria n° 9, cally suspicion was not correct or the affected gene was not in the panel. We Treviso, Italy, 13Nephrology and Dialysis S.O.C., Department of General Medicine and therefore investigated the diagnostic power of whole exome sequencing as Medical Specialties “Giuseppe Spada”, A.O. Pugliese-Ciaccio, Catanzaro, Italy, 14U.O.C. a mutational screening tool in patients with clinically suspected, genetically Pediatric Nephrology and Hemodialysis, Ospedale Maggiore Policilinico, Milano, heterogeneous syndromes. In order to establish an optimized work-flow for Italy, 15Clinical Research Center for Rare Diseases “Aldo e Cele Daccò”, Ranica, Italy, 16Medical Genetics Units, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, diagnostic whole exome sequencing using the SOLiD 5500XL platform we Italy, 17Second Division of Nephrology, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Montichiari, Italy, used DNA of 7 patients with a variety of known disease causing mutations. In 18Department of Pediatric Sciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy. the initial approach with pooling of 8 samples on one flowchip 3 mutations out of 5 were not detected due to low coverage. We therefore changed the procedure to pool only 4 samples resulting in an average 100x coverage and Alport syndrome (ATS) is a clinically heterogeneous progressive nephropa- optimized the analysis setting by permutation of the various alignment and thy caused by mutations in three large genes: the X-linked CO L4
A5 gene, filter parameters. We then used an optimized protocol with 16% aberrant thought to be responsible for the majority of cases (85%), and the autoso- allele calling in at least 3 reads and 6x coverage to analyze five patients with mal CO L4
A3-CO L4
A4 genes accounting for a minority of cases (15%). We suspected genetically heterogeneous syndromic diagnosis and unknown developed a protocol for the simultaneous analysis of CO L4
A3-CO L4
A4-CO- mutation. Using these settings disease causing mutations were identified  L4
A5 genes using a benchtop Next Generation Sequencer (Artuso et al, 2012 in all 7 subsequently tested patients for Joubert syndrome, Fraser syndro- Eur J Hum Genet). Here, this approach is employed to screen a cohort of 100 me, Noonan syndrome, primary microcephaly and others. Our results thus ATS patients. Overall, 57 mutations are identified in 54 patients, including demonstrate that whole exome sequencing is a powerful diagnostic tool in 41 novel mutations. Unexpectedly, nearly 40% of cases were autosomal, p Pa. tJieonstest :w Niothne s.u Ds.p Necietdedri sgte: nNeotnicea. lCly. hOetttee:r oNgoennee. oI.u Ssu sdyhnodlrt:o Nmoense.. K. Steindl: None. A. Baumer: None. A. Rauch: None. mostly dominant, indicating that autosomal forms are underestimated. The method has proved particularly useful in that fraction of cases (28) that lak- ked a diagnostic orientation according to traditional criteria and/or formal genetics. In such cases the traditional diagnostic workflow would have led to  P13
.02 the analysis of CO L4
A5 as first, based on mutation frequency prioritization. Detection of new variants in ABCB4 gene using NGS 454 Instrument NGS directly identified a consistent number of autosomal cases (13) with a GS Junior. significant reduction of turnaround time. The most important finding of this V. D. BARBU1, E. Mundwiller2, E. Fernandez3, L. Muller3, C. Corpechot4, O. Chazouillères5, study is that a fraction of families (5) that would not have been classified C. Housset6, Y. Marie2; 1AP HP HUEP HOPITAL ST ANTOINE, LCBGM & UPMC Univ Paris 06, PARIS, France, as X-linked, based on traditional criteria relying on the greater severity in 2ICM Pitié Salpêtrière & UPMC Univ Paris 06, PARIS, France, 3AP HP HUEP HOPITAL ST males, eventually turned to be X-linked. This last observation shows for the ANTOINE, LCBGM, PARIS, France, 4AP HP HUEP HOPITAL ST ANTOINE, CRMIVB, PARIS, first time X-linked “forme fruste” and highlights the necessity of revaluating France, 5AP HP HUEP HOPITAL ST ANTOINE, CRMIVB & UPMC Univ Paris 06, PARIS, the ATS natural history. This in turn might lead to a reassessment of the pro- France, 6AP HP HUEP HOPITAL ST ANTOINE, CRMIVB & INSERM & UPMC Univ Paris 06, g Cn.o Fsaisll ethrianti :u Nsuonaell.y L i.s D doisscau: sNsoende w. Rit.h T pitaat:i eNnotnse d. uMr.i Bnga lgdeansestaircr ic:o Nuonnsee.l iDn.g . PARIS, France. Del Prete: None. S. Feriozzi: None. G. Gai: None. M. Clementi: None. A. La Manna: None. N. Miglietti: None. R. Mancini: None. G. Mandrile: None. R. Artuso: None. G. Ghiggeri: None. G. Piaggio: None. F. Brancati: None. L. ABCB4 gene encodes a canalicular phosphEoSlipHidG t r2an0s1lo3ca |t oPrA MRDIR S3
, i nFvRoAlveNd CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 331ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Diano: None. E. Frate: None. A. Pinciaroli: None. M. Giani: None. P. Castorina: None. E. Bresin: None. D. Giachino: None. D. Giachino: None. M. De Marchi: None. M. Seri: None. C. Izzi: None. S. Briuglia: None. F. Mari: None. M. Bruttini: dMoemthinoadnst: retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) using genomewide linkage analysis None. A. Renieri: None. F. Ariani: None. and exome sequencing. Five affected and eight unaffected individuals from a Belgian adRP family underwent genomewide linkage analysis using BeadChips (Illumina)  P13
.04 and multipoint linkage analysis (Merlin). Exome sequencing was performed Mutation analysis in patients with Alport syndrome using multiplex in two affected individuals (TruSeq Exome Enrichment Kit, HiSeq, Illumina). PCR and next generation sequencing TRhees uClLtsC: Genomics Workbench was employed for read mapping and variant L. Heidet1, V. Morinière2, K. Dahan3, S. Lebbah1, P. Nitschké4, C. Bole5, M. Gubler6, C. calling. Linkage regions and RetNet genes were used for filtering. Antignac2,6,7; Genomewide linkage analysis revealed two regions with a maxi- 1APHP, Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2APHP, Genetics mum LOD score of 1.7. As to the exome data, 11.3/12.7 and 12.9/14.5 mRPil1- Department, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 3IPG, Human Genetics Center, Gosselies, lion reads could be mapped against the human genome. Integrated linkage- Belgium, 4Paris Descartes University, Bioinformatics department, Paris, France, 5Imagine and RetNet gene-based filtering of exome data revealed a heterozygous Fundation, Necker Hospital, Genomics platform, Paris, France, 6Inserm U983, Paris, change in both patients: p.Leu749fs and p.Leu750fs respectively. Of note, France, 7Imagine Fundation, Necker Hospital, Paris, France. variant calling failed to correctly call this change. Sanger sequencing con- firmed following mutation: c.2245_2248delinsTGAG (p.Leu749X). This mu- CO L4
A5 CO L4
A3 CO L4
A4 tation co-segregates with disease, one unaffected individual excepted, sug- Alport syndrome (AS) is an inherited nephropathy associated with muta- gesting incomplete penetrance. It creates a premature stop codon that may tions in (X-linked AS) or in and (autosomal reces- lead to a truncated protein. The mutation belongs to the ‘Class II’ mutations, sive and dominant AS). Mutation screening of these 3 large genes is time fCroenqucleunstiloy nres:p orted nonsense mediated decay-insensitive truncations, with consuming and expensive. Here we carried out next generation sequencing a net dRoPm1inant negative effect. (NGS) mutation analysis in 70 unrelated patients using a PCR-multiplexing RP C1
ombined linkage-based filtering of exome data revealed a approach allowing amplification of 149 amplicons covering all but 3 exons novel mutation in a Belgian pedigree with adRP. Our study expands the of the 3 genes. Amplicon-PCR-derived fragments were checked by capillary spectrum of Class II mutations leading toR aPd1RP with incomplete pene- electrophoresis and then processed for sequence analysis on Ion PGM using trance. Interestingly, the findings of this study can be used as a starting point the 170-200 bp chemistry, on an Ion 316 chips (Life Tech). BioinformaCtOic- fCor. Vfuarnt hCearu rweesnebarecrhgh o:n N monoed. iFfi.e Cros pinpfileuteernsc:i nNgo ne. J .e Dxper Zeasseiyotnijd.: None. S. De Lan4aAl5ysis wasC pOeLr4fAor3med usCinOgL a4nA 4in-house web interface. All targeted positi- Jaegere: None. C. Claes: None. E. Fransen: None. G. Van Camp: None. B.P. ons but one were covered at least 15X. We identified 71 mutations (19 in Leroy: None. E. De Baere: None. , 32 in , 20 in ) thought to be pathogenic in 59 patients. All were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Genescan analysis of multiplex PCR products allowed the discovery of 5 large rearrangements (3 deletions,  P13
.07 2 duplications) that would not have been detected by conventional sequen- Breakpoint mapping in a family with balanced translocation t(1;12) cing. Sequencing the 3 genes at once was particularly helpful as in 7 cases and learning difficulties and cerebral infarctions drawn from the considered toC bOeL l4iAke3ly X-ClOinLk4eAd4 (based on genealogy analysis and including Finnish national registry of balanced rearrangements one case with weak α5(IV)C lOaLb4eAll5ing of skin basement membrane) we found T. M. Luukkonen1,2, M. Pöyhönen3,4, R. Salonen5, P. Ellonen1, A. Palotie1,3,6, J. Terwilliger7,8,2, mutations in or , and in one case considered to be probably T. Varilo3,2; autosomal we identified a mutation. We conclude that the combined 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute for approach of multiplex PCR amplification and NGS is highly efficient, reduces Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept. of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, t Lim. Hee aidnedt :c oNsotn aen. dV .s Mtroorningilèyr fea:c Niloitnaet.e Ks .d Diaaghnaons:t Nico mneu. tSa.t iLoenb abnaahl:y Nsiosn ien. AP.S . University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Nitschké: None. C. Bole: None. M. Gubler: None. C. Antignac: None. Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Dept. of Medical Genetics, Norio-centre, Rinnekoti Foundation, Helsinki, Finland, 6Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Dept. of Genetics and Development, Dept. of Psychiatry, Columbia Genome Center, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 8Division of Medical  P13
.05 Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY, United States. Challenges and solutions for preparing NGS libraries from clinical samples J. Langmore, E. Kamberov; We have established a National Registry of Balanced Translocations and Rubicon Genomics, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. Inversions in Finland by ascertaining all known Finnish carriers (n=2575). Our registry contains medical records of all available carriers in each family including relatives carrying the same rearrangement identical-by-descent. Clinical samples are difficult to prepare for NGS. Plasma, serum, urine, single As a pilot study, we have focused on families identified from this resource, cancer and fetal cells, formalin-fixed tissue, and even fresh tissue are collec- which appear to have a phenotype correlating to the balanced translocation. ted as small samples of variable quantity and quality. To obtain high-quality, In our first gene mapping pilot we identified a potential positional candidate reproducible results, the enzymology and chemistry of NGS library prepara- gene for intracranial and aortic aneurysm. Here, we present a family where tion need to be highly efficient and robust over wide ranges of DNA and RNA all carriers (n=6) of t(1;12) manifest first with learning problems and later size, quantity, and quality. In addition, the libraries must be prepared with with unexplained neurological symptoms, which seem to lead to cerebral minimal number of steps, sample transfers, and elapsed time. infarctions without identified predisposing factor. We will show that careful design and quality control of library preparation Conventional methods for breakpoint mapping are laborious and with in- can yield high-quality libraries by objective criteria, including a) library di- sufficient resolution to identify the disrupted loci. The next-generation se- versity, b) sensitivity, c) uniformity of coverage, d) balance and breadth of GC quencing paired end approach serves this aim exceptionally well, as it al- coverage, e) reproducibility over a 100X range of sample input and insensi- lows focusing on the precise break region from the vast DNA information tivity to the number of PCR amplification cycles used, and f) high concor- overload. Here, we employ genome-wide mate pair sequencing using Illumi- dance with NGS results from microgram amounts of undamaged DNA using na platform to fine-map and subsequently identify the specific breakpoints PCR-free methods. These criteria can be routinely achieved for non-invasive in this family. prenatal screening, PGS/PGD, and for mutation detection in formalin-fixed Disease-associated balanced rearrangements are a unique resource for t iJs.s Luaen agnmdo srme:a All. nEummpbloeyrms eonft c(ifrucllu olra ptianrgt- ttiumme)o; rS cigenlilfisc.ant; Rubicon Genomics. E. Kamberov: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Rubicon Genomics. bridging genotype to phenotype in patients with both early-onset Mende- lian disorders as well as complex and late-onset diseases. Our registry faci- litates diagnostic purposes, genetic counseling, and subsequent follow-up and, moreover, the identification of asymptomatic carriers in at-risk fami-  P13
.06 lies. It also provides us momentum towards characterizing more general- Exome Sequencing Identifies a Novel R P1
 Mutation in a Belgian Family ly the molecular basis of all translocations in Finland and their associated with Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa p Th.Men. Loutyupkikco enfefenc:t Ns.one. M. Pöyhönen: None. R. Salonen: None. P. Ellonen: C. Van Cauwenbergh1, F. Coppieters1, J. De Zaeytijd2, S. De Jaegere1, C. Claes3, E. None. A. Palotie: None. J. Terwilliger: None. T. Varilo: None. Fransen3, G. Van Camp3, B. P. Leroy2,1, E. De Baere1; 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University, Antwerp, Belgium. Purpose: 332 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG Identifying the genetic cause in a Belgian family with autosomalABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.08  P13
.10 Targeted high-throughput sequencing for mutation detection in Targeted next generation sequencing approach of Brugada syndrome Bardet-Biedl Italian patients and sudden cardiac death S. Palchetti, C. Pescucci, I. Passerini, G. Marseglia, M. Benelli, A. Sodi, L. Berti, U. D. Proost1, G. Vandeweyer1, G. Mortier1, C. Vrints2, B. Loeys1, J. Saenen2, L. Van Laer1; Menchini, F. Torricelli; 1Center of medical genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy. Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is characterized by truncal obesity, polydac- Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a heritable primary electrical disorder with typi- tyly, hypogonadism, developmental delay, learning disabilities, progressive cal ECG alterations accounting for up to 20% of sudden cardiac death (SCD) retinopathy, renal disease and susceptibility to diabetes mellitus. Although in young patients (<45 yrs) without apparent structural cardiac abnorma- BBS is mainly transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner, few families lities. BrS is genetically heterogeneous and so far a dozen causative genes exhibit a tri-allelic mode of inheritance. To date, 16 different BBS genes have been identified. A clinical diagnosis is not always straightforward as (BB S1
-BB S16
) are known and BB S1
 and BB S10
 show the highest mutation expressivity is variable and penetrance is low. Therefore molecular confir- frequency in BBS patients. mation of the diagnosis is important for further patient management and Six unrelated patients evaluated by standard ophthalmologic examination therapy. The consecutive molecular screening of all BrS genes using con- and with a clinical diagnosis of BBS were analysed by targeted re-sequencing ventional methods is expensive and labor-intensive. To shorten the turn- of 130 retinopathies-related genes on HiScanSQ Illumina platform (mean aCroAuCnNdA-1tiCm, CeAanCdN Ato2 Dre1d,CuAcCe NthBe2 ,oGvPeDra1lLl ,cKoCsNt Eo3f ,mSCoNle1cBu,lSaCrN te3sBt ing, wSCeN h5aAve). de- coverage 500X). Bioinformatic analysis identified a mean of 1100 sequence veloped a BrS gene panel for next generation sequencing of eight BrS genes variants per sample. Filtering pipeline (exonic function, frequency, predic- ( and tion and inheritance model) leads to distil a mean of 10 candidate variants After optimalisation of multiplex PCR, designed by Multiplicom, sequencing per sample. The candidate variants were independently validated by Sanger was initially performed on a GS junior (Roche), and later adapted for Miseq sequencing and segregation analysis was performed. (Illumina). To date we have screened 58 patients: 8 patients with unexplai- We identified two known causative deletions in BB S9
 (c.1877_1880del) ned SCD, 14 patients with atypical BrS ECGs and 36 patients with type 1 and BB S7
 (c.712_715del) genes and a novel frameshift deletion in BB S10
 BrS ECGs. WeS CidNe5nAtified 15 genetic variants, all in the latter group. Twelve (c.804_805del). Morever, a patient is compound heterozygote for two novel varCiAanCtNsA (11 C0
 mutaCtAioCnNsB a2nd 2 variants of unknown significance) were disco- variants in BB S10
 (c.1677_1678insA and c.1220T>C); one patient present a vered in the gene, whereas one and two mutations were identified homozygous variant in BB S2
 gene (c.209A>G) and one novel heterozygous in and , respectively. Our results demonstrate that a next variant (c.538C>T) in BB S3
 gene. The last patient has two variants in BB S12
 generation panel approach can increase the genetic yield from 33% (if only gene both in homozygous status [c.1044del (novel) and c.61T>C (descri- SCN5A analysed) to 42% in probands with typical BrS ECGs, whereas no bed)]. m Du. Ptartoioosnts: wNoenrde. f Gou. nVdan idne awtyepyiecra: lN BornSe o. Gr u. Mneoxrptileari:n Neodn cea. rCd.i aVcr idnetsa:t hNso.ne. B. NGS approach has enabled us to detect variants in BBS genes. Although for Loeys: None. J. Saenen: None. L. Van Laer: None. described variants and ins/del frameshif variants the genotype-phenotype correlation is clear, in order to clarify tri-allelic variants’ role in BBS-onset, f Su.r tPhaelcr haeststoi:c Niaotnioen. Cs.t uPdeisecsu acrcei :r Neqouneir.e Id. P.asserini: None. G. Marseglia:  P13
.11 None. M. Benelli: None. A. Sodi: None. L. Berti: None. U. Menchini: None. F. Understanding genetics of Brugada Syndrome: NGS leads the charge Torricelli: None. R. Bordoni1, A. Pietrelli1,2, C. Di Resta3, S. Sala4, P. Della Bella4, S. Benedetti5, M. Ferrari3,5, G. De Bellis1; 1ITB-CNR, Segrate (MI), Italy, 2Dept. of Biomedical Sciences and Technologies, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3University Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 4Department  P13
.09 of arrhythmology, San Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy, 5Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Best practice guidelines for the use of NGS applications in genome Biology, Diagnostica e Ricerca San Raffaele, Milano, Italy. diagnostics: A national collaborative study of Dutch genome diagnostic laboratories . N. van der Stoep1, M. Weiss2, A. van der Zwaag3, J. Jongbloed4, M. Vogel3, H. Brüggenwirth5, R. Lekanne Deprez6, O. Mook6, C. Ruivenkamp1, M. van Slegtenhorst5, A. Brugada syndrome (BS) is a cardiac arrhythmic disorder characterized by Van den Wijngaard7, Q. Waisfisz2, M. Nelen8; typical electrocardiographic pattern that can lead to sudden cardiac death 1Department of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. Clinical Genetics, at young age. VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept. of Medical Genetics, BS is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetran- University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Genetics, University ce and variable phenotype expressivity; however, genetic bases have been Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Dept. Clinical Genetics, Erasmus only partially understood. Most mutations are located in the SCN5A gene, Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical encoding the α-subunit of the Na+ cardiac channel, but more than 70% of BS Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Dept. of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands, 8Dept. of Human Genetics-, Radboud University patients remain genetically undiagnosed. Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Our study aims to increase the proportion of genetically diagnosed BS pa- tients, identifying new syndrome-related genes and causative variants by target resequencing. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods are advancing in genome dia- We analysed 100 BS patients for a panel of 158 candidate genes, mainly en- gnostics laboratories worldwide. However, the implementation of NGS coding cardiac ion channels, structural proteins, modulators of ionic flow based tests according to diagnostic standards is challenging for individual and regulatory proteins. We used the Agilent SureSelect target enrichment diagnostic laboratories. In order to facilitate the implementation of NGS in protocol and we performed the deep sequencing on Illumina GAIIx. We also the Dutch laboratories the Dutch Society for Clinical Genetic Laboratory Dia- developed an automated bioinformatics pipeline based on BWA aligner to gnostics (VKGL) initiated a workgroup. The result of this workgroup will be map reads versus the hg19 reference with great accuracy. For each sample, presented. We provide best practice guidelines and criteria for validation at least 2 million paired-end reads was successfully mapped. More than 98% and implementation of NGS applications in a clinical setting. We introduce of the target sequences were covered with more than 230X mean depth by the concept of ‘diagnostic yield’ as the main performance characteristic to gene and the 90% of the bases are sequenced above a 50X depth. evaluate diagnostic testing for a given genetic disease. We recommend that We detected 87 novel missense mutations, 2 nonsense and 2 splice-site va- the laboratory procedures including the tested genes are recorded in a pu- riants, 16 indels in 64 different genes. Almost all of these mutations are pri- blicly available document describing the complete ‘diagnostic routing’. In vates. In 25 candidate genes we identified also 48 clinical variants that can addition, we propose the use of a ‘core disease gene list’ for specified ge- c Ro.n Btroirbduotnei t: oN pohnee.n Ao.t yPpieet rmelolid: uNloantieo.n C.. Di Resta: None. S. Sala: None. P. Della Bella: None. S. Benedetti: None. M. Ferrari: None. G. De Bellis: None. netic diseases. This core disease gene list encloses the significant genes for a defined genetic disorder and these should all be included in a diagnostic test in order to establish a molecular diagnosis. This will ensure a clear and standardized quality of care throughout the genetic diagnostic laboratories.  P13
.12 The best practice guidelines and criteria that will be presented are accepted Elucidation of genetic basis of hypoplastic left heart syndrome b Ny. Dvauntc dhe Sr oSctioeetyp :f oNro Cneli.n Mic.a Wl Geeisnse:t Nico Lnaeb. Aor. avtaonr yd eDri aZgwnaoasgt:i cNso.ne. J. M. Sana1, S. Khadjeh2, M. Hitz3, L. Pezzoli1, I. Friehs4, D. Marchetti1, S. Marcora5, D. Jongbloed: None. M. Vogel: None. H. Brüggenwirth: None. R. Lekanne Federici5, L. Galletti5, P. del Nido4, P. Ferrazzi6, M. Hurles3, E. Zeisberg2,7, M. Iascone1; Deprez: None. O. Mook: None. C. Ruivenkamp: None. M. van Slegtenhorst: 1Genetica Molecolare - USSD Lab. Genetica Medica, Bergamo, Italy, 2Department None. A. Van den Wijngaard: None. Q. Waisfisz: None. M. Nelen: None. of Cardiology, University Medical Center of Goettingen, Georg-August University, Goettingen, Germany, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 333ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Kingdom, 4Department of Cardiac Surgery, Children‘s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical  P13
.14 School, Boston, MA, United States, 5USSD Cardiochirurgia Pediatrica, Bergamo, Italy, Adiponectin G276T gene polymorphism is associated with myocardial 6Dipartimento Cardiovascolare, Bergamo, Italy, 7German Center for Cardiovascular infarction in south Indian patients with type 2 diabetes: A hospital Research (DZHK), Charité, Berlin, Germany. based study BACKGROUND: S. Dayakar1,2,3, T. Parvathi Kumara Reddy4, B. Shyamala Sesikeran3, M. Sadhnani5; 1Post Box No:1096, Flat No:48, Area 9, Pacific Village, Lilongwe, Malawi, 2Department The hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), mainly cha- of Clinical Biochemistry, Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases,Osmania racterized by an underdeveloped left ventricle, accounts for significant mor- University, Hyderabad, India, 3Apollo Hospitals Educational And Research Foundation, tality and morbidity in infancy. Despite strong evidence of an underlying Hyderabad, India, 4Instituto de Genetica,Dpto.de Biología Molecular Y Genomica, Centro Universitario de, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 5Department of Clinical Biochemistry, genetic aetiology, only a minority of cases can be explained on genetic bases. Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases,Osmania University, Hyderabad- Our aim was to discover novel causative genes using whole-exome sequen- 500016, India. cMinEgT (HWOEDSS) AinN cDo mREbSinUaLtTioSn: with functional studies in zebrafish and cellular models. de novo We have analyzed by WES 15 unrelated parents- Adiponectin has anti-atherogenic properties anadd irpeodnueccetdin serAuDmIP aOdQiponec- child trios. Our analyses lead to the identification of several mutati- tin levels are associated with Myocardial infarction (MI). In this study, we ons in different genes involved in cardiac development and tissue remode- examined the relationship between MI and ( ) gene ling in heart. Missense mutations have been detected in genes belonging to G276T polymorphism that is associated with serum adiponectin levels in HDAC pathway, which regulates mesoderm differentiation into cardiac mu- tAyDpIeP 2O Qdiabetic patients. We enrolled 425 subjects with type 2 diabetic (ma- scle cells. Other genes are associated to NOTCH signaling pathway, which is les, 61.1%; age, 54.9 ± 7.9 years old) to determine their genotypes regarding involved in impaired endothelial to mesenchymal transition (EndMT). Using G276T polymorphisms, and evaluated the association between this morpholino antisense oligonucleotides in a novel candidate gene, we were polymorpphism and the prevalence of MI. The prevalence of MI tended to able to show severely impaired chamber formation. Moreover, our newly be higher as the number of G alleles increased [GG (9.5%), GT (6.8%), TT eCsOtNabClLisUhSeIdO NanSimal model of endocardial fibroelastosis strengthened the (5.6%), vpalue for trend = 0.0059] and was significantly higher in the sub- role of aberrant EndMT in the development of HLHS. jects with GG genotype compared to those with GT or TT genotype (9.5%p : Our results confirm an extreme genetic heterogeneity in vs. 6.6%, = 0.0060). Multiple logistic regression analyses repvealed that HLHS pathogenesis, as previously reported by our group. Moreover, our the number of G alleles (Odds ratio (OR) = 1.49 with 95%) CI 1.09-2.05, data suggest that different molecular defects interfering with EndMT, deve- = 0.0125) and GG genotype (OR = 1.66 with 95%CI 1.13-2.43, = 0.0098) lopment of the atrioventricular valves and ventricular chamber formation were significantly associated with MI even after adjustment for conventio- are at basis of HLHS. The elucidation of genetic defects of HLHS may lead to a nal risk factors. Inpterestingly, further the presence of obesity significantly more appropriate classification of patients potentially useful for therapeutic increased the risk of MI in the subjects with GG genotype (OR = 1.67 wADitIh- m Ma. nSaagneam: Nenont.e. S. Khadjeh: None. M. Hitz: None. L. Pezzoli: None. I. Friehs: None. D. Marchetti: None. S. Marcora: None. D. Federici: None. L. Galletti: 9 P5
O%QCI 1.14-2.44, = 0.0090) but not in the subjects with TT or GT genotype None. P. del Nido: None. P. Ferrazzi: None. M. Hurles: None. E. Zeisberg: (OR = 1.17 with 95%CI 0.73-1.89, NS). It is likely that the G allele of the None. M. Iascone: None. G276T polymorphism is a susceptibility allele for MI in type 2 diabetic p Sa.t Dieanytask, aers:p Necoinaell. yT .w Phaernva tthhei yK aucmcoarma pRaendyd wy:i tNho onbe.e Bsi.t yS.hyamala Sesikeran: None. M. Sadhnani: None.  P13
.13 Comprehensive molecular genetic analysis for Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: conventional and Next Generation Sequencing  P13
.15 E. Lazzarini1, A. Albiero2, I. Rigato1, B. Simionati2, E. Carturan1, D. Corrado1, G. Thiene1, Introduction of NGS in diagnostics for cardiomyopathies results in C. Basso1, K. Pilichou1; increased diagnostic yield 1Department of Cardiac Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, M. van Slegtenhorst1, M. van Tienhoven1, M. Wessels1, C. Kockx2, J. Verhagen1, M. Italy, 2BMR Genomics, Padua, Italy. Michels3, W. van Ijcken2, H. Brüggenwirth1, D. Halley1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Background 2Center for Biomics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. : Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC) is an autosomal do- minant disease characterized by progressive fibrofatty replacement of the working myocardium and an increased risk of sudden death. Mutations in Cardiomyopathies are a group of disorders characterised by extreme gene- desmosomal encoding genes are accounting for tic and clinical heterogeneity, with >40 causative genes known to date. In aApimproximately 50% of AC patients and 10% of AC patients are multiple mu- the past 10 years, diagnostic testing of affected individuals using serial San- tation carriers. ger sequencing of a limited number of genes has been expensive and time- : The aim of the present study was to develop a NGS whole-exome strat- consuming. The aim of this study was to develop an NGS-based workflow for eMgeyt ihno odrsder to assess its potential diagnostic value in comparison with con- routine diagnostics to improve genetic testing for a group of cardiomyopa- ventional screening approaches. thy patients (HCM/DCM/NCCM). : Twenty-eight patients identified by classical clinical screening at An NGS-based targeted workflow was designed by developing an enrich- the Referential Clinical-Genetic Centre of Arrhythmic Cardiomyopathies un- ment array (Agilent Sure Select) for 46 genes, running12 pooled barcoded derwent genetic evaluation. Nucleotide sequencing was performed both on samples on the Miseq system (Illumina), followed by mapping and variant an Applied Biosystems 3730XL DNA Analyzer and an Illumina Hiseq2100 calling using the SeqNext software package (JSI). Fifteen frequently mutated pRleastufolrtms. Novel variations absent in NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project genes, previously tested by Sanger sequencing, were selected to validate the (ESP) and dbSNP databases, were considered potentially pathogenetic. process. Testing the workflow also showed that it is possible to detect dele- : Sanger sequencing identified causative mutations in 82% of the tions of up to 65 bp and duplications of up to 28 bp. probands, of which 11 were multiple mutation carriers. Novel putative cau- At present, samples of the first 55 patients have been tested and analysed. sative nucleotide variations were identified in desmocolin-2 ( S868
F, T524A, Fifteen patients showed a pathogenic mutation and in five of them, the H604L, N629L), plakoglobin (A458T,  E654
L), desmoglein-2 (N330T, N330H, causative mutation would not have been found using the conventional ap- R292H, I386F), desmoplakin ( L2487
fsX189,  C2259
X,  E2090
K,  E1833
V) and proach. Furthermore, in a young severely affected patient at least two pa- plakophilin-2 (H179N, K37X, N670fsX683,  S70
N) genes. Whole-exome se- thogenic mutations were identified. Variants of unknown significance (VUS) qCuoennccluinsgio cnosnfirmed 68 out of 90 variations, including causative mutations were found in 27 patients and 13 patients did not show any pathogenic mu- and polymorphisms, with a sensitivity of 80% and a specificity of 100%. tation or VUS. : Whole-Exome Sequencing represents a fast, cost-effective and In conclusion, targeted NGS is an effective approach for cardiomyopathy dia- comprehensive approach for mutation screening, however further data are gnostics, resulting in increased diagnostic yield. One of the major challenges needed to optimize variant detection parameters and therefore to define it a Es. aL daziazganrionsi:t iNco tnoeo.l Afo. rA AlbCie.ro: None. I. Rigato: None. B. Simionati: None. E. Kr Me om. c v kaa xinn : i NSn olge n gi est . e t Jno .h s Voo erl rsv hte: a tN gh eoe nn i :en . N cM ore n. a evs .a e Mnd .T n Mieu in cmh hbo ee lv sre : n o N:f o NV noU en .S e W i.d .M e v.n a Wt ni fe Ii jse csd ke. el ns :: NN oo nn ee .. HC .. Carturan: None. D. Corrado: None. G. Thiene: None. C. Basso: None. K. Brüggenwirth: None. D. Halley: None. Pilichou: None. 334 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.16 Unparalleled outcomes of using Next Generation Sequencing technology in cardiac genetics third of families with hereditary CMs. These preliminary results underline the D. du Sart1, B. Chong1, S. Pantaleo1, I. Macciocca1, C. Semsarian2, A. Ellims3, P. James4; promising role of NGS technologies. However, due to the huge amount of data 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Centenary Institute, Sydney, arising from NGS analysis, bioinformatics management becomes crucial and Australia, 3Baker IDI Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 4Royal Melbourne Hospital, traditional genetic rules are still needed to understand and interpret the real Melbourne, Australia. s Fi.g Gniifrioclaanmcie: Nofo nnee.w S v. aBraiardnit:s N.one. M. Benelli: None. E. Contini: None. G. Marseglia: None. C. Pescucci: None. B. Tomberli: None. F. Cecchi: None. I. Olivotto: None. F. Torricelli: None. Inherited cardiac diseases, such as cardiomyopathy or inherited arrhythmia, are clinically important genetic disorders, as well as significant causes of sudden death. Genetic testing for these conditions remains limited due to complex gene-  P13
.18 tic pathology. They are often heterogeneous disorders with overlapping clinical A novel strategy for identification of Performance Enhancing symptoms, which may not always be penetrant. This adds to the complexity of Polymorphisms in athletes: new determinants that can modify determining whether variants identified are pathogenic, influence clinical seve- Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) risk rity or just normal variation within the genes. In addition some of the associated S. I. R. Santos1,2,3, V. Marques2,4, P. Justiniano2, J. Quintas2, P. V. Baptista5, A. R. Fernandes1,2,3; 1Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Escola de Engenharia, Universidade Lusófona genes are amongst the largest genes described, which further reduces the prac- de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Departamento Ciências da Vida, FCT, New ticality of detailed genetic testing and the availability of published information. University of Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal, 4Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade de Lisboa, We have developed a 100-gene cardiac next generation sequencing [NGS] panel Lisboa, Portugal, 5CIGMH, Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e to screen for the arrhythmias, cardiomyopathies, aortopathies and unexplained Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. sudden death conditions. To date we have tested greater than 150 samples. By analyzing the entire gene panel in all samples, we have been able to determine the value of the clinical phenotype to variant analyses, normal variation within In the last years, performance enhancing polymorphisms (PEPs) have been de- these genes, and identified possible new gene associations for these conditions. scribed as genetic variants that relevantly influence phenotypic traits related In addition, we have been able to further determine the strengths and limitati- to athletic performance. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), an autossomal ons of different forms of NGS technology and the validations required for use of dominant genetic disease, is the primary cause of sudden cardiac death in the tPhaisn etelchnology in clinicaDl itseosrtidnegr. Pathogenic Unclassified Negative young and athletes. PEPs have been identified in over 230 genes, both in nuclear Analyses of 96 samples and mitochondrial DNA, coding for proteins involved in metabolic pathways, oxygen transport, muscle biogenesis and blood flow. Therefore, it is important Arrhythmia LQT 13 3 2 to tackle the most relevant genetic features related to physical performance that [28 genes] Brugada 3 - 1 can influence training adaptation and/or HCM risk being in this regard, conside- CPVT 3 1 1 red molecular biomarkers related to athletic performance. ARVC 2 - - Our aim was to identify PEPs in 20 normal athletes and 20 HCM pacients (ath- Cardiomyopathy letes) of a Portuguese cohort in 19 genes previously described: ACE, ACTN2, DCM 3 3 - [65genes] ACTN3, ADRA2A, AGTR1, BDKRB2, CALM3, CKM, EPA S1
, FH L1
, GLA, MTDN5, HCM 17 4 15 NEXN, NO S3
, PPARα, PPARG C1
A, RAF1, TTR and VCL. Athletes´ DNA was extrac-  C72
 ap g te un re e p Da en se il gn Su Od vd ee rn la D pe ca ath pture En1 d5 -to-end capture7 Whole exo3 me ted from peripheral blood and genotyped using high throughputt technologies Statistics Compardiesosnig onf different NGSd epslaigtfnorms sequencing such as High Resolution Melting (HRM) (LightCycler 480®, Roche) and Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) (Ion Torrent PGM platform, Life Technologies®) for which a genomic library was specifically constructed. Using HRM several Capture Design Size 6051521bp 3681483bp - polymorphisms were identified in ACTN2, AGTR1, GLA, RAF1 and TTR genes. (bp) [7Mb] % Target in Capture Moreover, several new genetic variations were identified by NGS, nevertheless, 84.90% 51.63% 5.76% Design due to the high complexity of NGS data analysis, these results are still under % Exon Bases Covered 91.34% 81.93% 94.02% validation. Genetic data provided from these studies will allow contributing to by Design e Ss.tIa.Rb.l iSsahn atno sa:s Nsoocniea.t Vio. nM baerqtwueese:n N PoEnPes. ,P a. tJhulsettiinci apneorf:o Nrmonaen. cJe. Qanudin HtaCsM: N roisnke.. P.V. % of genes with >5% Baptista: None. A.R. Fernandes: None. exons with 1% 6% 42% zDe.r do uc oSvaerrta: gN eone. B. Chong: None. S. Pantaleo: None. I. Macciocca: None. C. Semsarian: None. A. Ellims: None. P. James: None.  P13
.19 Massive parallel Sequencing in non-syndromic familial CHD  P13
.17 Y. Jia1, J. Louw1, J. Breckpot1, M. Gewillig2, K. Devriendt1, A. Corveleyn3; 1Department of Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Genetic causes of cardiomyopathies identified by Whole Exome 2Cardiovascular Developmental Biology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Sequencing 3Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. F. Girolami1, S. Bardi1, M. Benelli1, E. Contini1, G. Marseglia1, C. Pescucci1, B. Tomberli2, F. Cecchi2, I. Olivotto3, F. Torricelli1; 1Genetic Diagnostic Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2University of Florence, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Florence, Italy, 3Referral Center for The majority (~74%) of Congenital Heart Defects (CHD) occurs as an isolated Myocardial Diseases, Florence, Italy. defect (non-syndromic CHD). Non-syndromic CHD with familial recurrence re- present ~4% of all CHD cases. Identification of disease genes involved in non- sydromic CHD is difficult, not only different genes can be involved, also diffe- Genetic basis of hereditary cardiomyopathies (CMs) are not yet entirely under- rent inheritance patterns exist. Resequencing all genes using massive parallel stood. We studied 12 patients with different form of hereditary CMs, by Whole sequencing technology offers the unique opportunity to identify causative mu- Exome Sequencing (WES). tations. In order to determine the proportion of non-syndromic familial CHD Twelve families with early onset CMs were selected: 8 families with hypertro- cases that can be explained by the currently known cardiac genes, we performed phic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 1 with dilated cardiomyopathy, 1 with arrhythmo- targeted sequencing in selected non-syndromic CHD families. For target genes genic cardiomyopathy, 1 with unexplained juvenile sudden cardiac death and capturing, we used NimbleGen Sequence Capture 385K Arrays and NimbleGen 1 unclassified form. WES was performed on IlluminaHiScan SQ platform. After SeqCap EZ Choice library. We included 43 genes and 13 miRNAs in the probe de- bioinformatics analysis, data were filtered and the cosegregation was tested in sign for the arrays, and 14 additional genes in the in-solution library. The target the family. genes were selected via CHD Wiki (http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/~bioiuser/ We obtained 98% mapped reads against genome with mean coverage on target chdwiki). The sequencing was initially performed on the 454 FLX platform and of 60X. More than 61000 variants were found within each family. Variant calling subsequently on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform. In total we performed tar- selected about 18700 of them, both exonic and splice-site. By filtering and prio- geted sequencing in 39 patients from 15 non-syndromic CHD families. The se- ritization about 20 previously unreported variants were selected for each samp- quencing coverage is highly reproducible and uniform between multiple samp- le. However, only 4 of them turned out to be potential mutations. Cosegregation les. The data analysis is ongoing and results will be presented at the meeting. For analysis, performed in 7 families, identified two potentially disease-causing the families in which no shared mutation in the affected members were found mutations: the c. 1357C>T (p.Arg453Cys)myosin heavy chain 7 gene variant in in the target genes, we will perform exome sequencing to search for novel CHD a large Italian family with HCM, and thec.878A>T, (p.Glu293Val) desmoplakin a Ys.s Joicai:a Nteodn eg.e Jn.e Lso.uw: None. J. Breckpot: None. M. Gewillig: None. K. Devriendt: None. A. Corveleyn: None. gene variant in a family with ARVC. Whole exome sequencing enable the identiEfiScaHtioGn 2of0 c1au3sa |t iPveA vRarIiSan, tF inR tAwNo-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 335ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.20 Exome sequencing in research and diagnosis of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation Chondrodysplasia-pseudohermaphrodism syndrome (MIM 600092) following C. Medrano1, A. I. Vega1, J. Wesselink2,3, P. Gómez-Puertas2,3, L. R. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, C. autosomal recessive inheritance has only been reported in 2 siblings in lite- Pérez-Cerdá1, B. Pérez1; rature [Nivelon et al., 1992]. The clinical phenotype comprised severe dwar- 1CEDEM, CBMSO (CSIC-UAM), CIBERER-Madrid, IDIPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2BioMol-Informatics, fism with generalized chondrodysplasia, severe microcephaly with cerebellar S.L., Universidad Autóma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Biología Molecular Severo vermis hypoplasia, facial anomalies, hypoplastic irides, coloboma of both optic Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. discs, myotonia and 46,XY disorder of sexual development with comHplete hgo- naadal tdysgenesis. Until now, the pathogenesis of this striking association was unknown. Here, we report for the first time the involvement of HHAT ( edge og Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a heterogeneous group of dis- cetylransferase) in this congenital human disorder using exome sequencing. orders caused by genetic defects in the protein glycosylation pathway. Most Within 13 genes with mutations compatible with an autosomal recessive in- of them have a wide clinical spectrum and biochemical approaches cannot heritance, we identified a homozygous missense mutation (p.G287V) of HHAT, point out to a solely genetic defect, making diagnosis complicated and high- confirmed by Sanger sequencing. HHAT is a protein catalysing the attachment time consuming. Up to now, we have detected over 40 CDG patients but there of a palmitate moiety to hedgehog proteins, thus enabling their long-range ac- is still remaining a group of unsolved cases. Here we present the preliminary tion as morphogens during embryonic developmenth. hFautnctional studies showed results obtained by whole exome sequencing in a group of 7 patients clinical- that the palmitol transferase activity of the G287V mutant HHAT protein is ab- ly and biochemically selected as potential CDGs. The analysis was performed olished in vitro. Interestingly, previous analysis of -deficient mice [Dennis by combination of in solution capture kit SureSelect (Agilent) and subsequenint JF et al ., 2012 (PMID:23055936) and Chen MH et al., 2004 (PMID:15075292)] nsielixcto- generation sequencing with HiSeq (Illumina). On average, coverage was showed early lethality associated to reduced growth, chondrodysplasia and ho- 50 fold and we detected over 270.000 SNVs per patient. We performed an loprosencephaly. These data suggest that mutation in the HHAT gene is respon- capture of 150 candidate genes involved not only in the glycosylation sible for the Chondrodysplasia-pseudohermaphrodism syndrome by modifica- pathway but also in galactosemia, glycogen storage diseases and nucleotide- t Pio. nC aolfl iHere:d Ngoenheo. gP .p Croatlevienl:s Naocntieo.n M d. uRee tsoh :d Nefoencet.i vPe. Mpaalkmryittohyalnaatsioisn:. None. C. sugars and dolichol synthesis pathway. We also filtered them out so that their Thauvin: None. F. Santoni: None. M. Guiponni: None. A. Vannier: None. S. frequency in Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) were lower than 0.5% and fo- Lambert: None. F. Huet: None. F. Mugneret: None. L. Faivre: None. S. cused on pathogenic changes predicted by SIFT and mutations already descri- Antonarakis: None. S. Nef: None. bed in HGMD®professional. The initial results have allowed the detection of pathogenic mutations in DPAGT1, DPM1 and GALT genes. Based on the clinical and biochemical features of the GALT patient, we analyzed and identified two  P13
.23 more GALT-deficient patients by Sanger sequencing. In summary, whole exome Gene panels for the rapid diagnosis of connective tissue disorders and sequencing is a potential technique that provides an efficient analysis for hete- familial arterial diseases rCo.g Meneedorauns od:i sNoorndee. rAs. cI.o Vmegpari:s Ninogn ea. lJa.r Wgee csosheloinrtk :o Nf goennee. sP .s Gucóhm aesz -CPDuGer.tas: P. J. Coucke, M. Baetens, K. Wettinck, I. Vereecke, E. Debals, W. Steyaert, F. Malfait, O. None. L.R. Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. B. Pérez: Vanakker, B. Callewaert, J. De Backer, S. Lefever, J. Vandesompele, S. Symoens, A. De Paepe; None. Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium.  P13
.21 Genetically heterogeneous connective tissue disorders, such as the Ehlers- Profiling circulating miRNAs in plasma samples of Celiac Disease Danlos syndrome (EDS), Cutis Laxa (CL) or Familial Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms patients (FTAA) are cumbersome to diagnose at the molecular level due to overlapping R. Almeida1,2, V. Kumar1, R. Moderman1, C. Wijmenga1, M. Laass3, S. Withoff1; clinical features that hamper the selection of the right gene for testing. Next 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has enabled the development of gene Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Brasilia, Brasília, Brazil, 33Department of Pediatric panels which provide a clinically relevant and cost effective solution for the Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany. molecular diagnosis of those heterogeneous disorders. HFTeAreA,- wpaen perl1es-2e;n Et aD hS-ipgha-- lnye le1f-f2ic;i eOnI tp aapnperl1o-a2c h(O fsotre othgeen deisaigs nImospise rofef cat ar)a;n CgLe poaf ngeeln; ePtXicEa pllayn heel t(ePrsoeguednoexoauns- cthoonmneac Etilvaes ttiicsusmue) ; dSiTs opradneerls (. SWticek dleerv)e) loped 9 panels ( Celiac disease (CeD) is an autoimmune disorder triggered by gluten in gene- tically predisposed individuals. Its affects around 1% of the world population for a total of 51 causative genes. Using a and thus far the only treatment available is a gluten-free diet (GFD). Diagnosis high-throughput PCR enrichment platform, all coding exons are amplified by a of CeD is currently based on symptoms and serology, but vague symptoms can uniform PCR approach followed with paired-end sequencing on a 454 NGFSB Nse1-, mean that possibly 7 out of 8 patients with CeD are not diagnosed or misdia- qTuGeFnBcRe1r/ (2R, oAcChTeA)2, h, eTrGeFbBy2 s,i gSnMiAfiDca3n atlnyd e nChOaLn3cAi1ng the efficiency of this approach. gnosed. We aim to identify novel biomarkers that can lead to better identifica- With the application of our new FTAA panel 1 containing 7 FTAA genes ( tion and monitoring of this disease. ), we identified causative muta- MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small non-coding RNAs that are involved in many cel- tions in 10 of 35 patients with a syndromal or non-syndromal form of FTAA. lular processes by fine-tuning gene expression. Recently, it was found that cir- Interestingly, in several of them the nature of the causative gene revealed to be culating miRNAs in plasma can be excellent biomarkers for disease or even the different from the initially suspected gene. Moreover, in some, the mutation had disease-stage, partly because of their unexpected stability in plasma. remained undetected with conventional sequencing, illustrating the power of We aim to profile circulating miRNAs in plasma samples from CeD patients be- this efficient strategy. Concurrent work is exploring this NGS approach on the fore and after GFD. To date, we have isolated miRNAs from 10 plasma samples M P.iJS.e Cqo iuncstkreu: mNeonnet .( MIll.u Bmaientean).s: None. K. Wettinck: None. I. Vereecke: None. E. from 5 individuals (5 samples before and 5 after GFD). Next generation sequen- Debals: None. W. Steyaert: None. F. Malfait: None. O. Vanakker: None. B. cing libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2000 and the results were Callewaert: None. J. De Backer: None. S. Lefever: None. J. Vandesompele: aPnalyzed using previously described methods. In a pilot experiment, we found None. S. Symoens: None. A. De Paepe: None. miR-155 to be significantly more highly expressed before GFD than afterwards ( -value=0.04). MiR-155 is known to be involved in inflammation and immuni- ty, and it activates the innate immune system and Th1 and Th17 cells. We are  P13
.24 now expanding this cohort to 50 patients to validate the results and improve Cystic fibrosis and molecular analysis of CFTR locus: comparison of three t Rh.e A plomweeidra t:o N doinseco. Vve. Kr unmovaerl: bNioonmea. rRk. eMrso.derman: None. C. Wijmenga: None. M. technical approaches by targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Laass: None. S. Withoff: None. P. Gueguen1,2,3, M. Audrezet1,2, A. Despres1, C. Le Marechal1,2,3, C. Ferec1,2,3; 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire - CHRU, Brest, France, 2INSERM U1078, Brest, France, 3Faculté de Médecine, UBO, Brest, France.  P13
.22 CFTR Hedgehog acetyltransferase (HHAT) mutation in autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia-pseudohermaphrodism syndrome identified by 23 years after the discovery of the gene, more than 1900 anomalies are exome sequencing. described in the world, the majority of them being single base-pair substituti- P. Callier1, P. Calvel2, M. Resh3, P. Makrythanasis2, C. Thauvin1, F. Santoni2, M. Guiponni2, A. ons or micro-insertions/deletions. Identification of mutations has important Vannier2, S. Lambert1, F. Huet1, F. Mugneret1, L. Faivre1, S. Antonarakis2, S. Nef2; implications for genetic counselling, prenatal diagnosis, cascade screening in 1Département de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and families, as well as for understanding the genotype-phenotype relationship. Development, Geneve, Switzerland, 3Cell Biology program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Since a few years, NGS technologies enable us to overcome the classical approa- Center, New York, NY, United States. ches of whole coding sequence sequencing at single nucleotide resolution. 336 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRTAheN aCimE o |f WourW stWud.yE isS tHo Gco.mOpRarGe 3 different strategies with the Ion TorrentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index technology (Life Technologies, LT): Ampliseq (LT), HaCloFpTlRex (Agilent) and ho- single day. Our miniaturized assay format allows simultaneous genotyping of me-made Long Range PCR (LR). eight different test samples at minimized reagent costs and is therefore ame- Preliminary results showed that the coverage of the locus by Ampliseq n Sab. Mlea tsom laorugdei :s Bca. lRee ssceraerecnhi nGgra.nt (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; ISESCO. B. is limited to 51% and includes 86% of exons with a depth generally consistent Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants between amplicons. Haloplex approach gives more heterogeneous depth and as well as grants already received); Significant; ICGEB. I. Chakchouk: None. M. Ben coverage. Finally, LR-PCR showed coverage consistent with the design but dif- Said: None. F. Jbeli: None. S. Loukil: None. H. Hadj Kacem: None. ferences at depth between each LR amplification. The development of libraries by the two first approaches is rapid (less than 24h) and technically easy. FCoFrT LRR-PCR, It takes about two days to build a library with long and time- consuming manual steps.  P13
.27 Sequencing result for the gene were validated with wild-type samples Whole-exome sequencing in pedigrees segregating Type 1 Diabetes E. Mereu1,2, M. Pitzalis2, R. Berutti3,4, M. Oppo5, C. Sidore2,4, M. Zoledwieska2, L. Crisponi2, M. and DNA carrying known variants (mutatioCnFsT aRnd polymorphisms) previously Valentini3, A. Puddu2,6, I. Zara3, F. Deidda4, F. Rienier3, R. Galanello1, P. Pusceddu7, M. Frongia7, identified by DHPLC, HRM and sequencing. C. Jones5, A. Angius2,5, S. Sanna2, F. Cucca2,5; In conclusion, the sequencing of the entire locus by NGS is a tool that can 1Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Università di Cagliari, quickly respond to issues such as prenatal diagnostic and the most promising Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, CNR, Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, a Pp. pGruoeagcuhe sne:e Nmosn teo. Mbe. Athued rLeRz estt:r Natoengey.. A. Despres: None. C. Le marechal: 3CR S4
, AGCT group, Parco Tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 4Dipartimento di None. C. Ferec: None. Scienze Biomediche, Universita‘ degli Studi di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 5CR S4
, GSP group, Parco Tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 6Sardegna Ricerche, Parco Tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 7Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu, Cagliari, Italy.  P13
.25 Development of a comprehensive gene screen for dilated Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a complex autoimmune disease with high heritabi- cardiomyopathy using next-generation sequencing. S. L. Reid1, K. Thomson1, J. Woodley1, M. Shanks1, J. Taylor1, J. Hayesmoore1, E. Blair2, H. lity. Genetic association studies identified more than 56 susceptibility loci Watkins3, A. Seller1; outside the major HLA locus, but a remarkable portion of heritability (up to 1Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical 40%) remains unexplained. We thought part of the missing heritability could Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Oxford University Department of Cardiovascular be attributable to variants segregating in families with closely related affected Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom. individuals. With the aim to assess this hypothesis, we sequenced the whole- exome of 32 Sardinian individuals representing 16 parent+offspring affected pairs. Being Sardinia an isolated population, we can not exclude that a founder, Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease with an estimated highly penetrant variant, shared among those families, is present on the island. prevalence of 1:2500; it is clinically heterogeneous and appears to be familial in Samples were sequenced with the TruSeq Exome Enrichment Kit (Illumina), ~30% of cases. The genetic basis of DCM is complex with over 30 genes repor- that provides coverage across 62 Mb of exomic sequence, including 5‘ UTR, 3‘ ted to be involved, few are associated with any differentiating phenotype and UTR, microRNA, and other non-coding regions. Reads were aligned using Bur- the majority of genes account for less than 1% of cases. This clinical and genetic rows-Wheeler Algorithm (BWA) to the reference human genome (build 37). heterogeneity means that traditional analysis strategies, undertaking testing Alignments for each sample were converted to BAM format, sorted, indexed on a gene by gene basis, have had limited utility in a clinical setting. Next Ge- and processed with MarkDuplicates from the package Picard-tools 1.81 for re- neration Sequencing (NGS) technology means that it is now feasible to develop moving PCR duplicates. The local indel realignment and recalibration was per- comprehensive and sensitive genetic tests for DCM, incorporating analysis of formed according to the GATK (v. 2.2-15) pipeline. On average, mean depth is the most commonly involved genes in a single test. A diagnostic NGS workflow 52.5x and a total of 98.9% of Q20 bases were observed. We are now performing for the analysis of 28 DCM genes has developed and validated using Haloplex multisample variant calling of both SNPs and indels using the HaplotypeCaller enrichment technology (Agilent Technologies) followed by sequencing on the algorithm in GATK. Our results will elucidate whether an highly penetrant vari- MiSeq (Illumina). Initial results demonstrate that this is a sensitive and robust ant shared between families or private variants in genes on the same pathway assay with an average of 97.5 % of target regions consistently covered to x30 c Ea.n M eexrpelua:i nN donisee. aMse. Psietgzareligsa: tNioonne i.n R t.h Boseeru ttrtiio: sN.one. M. Oppo: None. C. Sidore: depth. The results of this study will be presented to demonstrate the analytical None. M. Zoledwieska: None. L. Crisponi: None. M. Valentini: None. A. Puddu: and clinical sensitivity in our validation cohort; the potential utility of this test None. I. Zara: None. F. Deidda: None. F. Rienier: None. R. Galanello: None. P. s Str.La.t eRgeyid in: N ao cnlein. iKca. lT sheotmtinsogn w: iNllo bnee .d Jis. cWuososeddle.y: None. M. Shanks: None. J. Pusceddu: None. M. Frongia: None. C. Jones: None. A. Angius: None. S. Sanna: Taylor: None. J. Hayesmoore: None. E. Blair: None. H. Watkins: None. A. Seller: None. F. Cucca: None. None.  P13
.28  P13
.26 One step molecular diagnosis of 43 forms of monogenic diabetes or NADf chip, a two-color microarray mutation detection tool for the obesity, using microdroplet PCR enrichment and next generation diagnosis of deafness in North Africa sequencing S. Masmoudi, I. Chakchouk, M. Ben Said, F. Jbeli, S. Loukil, H. Hadj Kacem; J. Philippe1, E. Durand1, M. Vaxillaire1, O. Sand1, F. De Graeve1, H. Cavé2, M. Polak3, R. Centre of Biotechnology Of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia. Martínez Salazar4, L. Castano4, J. Muller5, J. Mandel5, S. Saeed6, A. Bonnefond1, P. Froguel1,6; 1CNRS UMR 8199, Lille, France, 2Robert Debré Hospital (AP-HP), Paris, France, 3Necker Hospital (AP-HP), Paris, France, 4Cruces Hospital, Barakaldo, Spain, 5Integrative Genomics and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Strasbourg, France, 6Imperial College London, London, Hearing impairment (HI) is the most prevalent sensorineural disorder. Genetic United Kingdom. causes are responsible in two-thirds of prelingual cases. About 70% of heredi- tary HI cases are non-syndromic (NS); the other 30% are associated to other symptoms. NSHI is exclusively autosomal recessive and highly heterogeneous. Objectives: Whole exome sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing can be Among the most common syndromic forms, Usher and Pendred syndromes are used for the molecular characterization of monogenic diseases but these tech- inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Autosomal recessive HI is parti- niques are still expensive and labor-intensive. Here, we aimed to develop a cost- cularly frequent in countries with high rate of consanguinity such as Northern effective high-throughput approach for molecular diagnosis of genetic diseases. Africans. This population shares several common features, such as history We assessed a new technology in 45 patients presenting with monogenic forms and social behaviors that promote the spread of founder mutations. The most of diabetes or obesity, of which causal mutations were already known. current strategy used for molecular genetic testing in North African countries Methods: We designed a PCR-based sequence enrichment panel targeting exons relies on PCR-RFLP and Sanger sequencing techniques. The extreme genetic of 43 known susceptibility genes for monogenic forms of diabetes and obesi- heterogeneity of HI renders its molecular diagnosis using these methods time- ty. Each of the 45 DNA samples was processed on the RDT1000 (RainDance). consuming and very expensive. We designed and optimized a NADf (North Afri- Fragmented DNA mixed with PCR reagents was processed into microdroplets can Deafness) chip using multiplex PCR coupled with two-color arrayed primer that were fused with microdroplets containing the primer library. The resulting extension (APEX) for the simultaneous analysis of 60 mutations that are com- microdroplets were subsequently amplified by PCR. Finally, all 45 amplicon en- monly found in Northern African deaf patients. These mutations are distribut- riched samples were sequenced on the HiSeq2000 (Illumina) at mean coverage ed over 40 different exons and introns. We used the fluorescent dyes Cy3 and depth of 100×. Cy5 that are compatible with the most common scanners. Our array showed Results: The mean depth was ≥8× for 99% of targeted regions resulting in a 100% sensitivity and specificity in the detection of 40 HI mutants, and ensures good uniformity of coverage in each sample. The known mutations of 43 pati- robust genotyping. The whole procedure cEanS bHeG pe 2rf0or1m3ed | tPo AcoRmIpSl,e tFioRnA inN a CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 337 ents were confirmed. These included missense, nonsense and splice site muta-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index J. Klar: None. J. Schuster: None. T. Khan: None. M. Tariq: None. P. Arzoo: None. N.A. Malik: None. K. Mäbert: None. S.M. Baig: None. N. Dahl: None. tions as well as deletions. Two proven variants were not retrieved due to issues in Indel detection algorithm and homopolymer sequencing errors. Surprisingly, we found that three patients carry other potentially causal mutations than the  P13
.31 expected one. Diagnostic application of exome sequencing in Limb Girdle Muscular Discussion: Microdroplet based PCR enrichment combined with next genera- Dystrophies and Distal Myopathies. tion sequencing is a promising technique for molecular diagnosis of genetic M. Krahn1,2,3, J. Desvignes1,3, M. Lathrop4, N. Lévy1,2,3, M. Bartoli1,2,3; diseases. It may replace Sanger sequencing as it is far more cost effective and 1Aix Marseille Université, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France, 2APHM, Département q Ju. iPchkeilrip.pe: None. E. Durand: None. M. Vaxillaire: None. O. Sand: None. F. De de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Timone Enfants, Marseille, France, 3INSERM UMRS 910, Graeve: None. H. Cavé: None. M. Polak: None. R. Martínez Salazar: None. L. Marseille, France, 4Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France. Castano: None. J. Muller: None. J. Mandel: None. S. Saeed: None. A. Bonnefond: None. P. Froguel: None. Exome sequencing offers promising perspectives for molecular diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous diseases, either as a first-tier-approach, or following  P13
.29 an initial negative result of targeted single-gene-analysis. In autosomal reces- Targeted next generation sequencing for identification of genotypes and sive muscular dystrophies, the latter situation may account of approximately associated phenotypes in epileptic encephalopathy 10-20% of samples screened for a selected gene after clinical orientation. E. H. Brilstra1, M. J. A. van Kempen1, Y. K. Lam1, R. van t Slot1, F. E. Jansen2, B. P. C. This includes dysferlinopathies which present mainly as Limb-Girdle Muscular Koeleman1, C. de Kovel1; Dystrophy or distal myopathy (Miyoshi myopathy). 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Child Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Among our cohort constituted during the past 12 years for mutational analy- sis of the dysferlin gene (DYSF), we included 37 samples initially addressed for diagnostic suspicion of dysferlinopathy, without identified disease-causing mutation (DCM). Exome sequencing (Agilent Sureselect V3 and Illumina se- Known monogenic causes for epileptic encephalopathy (EE) explain only a quencing) yielded a mean depth of 68X and an overall coverage of >10% for fraction of all patients. To explain more cases, the phenotypic spectrum asso- 98.4% of the targeted exons. Variants were filtered through the “Gene Table of ciated with mutations in known genes needs to be further explored, and new Neuromuscular Disorders” list of genes, disease-group “muscular dystrophy” genes for EE need to be identified. In order to do so, we selected 342 genes (http://www.musclegenetable.fr ; 34genes). In six samples, molecular diagno- with a known or possible relationship to EE and performed targeted next sis could be concluded by identifying compound heterozygous or homozygous generation sequencing of these genes in 64 EE patients. To investigate how DCM in previously known LGMD or distal myopathy genes (including CAPN3, common deleterious mutations in these genes are in healthy people, we also ANO5 and GNE). In three additional samples, respectively one DCM was iden- performed this sequencing in 64 healthy persons. tified, warranting further targeted exploration (including MLPA/CGH) for the After filtering, in the EE patients 144 variants that were novel and unique for identification of a possible second DCM. For the remaining 28 samples, no the patient group, were found, 0-6 per sample. Of those 34 were in known DCM were identified among the disease-group “muscular dystrophies”, which epilepsy or encephalopathy genes, of which six have been confirmed by Sanger points to further genetic heterogeneity with regard to the currently known list sequencing (at this time), but two were not. In controls 94 unique and novel of genes implicated in muscular dystrophy. Widening of the informatics filter variants were found, of which 9 in genes previously found to be associated to the entire “Gene Table of Neuromuscular Disorders” list (297genes) identi- with epilepsy or encephalopathy. Therefore, patients seem to be enriched for f Mie.d K sreavhenr:a Nl monuet.a Jt.e Dd ecsavnidgnideast:e Ns ownhei. cMh. aLraet hurnodpe:r N founreth. eNr. iLnévveys:t iNgoantieo. nM.. mutations in known epilepsy-related genes. Bartoli: None. One interesting variant was a non-synonymous mutation in CACNA1A in a patient with moderate intellectual disability, refractory epilepsy and ataxia. CACNA1A is commonly found to be mutated in patients with familial hemiple- gic migraine and/or (episodic) ataxia. Another interesting variant was in KCN-  P13
.32 MA1, which has previously been found mutated in a family with generalized Activating mutation of natriuretic peptide receptor B causes extremely e Ep.iHle. pBsryil satnrad: pNaornoex.y Msm.Ja.Al .d vyasnk iKneemsiap.e Fno: lNloowne-u. pY. iKs. uLnadme:r Nwoanye.. R. van t Slot: tall stature None. F.E. Jansen: None. B.P.C. Koeleman: None. C. de Kovel: None. M. Losekoot1, H. A. van Duyvenvoorde1,2, S. E. Hannema2, T. Premsler3, R. Yang4, T. Mueller5, B. Gaßner3, H. Oberwinkler3, F. Roelfsema6, G. Santen1, T. Prickett7, S. G. Kant1, A. J. M. A. Verkerk8, A. G. Uitterlinden8, E. Espiner7, A. M. Pereira6, M. Kuhn3, J. Wit2; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics,  P13
.30 LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Institute of Physiology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Exome sequencing as a diagnostic tool identifies a novel mutation Germany, 4Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Department associated with congenital generalized lipodystrophy. of Molecular Plant Physiology and Biophysics, Julius-von-Sachs-Institute, Biocenter, J. Klar1, J. Schuster1, T. Khan2, M. Tariq2, P. Arzoo2, N. A. Malik3, K. Mäbert1, S. M. Baig2, N. University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 6Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Dahl1; Diseases, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 7Department of Medicine, University of Otago, 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Human Molecular Christchurch, New Zealand, 8Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Centre, Genetics Laboratory, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering Rotterdam, Netherlands. (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan, 3Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faialabad, Pakistan. Here we describe NthPeR c2ombined approach of whole exome sequencing (WES) and subsequent functional studies in the identification and characterization of Exome sequencing has emerged as a diagnostic tool in cases of genetic hetero- a novel activating gene mutation in a healthy male with extreme tall sta- geneity or when clinical and/or laboratory data from patients is unattainable. ture (221 cm). GH hormone overproduction, known syndromes, and a deleti- We identified a consanguineous Pakistani pedigree with three members, two on in chromosome 15q25.2q25.3 containing 8 protein-coding genes had been females and one male, with short and muscular stature, mild mental retarda- excluded as the NcaPuRs2e of tall stature. WES was performed and analysis of the tion and acromegalic appearance. The diagnosis remained unclear in the ab- data with a home-made analysis pipeline elucidated a heterozygous missense sence of further clinical information and laboratoBrSyC dLa2t a. We then performed mutation in the gene (c.1963C>T p.Arg655Cys) within the NPNR P2
R k2inase exome sequencinBgS oCnL 2a ffected members and we identified a homozygous no- homology domain as the most likely pathogenic event. This variant was not vel variant on chromosome 11 in intron 5 of the gene encoding Seipin. present as a known variant in any of the available databases. The mu- Mutations in the gene cause congenital generalized lipodystrophy type tation was not found in the patient’s sister or son, who are tall but within the 2 (CG L2
). The transition (c.574-2A>G) identified in this family is predicted to normal range. His parents were not available for analysis. Transfection studies alter the intron 5 acceptor splice site and expression analysis of the mutated of the mutant NPR2 protein in HEK293 cells resulted in increased basal and allele confirmed skipping of exon 6. CNP stimulated NPR2 activity. Co-expression of wild-type and mutant NPR2 Patients with CG L2
 are born without body fat and later develop insulin re- resulted in increased activity, close to the value of mutant NPR2 alone, sugge- sistance, hypertriglyceridemia, hepatic steatosis and early onset of diabetes. sting a dominant positive effect. Co-immunoprecipitation studies confirmed Clinical re-evaluation of affected family members showed lipodystrophy and heterodimer formation of wild-type and mutant NPR2. Studies using skin fi- axillary acanthosis nigricans. Thus, congenital generalized lipodystrophy was broblasts of the patient showed increased NPR2 activity after stimulation with confirmed despite cholesterol and triglycerid levels within normal ranges. CNP, confirming that the mutant NPR2 enhances CNP-NPR2-cGMP signalling. The cost of exome sequencing has become more and more affordable and This pathwNaPyR i2s critically involved in bone development by stimulating grow- could represent a universal diagnostic tool for genetic disorders at early sta- th plate chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation. We conclude that the ges of investigations or, as illustrated here, when access to clinical information identified mutation in our patient is responsible for the extremely tall 338 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG is limited. stature.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index M. Losekoot: None. H.A. van Duyvenvoorde: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Novo Nordisk, The Netherlands. S.E. Hannema: identified using the GATK software and annotated with Annovar. Variants were None. T. Premsler: None. R. Yang: None. T. Mueller: None. B. Gaßner: None. H. filtered for confident calls using a ≥30 quality threshold, ≥15 read depth, and ≥ Oberwinkler: None. F. Roelfsema: None. G. Santen: None. T. Prickett: None. S.G. 0.15 allele frequencies. The average read depth for capture target regions was Kant: None. A.J.M.A. Verkerk: None. A.G. Uitterlinden: None. E. Espiner: 98.84. Prior to further filtering, variants were assessed for overtly deleterious None. A.M. Pereira: None. M. Kuhn: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); mutation in known BC/OC genes. Then, variants in the 1000 Genomes Project, Significant; DFG (SFB 688 and KU1037/5-1). J. Wit: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project, and dbSNP database with minor allele fre- (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Pfizer, Lilly, Ipsen, quency of ≥1% were removed. Next, variants functionally deleterious in hete- Ferring. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Tercica, Ipsen, Pfizer, Prolor, Teva, rocigosis (frameshift and nonsense SNVs) were identified. After filtering, an Biopartners. average of 37 deleterious mutations was identified per individual. Only those genes with deleterious mutations shared by the affected relatives were consi- dered. Priority was given to genes implicated in well-established pathways as-  P13
.33 s So.c Giautetidé rtroe zc-aEnncreíqr.u Tehz:e Nvoanriea.n Jt. vBaallimdaatñioan: Nwoinlle b. eN .d Gonade ebay: SNaonngee. rN s. eBqousecnhc:i ng. None. A. Tenés: None. M. Masas: None. R. Moreno: None. G. Montalban: Performance enhancement of Haloplex target enrichment disease None. S. Bonache: None. O. Diez: None. panels using advanced probe design algorithms S. Happe1, F. Roos2, M. Isaksson2, E. Åström2, P. Eriksson2, M. Danielsson2, H. Johansson2, M. Guadalupe1, J. Deng1, F. Dahl2; 1Agilent Technologies, Cedar Creek, TX, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, Uppsala,  P13
.35 Sweden. Prediction and prioritization of non-coding variants of uncertain significance in heritable breast cancer P. K. Rogan, E. J. Mucaki, E. Dovigi, C. Viner, B. C. Shirley, S. Dorman, A. Stuart, J. Knoll, P. Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a powerful technology that is Ainsworth; transforming the understanding of human disease. The Haloplex PCR method University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. combines target enrichment and sequencing library preparation in a simp- le one day protocol without the requirement for dedicated instrumentation. While the Haloplex method is highly specific and results in deep coverage We present an approach to prioritize pathogenic non-coding, variants of across targets of interest for variant identification, specimens such as for- uncertain significance (VUS) based on information analysis of changes malin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues present challenges due to age, in DNA and RNA sequences bound by regulatory factors. Complete gene presence of interfering substances, limited material, and DNA template degra- sequences were captured by solution hybridization, enriching for variants in dation and damage. To make the Haloplex protocol even more robust when genes that harbor breast cancer risk mutations. Oligo baits for ATM, BRCA1, using difficult samples, we examined the effect of probe design parameters BRCA2, CDH1, CHEK2, PALB2 and T P53
 spanned complete coding and on enrichment metrics and variant calling performance using several disease- adjacent intergenic regions. A novel probe design captured both repeat-free specific panels with various sample types. We focused on targeting shorter and effectively single-copy, divergent repeat sequences. After sequencing 21 fragment sizes, capturing both strands of the target DNA, building redundancy patient samples, information theory-based sequence analysis prioritized non- into design, and adjusting stringency settings for targets with high homology coding variants predicted to occur within sequences recognized by proteins to other regions of the genome. We demonstrate how these advanced design or protein complexes. VUS were screened for mutations affecting binding sites considerations improved the performance of the disease panels in terms of in mRNA splicing, by transcription factors (TFBS), and proteins interacting coverage, uniformity, and specificity. We also discuss the effect of probe design with untranslated regions (UTR). Information theory based models of exon on coverage of hotspot regions, false positive rates due to formalin-induced recognition predict the relative abundance of natural, cryptic, and mutant damage, and allelic balance in the case of low frequency mutations. Our results splice isoforms resulting from predicted mutations (Mucaki et al 2013). demonstrate the utility of Haloplex for targeted next-generation sequencing We introduce a similar approach to detect mutations altering TFBS and using challenging samples often encountered during disease research and as- UTR binding sites. Information weight matrices were computed by entropy s aSy. Hdeavpepleo:p Am. Eenmtp.loyment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Technologies. minimization of ENCODE ChIP-seq data for 47 transcription factors expressed E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); in breast cancer. Novel variants in patients were then evaluated for alteration Modest; Agilent Technologies. F. Roos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; of TFBS affinity. We predict 9 splicing, 10 TFBS, and 6 UTR variants affect Agilent Technologies. M. Isaksson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Technologies. E. Åström: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; gene expression of 6 protein coding genes in the patient samples (from 7,909 Agilent Technologies. P. Eriksson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; variants in 7 genes). This strategy more comprehensively covers non-coding Agilent Technologies. M. Danielsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; regions in breast cancer genes than repeat masking, and introduces a unified Agilent Technologies. H. Johansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; f Pra.Km. eRwogoarkn :f oEr. Osywstneemrsahtiipc Iinntteerrepsrte (tsattoiocnk, osft oVcUkS o tphtaiot nasff,e pcat teexnpt roers soitohne.r Agilent Technologies. M. Guadalupe: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; intellectual property); Significant; Cytognomix. E.J. Mucaki: None. E. Dovigi: Agilent Technologies. J. Deng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; None. C. Viner: None. B.C. Shirley: None. S. Dorman: None. A. Stuart: None. J. Agilent Technologies. F. Dahl: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Knoll: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual Technologies. property); Significant; Cytognomix. P. Ainsworth: None.  P13
.34  P13
.36 Whole exome sequencing of germline DNA from non-BRCA1/BRCA2 Development and validation of massively parallel sequencing for the familial breast and ovarian cancer cases routine molecular diagnosis of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez1,2, J. Balmaña3,4,2, N. Gadea3,4, N. Bosch3,4,2, A. Tenés1,2, M. Masas5,1,2, R. L. Castéra1,2, J. Bauman1, O. Bruet1, A. Legros1, A. Rousselin1, B. Brault1, R. Fouillet1, Moreno6, G. Montalban1,7, S. Bonache5,1,2, O. Diez6,1,2; O. Letac1, O. Bera3, C. Dugast4, V. Layet5, P. Berthet6, F. Polycarpe6, A. Hardouin1,2, T. 1Oncogenetics. Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology-VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Frebourg7,2,8, S. Krieger1,2,9, D. Vaur1,2; Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 3Medical Oncology Department. University 1Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics CLRCC François Baclesse, Caen, France, Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4High Risk and Cancer Prevention Group. Vall 2Inserm UMR 1079, Rouen, France, 3Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Fort de d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology-VHIO, Barcelona, Spain, 5Oncogenetics. Vall d‘Hebron France, France, 4Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rennes, France, 5Department Research Institute-VHIR, Barcelona, Spain, 6University Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, of Genetics, Jacques Monod Hospital, Le Havre, France, 6Department of Genetics, CLRCC Spain, 7Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. François Baclesse, Caen, France, 7Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 8University, Rouen, France, 9University, Caen, France. Genetic etiology for the majority of families with breast/ovarian cancer (BC/ OC) is unknown. This could be due to a genetic heterogeneity with multiple In order to optimize the molecular diagnosis of hereditary breast and ova- loci of unequal frequency and penetrance. Next generation sequencing can be rian cancer (HBOC), we developed a NGS-based routine screening based on used to search predisposition genes by sequencing the entire protein-coding the capture of 21 genes (exons and introns) involved in HBOC, pooling of 12 sequence (exome). In a still ongoing analysis (ISCIII Miguel Servet funded) we indexed DNA, 2x76bp paired-end sequencing on a GAIIx and confirmation by applied whole-exome sequencing to multiple affected relatives from eight BC/ Sanger sequencing or MLPA/QMPSF. The bioinformatic pipeline includes CA- OC families. Genomic library was prepared from 1 µg of DNA. Exome enrich- SAVA, NextGENe, CNVseq and Alamut-HT. The procedure allows the analysis of ment was performed using the SureSelect XT HumanAllExon 50Mb (Agilent). 80 patients per run with a 60x coverage. We validated this procedure first by Sequencing, paired-end 2x100, was performed on a HiSeq2000 instrument (Il- analysis of 60 DNA with deleterious SNV, indels or genomic rearrangements lumina). Reads were aligned to the human genome (hg19) using the Burrows- ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEo |f WBRWCAW1 o.Er SBRHCGA2.O, thReGn by performing in parallel the NGS and Sange3r3 s9e- Wheeler Aligner algorithm. Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and indels wereABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index quencing/MLPA analyses of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in 160 patients. All mutations mean coverage was between 628-1079x, and 74.9-98.5% of the target region detected by conventional procedures were detected by NGS. We then analysed had a coverage of at least 30x. Through these studies, expertise will be gained 707 new patients for SNV and Indels. We detected 91 variations inducing a providing the genetic counsellors with an important tool in the battle against premature codon stop or a splice defect, in BRCA1(n=28), BRCA2(n=24) and i Anh. Beroijteesde cna: nNcoenre d. iKsp.Do.s Sittieofnfe.nsen: None. M.M. Aagaard: None. A.H. Petersen: None. 39 in the other genes: ATM(n=5), CHEK2(n=5), PALB2(n=5), MR E11
A(n=4), RAD51C(n=3), NBN(n=3), RAD50(n=2), BARD1(n=1), CDH1(n=1), MSH2(n=4), PM S2
(n=2), PM S1
(n=1), MLH3(n=1), RAD51D(n=1) and RAD51B(n=1). Inter- pretation of these potentially deleterious variants is being performed by se- gregation studies within the families. We also detected potentially deleterious  P13
.40 21 missense mutations, including 11 within BRCA1 and BRCA2 (Align GVGD Targeted high-throughput sequencing of 220 genes identifies a high score >  C65
 MAF in ESP sample <0.01). These results demonstrate the efficien- proportion of causative mutations in 50 patients with undiagnosed cy of this NGS procedure to perform molecular diagnosis of HBOC and shows intellectual disability that the fraction of potentially deleterious mutations detected within the other C. Redin1,2, J. Lauer3, S. Le Gras4, V. Geoffroy4, A. Creppy1,3, Y. Herenger3, Y. Alembik5, M. gLe. nCeass ttéhraan: NBoRnCeA. 1J. a Bnadu BmRaCnA: N2 ojunest. iOfie. sB trhueeti:r Naonnaely. sAis. .Legros: None. A. Doco-Fenzy6, B. Doray5, P. Edery7, S. El Chehadeh8, E. Flori9, G. Lesca7, A. Masurel8, B. Rousselin: None. B. Brault: None. R. Fouillet: None. O. Letac: None. O. Bera: Gerard3, J. Muller1,3, B. Jost4, L. Olivier-Faivre8,10, J. Mandel1,2,3, A. Piton1,2; None. C. Dugast: None. V. Layet: None. P. Berthet: None. F. Polycarpe: None. A. 1Department of Translational Medicine and Neurogenetics, IGBMC, Illkirch Hardouin: None. T. Frebourg: None. S. Krieger: None. D. Vaur: None. Graffenstaden, France, 2Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Paris, France, 3Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Microarray and Sequencing Platform, IGBMC, Illkirch Graffenstaden, France, 5Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux universitaires de  P13
.37 Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Biology Section, Department of Genetics, University Ultra-Fast BRCA1/2 Analysis for Clinical Diagnostics of DNA from Blood Hospital of Reims, Reims, France, 7Laboratoire de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Samples Service de Génétique, Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, A. H. Petersen, A. Bojesen; Bron, France, 8Centre de génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement Department of Clinical Genetics Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. et Syndromes malformatifs, Hôpital d‘Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 9Service de cytogénétique, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 10Génétique des anomalies du développement (GAD) EA 4271, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. Several studies have indicated that, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer pa- tients who harbor mutations in BRCA1/2 can benefit from new therapeutics, known as poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. Patients suitable for Over 200 genes have a well-documented implication in monogenic forms entry in protocols using PARP inhibitors are typically at a late stage of their of intellectual disability (ID), including 100 located on the X-chromosome. cancer disease. If patients without prior knowledge of mutations in BRCA 1/2 While there is a good coverage for diagnostic demands in patients with evo- should benefit from treatment, very fast screening for mutations in BRCA 1/2 cative syndromic forms, in lesser syndromic patients the diagnostic offer is is needed. Therefore, we developed a novel in-house ultra-fast BRCA1/2 muta- limited to Fragile-X and CGH-array analyses and most cases hence remain tion analysis, making it possible to screen the coding regions, the intronic regi- undiagnosed. ons (33-1881 bp) flanking the exons and the 5’ and 3’ UTRs of the BRCA1 and We tested a targeted exon-capture strategy of 220 ID genes (100 XLID genes BRCA2 genes within two weeks. This allows BRCA1/2 positive patients to be and 120 autosomal genes mostly associated to dominant forms) coupled enrolled in clinical trials at an earlier stage, since traditional Sanger sequence with multiplexing and NGS. We successfully analyzed 50 patients (mostly based screening of BRCA1/2 may take up to, as long as 3 months, in Denmark. males and sporadic cases) with undiagnosed moderate to severe ID. Method: Genomic DNA was subjected to 13 individual LongRange PCR am- We identified eight certainly-causative mutations: five maternally-inherited plifications (In House primer design and Qiagen LongRange PCR kit). 1 ng in X-linked genes (DMD/D P71
, KDM5C, MAOA, MEC P2
, SL C9
A6) and three of pooled amplicon DNA was used as input DNA for the library preparation truncating de novo in autosomal genes (DYRK1A, RAI1, TCF4). We also re- (Nextera XT, Illumina). Sample libraries were multiplexed and sequenced on a ported four likely-causative X-linked mutations in HUW E1
, IQSE C2
, SRPX2 MiSeq (PE 2x 150 bp, dual indexing). Data analysis was performed using CLC and FLNA requiring additional validation analyses. Genomic Workbench. Patient DNA was tested for larger InDels using MLPA Interestingly, the DMD/D P71
 mutation is a very distal frameshift in a patient  P002
- C2
 and  P045
-B3. with no muscular phenotype. The MEC P2
 mutation is an exceptionally com- Results: A total of 60 patient samples have been analyzed since August 2012. plex rearrangement detected in an 11 years-old boy with severe ID and his The average analysis time is 13.3 days (8 to 25 days), and 6 disease causing m Au.Hta. tPieotnesr sheanv:e N boeneen. Ade. tBeocjteesde.n: None. unaffected mother. Patients with RAI1 and TCF4 mutations did not present with clear phenotypic traits evocative of Smith-Magenis or Pitt-Hopkins syndromes. The identification of certainly/likely causative mutations in 16%/24% of  P13
.38 the patients proves the relevance of our strategy for the diagnosis of ID, Screening FFPE archival tissue for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 - A being more cost-effective than trio-exome sequencing while leading to a new paradigm in genetic counselling/investigation comparable proportion of diagnostic results (16%/41% in 100 trios, de Ligt A. Bojesen1, K. D. Steffensen2, M. M. Aagaard1, A. H. Petersen1; e Ct .a Rl.e; d3i1n%: N/o4n3e%. J i.n L 5a1u etrr:i oNso, nRea.u Sc.h L eet Garl.a, s2:0 N1o2n)e.. V. Geoffroy: None. A. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of Oncology, Creppy: None. Y. Herenger: None. Y. Alembik: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None. B. Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. Doray: None. P. Edery: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. E. Flori: None. G. Lesca: None. A. Masurel: None. B. Gerard: None. J. Muller: None. B. Jost: None. L. Olivier-Faivre: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Piton: None. By revealing the BRCA status of deceased relatives using archival Formalin- Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) samples, genetic counsellors get an extra tool to make more qualified risk assessment on living family members. The  P13
.41 elucidation of a family’s BRCA status may also release family members from Using Ion AmpliSeq™ RNA to Detect Fusion Transcripts in Human psychological worries, if the test result is BRCA negative. Importantly, if the Oncology Samples test result is positive for a disease causing BRCA mutation, the genetic coun- S. Magdaleno, J. Schageman, L. Chapman, B. Setterquist; sellors can guide the family members about the benefits of genetic testing and Ambion, Inc, a part of Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States. screening programs. The department of Clinical Genetics at SLB-Vejle Hospital, Denmark, is imple- menting a targeted sequencing strategy of 29 cancer genes including BRCA1/2 We have developed a new method of targeted RNA sequencing application for routine analysis of mutations in DNA extracted from FFPE samples < 10 for low input and degraded FFPE total RNA samples using the Ion Ampli- years old. The first study included 7 FFPE samples and 1 blood sample, all with Seq™ RNA technology. This technology has been shown to be technically a known germline BRCA mutation, and focused on examining the quality of reproducible, quantitative and to maintain excellent correlation with qPCR the chosen method for targeting the cancer genes, and setting up a data analy- using TaqMan gene expression assays. We have applied this novel targeted sis pipeline. A second study involves FFPE samples from 20 cancer specimens RNA sequencing approach to the detection of fusion transcripts in human with a known germline BRCA1/2 mutation and focus on examining the relati- disease tissues. onship between the age of FFPE sample, quality and amount of DNA required Panels of amplicons were designed to all the known fusion transcripts as- to get a successful result. sociated with mesenchymal neoplasms (soft tissue tumors). The Ion Ampli- R3e4su0lts: All BRCA mutations were identified exceptE frS oH m G a la2 r0 ge1 d3 e l| e tP ioA nR . TI hS e, FR SA eqN ™ C RE NA | tW ecW hnoW lo. gE yS wH asG u. sO edR tG o quickly scan through all known chimericABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index transcription factors in the COSMIC database that have been observed in METHODS: The procedure was first tested on a training set of 16 samples soft tissue tumors. This was accomplished by generating a fusion transcript from patients with a suspicion of Lynch syndrome anMdL H161 sMamSHp6lesM frSoHm2 AmpliSeq™ RNA panel that contained oligo primers specific for highly ob- patients with an aMttUenTuYaHted polyposis syndrome. For those 32 patients, a served fusion transcripts as well as, rare fusion transcripts in a single tube. MscSreHe2ning wMithL Hq1PCR-HRMMS mH6ethod was performed for , A P, C Thus, if the fusion transcript is expressed in the sample, that amplicon will (85 variants) and (42 vaMriUanTtYsH). The variants were 4 deleterious in be present and contribute to the mapped reads on the Ion PGM. If the fusion , 2 in , 4 in . The variants were 4 deleterious in and transcript is not present in the sample, the unused oligonucleotides are de- 1 monoallelic and 1 biallelic in gene. All data were analyzed with stroyed and no reads are produced. With this approach hundreds of fusion NextGene module. PM S2
 transcripts can be screened in a simultaneously in a single tube on the Ion RESULTS: All deleterious variants were detected. The difficulties were ob- PGM with resolution down to the single nucleotide level. Data from positive served mainly with homozygous variants,P M S2
pseuAdPoCgene and indel vari- and negative control tissues will be demonstrated as a proof of principle ants in homopolymer region. In addition to mutants already identified, two for the use of Ion AmpliSeq™ RNA for the detection of fusion transcripts in deleterious mutations were identified in and gene, whereas the o Sn.c oMlaoggdya slaemnop:l Aes. .Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambion, a part of screening was pending. The assets and limitation of the approach will be Life Technologies. J. Schageman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; discussed. Ambion, a part of Life Technologies. L. Chapman: A. Employment (full or CONCLUSIONS: This new approach offers the possibility to propose a widest part-time); Significant; Ambion, a part of Life Technologies. B. Setterquist: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Ambion, a part of Life Technologies. panel of screened genes, reducing the time lag in the diagnostic process due to unspecific tumor information (attenuated polyposis or no molecular data aCv.a Lileafbolle: )N.one. J. Tarabeux: None. B. Zeitouni: None. S. Lair: None. C. Guy: None. F. Copigny: None. K. Abidallah: None. H. Tenreiro: None. Q. Leroy:  P13
.42 None. N. Servant: None. V. Moncoutier: None. L. Golmard: None. T. Rio Frio: Streamlined Ion Torrent PGM-based diagnostics: BRCA1 and BRCA2 None. D. Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. C. Houdayer: None. E. Rouleau: None. genes as a model J. Tarabeux1, B. Zeitouni2, V. Moncoutier1, H. Tenreiro1, K. Abidallah1, S. Lair2, P. Legoix- Né3, Q. Leroy3, E. Rouleau1, L. Golmard1, E. Barillot1, M. H. Stern4, T. Rio-Frio3, D. Stoppa-  P13
.44 Lyonnet1,5, C. Houdayer1,5; IonTorrent: 2nd generation sequencing in a diagnostic laboratory 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, U900, Paris, France, 3Institut Curie, NGS B. Dworniczak, S. Fleige-Menzen, N. Bogdanova, P. Pennekamp; platform, Paris, France, 4Institut Curie, U830, Paris, France, 5Université Paris Descartes, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany. Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. Molecular diagnosis of complex human genetic diseases is still challenging To meet challenges in terms of throughput and turnaround time, many dia- because in most cases multiple genes harboring putative deleterious muta- gnostic laboratories are shifting from Sanger sequencing to higher through- tions have to be investigated. So far in most diagnostic laboratories Sanger put second-generation sequencing (SGS) platforms. Bearing in mind that sequencing is used but capillary sequencing is excessive time-consuming the performance and quality criteria expectBeRdC fAro1m/2 SGS in diagnostic or and expensive at least for the screening of multiple genes. Recently next- research settings are strikingly different, we have developed an Ion Torrent generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have started to be applied, but PGM-based routine diagnostic procedure for sequencing. The pro- because these technologies are made especially for large sequencing pro- cedure was first tested on a training set of 62 control samples, and then jects it is not easy to scale it down for screening a set of disease causing blindly validated on 77 samples in parallel with our routine technique. The genes in a diagnostic laboratory. To fill this gap table top NGS systems have training set was composed of difficult cases, e.g. insertions and/or deleti- been introduced by Life Sciences (Ion Torrent PGM) from Illumina (MiSeq) ons of various sizes, large-scale rearrangements and, obviously, mutations and from Roche (GS Junior). While Illumina and roche launched sequencer occurring in homopolymer regions. We also compared two bioinformatics adapted to established technology IonTorrent introduced a sequencing de- solutions in this diagnostic context, an in-house academic pipeline and the vice using a sequencing technology based on the detection of hydrogen ions commercially available NextGene software (Softgenetics). NextGene analy- that are released during the polymerization of DNA. sis provided higher sensitivity, as 4 previously undetecteBdR CnAu1cl/e2otide varia- To validate this technology in respect to usability, software requirements tions were found. Regarding specificity, an average of 1.5 confirmatory San- and accuracy we tested several gene panels comprising between 3 and 420 ger sequencings per patient was needed for complete screening. genes covering between 200 and 16000 exons. Regions of interest were en- Large-scale rearrangements were identified by two distinct analyses, i.e. riched in different ways: single PCR, multiplex PCR (AmpliSeq, IonTorrent; bioinformatics and fragment analysis with electrophoresis profile compari- GeneRead NGS System, Qiagen) or HaloPlex custom specific kits (Agilent). son. Turnaround time was enhanced, as series of 30 patients were sequen- Our validation showed that for enrichment multiplex PCR is the superior cBeRdC Ab1y/ o2ne technician, making the results available for the clinician in 10 technology and that with the exception of one all tested software packages working days following blood sampling. are either excessive time consuming or did not find the mutations at all and genes are a good model, representative of the difficulties common- s Bti.l lD nweoerdn iucrzgaekn: tN iomnper. oSv. eFmleeignet-sM. enzen: None. N. Bogdanova: None. P. ly encountered in diagnostic settings, which is why we believe our findings Pennekamp: None. are of interest for the whole community and the pipeline described can be a Jd. aTpatreadb ebuyx a: nNyo unes.e Br .o Zf ePiGtoMu nfoi:r N doinaeg.n Vo.s Mtico npcuoruptoiesre:s N.one. H. Tenreiro: None. K. Abidallah: None. S. Lair: None. P. Legoix-Né: None. Q. Leroy: None. E. Rouleau: None. L. Golmard: None. E. Barillot: None. M.H. Stern:  P13
.45 None. T. Rio-Frio: None. D. Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. C. Houdayer: None. Whole-genome sequencing in Kallmann syndrome J. Känsäkoski1,2, S. Karinen3, H. Niinikoski4, J. Toppari4, S. Hautaniemi3, J. Tommiska1,2, T. Raivio1,2; 1University of Helsinki, Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, Helsinki, Finland, 2Children‘s  P13
.43 Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital (HUCH), Helsinki, Finland, 3Genome-Scale Colorectal cancer predisposition with multiplex PCR enrichment in an Biology Research Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Children‘s Hospital, Ion Torrent PGM-based routine diagnostic process Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland. C. Lefol1, J. Tarabeux2, B. Zeitouni3, S. Lair3, C. Guy1, F. Copigny1, K. Abidallah2, H. Tenreiro2, Q. Leroy4, N. Servant3, V. Moncoutier2, L. Golmard2, T. Rio Frio4, D. Stoppa- Lyonnet2, C. Houdayer2, E. Rouleau1; 1Institut Curie - Service de Génétique, Paris-St Cloud, France, 2Institut Curie - Service Kallmann syndrome (KS) is a rare disorder characterized by absent/defec- de Génétique, Paris, France, 3INSERM U900, Mines Paris Tech, centre de recherche de tive sense of smell and absent/incomplete puberty resulting from defects l‘institut Curie, Paris, France, 4Next generation sequencing platform, centre de recherche in the development of the hypothalamic GnRH neuron population. X-linked de l‘institut Curie, Paris, Paris, France. recessive, autosomal dominant (AD) and autosomal recessive (AR) inheri- tance patterns have all been described in KS patients, and di-or oligogenic inheritance of the disorder has also been suggested. Mutations in the many BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer predisposition can occur either in the genes already connected with the disorder explain only about 30-40 % of Lynch Syndrome (4 genes) and also with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis the cases, implying new disease genes are yet to be found. Whole-genome (2 genes). We developed an Ion Torrent PGM-based routine diagnostic pro- sequencing data of a male KS patient and his healthy parents and brother cess for sequencing those genes based on the Multiplicom HNPCC and FAP was analyzed to search for candidate causal variants in the coding regions of MASTR kit. The goal was to estimate the performance of this system and to the patient’s genome. Different filtering criteria were used for different mo- extend to the routine diagnostic process.ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCEd |e Ws oWf inWhe.rEitSanHceG: .1O) ARDG de novo mutation; 2) homozygous AR mutatio3n4; 31)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index compound heterozygous AR mutation; 4) AD mutation with sex-dependent Aim: To develop a targeted NGS screen to diagnose genetic disorders in in- penetrance. We only considered novel variants. Scenarios 1 and 2 were ruled fants with liver disease. out as no candidate variants were left after filtering. No obvious causal vari- Methods: 14 centres worldwide recruited 230 infants less than 2 years old ants were found for scenarios 3 and 4. Comparison of the patient’s genome presenting with cholestasis, acute liver failure or splenomegaly. The 6 ge- against that of his healthy brother revealed variants in several interesting nes involved in NPC, PFIC and CD were sequenced using 48.48 Access Array genes involved in cell migration and axon guidance, including ITGB1 and (Fluidigm) and GS Junior (Roche). Variants were classified into likely patho- NDNF. Additional analysis of de novo copy number variations and detection genic, unknown significance (VUS), and likely non-pathogenic groups. of SNPs and indels in genes encoding miRNAs revealed no further candidate Results: Testing was complete in 181 cases. A genetic diagnosis was possib- variations. These results highlight the many challenges still present in the le in 18 patients (10%, see Table). A further 7 patients (5%) had only one s Jt.u Kdäyn osfä gkeonsektii:c Nalolyne h. eSt.e Kroagrienneeno:u Nso dnies.o Hrd. eNriisn.ikoski: None. J. Toppari: likely pathogenic mutation, and approximately 20% had VUS only with no None. S. Hautaniemi: None. J. Tommiska: None. T. Raivio: None. pathogenic mutations. Number of patients Gene Diagnosis Carrier NP C1
 1 2  P13
.46 NP C2
 0 0 A combined NGS and CGH arrays approach identifies novel TRIM32 AT P8
B1 3 1 ABCB11 9 1 mutations in an unclassified case of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy ABCB4 5 5 J. Nectoux1,2,3, F. Leturcq1,4, J. Urtizberea5, R. Ben Yaou4, I. Nelson4, A. Cobo5, M. Arné-Bes6, SL C25
A13 0 0 E. Uro-Coste6, I. Richard7, S. Baulande8, P. Nitschke9, M. Claustres10, G. Bonne4, J. Chelly1,2,3, Conclusions: The combined incidence of these genetic diseases in infanti- N. Levy11, M. Cossée10; le liver disease is 10% with PFIC type 2 being the most common. NGS has 1Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux shown to be an efficient method of analysing multiple genes for these disor- de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique des Maladies d Ke.rEs.; MpcroKsa ayn: Nd ocnoen.s Z w. Gilrl abye: dAi.s Ecmuspsloeydm. ent (full or part-time); Significant; Neurodéveloppementales, UMR 8104, Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, Paris, Actelion Pharmaceuticals. A. Yeung: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; France, 3Inserm U1016, Paris, France, 4Institut de Myologie, UPMC UM76, Inserm U974, Actelion Pharmaceuticals. H. Bair: None. C. Lloyd: None. J.L. Hartley: None. C. Cnrs UMR7215, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Centre de référence neuromusculaire Hendriksz: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant GNMH, Hendaye, France, 6Centre de référence neuromusculaire, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Actelion France, 7Généthon, Evry, France, 8PartnerChip, Génopole Campus 2, Evry, France, Pharmaceuticals. F. Macdonald: None. D.A. Kelly: B. Research Grant (principal 9Plateforme de Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 10Laboratoire investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants de Génétique Moléculaire, Inserm U827, UM1, CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, already received); Modest; Actelion Pharmaceuticals. P. Gissen: B. Research 11Inserm UMR_ S910
, Université de la Méditerranée, Génétique médicale & Génomique Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well Fonctionnelle Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France. as grants already received); Modest; Actelion Pharmaceuticals. The EU-funded NMD-Chip project was established to design, develop and va-  P13
.48 lidate new sensitive high throughput DNA arrays to efficiently diagnose pa- Massive parallel sequencing in molecular diagnostics: universal tailed tients affected with neuromuscular disorders (NMDs). In this context, both amplicon sequencing of lynch syndrome genes CGH arrays to detect copy number variations as well as Sequence Capture M. F. Hansen1, L. Lavik2, B. Gilde2, T. Vold2, U. Neckmann1, W. Sjursen2,1; (SC) arrays for massive re-sequencing and point mutation detection, have 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children‘s and Women‘s Health, The Faculty been set up, allowing the simultaneous screening of more than 50 genes of Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, known to be involved in NMDs, in addition to hundreds of candidate genes 2Department of Pathology and Medical Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. selected from experimental and published data. Thanks to these combined NGS and CGH arrays approaches, we report here the molecular diagnosis of TRIM32 compound heterozygous mutations in a 50 year-old male patient Lynch syndrome accounts for 3-5% of all colorectal cancers (CRC), making it suffering from slowly progressive muscle weakness, characterized by a late the most common hereditary CRC syMnSdHro2mMe.S THh6e MdiLsHea1se is PinMhSe2rited in an age of onset (30y), unspecific limb-girdle muscular dystrophy with scapular autosomal dominant manner, and is attributed to mutations in either of the winging and moderately elevated CPK (400U/I). For this patient, sequen- DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes , , and . cing of TRIM32 using the custom in-solution DNA SC library revealed first a We have one year experience in the use of massive parallel sequencing distal frameshift mutation, c.1603delC (p.Leu535Serfs*21) which appeared (MPS) (GS Junior, 454 technology, Roche) for diagnostic detection of germli- at homozygous state. Because there was no history of consanguinity, a pos- ne mutations in Lynch syndrome genes. A time- and cost effective workflow sible deletion of the other allele of TRIM32 has been investigated by CGH suitable for routine molecular diagnostics has been developed. The GS Ju- array, which allowed the identification of a large deletion of chromosome nior system is based on emulsion PCR (emPCR) to clonally amplify single 9 encompassing the whole TRIM32 gene. Defects in TRIM32 have already stranded DNA molecules to be sequenced. Before emPCR a DNA amplicon been reported in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H (LGMD2H), also library is prepared by two-step PCR based amplification of the regions of in- known as muscular dystrophy Hutterite type, a rather mild and progressive terest. With the use of molecular barcodes (multiplex identifier sequences, myopathy characterized by a wide phenotypic heterogeneity. These novel MIDs), many amplicons from several patients can be pooled and sequenced mutations confirm that integrity of the C-terminal domain of TRIM32 is ne- together. All amplicons are sequenced in parallel by pyrosequencing chemi- cJe.s Nsaercyto fuoxr :m Nuosncel.e F m. Laeintutrecnqa:n Ncoen.e. J. Urtizberea: None. R. Ben Yaou: stry. Data analysis is done with the AVA-software supplied by Roche. A well- None. I. Nelson: None. A. Cobo: None. M. Arné-Bes: None. E. Uro-Coste: known problem with Pyrosequencing is incorrect basecalling in homopoly- None. I. Richard: None. S. Baulande: None. P. Nitschke: None. M. Claustres: None. G. Bonne: None. J. Chelly: None. N. Levy: None. M. Cossée: None. meric regions. Our workflow circumvents this issue by Sanger sequencing amplicons that contain homopolymers. Implementation of diagnostic MPS at our laboratory has led to decrease in sample turnaround time and costs. We find the technology to be good in  P13
.47 terms of sensitivity and well suited for use in molecular diagnostic labora- Identifying the incidence of rare genetic disorders in infants with t Mor.Fie. sH.ansen: None. L. Lavik: None. B. Gilde: None. T. Vold: None. U. liver disease using targeted next generation sequencing. Neckmann: None. W. Sjursen: None. K. E. McKay1, Z. Gray2, A. Yeung1, H. Bair1, C. Lloyd2, J. L. Hartley2, C. Hendriksz3, F. Macdonald1, D. A. Kelly2, P. Gissen4; 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Birmingham Children‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Salford Royal Hospital, Birmingham,  P13
.49 United Kingdom, 4UCL Institute for Child Health, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Effect of a novel intronic FBN1 mutation on splicing revealed by splicing minigene assay. L. Grodecká1,2, P. Cibulková3, M. Dvoráková3, R. Krenková3, R. Richterová3, A. Baxová4, A. Background: The incidence of infantile liver disease due to rare genetic dis- Sípek4, T. Honzík4, T. Freiberger1,5; 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, CKTCH, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Central European orders, including Niemann Pick type C (NPC), progressive familial intrahe- Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Laboratory of patic cholestasis (PFIC) and citrin deficiency (CD) is unknown. Early genetic medical genetics, AGEL Laboratories, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 4General University diagnosis allows targeted therapy avoiding inappropriate liver transplan- Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Central European Institute of Technology, tation. Traditional testing by sequential sequencing of the genes involved Masaryk university, Brno, Czech Republic. using Sanger sequencing is costly and time consuming. Next generation sequencing (NGS) permits simultaneous analysis of multiple genes whilst 342 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG reducing time to diagnosis and cost. A girl presenting severe neonatal form of Marfan syndrome (MFS) was bornABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index fibrillin-1 to healFtBhyN 1parIenn stsil.i cMoutational screening of patient’s DNA revealed an intro- based on APEX technology. The microarray allows to diagnose 80 mono- nic change, 20 bp deletion in intron 34 (c.4211-32_-13del) in the genic disorders, 12 multifactor diseases and includes several pharmacoge- gene ( ). predictions of the effect of the deletion on pre-mRNA netic tests (table 2). During design of the microarray several points were splicing showed marked drop in both the 3’ splice site score and the polypy- taken into account: Frequencies of diseases in Russian population; Known rimidine tract score. As we were not able to perform RT-PCR directly from genetic cause of the disorder together with existence of common mutati- patient’s RNA, we took advantage of splicing minigene assay. We cloned exon ons in particular genes; Technical capability. Thus using of the microarray 35 together with neighbouring intronic regions into the vector pET. After “Ethnogene-400” will facilitate the prophylactics of genetic disorders in the transfection of HeLa cell line with the wild type and mutant constructs, we families of asymptomatic carriers and increase life quality and longevity in isolated total RNA and performed RT-PCR. Its results clearly showed that the general population. mutatFiBonN 1led to exon 35 skipping in the majority of RNA. In patient, this spli- Genotyping results of 211 newborns for the most cing aberration presumably caused the in frame deletion of 126 nucleotides common monogenic disorders and conditions Cases from mRNA. Total amount of analyses: Hetero- Homo- Homo- The splicing minigene analysis is not a standard diagnostic procedure and 211 zygous zygous zygous the results driven from this highly artificial system could differ from the real Disorders Conditions situation in the patient. We can not be sure about precise RNA aberration Cystic fibrosis (CFTR) 3 Gilbert syndrome 25 (UGT1A1) that the examined mutation induced. On the other hand, since we have de- Lactase deficiency tected that the mutation affects splicing under certain conditions, theFrBeN i1s Phenylketonuria (PAH) 2 (LCT) 89 high probability that the mutation disrupts normal splicing to some extent. Spinal muscular atrophy 5 Furthermore, we have not detected any other mutation neither in the (SMN) Autosomal recessive gene nor in other MFS-related genes. Hence, we regard the mutation as cau- 8 1 deafness (GJB2) s La.l Gonroed ienc tkhái:s N coansee.. P. Cibulková: None. M. Dvoráková: None. R. Krenková: None. R. Richterová: None. A. Baxová: None. A. Sípek: None. T. Honzík: Total 18 1 114 None. T. Freiberger: None. Monogenic diseases from Federal list of Russian newborn screening program included into microarray Amount Disease Testing Disorder Gene of testing  P13
.50 frequency mutations informativity Comparison of screening for Marfan syndrome using SSCP and NGS Cystic fibrosis CFTR 1/8 500 24 82% Phenylketonuria M. Dvorakova, R. Krenkova, P. Cibulkova; PAH 1/10 000 16 87% (type 1) Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Laboratore AGEL a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic. Phenylketonuria PTS 1/200 000 3 18% Background: (type 2) Galactosemia GALT 1/20 000 6 70% Deafness Marfan syndrome (MFS) and Marfan-like diseases are inheri- (isolated neurosensory, GJB2 1/5 000 6 91% ted autosomal dominant disorders that affect connective tissue, the tissue autosomal recessive) that strengthens the body‘s structures, mainly involving the carddeio nvoavsocular, Deafness M.M. Litvinova: None. K.G. SSLhCe2v6cAh4enk1o/1: 0N 0o0n0e. A.V. Pol6yakov: None.5 A0%.A. skeletal and ocular systems. The estimated incidenceF iBs No1f about 1:5 000 (Pendred syndrome) Isaev: None. - 1:10 000 and approximately 30% of cases are associated with mu- tations. MFS is caused by mutations in fibrillin-1 gene ( , 15q15-q21.1.) rAeismuslt:ing in defective glycoprotein fibrillin-1. Recently, two other genes TGFBR2 (3p22) and TGFBR1 (9q22) have shown to effect MFS.  P13
.52 In this study we performed analysis of all exons of FBN1 gene, except Targeted PCR-based enrichment and next generation sequencing exon 1, in order to identify pathogenic mutations in unrelated patients with for diagnostic testing of Primary Microcephalies (MCPH and Seckel cMliantiecrail adlisa agnnods Mis eotfh MoFdSs.: 758 patients were analyzed by SSCP (single-strand Syndrome). conformation polymorphism) and 56 by NGS (next generation sequencing). S. Drunat1,2, J. Masliah-Planchon1,2, C. Vignal1, H. Cave1, S. Passemard3,2, A. Verloes3,2; DNA was isolated from whole blood, the molecular 1Génétique Moléculaire, APHP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2U676-INSERM, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Génétique Clinique, APHP, Hôpital Robert Debré, analysis included SSCP and NGS (GS Junior454, Roche). Exons with abnor- Paris, France. min asli lmiciog ration patterns and changes in nucleotide sequence were confirmed bRye sduirltesc:t sequencing. NewlFyB dNe1tected sequence variants weFrBeN s1ubjected to predictions. Primary Microcephalies (PM) are a group of recessive disorders characte- Conclusi Wones i:d entified 129 mutations by SSCP and 16 mutations rized by reduced head circumference without additional severe brain mal- by FNBGN S1
. formations, normal motor development and mental retardation. PM encom- We have confirmed 129 cases of Marfan syndrome caused pass two phenotypes, primary microcephalic dwarfism (PMDW or Seckel by mutation by SSCP analysis, which constitutes detection about 17%, syndrome), with growth retardation and Autosomal recessive primary mi- and 16 cases by NGS, which constitutes detection about 29%. We have found tMha. tD NvoGrSa kiso av am: oNroen see. nRs. iKtirveen mkoevtah:o Ndo fnoer .s Pc.r Ceeibnuinlkgo MvaF: SN tohnaen. SSCP. crocephaly (MCPH), with normal stature. MCPH and PMDW share the same pathogenesis and may result from mutations in at least 15 genes. Due to genetic heterogeneity, exhaustive conventional Sanger sequencing for PM diagnosis is expensive and time consuming and then, 50 to 75% of PM pati-  P13
.51 ents from the Caucasian population have no identified gene defect. In order Preventive genetic testing using microarray technology is perspective to develop an efficient mutation-screening strategy for diagnosis, we evalu- prophylactic approach in medical practice ated a multiplex PCR-based approach in combination with next generation M. M. Litvinova1,2, K. G. Shevchenko2, A. V. Polyakov3, A. A. Isaev2; sequencing on 96 patients. The coding exons of 24 genes known to cause PM 1I Moscow State I.M. Sechenov Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Human were targeted. 48 samples were screened with a first primer panel design. Stem Cells Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. 95.2% of initially targeted regions were effectively covered. Sequencing resulted in a mean coverage of 301X with 88% of targeted regions being covered more than 25X. In targeted regions, we detected, on average, 163 Currently personalized medicine is developing very rapidly. The main focus variants per patient. Filtering and ranking finally yielded to 27 potentially of such approach is usually concentrated on detection of genetic predisposi- pathogenic mutations still under investigations. The following 48 patients tion to common complex disorders whereas less attention is devoted to pre- were screened with a second panel of primers designed to improve the co- ventive genetic testing for monogenic diseases. Our previous work proved verage of the targeted regions and are still being analyzed. Our study shows that DNA-analysis for monogenic defects can be useful among newborns. Te- the effectiveness of this strategy available to routine laboratories and its op- sting program “Gemascreen” includes 6 conditions: cystic fibrosis, phenyl- timization will achieve the reliability required before its implementation in ketonuria, spinal muscular atrophy, autosomal recessive deafness, Gilbert t Sh.e D crounntaetx:t N oofn teh.e J d. iMaagsnloiashis-.planchon: None. C. Vignal: None. H. Cave: None. S. Passemard: None. A. Verloes: None. syndrome, lactase deficiency. From 211 cases the genotyping results of 115 analyses were found to be essential for health maintenance of the examined persons. In 19 cases the results were beneficial to the planning of individu- als’ future reproductive behavior (table 1). To improve diagnosticum the microarrayE S “EH thG no 2 ge0 n1 e-3 4 0| 0 P ” A wR asI S d, e vF eR loA peN d CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 343ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.53 Conclusion: High Throughput Sequencing Approach Identify MAFA as the fourteenth MODY gene The established platform is a cost-effective and high-through- R. Artuso1, A. Provenzano2, B. Mazzinghi1, L. Giunti1, V. Ariu3, S. Toni4, M. Salvadori5, M. put gene testing method which may be applied in clinical diagnosis of mo- Pistello6, P. Marchetti7, E. Mannucci8, O. Zuffardi9, S. Giglio2,1,1; n Mo.g Henolilce dnisatbedet: eNso.ne. R. Gao: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 1Medical Genetic Unit, Meyer‘s Children University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. X. Wan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Genetic Unit, Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences, University Significant; BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. Y. Liu: A. Employment (full or part- of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 3Medical Genetic Unit, Department of Biomendical, time); Significant; BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. A.P. Gjesing: None. O.B. Experimental and Clinical Sciences, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 4Pediatric Pedersen: None. X. Yi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BGI Diabetology Unit, Meyer‘s Children University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 5Clinical Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. T. Hansen: None. Biochemistry Unit, Meyer‘s Children University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 6Departement of Experimental Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 7Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 8Section of Geriatric Cardiology and Medicine, Dept of Cardiovascular Medicine, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy, Firenze,  P13
.55 Italy, 9Medical Genetic Unit, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. Whole exome sequencing as genetic diagnostic tool in Myofibrillar Myopathies M. Neri1, C. Scotton1, T. Castrignanò2, G. Pesole3, G. Vattemi4, G. Tomelleri4, E. Schwartz5, N. Daraselia5, E. Kotelnikova5, P. Sabatelli6, B. DallaPiccola7, N. Levy8, C. Beroud8, L. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabe- Merlini6, A. Ferlini1, F. Gualandi1; tes mellitus characterised by autosomal dominant inheritance, a young age 1University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2CASPUR, Roma, Italy, 3University of Bari, Bari, of onset and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction. It is both clinically and genetical- Italy, 4University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 5ARIADNE Genomics, Rockville, MD, United ly heterogeneous with mutations at the moment in at least thirteen genes. States, 6Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 7Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy, Genetic testing for MODY has become a routine procedure allowing to set up 8University of Marseille, Marseille, France. proper treatment and discriminate from type 2 diabetes (T2D) whose sym- ptoms are often overlapping. Although more than 40 loci associated with T2D or glycemic traits have been reported and reproduced, only a minor Hereditary myofibrillar myopathies (MFMs) are a group of rare neuromus- part of the genetic component of the disease has been explained, and the cular disorders with a great genetic heterogeneity. Currently, the molecular causative variants and affected genes are unknown for many of the loci. genetics diagnosis is based on a gene-by gene approach (six causative genes To determine the role of low-frequency coding variants in traits reflecting identified until now) which is time consuming and expensive. Furthermore, pancreatic β-cell function, insulin sensitivity and glycemia, we performed to date, up to 50 % of MFM patients remain devoid of genetic confirmati- targeted resequencing technology by high-throughput sequencing in 27 pa- on of their disease. In a selected group of seven MFM patients we adopted tients with suspected MODY/T2D. They were Sanger sequencing-negative high throughput techniques as WES (Whole-Exome-Sequencing) and CGH for mutations in the GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A, HNF1B genes. We excluded com- (Comparative Genomic Hybridization) to identify causative mutations, also mon, non-coding and synonymous gene variants, and performed in-depth supported by gene prioritization based on an algorithm providing candidate analysis on filtered sequence variants in a pre-defined set of 103 genes im- genes to interrogate the exome. Except for one with an autosomal dominant plicated in glucose metabolism. We found, in association with known hete- inheritance, all cases were sporadic. In all muscular biopsies, focal areas rozygous SNPs already described in diabetes, rare and pathogenetic vari- strongly immunoreactive with antibodies against desmin, αB-crystallin and ants, demonstrating that this approach led to a genetic diagnosis in most myotilin were present within muscle fibers. Among these MFM patients, we of patients. identified two pathogenic mutations in FLNC gene, two variations in the ti- Interestingly two novel possible causative variations in MAFA gene, implica- tin (TTN) gene and a genomic duplication in LAMA2 gene. We also identified ted in diabetes in animal models, in two different families could identify this a variation located within the CAMK2D gene (not known to be involved in g Re.n Aer atuss toh:e N foonuert. eAe.n Ptrho MveOnDzaYn goe:n Neo.ne. B. Mazzinghi: None. L. Giunti: muscular diseases) as a novel variation with a possible role in MFM pheno- None. V. Ariu: None. S. Toni: None. M. Salvadori: None. M. Pistello: None. P. type, to be confirmed in larger patients series and by functional evidence. Marchetti: None. E. Mannucci: None. O. Zuffardi: None. S. Giglio: None. We are currently studying a further cohort of 12 MFMs cases by WES ana- lysis and pathway-driven candidate genes interrogation. We propose that these approaches may be the ideal tools for gene identification in MFM and  P13
.54 other similarly clinically/genetically Validation of a novel high-throughput gene variation identification h Me.t eNreorgi:e Nnoenoeu.s C m. uSsccoltet odnis: eNaosnees.. T. Castrignanò: None. G. Pesole: None. G. assay for diagnosis of monogenic diabetes Vattemi: None. G. Tomelleri: None. E. Schwartz: None. N. Daraselia: None. E. M. Hollensted1, R. Gao2, X. Wan2, Y. Liu2, A. P. Gjesing1, O. B. Pedersen1, X. Yi2, T. Hansen1,3,4; Kotelnikova: None. P. Sabatelli: None. B. DallaPiccola: None. N. Levy: 1The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of None. C. Beroud: None. L. Merlini: None. A. Ferlini: None. F. Gualandi: None. Metabolic Genetics, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 3Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark, 4Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark,  P13
.57 Odense, Denmark. Targeted “ciliome” sequencing for gene identification in Introduction: nephronophthisis and associated ciliopathies P. Krug1,2,3, E. Filhol1,2,3, C. Masson3,2, M. Parisot2, C. Bole-Feysot2, P. Nitschké3,2, I. Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is a monoge- Perrault4,2,3, R. Salomon1,2,5, T. Attié-Bitach6,2,3, K. Tory7,1,2, C. Antignac1,2,8, C. Jeanpierre1,2,3, nic form of diabetes. It is a heterogeneous disorder and to date, 13 genes S. Saunier1,2,3; in which mutations may cause MODY have been reported. These distinct 1Inserm U983, Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 3Université Paris molecular etiologies explain the clinical heterogeneity and also differential Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 4Inserm 781, Paris, France, 5Department responsiveness to treatment observed among MODY patients. MODY pati- of Paediatric Nephrology, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 6Inserm U781, Paris, ents are often misdiagnosed as either type 1 or type 2 diabetes patients, France, 7Ist Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 8Department of Genetics, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France. resulting in suboptimal treatment, and the importance of correct MODY diagnosis through genetic testing is thus evident. So far, however, genetic sAcirmee: ning has been performed using expensive and time-consuming Sanger Nephronophthisis (NPH) is an autosomal recessive, clinically and genetical- sequencing. ly heterogenous renal ciliopathy and a major cause of end stage renal failure MethTood sv:a lidate a novel high-throughput, cost-effective gene variation iden- in childhood. NPH is frequently associated with extra renal defects, retinal tification assay for diagnosis of monogenic diabetes. degeneration, cerebellar hypoplasia, polydactyly, cystic liver, situs inversus We generated a novel targeted DNA capture and Illumina next- and skeletal anomalies. generation sequencing assay which is applicable to whole genome regions To identify new genes underlying NPH and characterize the genetic bases (including exons, introns, and untranslated regions of seHleNcFt4edA ,g GeCnKes, )H. NAF s1tuA-, of the phenotypic variability, we have recently developed a targeted high dHyN sFa1mB,p IlNe So f 70 DKCanNiJs1h1 patients carrying previously identified causative va- throughput approach allowing exome sequencing of 1200 ciliary genes (Su- rRieasnutsl tisn: six of the known monogenic diabetes genes ( reSelect Agilent technologies and SOLiD5500 XL Platform). We screened and ) were screened applying the novel assay. 113 patients presenting with isolated (28 cases) or syndromic (85 cases) Among the 70 analyzed disease samples, we identified 63 small NPH, in whom NPH P1
 deletion, the most frequent mutational event, had size single nucleotide polymorphisms and indels as well as seven larger been excluded. deletions and duplications as the pathogenic variants. Our results are con- Two pathogenic mutations in known ciliopathy genes were identified in 54 sistent with previously identified pathogenic mutations based on Sanger patients (48%). A major result is that all the genes encoding components sequencing and the use of a Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplifica- of the intraflagellar retrograde transport (6 IFT-A genes and DYN C2
H1) are t3io4n4 assay. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG frequently mutated (20 patients, i.e. 18%). Moreover, we identified 20 newABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index candidate genes, based on the presence of homozygous or compound mu- nalyzed using the Torrent Suite 3.4. Sequence alignment and extraction of tations predicted to be damaging (frameshift, stop, missense) in 25 patients SNPs and indels were performed using the Variant Caller plugin on the Ion (22%). Among the 36 patients without any causative mutation identified, 14 Torrent Browser. DNA sequences were visualized using the Integrated Ge- presented with isolated NPH. nomics Viewer (IGV) from Broad Institute. Identified mutations were confir- In conclusion, this method proved successful for both identifying mutations med using Sanger sequencing. We validated this approach by testing 50 NF1 in already known ciliopathy genes as well as in novel candidate genes and to mutated DNA samples previously characterized by means of Sanger sequen- highlight the phenotypic variability associated with mutations of the same cing at DNA and cDNA levels. A prospective NGS study of 200 NF1 patients gene. Further analysis of the ciliome data will allow us to characterize the w Ei.l Pl caosnmfiarnmt: tNhoisn em. eAt.h Louds acsa na: rNeofenree. nPc. eG foour srsoaurtdin: eN omnoel. eMcu. Vlaird aduiadg: nNoosnise.. B. e Pp. iKstrautgic: Nefofneect. Eo.f Fmiluhtoalt:i Nonosn eth. Cat. cMoauslsdo enx:p Nlaoinne .t hMe. pPhaerinsootty: pNiocn vea. rCia. bBioliltey-. Parfait: None. D. Vidaud: None. Feysot: None. P. Nitschké: None. I. Perrault: None. R. Salomon: None. T. Attié-Bitach: None. K. Tory: None. C. Antignac: None. C. Jeanpierre: None. S. Saunier: None.  P13
.60 Whole exomic next-generation DNA sequencing from dried blood spot DNA  P13
.58 D. Gavrilov, R. Majumdar, A. McDonald, D. Oglesbee; Identification and characterization of a new candidate gene for Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome A. Provenzano1, B. Mazzinghi2, L. Giunti2, F. Becherucci3, L. Murer4, M. Materassi3, P. Romagnani5,3, S. Giglio6,2; Efficient DNA sequencing approaches, such as next-generation sequencing 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clincal Sciences, (NGS), allows for simultaneous re-sequencing of many genes of interest (up University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit-Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Pediatric Nephrology Unit Meyer Childern‘s University to all genes in the genome) with greater speed and lower cost than by other Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 4Pediatric Unit Salus Pueri University of Padova, Padova, Italy, methods. However, studies of applying this technology to dried blood spots 5Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clincal Sciences, University of Florence, (DBS) have not been completed. Here, we describe a comparative whole exo- Firenze, Italy, 6Medical Genetic Unit, Department of Biomendical, Experimental and me sequence (WES) analysis of DNA isolated from DBS and peripheral blood Clinical Sciences, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. from the same individual. DBS DNA was sequenced on MiSeq (Illumina Inc.) platform using the Nextera Enrichment DNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina Inc.). DNA from whole blood was sequenced on HiSeq 2000 (Illumina Inc.) with Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is characterized by consistent proteinuria, oede- SureSelect V4 capture kit (Agilent). Although data obtained from the HiSeq ma, hypoalbuminemia, and it can be classified as steroid-sensitive N(aPbHoSu1t had much higher read output, both sample types generated good quality 90%NP) HorS 2s teroid-resistant (SRNS-about 10%). To date, mutations in at least data with high alignment percentages and the DBS enrichment was possible 15 genes have been found to cause SRNS and although mutations in as seen by the high percentage of mapped reads (in capture region) num- or are frequent causes of children SNSR, mutations in other genes bers (97.7%). When assessing regions that were common to both capture are very rare. In addition, multiple allelism and heterogeneity together with kits (~31 Mb), over 95% of a total of 5,000-6,000 identified variants were a phenotypic clinical overlap require an extensive mutational analysis effort identical between the studied sample types. Our preliminary data suggests to identify the molecular aetiology. To identify SRNS by molecular diagnosis that DNA isolated from DBS can be processed through our NGS system and has important clinical implication, as this would prevent unnecessary admi- results in accurate and specific reads. Moreover, the data imply that DBS are nistration of corticosteroids and immunosuppressants. potentially a viable option for performing WES experiments with possible We performed targeting and whole-exome (re)sequencing in 25 probands application for newborn screening. For our future studies, we propose to with a diagnosis of a paediatric SNSR (including 25 subjects steroid-sensiti- use the HiSeq2000 as sequencing platform as it results in a greater depth of ve). Because mutations in several genes have been demonstrated to lead to c Do.v Geraavgreil ogvr:e aNtoenre r. eRli.a Mbialjiutym.dar: None. A. McDonald: None. D. Oglesbee: familial or sporadic SNSR, we focused our attention on these genes and on None. those candidates potentially implicated in the pathogenesis of the disorder. We identified a putative new candidate gene that may allow to define a novel clinical entity in the field of genetic disorders (hyperactivation of this gene  P13
.61 was described to cause NS in podocyte-specific transgenic mice). Definition Adult patients with normal intellectual ability experience high of the causative role of these mutations would represent the first case of an satisfaction and low distress after diagnostic whole-exome defect leading to a disorder where SRNS is part of a more complex clinical sequencing: Preliminary results. syndrome including also immunologic alterations. The results of our work A. S. Sie, J. B. Prins, W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams, M. R. Nelen, H. G. Yntema, L. Spruijt, S. may lead to the identification of a new causative gene for SRNS and provide Vermeer, J. A. Veltman, I. Feenstra, N. Hoogerbrugge; d Ae.f iPnriotivoenn zoaf nao p: rNeovnioeu. Bsl.y M uanzizdienngthifi:i eNdo cnlein. Lic.a Gl siuynntdi:r Nomonee. F. Becherucci: Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. None. L. Murer: None. M. Materassi: None. P. Romagnani: None. S. Giglio: None. Background: Our Human Genetics department is one of the first offering diagnostic two-step whole-exome sequencing (WES). This study aimed to  P13
.59 evaluate acceptance, risk perception antdh distress of WES in thadults. Next generation sequencing for neurofibromatosis type 1 molecular Patients/Methods: Between August 15 2011 and June 20 2012, 213 pa- diagnosis tients were offered diagnostic WES for colorectal/kidney cancer <40 years E. Pasmant1,2, A. Luscan1,2, P. Goussard2, M. Vidaud1,2, B. Parfait1,2, D. Vidaud1,2; (n=51), deafness (n=60), blindness (n=41) or movement disorders (n=61), 1UMR745 INSERM, PRES Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté des 177 (83%) accepted. Baseline questionnaires including risk perception and Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris, France, 2Service de Biochimie et de heredity-specific distress (IES) were sent to 141 adults with normal intel- Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, AP-HP, Paris, France. lectual ability, 111 (79%) were returned. Follow-up after initial WES-results from disease-related gene sets, including satisfaction, is ongoing (currently n=73). Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a tumor predisposition syndrome with a Results: Baseline responders were diagnosed with: 26% cancer, 27% deaf- worldwide birth incidence of 1 in 2500. NF1 is caused by dominant loss-of- ness, 12% blindness, 35% movement disorders. Median age was 49 [22-79], function mutations of the NF1 gene (Neurofibromin 1). NF1 is a large gene 50% women, 83% with a positive family history. At follow-up, diagnostic containing 60 translated exons over ~280 kb. Most NF1 patients have pri- suggestive mutations were found in 26%. Nearly all responders (94%) were vate loss-of-function mutations scattered along the NF1 gene. Here, we pre- satisfied with WES. Heredity risk perceptions were similar in baseline and sent a NF1 targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) strategy developed at follow-up: believing heredity caused their disease (77% and 69%) and ex- the Cochin Hospital (AP-HP, Paris, France). The custom primers panel targe- pecting WES to find a genetic cause (51% and 46%). However, significantly ting the entire NF1 coding exons and the 5’ and 3’ UTRs were designed using more patients believed chance likely caused their disease (44% versus 58%, the AmpliSeq Designer. The targeted region (~12 kb) was amplified by 149 p=0.04) and fewer expected incidental findings (27% versus 19%, p=0.08). Amplicons of 200 bp using 20 ng of genomic DNA. NGS libraries preparation Heredity-specific distress was reported in only 17% versus 13%. was performed using the Ion AmpliSeq Library Kit 2.0. Template-positive Conclusion: Acceptance was high in the group offered diagnostic WES after bar-coded samples were loaded on Ion 314 chips and sequenced with an Ion genetic counseling. Adults with normal intellectual disability reported low PGM Sequencer (Lifetechnologies). The 314 chip capacity allowed mixing distress. After initial WES-results, they were highly satisfied. At follow-up 22 bar-coded samples, providing a 150XE aSveHraGge 2 c0ov1e3ra |g eP. ADRatIaS w, eFrRe AreNa-CE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 345 heredity risk perceptions were unchanged, while perceptions of randomABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index c Aa.uSs.a Sliitey: iNnocnree.a Jse.Bd.. Prins: None. W.A.G. van Zelst-Stams: None. M.R. Nelen: t Sh.e C rloauutiinn:e N doinaeg.n Lo.s Hise oyrf mmaonn: oAg. eEnmicp dloiyambeentet s( fguell noer sp.art-time); Significant; None. H.G. Yntema: None. L. Spruijt: None. S. Vermeer: None. J.A. Veltman: Multiplicom. S. Beaufils-Langlois: None. A. Rotthier: A. Employment (full or None. I. Feenstra: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. part-time); Significant; Multiplicom. C. Saint-Martin: None. J. Del-Favero: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Multiplicom. C. Bellanné-Chantelot: None.  P13
.62 Application of next generation sequencing for diagnosis of long QT syndrome  P13
.64 F. Kyndt1, M. Giraud2, A. Ponchaux2, T. Marsaud2, F. Airaud2, P. Boisseau2, S. Schmitt2, L. Next Generation Targeted Amplicon Resequencing with Long Sanger- Duboscq-Bidot1, S. Bonnaud1, R. Teusan1, P. Lindenbaum1, H. Le Marec1, V. Probst1, J. J. Like Read Lengths on the GS FLX+ System Schott1, R. Redon1, S. Bezieau2; D. Gratalo, M. Mohiuddin, R. Winer, M. Driscoll, B. Simen, J. Nealis; 1L’institut du thorax, Inserm UMR 1087 / CNRS UMR 6291, CHU de Nantes, NANTES, 454 Life Sciences Corporation, A Roche Company, Branford, CT, United States. France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, NANTES, France. The Roche 454 GS FLX+ System features the unique combination of long Next generation sequencing (NGS) is changing genetic diagnosis due to its readdes , neoxvcoe ptional accuracy and high-throughput, making the system well huge sequencing capacity. The aim of this study was to develop an NGS based suited for genomic projects that require large quantities of long reads such workflow for routine diagnostics for congenital long QT syndrome. Long QT as whole genome sequencing and assembly of large, complex or- syndrome is a genetic disease associated to delayed cardiac repolarization ganisms. With the launch of v2.9 system software, the long read and high that is reflected by electrocardiographic feature of QT prolongation and T accuracy sequencing capabilities will be available for amplicon applica- wave abnormalities, its predisposition for syncope, seizure, and sudden car- tions. Here we describe our current development program leveraging an diac death in young individuals with structurally normal hearts. Mutations acyclic nucleotide flow pattern, Flow Pattern B, for highly accurate targeted in 13 genes have been reported causing this pathology but current diagno- sequencing of amplicons 700-800 base pair and longer. The longer reads stic testing is restricted to a small number of genes and 25% remained un- allow more direct transition of existing Sanger amplicon designs to massi- resolved. A NGS-based workflow was designed using Haloplex Agilent libra- vely parallel sequencing with minimal re-design, direct haplotype phasing ries followed by MiSeq Illumina sequencing. We will describe our approach across longer spans, and improved identification of complex genetic va- to the validation of the entire workflow (assay design, sample preparation, riations including large insertions, deletions and block substitutions. The bioinformatic analysis and scientific analysis) of a NGS targetted enrichment technique is also promising for metagenomic studies targeting 16S and 18S of the 13 genes known to cause long QT syndrome. The validation process rRNA subunits by allowing full coverage of 6-7 variable regions in a single will include: defining minimum coverage criteria, assigning quality and co- uni-directional amplicon read which enables the investigator to generate verage thresholds for SNP calling, defining criteria for filtering of benign accurate diversity and abundance profiles. The advancements in long read polymorphisms and assessing SNP concordance between next generation s eDq. uGernactainlog: wA.i lEl mbep laopympleiendt (tfuol lt hore pGaSrt -Jtuimnieo);r SSiygsntieficma nats; 4w5e4l lL.ife Sciences sequencing and Sanger sequencing. Preliminary data showed that on a trai- Corporation, A Roche Company. M. Mohiuddin: A. Employment (full or part-time); ning set of 16 DNA samples of patients containing 16 unique pathogenic Significant; 454 Life Sciences Corporation, A Roche Company. R. Winer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 454 Life Sciences Corporation, A Roche mutations, all mutations were detected and all samples were enriched with Company. M. Driscoll: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 454 Life >70 % specificity, resulting in an average depth of coverage exceeding 100 Sciences Corporation, A Roche Company. B. Simen: A. Employment (full or part- fold after two runs of Illumina MiSeq sequencing. The results for 30 DNA time); Significant; 454 Life Sciences Corporation, A Roche Company. J. Nealis: A. p Fa. tKieynntdst :n Negoantei.v Me .f oGri rtahued m: Najoonre g. eAn. ePso wncilhl abuex p: rNeosneen.t eT.d M. arsaud: None. F. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 454 Life Sciences Corporation, A Roche Airaud: None. P. Boisseau: None. S. Schmitt: None. L. Duboscq-Bidot: Company. None. S. Bonnaud: None. R. Teusan: None. P. Lindenbaum: None. H. Le Marec: None. V. Probst: None. J.J. Schott: None. R. Redon: None. S. Bezieau: None.  P13
.65 Targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) for the molecular diagnosis of Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD)  P13
.63 M. P. AUDREZET, P. GUEGUEN, A. DESPRES, C. FEREC; Molecular diagnosis of monogenic diabetes applied to Next- CHRU BREST, BREST, France. Generation Sequencing S. Clauin1, L. Heyrman2, S. Beaufils-Langlois1, A. Rotthier2, C. Saint-Martin3, J. Del-Favero2, C. Bellanné-Chantelot3,4; 1Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2Multiplicom N.V, Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most com- Niel, Belgium, 3Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Département de Génétique, PARIS, France, mon monogenic disorder, with an estimated prevalence ranging from 1/500 4Institut de Cardiométabolisme et Nutrition, Paris, France. to 1/1000. PKD1 PKD2 PKD1 Mutation-based diagnosis in ADPKD is complicated by genetic and allelic heterogeneity, with 2 genes involved, and . Moreover, is Monogenic diabetes (MODY) is characterised by autosomal dominant in- duplicated over 2/3 of its length and is extremely rich in pyrimidic nucleoti- heritance of young-onset diabetes due to defective insulin secretion. It is des. both clinically and genetically heterogeneous. The identification of a mu- Since a few years, NGS technologies enable us to overcome the classical ap- tation has important implications for clinical management in diabetes. We proaches of whole coding sequence sequencing at single nucleotide reso- co-developed with Multiplicom, a MASTR assay as front-end amplification lution. for NGS based mutation and CNVG CdKe,t HecNtiFo1nA i,n H 7N MF4OAD, HY NgFen1eBs, .ABC C8
, KCNJ11 The aim of this study was to develop and validate a strategy to analyse both The IMNASSTR assay comprises 99 amplicons enabling the amplification of all genes by Next generation sequencing (NGS) with the IonTorrent technology coding exons of 7 MODY genes ( (Life Technologies). and ) and 21 control amplicons for CNV analysis, all amplified in 5 mul- As the complexity of the two genes renders impossible the use of target en- tiplex reactions. richment, we develop a home-made long range (LR) PCR strategy, followed To verify the MASTR assay workflow, sixteen patients with know mutations by fragmentation and multiplexing to build our libraries. Thanks to PCR were analysed using the standard MASTR protocol followed by sequencing optimization, accurate quantification of our amplicons, we obtained a good on the 454 GS Junior instrument. The resulting sequencing data were ana- coverage of the two loci and a depth generally consistent between each LR lysed by AVA2 and SeqNext software tools. amplification for a multiplexing of 16 samples per run. We obtained an average of 100.000 reads per run (8 samples) correspon- We used this approach to characterize the molecular defects in a series of ding to on average of 94X coverage per amplicon. All 17 known mutations DNA from patients with typical ADPKD carrying known variants (mPKuDta1tions (10 substitutions, 7 indels), 1 complete gene-deletion and 196 SNP at ho- PanKdD 2polymorphisms) previously identified by Sanger sequencing. mozygous or heterozygous state were identified except one subtitution in We identified an average of respectively 14 and 2 variations in and a low-coverage amplicon and two indels located in homopolymer stretches. genes and all the molecular abnormalities, with the exception of one However, both indels were identified by GeneScan analysis of the MASTR mutation affecting an homopolymer repeat were found. assay. Based on the current analysis further optimisation of 10 amplicons is In conclusion, NGS is a promising strategy for ADPKD molecular diagnosis required to reach sufficient (40X) individual amplicon coverage for all am- a Ms .tPa. rAguedterdez tehte: rNaopniee.s Pa.r Ge uuengdueern d: eNvoenloep. Am. eDnets.pres: None. C. Ferec: None. plicons with an average coverage of 100X. I3n4 co6nclusion, the MASTR assay based NGS workfE loS wH sG ee m2 s0 w1 e3 ll | s uP iA tedR I foS r, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.66  P13
.68 A diagnostic strategy based on Next Generation Sequencing Comprehensive massive parallel DNA sequencing strategy for the C. Ruiz-Lafora, J. Valero, M. Bermejo, M. Molero, L. Rausell, M. Garcia-Hoyos, M. Perez- genetic diagnosis of the RAS/MAPK related syndromes Alonso, J. Garcia-Planells; A. Justino1, P. Dias2, M. J. Pina1, C. Ribeiro1, S. Sousa1, L. Cirnes1, A. B. Sousa2, J. L. Costa1, J. Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna (Valencia), Spain. C. Machado1; 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Genetics, Hospital de Santa Maria de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies are revolutionizing Gene- tics and Medicine reducing cost and timeline. Nevertheless their clinical utility still remains somewhat limited. Reduced sensibility compared with The Noonan, Cardio-facio-cutaneous, Costello and LEOPARD syndromes are Sanger sequencing (gold standard), high volume of data and elevated num- membersA o2fM thLe1 RASopathies. Mutations in 11 genes have been causally lin- ber of incidental findings are some of the main obstacles. Our main objective ked to these disorders. Recently, an exome sequencing study also associated is to develop a NGS based strategy that fulfills the following requirements: the gene . Due to the genetic and clinical heterogeneity of these dis- a) high sensibility comparable with Sanger, b) 100% representation of the orders it is challenging to define straightforward strategies of gene selection regions of interest (ROI) and c) reduction of the information without clinical for their molecular diagnosis. Therefore, the aim of this study was to deve- utility. lop and validate a massive parallel sequencing (MPS) based strategy for the We have developed a protocol based on the specific amplification by PCR molecular diagnosis of RASopathies. of coding regions of genes with clinical association and sequencing in a Mi- Genomic DNA of 50 clinically defined cases of RASopathies, including 3 Seq Personal Sequencer. This protocol has been validated by comparison suspected cases of prenatal diagnosis were used to optimize, validate and with the current gold standard sequencing technology, Sanger sequencing, evaluate the new MPS methodology. A multiplex PCR-based strategy for the in more than 900 nucleotide variations: substitutions and small indels, in enrichment of the 12 genes and a dedicated variant prioritization pipeline homozygosis, heterozygosis or hemizygosis. was established. All samples were studied using both Sanger sequencing This strategy NGS based shows a specificity and robustness comparable and Ion Torrent PGM. PTPN11 with Sanger sequencing and a higher sensitivity detecting mosaicisms. The All variants identified by SaCnBgLe r sequeSnHciOnCg2 w ere detected with ouAr2 MMP L1
S specific design, high coverage and sensitivity and the complete representati- approach. The most frequent mutated gene was (n=15). Mutations on of the ROIs provide to this strategy a high clinical utility making possible in less frequent genes, like (n=3), (n=1) and the novel i tCs .a Rpupilzic-Laatifoonra a: tA d. iEamgnpolosytmice lnetv (eful.ll or part-time); Significant; Instituto de (n=2) were found. The methodology resulted in an experimental approach Medicina Genomica. J. Valero: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; with a specificity of 99.7% and a maximum analytical sensitivity ≥97.7% Instituto de Medicina Genomica. M. Bermejo: A. Employment (full or part-time); with a confidence of 95%. Significant; Instituto de Medicina Genomica. M. Molero: A. Employment (full or In conclusion, here we present a workflow that provides a comprehensi- part-time); Significant; Instituto de Medicina Genomica. L. Rausell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Instituto de Medicina Genomica. M. Garcia-Hoyos: ve genetic screening tool in patients with RASopathies in a fast and cost- A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Instituto de Medicina Genomica. M. efficient manner. This approach demonstrates the potential of a combined Perez-Alonso: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; Instituto de Medicina MPS-Sanger sequencing based strategy as an effective diagnostic tool for Genomica. J. Garcia-Planells: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; h Ae.t Jeurosgtiennoe: oNuosn de.i sPe. aDsieass a: nNdo nfoer. Mpr.Je.n Paitnaal :g Nenoneeti.c C t.e Rstiibnegi.ro: None. S. Sousa: Instituto de Medicina Genomica. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; None. L. Cirnes: None. A.B. Sousa: None. J.L. Costa: None. J.C. Machado: Genagen. None.  P13
.67  P13
.69 CORIMAGEN: Advanced diagnostics of cardiovascular risk and sudden A novel nonsense mutation in EDA associated with nonsyndromic death prevention in paraffin tissue. tooth agenesis R. Miñambres1, J. Lucena2, A. Rico2, M. Santos2, E. Zorio3, P. Molina3, J. Giner3, C. Buades1, T. Nikopensius1,2, T. Annilo1, T. Jagomägi3, C. Gilissen4, M. Kals2, K. Krjutškov1, M. Eelmets1, D. Cantalapiedra1, P. Fernández1, J. Rosa1, S. Zúñiga1, Á. Ballester1, M. Gil1, C. Collado1, V. U. Gerst-Talas1, M. Remm1, M. Saag3, A. Hoischen4, A. Metspalu1,2; Fernández1, S. Santillan1; 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Forensic Pathology Service, Institute of Legal Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Stomatology, Faculty Medicine, Sevilla, Spain, 3Sudden Death Unit, la Fe Hospital, Valencia, Spain. of Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Center for Molecular Life Sciences, Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Objectives: To analyze the accuracy of NGS in paraffin tissue for the study of EDA genetics diseases in specific cases. We have developed a conceptual model Mutations in the ectodysplasin-A ( ) gene have been generally associated for a complete genetic test in Sudden Death (SD) prevention. with X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED), wEhDicAh is charac- Methods: NGS analysis was performed sequencing 72 genes related to car- terized by skin lesions, sweat gland dysfunctions, and defective morphoge- diomyopathy and SD. FFPE spleen tissue and blood samples were collected nesis of teethE, DhaAi r, and nails. Recently, missense mutations in have been at the postmortem examination. Autopsy reports indicated Arrhythmogenic reported to cause familial nonsyndromic tooth agenesis. In this study, we re- Cardiomyopathy (AC) as a tentative cause of death. NGS was performed in port a novel mutation in an Estonian family segregating nonsyndromic SOLiD v4. Bioinformatic analysis was carried out according to our pipeline tooth agenesis with variable expressivity. Affected individuals had no asso- and pathogenic variants were then confirmed by Sanger. TMEM43 ciated defects in other ectodermEaDlA organs. Using exome sequencing capture, Results: Firstly studied the correlation between fresh and FFPE tissue and we found a 76% of correlation. In first patient, we found a variant in we identified a heterozygodues n noovnosense mutation c.874G>T (p.Glu292X) in the TNF homology domain of in all affected females. This protein-al- in both FFPE tissue and blood DNA. This has been previously described as tering variant has arisen and the potentially causative allele was a pathogenic mutation associateTdT Nwith ACCA. CINt Bw2as only found in the index transmitted to affected offspring from affected mother. Glu292 is a highly case, suggesting its involvement in this cardiomyopathy. Second case we conserved rEeDsAid ue located on the outer surface of the EDA protein. We sug- found two uncertain variants in and , which were detected also gest that dental phenotype variability described in heterozygous female in both samples. Several healthy members also carried these variants sug- carriers of mutation may occur because of the differential pattern of X- gesting a) these variants are no pathogenic b) One of them is pathogenic chromosome inactivation, which retains certain level of EDA-receptor signa- although with incomplete penetrance. ling in tissues involved in tooth morphogenesis, resulting in tooth agenesis Conclusions: rather than XLHEEDD.A -NGS in FFPE shows a high concordance with fresh tissue 76% The present study broadens the mutation spectrum for this locus and de- -We have detected the same variants in fresh and FFPE tissue. monstrates that mutations may result in nonsyndromic tooth agenesis -Additional studies are necessary. i Tn. hNeikteorpoeznysgiouuss: Nfeomnea.l eTs. .Annilo: None. T. Jagomägi: None. C. Gilissen: -NGS is suitable for the study of FFPE tissue samples in specific families and None. M. Kals: None. K. Krjutškov: None. M. Eelmets: None. U. Gerst-Talas: cRir.c Muimñasmtabnrceess:. None. J. Lucena: None. A. Rico: None. M. Santos: None. M. Remm: None. M. Saag: None. A. Hoischen: None. A. Metspalu: None. None. E. Zorio: None. P. Molina: None. J. Giner: None. C. Buades: None. D. Cantalapiedra: None. P. Fernández: None. J. Rosa: None. S. Zúñiga: None. Á. Ballester: None. M. Gil: None. C. Collado: None. V. Fernández: None. S. Santillan: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 347ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.70  P13
.72 Use of next-generation sequencing for diagnostics of connective tissue PhenoVar: a phenotype-driven analysis of exome sequencing data - disorders proof of principle. M. M. Weiss1, A. Maugeri1, R. Straver1, D. Van Beek1, S. Dentro1, G. Pals1,2, E. Sistermans1, Y. Trakadis1, C. Buote2, J. Therriault2, H. Larochelle2, S. Levesque2; Q. Waisfisz1; 1McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2University of Sherbrooke, 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Connective Tissue Sherbrooke, QC, Canada. Disorders, Amsterdam, Netherlands. BACKGROUND : Widespread clinical utilization of Exome Sequencing (ES) Connective tissue disorders (CTDs) are a candidate for application of next- requires an approach addressing issues such as incidental findings and ac- generation sequencing (NGS) in the DNA diagnostics setting because of the curate prediction of causal mutations among massive amount of variations. large size and large number of genes involved. The complex spectrum of, WMEe TpHroOpDosSe a phenotype-driven analysis of exome data to predict diagnosis often overlapping, phenotypes, makes differential diagnosis difficult. For in the clinical setting. familial thoracic aortic aneurysms (FTAA), Marfan syndrome (MFS), Ehlers- : Control exome-files, modified to include a previously published Danlos syndrome (EDS) and Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), more than 40 ge- pathogenic mutation, were combined to the corresponding published phe- nes have been described. We currently perform approximately 2000 genetic notypic data of ten test patients with varied polymalformative syndromes analyses per year for patients suspected of a CTD. To improve diagnostics, and were used to test the efficiency of our software, PhenoVar, in predicting we designed a platform for the parallel analysis of a set of CTDs, including all their diagnoses. For each test patient, a geneticist blinded to the diagnoses known genes for FTAA, MFS, EDS and OI. reviewed the phenotype and selected 3 traits using terms in Human Pheno- A solution-based target enrichment kit was designed to capture all exons type Ontology. Modified exome variants file was input along with selected and flanking splice sites of 42 genes involved in CTDs. Sixty CTD patients, phenotypic traits in PhenoVar. PhenoVar calculated phenotypic similarity previously tested by Sanger sequencing and/or MLPA, were sequenced in between the test patient and a database consisting of simulated patients for multiplex on two separate lanes of a HiSeq2000 run. Subsequently, all samp- each OMIM phenotype with known molecular basis. Final diagnostic score les were analyzed using a home-made pipeline, which specifically analyses assigned to a given OMIM entry took into consideration both the patient’s six gene panels depending on the phenotype. phenotype and mutations. Resulting OMIM entries list was sorted according In the CTD patients, if coverage met our quality criteria (~97%), all mutati- tRoE dSiUaLgTnSostic score and filtered using a minimal phenotypic weight thres- ons previously identified with Sanger sequencing were detected. Low cove- hold to prevent undesired discovery of incidental findings. rage fragments (~3%) will be analyzed by Sanger sequencing analysis. : PhenoVar predicted the correct diagnosis in 5 / 10 patients, while We offer the NGS CTD kit as a diagnostic service since January 2013. The in 8 / 10 patients the diagnosis ranked within top 5 predicted most likely NGS methodology offers advantages in terms of time-efficiency, especially dCiOaNgnCoLsUeSsI aOnNd within top 20 in all. No incidental findings were found using in CTD with a complex spectrum of phenotypes and difficult differential dia- our minimal phenotypic threshold. gnosis. Furthermore, this approach offers the possibility to associate muta- : Results suggest that this “phenotype-driven” approach could t Mio.nMs. iWn ekinsso:w Nno gneen. Aes. Mwaituhg neroiv: eNlo, CneT.D R r. eSltartaevde pr:h Neonnoet.y Dpe. sV.an Beek: None. S. r Ye.n Tdreark awdiidse: sNporneea.d C u. sBeu ooft eE:S N monoer.e J p. rTahcetircraialu, eltt:h Nicoanle a. nHd. Lclairnoiccahlelyll eu:s eful. Dentro: None. G. Pals: None. E. Sistermans: None. Q. Waisfisz: None. None. S. Levesque: None.  P13
.71  P13
.73 Mutations of PKD1, PKD2 and PKHD1 genes in families with Homozygous frameshift deletion of KIAA1279, encoding for KIF1B- polycystic kidney disease in the Czech Republic binding protein, results in autosomal recessive polymicrogyria L. Obeidová1, J. Štekrová1, J. Reiterová2, V. Elišáková1, M. Merta1, M. Kohoutová1, V. Tesař2; S. VALENC E1
,2, K. Poirier1,2, N. LEBRUN1,2, F. ENCHA-RAZAVI3,4, T. ATTIE-BITACH3,4, J. 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University CHELLY1,2, N. BAHI BUISSON1,2,5; and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Nephrology, 1Institut Cochin - INSERM U1016, Paris, France, 2Institut Cochin, Université Paris- General Teaching Hospital of 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique, AP-HP, hôpital Republic. Necker, Paris, France, 4INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Neurologie pédiatrique AP-HP, hôpital Necker, Paris, France. PKD1 PKD2 Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most com- mon hereditary renal disorder caused by mutations of and ge- Polymicrogyria (PMG) is a clinically heterogenous malformation of cortical nes and affecting approximately 1 in 500-1,000 births. ADPKD is a systema- development, characterized by a loss of the normal gyral pattern which is tic disorder causing decline in renal function which often results in renal replaced by many small and infolded gyri separated by shallow sulci that are failure in adPuKltHhoDo1d. partly fused in their depths. Causes of PMG are heterogeneouSsR PanXd2 iGnPclRu5d6e The autosomal recessive form of polycystic kidney disease caused by muta- TacUqBuBir2eBd aTnUdB Bge3n, eNtHicE cJa1usTeUsB. TAh1eAr, eT aUrBeA m8ore thWanD R16020 syndromes possibly tions in the gene is less common than ADPKD but it usually presents associated with PMG but mutations in specific genes such as , , in early childhood when up to 50% of affected neonates die of pulmonary , , KIAA1279 and have been reported hypoplasia. only in a minority of patients. The aim of this work is the optimization of the molecular methods to provide Nonsense mutations in the gene known to encode the KIF1B-bin- reliable and fast presymptomatic, prenatal and preimplantation diagnostics ding protein, were initially described in patients with Goldberg-Shprintzen of polycystic kidney disease. Presymptomatic DNA analysis has been perfor- syndrome (GOSHS, MIM 609460). med in our laboratory for over 20 years by the linkage analysis. Nowadays By combining whole KgeIAnAom12e7 g9enotyping using single-nucleotide polymor- the analysis performed within research projects also includes detection me- phism (SNP)-array and whole exome sequencing, we identified a new pa- thods as heteroduplex analysis, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampli- thogenic mutation in in two fetuses with severe PMG born from a ficatPioKnH Dan1d high resolution melting analysis. Recently we have added the healthy, consanguineous Pakistani parents. It consists of a frameshift dele- next generation sequencing as well as a new mutational detection method in tion of 2 exoKnIsA lAe1a2d7in9g to premature termination of the translation. By de- the gene which is too complex for conventional detection methods. tailed phenotypic analysis of both fetuses, we found that this homozygous So far, mutations of the PKD genes have been detected in more than 50% mutation in gene causes PMG with microcephaly, b ut no additio- oPfK 1D50 CzPeKchH Dfa1milies with ADPKD. Most mutations were unique for Czech nal sign suggestive of GOSHS. population. Determination of localization and type of mutations within the This study expands the spectrum of KIF1B-binding proteinrelated disor- and genes and their genotype-phenotype correlation improves ders and supports its critical role in neuronal migration and organization. DNA diagnostics together with the assessment of the clinical prognosis of Furthermore, the accurate molecular diagnosis of this family exemplifies the patients. power of the comKbIiAneAd1 2s7tr9a-tegy -SNP-array and exome sequencing- in the Supported by the grant project IGA MZCR NT 13090-4 and PRVOUK-  P25
/ diagnosis of Mendelian disorders and allows us to broaden and refine our LLF. 1O/b2e.idová: None. J. Štekrová: None. J. Reiterová: None. V. Elišáková: u Sn. dVearlsetnacned: iNnogn oef. K. Poirier: rNeolanete. dN d. Liseobrrduenr:s N.one. F. Encha-razavi: None. T. None. M. Merta: None. M. Kohoutová: None. V. Tesař: None. Attie-bitach: None. J. Chelly: None. N. Bahi buisson: None. 348 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.74  P13
.76 Involvement of HYDIN in primary ciliary dyskinesia unveiled by a Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) for rare hemochromatosis forms: series of exome pitfalls Ampliseq versus Long-Range PCR E. Kott1, P. Duquesnoy1, B. Copin2, R. Chiron3, F. Dastot-Le Moal2, G. Montantin2, N. Collot2, G. Le Gac1,2,3, P. Gueguen1,2,3, M. Audrezet1,2, A. Despres1, C. Le Marechal1,2,3, C. Ferec1,2,3; L. Jeanson1, E. Escudier1,2, M. Legendre1,2, S. Amselem1,2; 1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire - CHRU, Brest, France, 2INSERM U1078, Brest, 1UMR_ S933
 Inserm/UPMC, Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique et Embryologie France, 3Faculté de Médecine, UBO, Brest, France. Médicales, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Département de Pneumologie et Addictologie, Montpellier, France. HFE HJV HAMP TFR2 SL C40
A1 Rare forms of hemochromatosis are associated with private missense mu- tations in five iron metabolism genes ( , , , and ). Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) are rare autosomal recessive disorders The Sanger sequencing method is commonly used to track these mutations. resulting from structural/functional defects of motile cilia, leading to re- However, depending of the strategy used by laboratories, this method can current respiratory infections. To identify new molecular defects involved be time consuming and quite expensive. HFeTrLe, we aimed to explore whether in PCD, we combined homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing next generation sequencing could improve the molecular diagnosis of he- (WES). 3,953 sequence variations were identified in the homozygous regi- mochromatosis. We also considered the gene that has been associated ons of a consanguineous patient with a typical clinical PCD phenotype and with different forms of inherited hyperferritinemia. subtle ultrastructural defects (i.e. abnormal central complex sheath). These We have compared two strategies with using the Ion Torrent platform (Life include a frameshift (c.11709delT) in exon 69 of HYDIN, a gene that has just Technologies, LT): Ampliseq(LT), which was designed to explore the whole recently been involved in PCD. Although already described as SNP, we paid coding sequences, the intron/exon junctions and the 5’ and 3’untranslated particular attention to this variation, given its presence in the homozygous regions (12.6 kb), and a home-made Long Range PCR(LR) method, which state in the patient and apparently in the heterozygous state in all controls allowed us to explore the six entire loci (74 kb). Variants (mutations and tested. The existence of a 99%-identical pseudogene of HYDIN (HYDIN2) polymorphisms) previously identified by Sanger sequencing were used for led us to look for HYDIN variations with a 0.5 frequency and to note that validation. at least one third of the so-called “SNPs” (including c.11709delT) are not The coverage by Ampliseq is limited to 90.3% and only includes 94.9% of true polymorphisms but represent sequence differences between HYDIN CDS, with a depth consistent between amplicons. The LR-PCR method al- and HYDIN2. The apparent homozygosity of those fake “SNPs” in the patient lows analysing of regions not covered by Ampliseq but differences at depth revealed a homozygous intragenic deletion involving exons 68 to 71 of HY- are observed between LR amplicons. Libraries constructs from the LR-PCR DIN (c.11469-750_12126+181del4046bp). As subsequently shown by the method are two-times longer and require more manual steps. analysis of HYDIN transcripts obtained from nasal brushing, this deletion, NGS with using the Ampliseq technology could be used as a first screening which results in shorter transcripts, leads to a frameshift and a premature method to diagnose rare forms of hemochromatosis and inherited hyper- stop codon (p.Phe3824SerfsX20). This study, which underlines the role of ferritinemia without iron overload. Advances in technology should rapidly HYDIN in the pathogenesis of PCD, illustrates the importance of cautious permit to improve coverage of the coding regions and to get an exhaustive analysis of sequence variations identified by WES, in order to thwart mul- aGn.d L feu gllyac a:c Ncuonraet. eP .r eGaudeignuge.n: None. M. Audrezet: None. A. Despres: None. C. t Eip. lKe optot:s Nsiobnlee .e Px.o Dmueq upeitsfnalolsy.: None. B. Copin: None. R. Chiron: None. F. Le marechal: None. C. Ferec: None. Dastot-Le Moal: None. G. Montantin: None. N. Collot: None. L. Jeanson: None. E. Escudier: None. M. Legendre: None. S. Amselem: None.  P13
.77 Gene panel for screening of RASopathies using HaloPlex target  P13
.75 enrichment and next-generation sequencing Identity-by-Descent Mapping and Exome Sequencing Reveals a New S. Ekvall, B. Baskin, B. Jonsson, E. Falk-Sörqvist, G. Annerén, M. Bondeson; Candidate Gene for the Primary Congenital Glaucoma locus GL C3
E Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden. H. Verdin1, B. P. Leroy1,2, B. D‘haene1, E. Vantroys1, S. Lefever1, F. Coppieters1, P. G. Kestelyn2, E. De Baere1; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of RASopathies are a group of clinically and genetically related disorders, inclu- Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. ding Noonan, LEOPARD, cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC), Costello, Legius and neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). These disorders result from mutations affecting the RAS-MAPK signaling Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is caused by developmental anomalies pathway, which explains the clinical overlap within this group of syndromes. of the trabecular meshwork and the anterior chamber angle, resulting in In the clinical setting, RASopathy-associated genes are traditionally tested increased ocular pressure and optic nerve damCagYeP 1frBo1m earlLyT lBifPe2. PCG most- sequentially using Sanger sequencing until a likely causative mutation is ly displays an autosomal recessive inheritance. To date, four PCG loci are identified, which is laborious, time consuming and expensive. known (GL C3
A-D), with two genes identified, and . Here, we We have utilized the advent of next-generation sequencing technology to aimed to map the disease gene in a four-generation consanguineous family develop a cost-effective multi-gene sequencing panel for RANSFo1p,a PthTiPeNs 1b1y, with PCG from Jordan. uSOsiSn1g, RHAaFlo1P, lBeRxA tFa,r HgeRtA eSn, KriRcAhSm, eNnRtA, Ssa, SmHpOleC 2b, aSrPcRoEdDin1g, ManEdK 1se, MquEeKn2cing wCiBthL Mutations in known PCG genes were excluded. Identity-by-descent (IBD) MiSeq. Our multi-gene panel targets the coding sequences of mapping was performed in six affected members using genomewide SNP and genotyping (250K, Affymetrix). Two affected individuals underwent exome (about 40 kb). sequencing (TruSeq Exome Enrichment; HiSeq, Illumina; CLC Bio). To validate the gene panel, 10 patients with known disease-causing muta- IBD mapping revealed a common region of 11.5 Mb on 19p13.2-p13.11, tions associated with NF1, Noonan, CFC and Costello syndrome were inve- being a new candidate PCG locus named GL C3
E. Using IBD filtering of exo- stigated. Five samples were pooled and run on a single lane of the MiSeq. me data and Ingenuity Variant analysis, we found a homozygous missense Obtained sequences were analyzed using commercial data programs. The variant c.304C>T (p.R102C) in a novel candidate gene for GL C3
E. This va- gene panel was highly specific; ~93% of sequencing reads aligned to targe- riant is predicted to be deleterious. It was absent in 718 Caucasian control ted regions. Average read depth in the region of interest (ROI) was >2000 chromosomes and was found in one out of 156 Jordan control chromoso- andN F~19. 8% of targeted bases in ROI had at least 30x coverage. All known mu- mes, being consistent with its reported minor allele frequency. The potential tations were identified, including a 4 bp deletion and a splice site mutation GL C3
E might play a role in Toll- and BMP-signalling pathways. In addition, in Screening of additional RASopathy patients is presently underway. its mutations might dysregulate mitochondrial complex I. Its expression do- Conclusively, the validated RASopathy-multi-gene sequencing panel pre- main in the eye anterior segment is currently being investigated in zebrafish sented here enables rapid and cost-effective high throughput screening of and mouse. i Sn.d Eivkivdaulal:l sN wonieth. BR.A BSaospkaitnh: iNeso.ne. B. Jonsson: None. E. Falk-Sörqvist: We identified a new candidate gene for the GL C3
E locus, confirming the ge- None. G. Annerén: None. M. Bondeson: None. nHe.t Vice hrdeitne:r Nogoennee. iBty.P o. Lf ePrCoGy,: aNnodn ep.o Bss. iDb‘lhya reenper:e Nseonntei.n Eg. tVhaen tthroiryds :P NCGon gee. nSe. . Lefever: None. F. Coppieters: None. P.G. Kestelyn: None. E. De Baere: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 349ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.78  P13
.80 Massively parallel sequencing identifies the large majority of Next generation sequencing analysis of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies mutations causing red blood cell membrane disorders. (IRD) using Agilent Haloplex technology. B. van der Zwaag1, R. van Wijk2, M. G. Elferink1, M. J. Vogel1, I. J. Nijman1, E. Cuppen1, W. M. E. Shanks1,2, P. Clouston1, E. Packham1, S. Reid1, K. Thomson1, J. Taylor3, A. H. W. van Solinge2, H. K. Ploos van Amstel1; Nemeth4,5, S. Downes5, A. Seller1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 1Oxford Molecular Genetics laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Oxford Biomedical Netherlands, 2Laboratory for Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, University Medical Research Centre, Univeristy of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Biomedical Research Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Oxford Eye Hospital, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. Hereditary disorders of the red blood cell (RBC) membrane constitute a Introduction: major cause of hereditary hemolytic anemia, and are caused by mutations affecting structural proteins of the RBC cytoskeleton and their anchoring to IRD is a common cause of vision loss (population prevalence the RBC membrane. Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) and elliptocytosis (HE) ~ 1/3500) with significant genotype and phenotype heterogeneity. Genetic are common abnormalities, hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP) and stoma- testing in clinical diagnostics has been limited because a similar clinical phe- tocytosis (HST) are rare. In most cases the mode of inheritance is autosomal notype may be caused by mutations in numerous genes, all of which could dominant. Traditionally, RBC membrane disorders are classified according require testing. Targeted gene capture and Next generation sequencing has to morphological appearance on blood smear. Molecular analysis has long provided the opportunity to investigate multiple genes per patient. We have been hampered due to the size of the genes involved, but has become feasib- dMeestihgnoedd: a targeted retinal panel for 45 common causative genes and one le with the advent of NSePxTtA G1e, nSePrTaBti, oAnN SKe1quSeLnCc4iAn1g (ENPGB S4
)1. WEeP Bse4t2 up anRdH iAmG- deep intronic splice site associated with retinal degeneration. plemented an NGS based test to sequence seven genes associated with RBC Our retinal panel workflow uses Agilent’s Haloplex enrichment membrane disorders: , , , and . technology with Illumina’s MiSeq platform. A bioinformatics pipeline has After enrichment of gDNA using a custom Agilent SureSelectXT kit (targeted been designed to annotate and filter our results; using SoftGenetic’s Next at 650 clinically relevant geTnMes) exons and flanking intronic sequences were GENe as a variant caller and WAnnovar for annotation. Variants identified determined using a SOLID -5500XL system (~92% of bases covered with aRte as ufrletsq:u ency of <5% in EVS and 1000 genomes are taken forward for lite- >99% SsPenTAsi1ti vity).A CNaKu1sative mutations, most of which were novel, were rature investigation. idenStLifCie4dA 1in 16/20 patients with defined membranopathies, predominantly Each MiSeq run produces > 4Gb of data and our validation experi- in the and gene. Surprisingly, no mutations were detected in ments indicate that 96-98% of bases are covered at a minimum of 30 reads. the gene, a major cause of HS. NGS based DNA diagnostics has thus Within the first panel of 10 patients, a pathogenic homozygous frameshift been shown to be a highly reliable and effective method to detect mutations in AIP L1
 was found in a Lebers congenital amaurosis (LCA) patient, whilst in patients with hereditary RBC membrane disorders. The efficacy on these aC osnecclounsdi opnast:ient, with Usher II, had a pathogenic premature stop in the RBC membrane disorders might well be indicative for other disorders like USH2A gene. eBp.i lveapns yd,e hre Zawrta aang:d N koidnen.e Ry .d viasena Wseijsk u: sNionnge t.h Me. sGa.m Eelf ecruinstko: mNo enner.i Mch.Jm. eVnotg keilt: . The Haloplex protocol is a fast, simple and efficient workflow None. I.J. Nijman: None. E. Cuppen: None. W.W. van Solinge: None. H.K. that is suitable for use in a diagnostic setting for large gene screens in hete- Ploos van Amstel: None. r Mog.Ee.n Sehoaunsk cso:n Ndointieo.n Ps.. Clouston: None. E. Packham: None. S. Reid: None. K. Thomson: None. J. Taylor: None. A.H. Nemeth: None. S. Downes: None. A. Seller: None.  P13
.79 Next generation sequencing in renal disorders: molecular and clinical aspects of renal tubular acidosis  P13
.81 V. Palazzo1, A. Provenzano1, R. Artuso2, E. Andreucci2, M. Materassi3, F. Emma4, E. Application of Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) for the genetic Benetti5, M. Caruso6, G. Ghiggeri7, M. Genuardi1, P. Romagnani8,3, I. Pela9, S. Giglio1,2; characterization of families with an unusual phenotype of autosomal 1Medical Gentic Unit, Department Of Biomedical Experimental And Clinical Sciences, dominant Retinal Dystrophy (adRD) University Of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetic Unit Meyer Children‘s University P. Fernández San José1, B. Almoguera1,2, F. Blanco-Kelly1, M. Cortón1, H. Hakonarson2, C. Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Pediatric Nephrology Unit Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Ayuso1; Firenze, Italy, 4Pediatric Nephrology Unit Bambin Gesù Children‘s Hospital, Roma, 1Department of Genetics, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Center for Applied Italy, 5Pediatric Unit Salus Pueri University Of Padova, Padova, Italy, 6Nephrology Genomics, Chidren‘s Hospital of Philadelphia. 3615 Civic Center Blvd. Philadelphia, PA Unit Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy, 7Pediatric Nephrology Unit Gaslini Children‘s Hospital, 19104, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Genova, Italy, 8Department Of Biomedical Experimental And Clinical Sciences University Of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 9Department of Sciences for Woman and Child‘s Health, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. Autosomal dominant retinal dystrophies (adDR) are a group of inherited diseases clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Late Onset Retinal Dege- neration (LORD, MIM# 605670) is a rare subtype of adDR, which can be Molecular genetics has allowed the identification of the structure and func- caused by the mutation p.Ser163Arg in  C1
QTNF5 gene. Patients with this tion of the several main transporters and ion channels involved in renal mutation present a phenotype characterized by late onset with nictalopia disorders. Between that, distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) received in- and drusenoid deposits at the beginning, followed by midperipheral depo- creased attention because of SaLdCv4aAn1cesA TinP 6tVh1eB u1n/dAeTrPs6taVn0dAi4n g of the mole- sits, chorioretinal atrophy and electroretinographic reduced b wave. cular mechanism. We studied 90 subjects with dRTA (where possible also Three members of family with and initial diagnosis of Retinitis Pigmentosa their families) analyzing the / genes and we (RP) and/or Macular Degeneration (MD) and six healthy relatives were stu- focused on the clinical features and their correlation with the different types died using Whole Exome Sequecing (WES). adDR common mutations were of mutations. Furthermore, in some of our cases we reported the associati- previously screened and discarded by adDR microarray (Asper Biotech) and on with medullary sponge kidney (MSK), aA TraPr6eV c0oAn4genitaAlT rPe6nVa1l Bd1isorder, Sanger sequencing for the most frequent genes responsible for adDR. characterized by diffuse ectasia of the tubules precaliceali collecting duct. WES analysis identified the mutation p.Ser163Arg in  C1
QTNF5 gene in hete- In some subjects we have found variants in and genes, rozygosity in all the affected members of the family. pr+oviding evidence of a possible role of the subunits B1 and a4 apical pump The further screening of this mutation by Sanger sequencing in a cohort of HATPase in the pathogenesis of the MSK. Of all the individuals tested, 35 200 non-characterized adDR patients enabled the characterization of an ad- were negative after molecular analysis of the genes above cited and then we ditional family with a similar phenotype. polarized our efforts to characterize from a clinical-molecular point of view The follow up of patients is important for a precise diagnose on adDR fami- families affected by RTA applying next generation sequencing strategy. We lies. The evaluation of new strategies for analysing infrequent adDR genes decided also to analyze genes encoding for SL C4
A4/NBCe1, for ENaC sub- should be considered on patients with complex or unusual diagnose in or- units, those responsible for PHA2 and for the other the V-ATPase subunits d Pe. rF teor neáxncdluedze S aadnD JRo skén:o Nwonn eg.e Bn.e As lbmeofogruee prae:r Nfoornme.i nFg. BWlaEnSc.o-Kelly: None. M. and other pathway’s genes that for us may be responsible of this genetic dis- Cortón: None. H. Hakonarson: None. C. Ayuso: None. orders (SL C26
A11 and SL C4
A9 subunits, SL C4
A7 and SL C4
A8 transporters, isoforms of the carbonic anhydrase, various G-protein-coupled receptors activated by protons or divalent cations). We will show the results of this n Ve. wPa plailzozto s:t Nudoyn.e. A. Provenzano: None. R. Artuso: None. E. Andreucci: None. M. Materassi: None. F. Emma: None. E. Benetti: None. M. Caruso: None. G. Ghiggeri: None. M. Genuardi: None. P. Romagnani: None. I. Pela: None. S. Giglio: None. 350 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.82  P13
.84 Next-generation sequencing blurs phenotype limits Unraveling the cause for familial sudden cardiac death by whole- M. González-del Pozo1,2, A. Vela3, C. Méndez-Vidal1,2, L. Fernández-Martínez1,2, N. Bravo- exome sequencing (WES) - an approach Gil1,2, A. Rueda3, J. Dopazo3,4,5, J. Santoyo3, S. Borrego1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2,3; D. Böckelmann1, S. Le Scouarnec2, S. Zumhagen1, B. Stallmeyer1, N. Carter2, J. Schott3, R. 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. Instituto de Redon3, E. Schulze-Bahr1; Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS). Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad 1Institute for Genetics of Heart Diseases, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, de Sevilla, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades University Hospital, Münster, Germany, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, Raras (CIBERER), Seville, Spain, 3Centro Andaluz de Secuenciación Genómica Humana United Kingdom, 3L `institut du thorax, INSERM UMR 1087, Nantes, France. (CASEGH), Seville, Spain, 4Institute of Computational Genomics, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 5BIER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain. Sudden cardiac death (SCD) in the youth is a quite heterogeneous, mostly genetic disorder. In a large family with six victims of SCD (5 males/1 female, age of death 20 +6 years) WES was performed (Agilent SureSelect capture, Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are probably the most genetically hetero- Illumina sequencing) in an individual with stress induced ventricular tachy- geneous disorders in man. To date, more than 190 genes have been identi- cardia. A mean reading depth of the targeted sequences of 130x was reached fied and the number of loci that influence phenotype variability is expan- (coverage: 92% >10x). Overall, 2008 variants were rare (MAF<1% in 1000 ding. In consequence, the diagnosis is not always easily performed due to Genomes Project) and filtered for presence in 392 selected genes associated phenotypic and genetic overlap. Current diagnostic approaches have been with inherited heart disorders. Hereafter, 8 (0.3%) coding variants remai- focused on the systematic evaluation of a set of known genes for each phe- ned (6x ns, 1x splice-site, 1x del). After analysis for evolutionary conservati- notype but this approach may fail in patients with inaccurate diagnosis. To on, pathogenicity prediction (PP) and presence in the ESP database, 3 out of overcome these limitations, we conducted an exome sequencing approach 8 (RYR2, RYR3, PLE C1
) were checked for familial co-segregation. The RYR2 for the diagnosis of 7 unsolved families clinically diagnosed of autosomal variant c.1082G>A (p.Cys361Tyr) is novel and likely to be causative, since recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa (arRP). In total, 28 samples were sequenced sequence alignment showed high conservation, absence in databases and on SOLID 5500xl platform and stringent bioinformatic filters were applied. PP mostly (6:1) as ‘deleterious’. Mutations in cardiac ryanodine receptor The most likely disease-causing variants were validated by Sanger sequen- gene cause catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CP- cing and potential pathogenicity was assessed by functional predictions and VT1). This RYR2 variant was also present in 5 additional family members frequency in controls. As a result, 10 likely pathogenic variants (6 novel) (one SCD victim). The variants in PLE C1
 c.12741C>G, p.Asp4247Glu) and were detected in 6 out of 7 families. In two presumed arRP families, syn- RYR3 (c.7604T>C, p.Leu2535Pro) also affected highly conserved amino dromic retinal disease genes were implicated. Clinical revaluation showed acids; PP was not conclusive (PLE C1
: 2:3; RYR3: 4:1) and no clear clinical extraocular features that were overlooked at the time of first diagnosis. In cosegregation for the RYR3 variant (SCD victim negative). The observation other case (a sporadic RP patient) the inheritance pattern assigned was that in this large SCD family some relatives also were at cardiac risk may arRP (the most frequent one for sporadic RP cases), explaining why the indicate presence of other gene variants causing a confounding overlay. This disease-causing mutations were not found before. Our results reinforce the w Do. uBlödc hkaevlme abnene:n N uonndee. tSe.c Lteed S icno au asmrnaelcle: rN foanme.i lSy. sZeut.mhagen: None. B. role of exome sequencing in the diagnosis of retinal diseases as a global ap- Stallmeyer: None. N. Carter: None. J. Schott: None. R. Redon: None. E. proach even when clinical diagnosis or presumed inheritance pattern were Schulze-Bahr: None. not accurate. Supported by ISCIII (PI11-02923), FRA (CIV P16
A1856) and C ME.I GCEo n(CzáTlSe-z0-d3e6l8  P7
o)z.o: None. A. Vela: None. C. Méndez-Vidal: None. L. Fernández-Martínez: None. N. Bravo-Gil: None. A. Rueda: None. J. Dopazo: None. J. Santoyo: None. S. Borrego: None. G. Antiñolo: None.  P13
.85 Spinal Muscolar Atrophy - NGS targeted resequencing of the entire SMN2 gene S. Radovic1, G. Dubsky de Wittenau2, F. Cesca2, F. Cattonaro1, M. Morgante2,3, F. Curcio4,  P13
.83 R. I. Lonigro2,4; AmpliSeq™ RNA: Targeted sequencing of genes on the PGM ™ 1IGA Technology Services, Udine, Italy, 2University of Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Institute of L. Chapman, J. Schageman, B. Sanderson, A. Cheng, K. Bramlett; Applied Genomics, Udine, Italy, 4Azienda Ospedaliera di Udine, Udine, Italy. Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States. Genetic heterogeneity of individuals highlights the need to enhance perso- As Next Generation Sequencing matures, it is quickly moving into trans- nalized medicine to achieve effective treatments of human diseases. Spinal lational research applications where it has promise to be a useful tool for muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disease evaluation of human samples. RNA profiling using NGS (RNA-seq) is one of characterized by degeneration of α-motorneurons in the spinal cord. The the applications where this potential is currently being realized. RNA-seq primary SMA-determining gene is SMN1, absent in about 95% of patients. experiments have traditionally started with a whole-transcriptome library The neighbouring nearly identical SMN2 gene fails to generate adequate preparation that produces a sequencing template from all RNA species in levels of full-length SMN protein (FL-SMN). Still, SMN2 copy numbers can a sample. However, in many cases, only a handful of the genes present are vary between 1 and 6, potentially modifying the severity of the disease. Ho- necessary to make a clinically relevant diagnosis. wever, all SMN2 alleles are not functionally equivalent since they produce We have demonstrated new technology that allows for RNA-seq from a pa- FL-transcripts with different efficiencies, most probably due to variations nel of directed amplicons using an AmpliSeqTM approach with Ion Torrent in their sequence. semiconductor sequencing. This approach offers many advantages over mi- We established a new method to identify genetic polymorphisms in the croarray or qPCR such as faster turnaround and data analysis, sample mul- complete genomic region of SMN2. We resequenced 40 SMN2 gene copies tiplexing, lower RNA inputs, and ability to use degraded or FFPE-derived from 12 SMA subjects with varying SMN2 copy numbers using the Illumina samples. In addition, the technique simultaneously provides quantitative platform and a pooled indexing strategy. We identified a total of 69 SNPs and gene expression information and gene sequence at the single nucleotide 40 INDELs out of which 21 and 37, respectively, had not been reported pre- level. viously. So far, we confirmed by genotyping assays the first fifteen SNPs that For this targeted RNA-Seq method, cDNA is generated from total RNA, follo- were chosen for validation. The estimated variant frequencies are usually wed by amplification using primers designed for targeted genes. Resulting indicative of the number of variant gene copies per subject when related to amplicons are prepared for sequencing using the AmpliSeqTM technology the individual’s SMN2 copy numbers. and sequenced on the Ion Torrent sequencing platforms. We demonstrate The method we described is ready to be used to identify variants/haploty- that the technique produces results that are technically reproducible, quan- p Se.s R aasdsoovciica:t eNdo nwei.t hG .a D puabrstikcyu ldaer WSMitAte npahue:n Nootynpee. .F. Cesca: None. F. titative, and have excellent correlation with qPCR using TaqMan® gene ex- Cattonaro: None. M. Morgante: None. F. Curcio: None. R.I. Lonigro: None. pression assays. Employing barcodes, we have also tested multiple samples on a single chip thereby increasing the cost-effectiveness of the tool for hig- h Le.r Cthhraopumgahnp:u At .l aEbmoprlaotyomreyn ste (tfutilnl ogrs .part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. J. Schageman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. B. Sanderson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. A. Cheng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. K. Bramlett: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 351ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.86 None. S. Heilmann: None. C. Scholz: None. S. Kabisch: None. H. Engels: Proximal monosomy of 13q due to 6;13 translocation None. S. Tierling: None. M. Zivicnjak: None. F. Schacherer: None. D. Haffner: H. Mkrtchyan1, A. Hovhannisyan1, A. Gasparyan1, L. Nazaryan2, S. Midyan1, N. None. R.G. Weber: None. Tommerup3; 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2¹; Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Wilhelm Johannsen  P13
.88 Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Targeted Next Generation Sequencing of TAAD genes using DNA University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. isolated from paraffin embedded tissue M. Stuhrmann, B. Keyser, T. Hartmann, A. Schöner, M. Mälzer, J. Schmidtke; Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Chromosome 13q deletion is associated with varying phenotypes, which seem to depend on the location of the deleted segment. Although various attempts have been made to link the 13q deletion intervals to distinct phe- Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Dissections (TAAD) may occur isolated or as notypes, there is still no acknowledged consensus correlation between the part of syndromes, like Marfan or Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Mutatpioonsts- mino sretveem- monosomy of distinct 13q regions and specific clinical features. Here we ral different genes are known to cause TAAD. Diagnosis is often made during describe a case of proximal monosomy 13q in a 8 month-old boy. He was autopsy. If available, paraffin embedded tissue can be used for referred for cytogenetic study due to different dysmorphic features invol- genetic testing. However, DNA extracted from this tissue is often degraded. ving a brachydactily, beaked nose, high frontal hairline, flat occiput, wide Since next generation sequencing (NGS) with the Illumina MiSeq platform re- nose bridge, epicantus along with double sided hydronephrosis and non- quires DNA fragments around 300 base pairs, it should be possible to analyse closed Bottalo’s duct. Karyotype revealed the translocation 45,XY,t(6;13) DNA isolated from paraffin embedded tissue with this platform. (p25;q12)dn. Firther Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0 analysis has We isolated DNA from paraffin embedded tissue from six deceased TAAD. Li- revealed approximately 6Mb deletion on chromosome 13(13q11-13q12.12) brary preparation was carAriCeTdA o2utC uOsLin3gA 1a cFuBstNo1miMzeYdH T1r1uSSeLqC  C2
uAs1to0mS AMmApDl3i- (chr13:19045719-25196912, GRCh37/hg19) in the patient’s genome. No TcoGnF BKRit1 f,rom ITllGuFmBiRn2a. Sequencing was performed with the Illumina MiSeq. deletion was detected on chromosome 6. However, we cannot excluded that 185 exons of the genes , , , , , , there might be subtelomeric deletion of 6p, which was not detected by any and have been analysed. The results showed that the qua- SNP on the array platform due to highly repetitive region. We assume that lity of the sequences depended directly on the quality of the isolated DNA. the input of the 6p deletion might be insignificant comparing with 13q proxi- When the fixation of the tissue was poor (e.g. unbuffered formalin, no homo- mal deletion, which includes a number of reliable genes: for example GJB6 is genous fixation), the coverage was very low. With good fixation, the sequen- associated with autosomal dominant deafness; FGF9 is associated with mul- cing results resembled that of DNA isolated from blood. Between 5% (poor tiple synostoses syndrome, which also includes deafness; SGCG associated fixation of the tissue) and 91% (good fixation/DNA from blood) of the 185 with muscular dystrophy limb girdle type 2C; and SACS is casing spastic ata- exons had a coverage greater than the threshold that we set at 50x. xia Charlevoix Saguenay type. Thus, the child may be under a high risk of ha- In the six analysed patients, we found some new sequence variations with v Hin. gM dkretacfhnyeasns:, mNounsec.u Ala. rH doyvshtaronpnhisyy aann:d N aotnaex.i aA b. aGsaesdp oanry tahne: dNeolneete. Ld. r egions. yet unclear relevance. Nazaryan: None. S. Midyan: None. N. Tommerup: None. In conclusion, DNA from paraffin embedded tissue can be analysed by NGS, w Mh. eSntu thhrem fiaxnanti:o Nno hnaes. Bb.e Kene ydsoenr:e N pornoep.e Tr.l yH.artmann: None. A. Schöner: None. M. Mälzer: None. J. Schmidtke: None.  P13
.87 Dissecting the genotype in syndromic intellectual disability using whole exome sequencing in addition to genome-wide copy number  P13
.89 analysis Mutation analysis of primary immunodeficiency patients by target V. Riehmer1,2, C. F. Classen3, C. Landwehr2,4, A. Kosfeld1, S. Heilmann2,5, C. Scholz1, S. enrichment and next-generation sequencing Kabisch3,6, H. Engels2, S. Tierling7, M. Zivicnjak8, F. Schacherer9, D. Haffner3,8, R. G. L. N. J. Moens1, E. Falk Sorqvist1, C. Asplund2, Y. Kumar3, C. Bauser3, E. Bernatowska4, C. I. Weber1,2; E. Smith2, M. Nilsson1,5; 1Department of Human Genetics, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Sweden, 2Clinical Research Center, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Pediatrics, University Hospital, Rostock, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Diagnostics, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 3GATC Biotech AG, Konstanz, Germany, 4Department of Berlin, Germany, 5Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Centre, University of Bonn, Immunology, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 5Science for Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Intensive Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Care, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 7Universität des Stockholm, Sweden. Saarlands, Biowissenschaften, Genetik/Epigenetik, Saarbrücken, Germany, 8Department of Pediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 9Biobase GmbH, Wolfenbüttel, Germany. Primary Immunodeficiencies (PID) are a heterogeneous group comprising over 150 diseases caused by congenital defects of the immune system. These diseases are mainly characterized by severe recurrent infections, and can of- When a known microimbalance affecting multiple genes is detected in a pati- ten be life-threatening. Diagnosing patients with PID is however challenging, ent with syndromic intellectual disability, it is usually presumed causative for since more than 179 genes are known to cause these diseases. all observed features. Whole exome sequencing (WES) allows questioning In this study, we adopted a selector-based sequencing capture assay together this assumption. In this study of tdher eneo fvaomilies with children affected by un- with Illumina sequencing, to identify disease-causing mutations in all 179 explained syndromic intellectual disability, genome-wide copy number and PID genes simultaneously, and evaluated the usefulness of this targeted as- subsequent analyses revealed a maternal 1.1Mb microdeletion in say for molecular diagnosis of PID. The exons of the 179 genes were captured the 14q32 imprinted region causing a paternal UPD(14)-like phenotype, and and sequenced in 34 patients, 15 of which had at least one known causal two inherited 22q11.21 microduplications of 2.5Mb or 2.8DMLbK. 1In patient 1 mutation at the onset of the experiment. carrying the 14q32 microdeletion, tall stature and renal malformation were Sequencing reads were aligned against the targeted regions, and variants unexplaFinBeNd1 by paternal UPD(14), and there was no altered expression were detected using an in-house developed software tool. or unexpected methylation status. By WES and filtering with a mining tool, In order to narrow down the number of potential disease-causing mutations a novel missense variaEnYtA w1as found in patient 1 and his mother, who per patient, variants were filtered according to read depth, variant allele ra- both showed clinical features of Marfan syndrome by thorough anthropome- tio and variant consequence. tric assessment, and a novel missense variant as a probable cause of the Using the applied criteria, 17 out of 21 (~81%) known single base or short renal malformation in the patient. In patient 2 with the 22q11.21 miBcLroMdupli- indel variants were detected, resolving of the mutation status for 12 out of cation syndrome, skin hypo- and hyperpigmentation and two malignancies 15 individuals (80%). were only partially explained. By WES, compound heterozygous stop Sequencing of the unknown samples resulted in the discovery of several new founder mutations were detected causing BloomO PsyHnNd1rome. In male patient mutations that could be confirmed by Sanger sequencing. 3 carrying a 22q11.21 microduplication inherited from his unaffected father, We will present the outcome of our mutation analyses, and discuss the use- WES identified a novel missense variant in the X-linked intellectual fulness of the developed assay for first tier cost efficient molecular diagnosis disability gene inherited from the unaffected mother as a possible additio- of PID, reducing the number of patients subjected to more expensive exome nal cause for developmental delay. Thus, WES seems warranted in patients a Ln.Nd .gJe. nMoomenes s:e Nqouneen.c Ein. gF.alk Sorqvist: None. C. Asplund: None. Y. Kumar: carrying microdeletions or microduplications who have unexplained clinical None. C. Bauser: None. E. Bernatowska: None. C.I.E. Smith: None. M. Nilsson: f Ve.a Rtuierehsm oerr :m Niocnroei. mCb.Fa. lCanlacsesse inn:h Neornitee.d C f.r Loamn danw euhnra: fNfeocntee.d A p. aKroensfte.ld: None. 352 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.90  P13
.93 The Shared Variant Database Whole-exome sequencing in Altaian families with autosomal M. Vermaat1,2,3, H. Mei1,3, I. F. A. C. Fokkema1, P. E. M. Taschner4, J. T. den Dunnen1,2, J. F. J. recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (the Republic of Altai, Southern Laros1,2,3; Siberia) 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, A. Y. Churbanov1, O. L. Posukh2,3, T. M. Karafet1; 2Leiden Genome Technology Center, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 1ARL Division of Biotechnology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States, Netherlands, 3Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Novosibirsk State of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. DNA diagnostics is based on sharing information on gene variants found Mutations in more than 70 different genes were found as the causes of in patients with a certain phenotype. Yet, most variants are not shared and hereditary Non-Syndromic Hearing Loss (NSHL). Identification of NSHL- valuable information gets lost. This is especially true for exome/genome se- responsible genes is a significant challenge due to extreme genetic hete- quencing projects, where only the results of successful projects and of these rogeneity of the disorder. Here we explore the utility of whole-exome se- only the causing variants identified get published. quencing (WES) for identifying candidate causal variants in unrelated fa- We have developed the Shared Variant Database (SVD) to support easy and milies from Altai with undiagnosed potentially autosomal recessive NSHL pre-publication sharing of all variants and phenotypes. Upon submission a (ARNSHL). We performed WES on 6 siblings, two from each of three Altaian report is returned summarizing, per variant, its frequency in the database. extended familiGeJsB (2F#38, F#40, F#54), with proportion of affected to non- To address privacy concerns, data can be submitted as a pooled set. The SVD affected siblings as 4:5, 4:5, 5:3, correspondingly. Likelihood of mutations accepts input in VCF and BED formats for variant calls and coverage compromising gene has been ruled out in these families. Sequence respectively. For variants that have a low frequency the submitter has the processing and variant calling were performed using standard bioinforma- option to contact submitting colleagues. tics tools. A custom filtering systemOT wOFas used to prioritize novel variants The public part of the SVD shows data that were made public by their sub- of candidate genes. We identified a novel missence homozygous mutation mitters and summary data from other sources. Variants can be shared with (NM_194248.2:c.1111G>C) in gene knRoAwIn1 in association with ARNSHL or without links to an individual. Submitters have the option to mark vari- (DFNB9) in both affected siblings (F#54) and missence homozygous mu- ants that are of special interest. These options should facilitate sharing data tation (NM_030665.3:c.5254G>A) in gene previously associated with of unsolved cases with the intention to initiate a collaboration with others Smith-Magenis syndrome (OMIM#182290) and Potocki-Lupski syndrome that have similar cases/findings. (OMIM#610883) in four affeOcTtOedF siblings (F#38, F#40). Subsequent San- An earlier version of the SVD, the Diagnostic Variant Database (DVD), was ger sequencing of exten deRdA If1amilies confirmed cosegregation of homozy- implemented to support the Dutch medical centers performing exome se- gous mutations c.1111G>C ( ) with hearing loss in all affected siblings quencing, facilitating effective filtering of variants frequently occurring in of F#54, an dO cT.O52F54G>A( ) in all affected siRbAliIn1gs in F#38, F#40. Non- t Mhe. VDeurtmchaa pt:o Npuonlaet.i oHn. .Mei: None. I.F.A.C. Fokkema: None. P.E.M. Taschner: affected siblings from all families were either wt/wt or heterozygous for None. J.T. den Dunnen: None. J.F.J. Laros: None. c.1111G>C( ) in F#54, and for c.5254G>A( ) in F#38, F#40. Study was supported by grant 2011Y1SA09 from the CAS Fellowship for Young International Scientists, NSFC grant 31150110466 to AC, RFBR grant  P13
.92 # A1.Y1.- 0 C4
h-u0r1b2an2o1v-à: Ntoo nOeP.. O.L. Posukh: None. T.M. Karafet: None. Next Generation Sequencing in molecular diagnostics of previously undiagnosed clinical conditions A. M. Boguszewska-Chachulska1, M. Krawczyk2,1, D. Loska2,1, M. Zagulski1;  P13
.94 1Genomed SA, Warsaw, Poland, 2Polish-Japanese Institute of Information Technology, Warsaw, Poland. NGS diagnosis on Willebrand disease : about a highly homologous pseudogene ? M. GIRAUD1, P. BOISSEAU1, P. TALARMAIN1, J. HARY1, M. GOURLAOUEN1, C. TERNISIEN1, E. FRESSINAUD2, A. VEYRADIER2, S. BEZIEAU1; Our project is aimed at identifying the molecular bases of previously undia- 1CHU Hotel Dieu, Nantes, France, 2CHU, Clamart, France. gnosed genetic diseases in Polish patients by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), mainly whole exome sequencing and multiplex PCR-NGS. Whole exome sequencing was performed for DNA samples of nine patients, Von Willebrand Disease (VWD) is a common autosomally inherited bleeding representing undiagnosed clinical cases, and a healthy control. Exome-en- disorder which results from a quantitative or qualitative deficiency of von riched libraries were prepared and sequenced using the TruSeq chemistry Willebrand factor (VWF), a glycoprotein that is essential to primary hae- and GA II or HiSeq 2000 instruments (Illumina). The exome analysis was mostasis. The VWF gene (VWF) is located on the chromosome 12, resides performed using specialised open access, commercial and company-deve- within 178 kb of genomic DNA and consists of 52 exons which gives rise loped bioinformatic tools. A pipeline was designed for data quality analysis, to a 9kb mRNA. Systematic identification of the causal VWD sequence va- mapping and SNP/indel detection for diagnostic purposes. riations has been hampered by the large size of the VWF, but the main dif- As a result of our studies, a previously described heterozygous mutation in ficulty resides on a 97% homologous partial pseudogene from exon 23 to the CO L1
A2 gene (c.1009G>A) was identified as resulting in osteogenesis exon 35 (21kb of genomic DNA). Cost and time consuming of Sanger method imperfecta symptomes in one patient, and its inheritance in the patient’s sequencing remain a serious obstacle for most diagnostic laboratories. Ho- family was analysed. Exome data analysis also allowed us to identify two wever, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) have radically changed the tech- mutations in the CAPN3 gene responsible for the muscular dystrophy sym- nical perspectives over the last years. Then we have planed to test NGS for ptoms, indicating the Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2A diagnosis. VWD diagnosis to evaluate the accuracy of this resequencing technique for Both mutations are single nucleotide deletions, leading to frameshifts. The this highly homologous region. We have selected the Agilent HaloPlex target first mutation is one of two most common mutation in the CAPN3 gene enrichment system to prepare sequencing library samples running out on (c.550delA), the second mutation (c.1642delC) has never been reported illumina MiSeq platform. The HaloPlex probes library design has been made before. Polyphen 2 and SIFT analyses suggested its pathogenicity and pos- on the Agilent web-base SureDesign , (free software) and comprised VWF sible targeting of improperly terminated mRNA for nonsense mediated de- exons, introns, 5’ and 3’ UTR and the known promoter. This design foresee a cay. The biparental inheritence and carrier status of both mutations in the coverage rate of 95.84% of the whole gene. 48 patients have been tested and patient’s family were analysed. raw datas will be analysed and compared to capillary sequencing. Results The results of our studies allow us to propose whole exome sequencing as a w Mi.l lG biera duids:c uNsosneed. Po.n B tohies sEeSaHuG: Npoonsete. rP.. Talarmain: None. J. Hary: None. M. t oAo.Ml t.h Baot gcuansz beew aspkpa-lCiehda tcoh dulisakgan:o As.e E Mmepnlodyemlieannt d(fiuslol rodr eprasr.t-time); Significant; Gourlaouen: None. C. Ternisien: None. E. Fressinaud: None. A. Veyradier: Genomed SA. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant None. S. Bezieau: None. and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Genomed SA. M. Krawczyk: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genomed SA. D. Loska: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Genomed SA. M. Zagulski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genomed SA. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Genomed SA. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 353ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P14
.01 Rapid sequencing of clinical samples using the Ion Proton™ system A. Ameur, C. Lindau, S. Häggqvist, I. Jonasson, U. Gyllensten; PCR, enriched and loaded on a picotiter plate on a GS junior (Roche). Data Dept. of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, National Genomics were analysed with Reference mapper (Roche) and Seqnext (JSI medical). Infrastructure at Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden. Both genes were sequenced for 7 patients and 3 controls and only CLCNKB in 2 patients and 3 controls. We compared NGS results to Sanger sequencing to determine specificity and sensitivity. We are evaluating the Ion Proton™ System (Life Technologies) as a platform The main obtained coverage varied from 40 to 200. All coding variants for massively parallel sequencing of clinical samples (MPS). This technology found with Sanger analysis were found with NGS. The sensitivity was near has several potential advantages as compared to other platforms for MPS. 100% for the common regions tested and the analytic specificity was veri- A sequencing run only takes 3 hours and the mapping and variant calling fied by the right match between the reads and reference sequence on the analysis is completed within 24 hours. Sequencing of human exomes using entire chromosome 1. the Ion PI™ chip typically results in the identification of 60-70,000 SNPs per In conclusion, this study allowed us to develop a whole specific sequencing sample, with ~98% of these overlapping variants reported in dbSNP. We of the homologous CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes in a same run. The use of successfully recover known insertions of lengths up to 25 bp and deletions NGS in diagnosis requires secure interpretation with two softwares, in order of up to 37 bp. The bioinformatics analysis has been streamlined using in- to avoid misinterpretation of contiguous variants and homopolymers regi- house database system, based on R and MySQL, where all detected variants oLn. sM, aanndso au wr-Helel nddeifliin: Nedo nteh.r eNs. hLoel dP ofottri evra: rNiaonnte i. nI.t eRropnrceetalitni:o Nn.one. X. from all our exome sequencing runs are stored. This system allows for very Jeunemaître: None. R. Vargas-Poussou: None. efficient filtering of SNPs and indels between any group of samples in a mat- ter a seconds. In addition to exome sequencing, Ion Proton™ is being used for clinical applications such as identification of fusion transcripts from  P14
.04 cancer samples, mutation screening using panels of candidate genes and Combination HRM and MLPA for identification of methylation whole-genome sequencing of bacterial or viral human pathogens. The intro- status at the H19 and KCNQ1OT1 DMRs in patients with Beckwith- duction of the Ion PII™ chip will enable whole-genome human sequencing Wiedemann syndrome in the time frame necessary to be useful for an increasing range of clinical C. Hung1,2, C. Lee3, S. Lin4, Y. Su2; a Ap.p Alimcaetuior:n Ns.one. C. Lindau: None. S. Häggqvist: None. I. Jonasson: None. U. 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of Gyllensten: None. Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Sofiva Genomics, Co., Ltd,, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Hsin Chu Branch, Hsin Chu, Taiwan.  P14
.02 H19 KCNQ1OT1 A fast solution to NGS library preparation with low nanogram DNA Methylation alterations in and differe ntHia1l9ly methylated re- input gions (DMRs) oKnC cNhQro1mOTo1some 11p15.5 are relativelycommon in Beckwith- P. Liu, B. W. Langhorst, E. Yigit, L. M. Apone, D. B. Munafo, C. Sumner, F. J. Stewart, G. J. S. Lohman, E. Cantor, T. C. Evans Jr, N. Nichols, E. T. Dimalanta, T. B. Davis; Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). Gain of methylation in DRM or loss of New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United States. methylation in DMR result in heterogeneous overgrowth which is also associated with high risk for tumor development. The goal of the stu- dy was to combine methylation-sensitive high-reHs1o9lu tionK mCNelQti1nOgT a1nalysis Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) has significantly impacted human ge- (MS-HRM) and methylation-spe cific multiplex ligation-dependent probe netics, enabling a comprehensive characterization of the human genome amplification (MS-MLPA) for theidentification of and DMRs as well as a better understanding of many genomic abnormalities. By deli- methylation status in 43 patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. vering massive DNA sequences at unprecedented speed and cost, NGS pro- The ge nKoCtNypQe1sO oTf1 these samples were compared to traditional me Hth1y9lation- mises to make personalized medicine a reality in the foreseeable future. To specific PCR results. Of 43 BWS samples, 30.2% (13/43) were hypomethyla- date, library construction with clinical samples has been a challenge, prima- tionin DMR, 2.3% (1/43) were hypermethylationin DMR, rily due to the limited quantities of sample DNA available. To overcome this 2.3% (1/43) were paternal uniparental disomy (UPD), and 65.1% (28/43) challenge, we have developed NEBNext® Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit, a fast were negative. The detection rate for BWS at two DMRs is 34.9%. These library preparation method using novel NEBNext reagents and adaptors, two me thods produced consistent results regarding methylation status and including a new DNA polymerase that has been optimized to minimize GC yieHld1e9dneitKheCrN fQa1lsOeT p1o sitive nor false negative results. Moreover, this study bias. This method enables library construction from an amount of DNA as provides a representative picture of the distribution of methylation status low as 5 ng, and can be used for both intact and fragmented DNA. Moreover, of and DMRs in clinically ascertained BWS cases in the Tai- t hPe. Lwiuo:r Akf. lEomwp ilso ycmomenpt a(tfuibll loer w paitrht- tmimuel)t;i pMloed NeGstS; Npelawt fEonrmglasn.d Biolabs. B.W. wanese population. The MS-HRM and MS-MLPA clearly demonstrated that Langhorst: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. these are significant tools for quantification of methylation in molecular epi- E. Yigit: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. L.M. g Ce.n Heutincg d:i Nagonnoes. iCs.. Lee: None. S. Lin: None. Y. Su: None. Apone: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. D.B. Munafo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. C. Sumner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. F.J. Stewart: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. G.J.S.  P14
.05 Lohman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. E. FAVR (Filtering and Annotation of Variants that are Rare): methods Cantor: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. T.C. to facilitate the analysis of rare germline genetic variants from SOLiD Evans Jr: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. N. and Illumina datasets Nichols: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. E.T. T. Nguyen-Dumont1, B. J. Pope2, F. Odefrey1, R. Bell3, S. V. Tavtigian3, A. Lonie2, M. C. Dimalanta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. T.B. Southey1, D. J. Park1; Davis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; New England Biolabs. 1Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 2Victorian Life Sciences Computation Initiative, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.  P14
.03 Next Generation Sequencing application to challenged sequencing on homologous genes CLCNKA and CLCNKB, implicated in two forms of Characterising genetic diversity through the analysis of massively parallel Bartter syndrome. sequencing (MPS) data offers enormous potential to significantly improve L. Mansour-Hendili, N. Le Pottier, I. Roncelin, X. Jeunemaître, R. Vargas-Poussou; our understanding of the genetic basis for observed phenotypes, including AP-HP, Paris, France. predisposition to and progression of complex human disease. Great challen- ges remain in resolving genetic variants that are genuine from the millions of artefactual signals. CLCNKA and CLCNKB encode for renal chloride channels ClC-ka and ClC-kb FAVR is a suite of new methods designed to work with commonly used MPS involved in Bartter syndrome (BS), a rare recessive salt-losing tubulopathy. analysis pipelines, with a focus on relatively rare genetic variants. The most These genes are highly homologous, with a 95% identity and a similar ge- important and novel aspect of FAVR is the use of signatures in comparator nomic organisation. In order to improve CLCNKB analysis and to sequence sequence alignment files during variant filtering, and annotation of variants CLCNKA, we have developed a NGS protocol for both genes in a same run. potentially shared between individuals. The FAVR methods use these signa- The DNA library was prepared using nebulised specific LR-PCR following tures to facilitate filtering of (i) platform and/or mapping-specific artefacts, manufacturer recommendations. Each patient was tagged with two distinct (ii) common genetic variants, and, where relevant, (iii) artefacts derived M3I5D4s, one for each gene. The library was clonally EamSHplGifie 2d 0u1si3ng | e PmAulRsiIoSn, FRfrAomN CimEb |a lWanWcedW p.aEirSeHd-eGn.dO sReqGuencing, as well as annotation of geneticABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P14
.08 New splicing vector pSAD: Splicing functional analysis of a hybrid variants based on evidence of co-occurrence in individuals. We applied “maxi-minigene” with exons 19 to 27 of BRCA2 conventional variant calling applied to whole-exome sequencing datasets, A. Acedo, B. Díez, A. Curiel, C. Hernández, M. Infante, M. Durán, E. Velasco; produced using both SOLiD and TruSeq chemistries, with or without down- Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (UVa-CSIC), Valladolid, Spain. stream processing by FAVR methods. We demonstrate a 3-fold smaller rare single nucleotide variant shortlist with no detected reduction in sensitivity. The principles described herein were applied in our publication identifying At least 50% of all mutations identified in BRCA genes in breast/ovarian XRC C2
 as a new breast cancer risk gene and have been made publically avai- cancer patients are variants of unknown clinical significance (VUS). Several lable as a suite of software tools. studies have shown the link between disease and splicing disruptions due to FAVR is a platform-agnostic suite of methods that significantly enhances the mutations, including predicted nonsense or frameshift mutations. We aimed analysis of large volumes of sequencing data for the study of rare genetic to investigate the role of splicing aberrations of BRCA2 in breast/ovarian v Ta. rNiagnutyse ann-Dd utmheoinr ti:n Nflouneen.c Be. Jo.n P pohpeen: oNtoynpee.s F.. Odefrey: None. R. Bell: cancer. None. S.V. Tavtigian: None. A. Lonie: None. M.C. Southey: None. D.J. Park: We followed a simple strategy consisting of bioinformatics analysis with None. NNSplice and Human Splicing Finder of DNA variants and splicing functio- nal assays of hybrid minigenes. Splicing reporter plasmids allow to perform functional analysis without the need of patient RNA. We designed a new  P14
.06 splicing vector, pSAD, which enabled us the creation of a “maxi-minigene” Rapid Single Cell Targeted Sequencing: Applications in Tumorigenesis that includes nine exons of BRCA2 (19 to 27, MGBR2_19-27), where exon 27 T. Harkins, C. Lee; substituted the second vector exon. The wt minigene produced a mRNA of Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. 2,174 nucleotides. We validated the new MGBR2_19-27 with four splicing va- riants of the exons 19, 20, 23 and 24, which were tested in a previous report. Thirty-six out of 166 variants reported in these 9 exons were bioinformati- Current sequencing technologies have allowed the genomic community to cally selected and introduced by PCR-mutagenesis in the wt MGBR2_19-27. delve deeper into complex cellular systems on a massively parallel scale. We Fifteen variants (42%) of all types (synonymous, nonsense, frameshift or now, for example, have a better understanding of cancer evolution, as well missense) altered splicing by different mechanisms. Altogether, most vari- as the general genomic heterogeneity within a single tumor sample. Rare ants disrupted the canonical splice sites; one affected a splicing silencer and mutations and copy number variations (CNVs) are known to drive tumori- another the polypyrimidine tract. genesis and disease progression, but the amount of sample DNA required Aberrant splicing represents a relevant pathogenic mechanism in heredi- for deep sequencing is a limiting factor. This hindrance means that our un- tary breast/ovarian cancer. Splicing functional assays with the new vector derstanding of cancer and other cellular systems, such as embryo develop- pSAD are valuable tools to discriminate between benign and pathogenic ment, is limited to the sub-population level. A detailed understanding of cel- D AN. AA cveadroia: nNtos noef. aBn.y D híeuzm: Nano ndei.s eAa. sCeu greienl:e sN.one. C. Hernández: None. M. lular genomic hierarchies, whether on a temporal or spatial scale, requires Infante: None. M. Durán: None. E. Velasco: None. an improved capacity to perform quantitative analysis on a single-cell level. In this study, we have developed methodologies using as little as 1 picogram of input material to generate sequence information across 100’s to 1000’s  P14
.09 of amplicons. Sequencing performance did not show any appreciable am- A novel technique that distinguishes low-level somatic DNA variants plification bias as measured by strand bias and coverage uniformity. Using from FFPE-induced artifacts in solid tumors by next-generation a custom AmpliSeqTM assay, individual cells from primary and metatstatic sequencing (NGS) ovarian tumors were sequenced at ultra-high coverage (>1000x), allowing N. Udar1, R. Haigis1, T. Gros1, N. Kerry1, B. Barnes1, D. Pokholok1, M. Ross1, A. Lucio- us to study low frequency mutations and changes in gene copy numbers, Eterovic2, Q. Zhang2, M. Zenali2, E. Jaeger1; a Tn.d H haernkicnes t:h Ae. eEvmoplulotyimone notf (ofuvlal orira pna crta-tnimceer); aSti gthneifi ccaenlltu; lLairfe l eTveechl.nologies. C. 1Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Institute of Personalized Cancer Therapy, MD Lee: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States.  P14
.07 Several applications, including somatic mutation detection in cancers, re- First experiences with the GS Junior 454 in molecular genetic analysis quire methods that can efficiently detect low-frequency variants (< 10% of patients with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer at the Center of minor allele frequency, MAF) in DNA extracted from formalin-fixed-paraf- Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, University of Cologne fin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. We have developed a novel technique that can A. Baasner, B. Bluemcke, J. Hauke, B. Wappenschmidt, E. Hahnen, R. K. Schmutzler; distinguish true variants from fixation artifacts with high sensitivity and Center of Familiar Breast and Ovarian Cancer, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. specificity by investigating each of the two DNA strands independently. Tru- BRCA1 BRCA2 Seq Custom Amplicon technology was used to generate sequencing libraries and deep sequencing was carried out to an average depth of 20,000X with Mutations in and are linked to the development of hereditary a minimum of 1000X. The targeted re-sequencing assay* investigates ~14 breast and ovarian cancer. In 2012, 74.500 women and 600 men got breast kb of exons in 26 genes commonly mutated in solid tumors. Testing of more cancer and 7.200 women got ovarian cancer in Germany, while a hereditary than 200 samples with a MAF ≥5%threshold revealed the presence of a lar- predisposition is suspected in about 10% of these cases. Family history and ge number of potentially false positive calls when data from only one strand age of onset are the most important inclusion criteria for genetic testing. of DNA was analyzed, but this number was significantly reduced (e.g. >50% Since August 2012, we have analysed 237 inBdReCx Ap1at2ients with hereditary for G>A) when both strands were considered. Conclusion: This technique breast and/or ovaTrMian cancer using the GS Junior 454 (Roche) and the BRCA can distinguish FFPE artifacts from true variants and therefore provides in- kit (BRCA Master Dx kit, Multiplicom). The / genes contain many creased accuracy for the detection of low-frequency variants by NGS. homopolymer stretches of at least 6 bp in length. Since these stretches are * RNe. sUedaarrc:h A U. Esem Oplnolyyment (full or part-time); Significant; Illumina. R. Haigis: A. difficult to detect with the GS Junior 454 platform, we additionally employ- Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Illumina. T. Gros: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Illumina. N. Kerry: A. Employment (full or part-time); ed a homopolymer assay fragment analysis B (RBCRA C1
A/ 2HP, Multiplicom), which Significant; Illumina. B. Barnes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; allows rapid detection of small insertions/deletions in apBpRroCxAi1m/a2tely 30 Illumina. D. Pokholok: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Illumina. M. of these coding homopolymer stretches in . In this cohort, 36 out Ross: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Illumina. A. Lucio-Eterovic: of 237 index patients were tested positive for pathogenic muta- None. Q. Zhang: None. M. Zenali: None. E. Jaeger: A. Employment (full or part- tions. Of those, 10 individuals show disease-causing alterations located in time); Significant; Illumina. homopolymer stretches that were easily detected by homopolymer assay pre-screening. Thus, our results warrant homopolymer pre-screening prior t Ao .c Boasatlsyn neer:x tN goennee. rBa.t Biolune smeqcukee:n Ncionnge a. nJ.a Hlyasueks.e: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. E. Hahnen: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 355ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P14
.10 time); Significant; Sequenom. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent Characterisation of the RNU2 CNV, a bulky neighbour for BRCA1 or other intellectual property); Significant; Sequenom. C. Tessereau1,2, N. Monnet1, M. Imbert1, M. Buisson1, L. Barjhoux1, C. Schluth-Bolard3, D. Sanlaville3, S. Letort4, E. Génin4, E. Conseiller2, M. Ceppi2, L. Duret5, O. Sinilnikova1,6, S. Mazoyer1; 1Cancer Research Center of Lyon (CRCL), CNRS UMR5286/Inserm U1052/Université  P14
.12 Lyon 1, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 2Genomic Vision, Bagneux, France, 3Service de Comparative study for the evaluation of a new technology for cystic Génétique Moléculaire et Clinique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 4Inserm U1078, fibrosis screening Génétique, Génomique Fonctionnelle et Biotechnologies, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire M. C. A. Rongioletti1, F. Papa1, C. Vaccarella1, M. B. Majolini1, C. Centrone2, B. Minuti2, A. Morvan, Brest, France, 5Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, Université de Luciano1, V. Mazzucchi1, M. Belli1, I. Giotti2, C. Giuliani2, F. Torricelli2, G. M. Liumbruno1; Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, INRIA, UMR5558, Villeurbanne, France, 6Unité Mixte de 1Clinical Pathology Laboratory, San Giovanni Calibita Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome, Génétique Constitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents, Hospices Civils de Lyon / Centre Léon Italy, 2SOD Diagnostica Genetica, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy. Bérard, Lyon, France. Objectives Structural variation in the human genome has gained considerable attention Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most frequently diagnosed autosomal-re- in the recent years as it accounts for much of the variation between human cessive diseases in the Caucasian population. Screening forCystic Fibrosis genomes. However, the question of theR iNmUp2lication of multi-allelic CNVs in Transmembrane conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene mutations, including complex traits remains largely open as most of them cannot be genotyped poly T, is strongly recommended in infertile couples planning a pregnancy by array technology. Among them, the CNV is missing from the latest by assisted reproductive technology (ART). This study evaluated the perfor- human genome assembly. HowevBeRr,C tAh1is. locus has been previously shown mance of the new Nanochip CF70 kit (Savyon Diagnostic, Israel), a microar- to contain a variable number of tandem repeats and to reside close to the ray assay, and compared it with the Innolipa kits (Innogenetics, Belgium) breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 Methods We developed new tools to fully characterize it. By FISH analyses on combed From January to July 2012 we analyzed 392 blood samples with Innolipa DNA, we precised its location 124 kb telomeric of , we determined for and Nanochip technologies that identify respectively 70 and 56 CFTR muta- the first time the exact allelic number of repeats in 41 individuals and found tions. Both tests include the most common Italian mutations and the poly-T a range of 6-82 and a level of heterozygosity of 98%. Analysis of the 1,000 screening. Discordant results were analyzed with the Devyser CFTR Core GenoBmRCeA  P1
roject data sets confirmed the high degree of pRoNlyUm2orphism and Kit (Devyser, AB, Sweden), MLPA (MRC Holland), Direct Sequencing (DS) on concerted evolution of this CNV. By taking advantage of its location wRiNthUin2 the 3730 DNA Analyzer (AppliedBiosystems), and Sequenom’s MassArray the linkage disequilibrium block, we studied the array trans- system (Diatechpharmacogenetics, Italy) mission through a large number of generations and found that the Conclusions CNV displays an unexpected high degree of meiotic stability. Innolipa and NanoChip were concordant for 371/392 samples. 21/392 These new approaches extend our knowledge of a recently neglected CNV (0.5%) discordant results were tested with the aforementioned technolo- that could be valuable for evaluating the potential role of structural variati- gies: DS confirmed Innolipa results in 18/21 samples and Nanochip results oCn.s T iens dseisreeaasue: Nduonee t.o N it. sM looncanteito:n N noenxet. tMo. aIm mbaejrot:r Ncaonncee. rM s. uBsuciespstoibni:l iNtyo ngee.n Le.. in 1/21, while Devyser and Sequenom did not recognize some mutations Barjhoux: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None. D. Sanlaville: None. S. Letort: not included in their panels. DS was essential for the identification of twnoo None. E. Génin: None. E. Conseiller: None. M. Ceppi: None. L. Duret: None. O. Sinilnikova: None. S. Mazoyer: None. dinitffeerrpernett ahtoiomno pzoysgsoibulse deletions; although they were not present in Innolipa panels, in 2/21 samples Innolipa indicated a mutation with the warning In this study the Innolipa assay confirmed its reliability and Nanochip sho-  P14
.11 w Me.Cd .tAh.a Rt oitn cgoioulledt tbi:e Ncoomnee. Fc.o Pmappeat:i tNivoen ew. iCth. Vsalicgchatr cehllaan: gNeosn eto. Mth.Be .s Mofatjwolainrei: A novel approach for multiplex ultrasensitive detection of somatic None. C. Centrone: None. B. Minuti: None. A. Luciano: None. V. Mazzucchi: mutations in tumor samples None. M. Belli: None. I. Giotti: None. C. Giuliani: None. F. Torricelli: None. G.M. A. O. H. Nygren, M. Mosko, E. Flores, A. Nakorchevsky, M. Ehrich, C. Honisch, D. van den Liumbruno: None. Boom; Sequenom, San Diego, CA, United States.  P14
.13 Induced pluripotent stem cells derived from human chorionic villi Systematic characterization of somatic mutations in cancer genomes has P. Spitalieri, M. C. Quitadamo, A. Luchetti, L. Saieva, F. C. Sangiuolo; improved our understanding of this multifaceted disease and has provided Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. opportunities for targeted therapeutic development. Despite much progress several analytical challenges remain to be resolved, in particular the detec- tion of low abundance somatic mutations. These genetic events are hard to Trophoblast cells (TCs) are placenta fetal components that can be isolated identify due to the heterogeneous nature of most tumor tissue samples and from patients undergoing chorionic villi sampling for prenatal diagnosis. In where the mutation may differ from the highly abundant wild type sequence consideration of some of the features of these cells we speculated that TCs by only a single nucleotide. A method capable of accurate detection of these could be used to produce induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS). To valida- rare variants would allow identification of genetic determinants for the in- te this hypothesis, we employed human chorionic villi and a polycistronic itiation and proliferation of tumors at an early stage of disease progression lentiviral vector (hSTEMCCA-loxP) encoding Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc or would serve as a tool for monitoring residual disease. genes necessary to cell reprogramming. Stem cells specific morphological, We have developed a novel approach for ultrasensitive high-throughput molecular and immunocytochemical markers (ALP; OCT4; SSEA3; SSEA4; multiplex mutation detection and used this technique to detect as low as TRA1-60) confirmed the successful reprogramming. Additionally, we evalu- 0.125% of a mutant sequence in a mixture model. The process consists of ated their ability to differentiate into the three embryonic germ layers (ecto, multiplex PCR followed by a mutation specific single base extension reac- endo and mesoderm) by immunocytochemical characterization and their tion. The extension reaction utilizes a single mutation specific chain ter- ability to in vivo form teratomas. minator labeled with a moiety for solid phase capture. Captured, washed, This study was carried out on two different samples: a cystic fibrosis (CF) and eluted products are interrogated for mass and mutational genotypes patient carrying  E831
X/F508 mutations and a wild type one. Following re- are identified and characterized using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. For programming, the presence of the mutations were confirmed in iPS-CFTR further validation of this methodology, we successfully verified rare muta- cells and then cells were induced to differentiate into alveolar type II cells tions in a set of characterized cell-lines with ultra-low fractions of defined (ATIICs; a lung cell lineage). Within the cell population generated, the pres- somatic mutations. This new method, when compared to next generation ence of ATIICs was confirmed by molecular analyses. sequencing platforms, offers a relatively simple workflow with quick turna- To date, this represents the first example of iPS cells derived from a very ear- r oAu.On.dH t. iNmyeg arennd: mA.i nEimmpalol ysmamenpt l(efu ilnl poru pt arretq-tiumiree);m Seignntisfi.cant; Sequenom. E. ly extra-embryonic fetal tissues like chorionic villi (hiPS-CVS). These data Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Sequenom. M. Mosko: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; suggest that hiPS-CVS can be considered a valid cell model to accomplish Sequenom. E. Flores: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Sequenom. pathogenesis studies and possibly represents a valid tool for future thera- A. Nakorchevsky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Sequenom. M. p Pe. uStpicit aalpieprlii:c Natoinoen.s M. .C. Quitadamo: None. A. Luchetti: None. L. Saieva: Ehrich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Sequenom. E. Ownership None. F.C. Sangiuolo: None. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Sequenom. C. Honisch: None. D. van den Boom: A. Employment (full or part- 356 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P14
.14 Digital PCR modeling for maximal sensitivity, dynamic range and measurement precision Muscular dystrophy (BMD) are both caused by mutations in the dystrophin N. Majumdar, T. Wessel, J. Marks, D. Woo; gene (DMD) located on Xp21. The human DMD gene is the largest one span- Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. ning >2,200 kb of genomic DNA. It contains 79 exons involving various mu- tation types and regions. The mutational spectrum includes copy number mutations (CNMs) and point mutations that account respectively for appro- A mathematical framework is developed for modeling a digital PCR system ximately 65% and 35% of DMD mutations. Current diagnostic assays invol- with factors impacting the measurement precision such as the number of ve a variety of methodologies but theses methods are time-consuming. The available reaction chambers, sample volume reduction (due to a variety of main objective of our study was to implement Next Generation Sequencing causes), and false negative/false positive rates. This framework is used to (NGS) technology for diagnostic applications in DMD or BMD patients. For develop graphics showing the relationship between precision and the sup- this purpose, we assisted the Multiplicom Company to develop a multiplex ported dynamic range. The impact of total input sample volume on the lo- PCR assay of the 79 exons and splice sites (Multiplicom’s MASTR™ - Multi- west limit of detection or sensitivity is also illustrated. plex Amplification of Specific Targets for Resequencing) for further sequen- The model predicts an increase in supported dynamic range for the same cing on the Roche 454 GS-FLX sequencer. We compared data generated by number of reaction chambers with the use of two dilution points (using this approach with those obtained by classic Sanger sequencing in a cohort half the number of reaction chambers for each dilution). The loss of half of patients with known and unknown mutations, and tested its quality and the number of reaction chambers to a second dilution point incurs a slight reproducibility. The results showed complete consistency between this NGS loss in the detectable concentration range. However, this loss is more than strategy and Sanger sequencing, with a gain in term of length of experiments offset by the gain in concentrations now detectable because of an overlap- and data analyses. Another major interest of this technique is its potential ping effect of the second dilution point. Beyond two dilutions, gains are not ability to exploit the multiplexed PCR amplicons to determine exonic CNMs. found to be as significant. The results also predict how to leverage availab- A single technique should allow screening the majority of DMD mutations, le reaction chambers for precise detection of two targets present at largely rDe.d Tuhcoinrge lt:h Neorneefo. rDe. cMoésctsh iann: dN doniaeg. nRo. sZteicn dageluaiy: Nino nmeo. sMt .c Calsaeuss.tres: None. M. Cossée: None. different proportions. A large subset of the chambers is dedicated to detec- ting the rare type and the remaining chambers are dedicated to detecting the wild type at a different dilution. The curves showing precision versus concentration will be used to plan two digital PCR experiments for genetic  P14
.18 q Nua. nMtaifjuicmatdioarn: aAn. dE mraprloey amlleenlet (dfueltl eocrt pioanrt -rtiemsep)e; cStiigvneilfiyc.ant; Life Technologies/ Evaluation of methodologies for the analysis of human exomes using Ion Torrent. T. Wessel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life DNA purified from saliva. Technologies/ Ion Torrent. J. Marks: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; R. M. Iwasiow, M. Tayeb; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. D. Woo: A. Employment (full or part-time); DNA Genotek Inc, Ottawa, ON, Canada. Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. Saliva provides a non-invasive sample collection option which can greatly  P14
.15 improve the success of a research study by ensuring donor compliance and Single cell analysis with QX100 Droplet Digital PCR system enabling collections in difficult environments. Saliva collected using Orage- Y. Jouvenot, J. Berman, N. Heredia, S. Hodges, C. Litterst, S. Marrs, S. Wang, W. Yang, E. ne self-collection kits provide results equivalent to blood as demonstrated Hefner; via published GWAS studies over the last 10 years. In this study we show Bio-Rad Laboratories, Pleasanton, CA, United States. that DNA from saliva collected using Oragene is a reliable sample for exome arrays and exome sequencing. Furthermore, we compare results between the two platforms. Saliva samples (2 mL) were collected using Oragene self- Over the last decades, it has become increasingly evident that gene expressi- collection kits. DNA was extracted using the prepIT• L2
P kit, an alcohol reci- on profiles can vary from cell to cell, even within an apparently homogenous pitation-based extraction kit that yields high quality, high molecular weight population. The analysis of this heterogeneity has become a focus of interest DNA. Samples were quantified using a Picogreen protocol, A260/A280 ra- in various fields of biology, especially in stem cell research. The main obsta- tios were evaluated using a UV spectrophotometer and DNA integrity was cle for analysis of gene expression at the single-cell level is the low amount assessed using agarose gel electrophoresis. All samples were of sufficient of starting material. This requires a high level of confidence in results ob- quantity and quality for analysis using the Illumina HumanExome v1.1 ar- tained from unique samples, making it nearly impossible to be accurately rays and for targeted exome sequencing. Ten samples were processed on the done by traditional quantification methods such as qPCR. Droplet digital exome arrays and all reported a call rate >99.8%. Three samples were exo- PCR (ddPCR) provides absolute quantification of individual molecules with me sequenced, for which we obtained > 98.5% exome coverage at a mean high precision, and without the requirement for standard curves or pre- depth >72x. We then evaluated the variants which are shared amongst the amplification steps. Using Bio-Rad’s QX100 ddPCR system, we developed array and target capture platforms and evaluated the concordance between a method that measures single-cell gene expression with a great accuracy, them. Saliva collected using Oragene provided DNA of sufficient quality and thus enabling us to simultaneously analyze expression of different targets in quantity for both exome array and targeted sequencing analysis. Data obtai- material from the same cell. In order to perform this, we carefully evaluated ned demonstrates the samples perform equally well using either approach various cell lysis and cDNA synthesis methods and developed a protocol that and that data is highly concordant across methodologies. is fully compatible with ddPCR, easy to use and capable of analyzing gene R.M. Iwasiow: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; DNA Genotek Inc. expression in single cell without pre-amplification. This method allows us to M. Tayeb: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; DNA Genotek Inc. measure the expression of genes of interest in a single cell, minimizing the stochastic effect of sampling and empowering us to accurately and sensitive- l yY .d Jeoteucvte annodt: qAu. aEnmtipflyo ylomwe-net x(fpurlle osrs ipnagr tg-teimnee)s; iSni gsninifigclaen ct;e Blliso.-Rad Laboratories. J. Berman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories.  P14
.19 N. Heredia: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. Haloplex, the next generation in exome sequencing S. Hodges: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. R. W. W. Brouwer1, M. C. G. N. van den Hout1, F. J. G. T. Sleutels1, C. E. M. Kockx1, Z. Ozgur1, C. Litterst: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. E. Oole1, E. Brosens1, B. Eussen1, Y. Yi2, F. Dahl2, H. Johansson2, M. Isaksson2, F. G. Grosveld1, S. Marrs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. A. de Klein1, O. Ericsson2, W. F. J. van IJcken1; S. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, W. Yang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. E. CA, United States. Hefner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Bio-Rad Laboratories. Exome sequencing allows samples to be sequenced at a fraction of the costs  P14
.17 of whole genome sequencing while retaining information on the impor- Development of a next-generation sequencing approach for molecular tant protein-coding portions of the genome. Haloplex technology offers a diagnosis of dystrophinopathies very short (3 day) sample prep time, that combined with the fast Illumina D. Thorel, D. Méchin, R. Zenagui, M. Claustres, M. Cossée; HiSeq2500 and MiSeq sequencers brings the turn-around time of exome se- Molecular Genetic Laboratory - CHU de Montpellier - INSERM U827, MONTPELLIER, quencing to days instead of weeks. Here, we present the first exome sequen- France. cing results obtained with Haloplex capture technology within a week. We processed 8 samples with the Haloplex exome capture including 1 samp- le from HapMap. The generated libraries were sequenced on the Illumina Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) anEdS itHs Gmi l2d0er1 a3ll e|l iPc AvaRriIaSn,t ,F BRecAkNer CE M | iW SeqW , HW iS. eE qS 2H 00G 0. aO nR d G HiSeq 2500 systems. The generated data was 3 co5 m7 -ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pared to SureSelect v4 data from the same samples. Haloplex requires only we replaced 1-3 thymines by biotinylated uracils. This modification was car- 200 ng of DNA input amount and provides a two day turn around time for ried out in previously inserted 30 b.p. sequence between SV40 polyadenyla- sample preparation. 90% of the exome is covered at 10x using only 4 Gbp tion signals downstream of the EGFP gene and f1 origin for single-stranded of sequencing. The datasets from Haloplex are highly concordant with Su- DNA production. The presence of biotinylated uracils in purified plasmid reSelect all exon V4 results (99.6% SNP concordance). Haloplex excels at was verified in restriction analysis followed by dot blot procedure. Strepta- calling insertions and deletions in and near repeats due to the structured vidin-conjugated alkaline phosphatase was used to detect the biotin-uracils. nature of the resulting reads but both data sets have specific benefits and TDh.Se .a Pboilliytayk toov e: xNpornees.s EGFP was tested in Hela cell culture. strengths which will be described. In conclusion, Haloplex exome capture is a solid platform for exome sequencing. Its short runtime and low input requirements make Haloplex exomes ideally suited for clinical genetics ap-  P14
.22 p Rli.cWa.tWio. nBsr.ouwer: None. M.C.G.N. van den Hout: None. F.J.G.T. Sleutels: Human Genome Structural Variation Discovery and de novo Assembly None. C.E.M. Kockx: None. Z. Ozgur: None. E. Oole: None. E. Brosens: at the Single Molecule Level using Nanochannel Genome Mapping None. B. Eussen: None. Y. Yi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Technologies. F. Dahl: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent A. Hastie, E. Lam, M. Requa, M. Austin, F. Trintchouk, M. Saghbini, H. Cao; Technologies. H. Johansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States. Agilent Technologies. M. Isaksson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Technologies. F.G. Grosveld: None. A. de Klein: None. O. Ericsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Agilent Technologies. W.F.J. van As a result of the remaining limitations of DNA sequencing and analysis IJcken: None. technologies_even ten years after the completion of the human genome project_there remain about 400 gaps in the human reference sequence as- sembly, hundreds of millions of unassembled bases in those regions, and no  P14
.20 effective tools to comprehensively characterize the structural variation in Determination of transgene copy number in stably-transfected an individual’s genome. Despite the ungapped reference sequence being of mammalian cells by PCR-capillary electrophoresis assay extremely high quality, it is not feasible to create similarly high quality as- I. B. Pruner, V. Djordjevic, M. Gvozdenov, B. Tomic, D. Radojkovic; semblies of individuals to detect and interpret the many types of structural Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia. variation that are refractory to high throughput or short-read technologies. We present a single molecule genome analysis system (Irys) based on Na- noChannel Array technology that linearizes extremely long DNA molecu- The quantitative determination of transgene copy number in stably-trans- les for direct observation. This high-throughput platform automates the fected mammalian cells has been traditionally estimated by Southern blot imaging of single molecules of genomic DNA hundreds of kilobases in size analysis. Recently, other methods have been available for appraisal of gene to measure sufficient sequence uniqueness for unambiguous assembly of copy number, such as real-time PCR. complex genomes. High-resolution genome maps assembled de novo pre- We describe here a new method for quantitating the transgene copy num- serve long-range structural information necessary for structural variation ber in stably-transfected mammalian cells. Method is based on the relative detection and assembly applications. We have used Irys genome mapping quantification of amplicons after multiplex PCR reaction in which we used for the assembly and characterization of two human genomes. From these fluorescently labelled primers.The visualisation of amplified fragments was assemblies, we have spanned many of the remaining gaps, identified known performed by capillary electrophoresis. Sequence specific for our target and novel structural variants and phase some haplotype blocks, including in gene (prothrombin) and internal control originating from genomic DNA the MHC region. We also resolve and measure long tandem repeat regions (18S rRNA) were amplified in the same PCR tube. We calculated mean peak t hAa. tH aarset ileik: eAl.y E immpplooysmsibenlet (tfou lal sosr epmarbt-lteim bey) ;o Sthigenrifi mcaentth; oBdiosN.ano Genomics. height ratio of target:control gene with standard deviation for every cell clo- E. Lam: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics. M. Requa: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics. M. ne sample and used this method to identify stably-transfected mammalian Austin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics. F. cell clones bearing same copy number of vector containing target gene. The Trintchouk: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics. M. results of our assay were confirmed by real-time PCR. Our study showed Saghbini: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics. H. that method is equally informative and less expensive compared to traditio- Cao: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BioNano Genomics. nally used assay. Apart from saving time and material, this method has the advantage of using a very small amount of DNA. Also, since PCR is carried out in a single tube, any factor affecting the PCR will affect both target and  P14
.23 internal control and hence the ratio remains unchanged. Gold-Nanobeacons for gene silencing: evaluation of the effect and In conclusion, herein described method proves to be fast, reproducible and toxicity of a new nanotheranostics tool low-cost and can be used as a rapid screening tool for the determination of J. Conde1,2, M. Larguinho1,3, A. Cordeiro1, L. R. Raposo4,5, P. M. Costa6, S. Santos4,5, M. S. g I.eBn.e P croupnye rn: uNmonbee.r V i.n D bjoarsdicje rveisce: aNrocnhe o. fM g.e Gnveo ezxdperneosvsi:o Nno.ne. B. Tomic: Diniz3, A. R. Fernandes4,5,7, P. V. Baptista1; None. D. Radojkovic: None. 1CIGMH, DCV, Faculdade de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal, 2Instituto de Nanociencia de Aragón, Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 3REQUIMTE, DQ, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal, 4Centro de Química Estrutural, Instituto Superior  P14
.21 Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal, 5CB3, FECN,Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Using biotinylation for plasmid DNA binding to streptavidin-cell- Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal, 6IMAR, DCEA, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, penetrating peptide conjugate Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal, 7DCV, Faculdade de Ciencias e D. S. Polyakov; Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal. Institute of Experimental Medicine of the NorthWest Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Science, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. Antisense therapy is a powerful tool for post-transcriptional gene silencing suitable for downregulating target genes associated to disease. Gold nanop- Gene therapy strategies based on plasmid DNA are more preferable than articles (AuNPs) have been described as effective intracellular delivery ve- viral-based gene delivery. Plasmids are more stable in vivo and known to be hicles for antisense oligonucleotides providing increased protection against less immunogenic. Retroviral-based vectors integrate in actively transcribed nucleases and targeting capability via simple surface modification. We con- genes that can lead to disruption of tumor suppressor genes. Gene delive- structed an Antisense Gold-nanobeacon consisting of a stem-looped oligo- ry methods based on plasmid DNA are not likely to cause mutagenesis and nucleotide double labelled with 3’-Cy3 and 5’-Thiol- C6
 and tested for the they do not integrate in chromosomes providing increased safety. Despite effective blocking of gene expression in colorectal cancer cells. Due to the the potential advantages of using plasmid DNA, delivery issues with plasmid beacon conformation, gene silencing was directly detected as fluorescence vectors exist. increases with hybridisation to target. Vectorisation via the AuNPs circum- One of the ways of plasmid delivery into a cell can be covalent bonding of vents the need of transfection agents but with comparable silencing effici- the plasmid to a cell-penetrating peptide (CPP). However, common covalent ency to that of commercial RNAi strategies with the advantage that AuN- linking methods are limited by the concern that the covalent bond between Ps provide additional protection against circulating RNases. An integrated CPP and plasmid may alter the target gene expression. To avoid this, few pre- toxicology evaluation was performed based on acute cell toxicity, genomic selected nucleotides must be linked with CPP. Besides the covalent bond, for DNA damage and proteome profiling showing that the proposed nanothera- this purpose may be used disulfide or biotin-streptavidin interaction. nostics tool does not exhibit significant toxicity, which is extremely relevant In this work, we have created a biotinylated circular plasmid DNA to further 358 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRwAhNenC trEa n|s WlatWingW in.tEo SinH vGivo.O syRstGems. its binding to the streptavidin-CPP. In one strain of the pEGFP-N3 plasmidABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index J. Conde: None. M. Larguinho: None. A. Cordeiro: None. L.R. Raposo: None. P.M. Costa: None. S. Santos: None. M.S. Diniz: None. A.R. Fernandes: None. P.V. Baptista: None. and diagnose complex diseases and particularly to visualize small structural aberrations. We have made efforts to substitute the state of the art karyotyping techni- que to a fast low-cost and automatic label-free karyotyping procedure using  P14
.24 absorption and stray light spectroscopy in the UV-VIS range combined with Reprogramming through the pluripotent state as a new paragigm for classical light microscopy. Therefore we designed a hyperspectral imaging human cell rejuvenation L. Lapasset1, O. Milhavet1, A. Prieur1, E. Bernard1, A. Babled1, N. Aït-Hamou1, J. Leschick1, system with a scanning software for marker free karyotyping. This system F. Pellestor2, J. Ramirez3, J. De Vos3, S. Lehmann4, J. Lemaitre1; allows visualizing the stray light interference pattern of unstained chromo- 1Team INSERM „Plasticité du Génome et Vieillissement“, IGF, Montpellier, France, somes resulting from small variations in size, thickness, refractive index and 2Chromosomal Genetics Laboratory, CHRU, Montpellier, France, 3IRB, Hopital St Eloi, field of chromatin condensation of chromosomal substructures on a nanos- Montpellier, France, 4IGH, Montpellier, France. cale. Up to 150 individual spectra along the chromosome are registered. The spatial pixel resolution can therefore be as small as 50nm. The spatial location is indeed limited to the diffraction limit of microscopy (5Mb), but Direct reprogramming of somatic cells into induced pliripotent stem cells the detected substructures remain in the spectra and even can be optically (iPSCs) provides a unique opportunity to derive patient-specific stem cells resolved using Scanning Near-Field Microscopy (SNOM). with potential application in autologous tissue replacement therapies and The complex spectral signature can be analyzed by means of Multivariate without the ethical concerns of embryonic stem cells (hESC). However, cellu- Curve Resolution (MCR) or Principle Component Analysis (PCA) which is lar senescence which contributes to aging and restricted longevity, has been now integrated in our scanning software. The unique banding pattern of described as a barrier to the derivation of iPSCs, suggesting that aging might unstained chromosomes can be visualized in a novel high resolution karyo- be an important limitation for the derivation of iPSCs for therapeutic purpo- gSr.a Lmu creksouwl-tMinagr kfrgormaf :t hNeo nhey.p Ae.r Lspoerecntrza: lN doantea. aKn.a Rlyesbins.er: None. R.W. Kessler: ses from elderly individuals. Recently, we developped an optimized 6 factor None. based reprogramming protocol that may cause efficient reversing of cellular senescence and reprogramming into iPSCs. We demonstrated that iPSCs de- rived from senescent and centenarian fibroblasts have reset telomere size,  P14
.27 gene expression profiles, oxidative stress and motochrondrial metabolism, WildFire: an In-situ Isothermal PCR Method forming Billions and are undistinguishable from hESC. Finally, we further demonstrates that Monoclonal Colonies for NGS re-differentiation led to rejuvenated cells with a reset cellular physiology, K. Q. Lao; defining a new paradigm for human cell rejuvenation. These results provide Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. new insights into iPSC technology and pave the way for regenerative medi- c Lin. Le afopra sasgeetd: Npoantiee.n Ots. .Milhavet: None. A. Prieur: None. E. Bernard: None. A. in-situ Babled: None. N. Aït-Hamou: None. J. Leschick: None. F. Pellestor: None. J. We have developed a new massive parallel monoclonal technology, called Ramirez: None. J. De Vos: None. S. Lehmann: None. J. Lemaitre: None. “WildFire”, where sequencing libraries are isothermal amplified di- rectly on the surface of a 5500 flowchip. Sequencing libraries (~ 40 uL per lane) are added directly to the 5500-series Genetic Analyzer flowchip, who-  P14
.25 se surfaces have been coated with a special library-adaptoinr -csaitputure oligonu- A rapid and simple method for NGS library normalization cleotide. A DNA polymerase reaction mix is added, and in a single isothermal G. Roma, S. Roman, C. Van Loy, D. Topacio, K. Rhodes, M. Andersen; step lasting ~ 30 minutes, single templates are amplified on the flow- Ion Torrent Systems, Inc., a Division of Life Technologies Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, chip. The net density of sequencing-colonies created in thiisn -msiatunner far ex- United States. ceeds anything currently util2ized in next-generation sequencing, reaching ~ 1.5 million colonies per mm per flowchip surface. During amplifica- tion, the capture oligonucleotide is “consumed”, and each individual nucleic- Library preparation is a major contributor to labor and reagent costs for acid fragment “spreads” (like a WildFire) inside the flowchip until reaching Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). This is particularly true for higher an adjacent library fragment(s). When the individually-growing fragments throughput applications, such as targeted re-sequencing, where many “meet”, the amplification step terminates, because all of the surface-bound samples are prepared in parallel. NGS platforms require careful quantifica- primer was consumed. These “self-assembled”, spatially resolved, monoclo- tion of libraries, and sets of barcoded libraries require normalization prior nal colonies, are then sequenced by SOLiD chemistry. The resulting colony- to pooling. We present a simple method for NGS library normalization that sequencing reads maintain the same high accuracy as our bead-based me- obviates the need for library quantitation and dilution. Five DNA samples thod. Full genomes (from bacterial to human), exomes (human), and tran- (1 matched lung normal/tumor pair, 1 FFPE DNA, and 2 high molecular scriptomes (human) have now been sequenced using WildFire technology. weight DNAs) were carried through a 207-plex amplicon library preparati- WildFire technology greatly improves NGS workflow, increases throughput, on workflow with 5, 10, and 20ng of DNA input. Libraries were prepared in a Knd.Q s.i Lgnaoif:i cAa.n Etmlyp dloeycmreeanst e(sfu nll eotr cpoasrtt--tpimeer-)g; eSnigonmificea.nt; Life Technologies. triplicate for each sample at each input level. After library construction and normalization, 45/45 (100%) of libraries were within a two-fold concentra- tion range (115 - 204 pM, average 156 pM, SD 16.5 pM), when measured by  P14
.28 qPCR. Sequencing of these libraries showed no adverse effects on accuracy Non - destructive aDNA extraction from museum specimens (>99.5%), uniformity of amplicon representation (>99%), or bases with no T. M. Dobosz; strand bias (>99%) compared to control libraries (non-normalized, indivi- Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. dually diluted). The method has been shown to be highly tunable, making it a Gpp. lRicoambale: Ato. Ea mvaprloieytmye onft N(fuGlSl o pr lpaatfrot-rtimmes.); Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. S. Roman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. C. Van Loy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Museum collections contains valuable genetic information. Most of them Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. D. Topacio: A. Employment (full or haven’t been available, mainly because specimens should be intact. The pos- part-time); Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. K. Rhodes: A. Employment sibility of obtaining DNA by non- destructive way from conservation fluid (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. M. Andersen: A. allows to explore these valuable specimens. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Life Technologies/ Ion Torrent. Analysis include exhibits, which were stored in two types of preservative fluids: ethanol/glycerol and ethanol/glycerol/formalin. Specimens are da- ted from first decade of XIX century to the second half of the XX century.  P14
.26 Method starts from vacuum filtration of the conservation fluid. DNA were Hyperspectral Imaging for Label Free High Resolution isolated from the filters, contained small fragments of tissue and whole and Characterization of Chromosomes fragmented cells. DNA was isolated according Ivanow’s method with our S. Luckow-Markgraf, A. Lorenz, K. Rebner, R. W. Kessler; own modifications, then evaluated using agarose gel and Quantifiler real Reutlingen Research Institute, Reutlingen, Germany. time - PCR test. Next, in view of the genetic material’s age and the degrada- tion stage, the samples were tested by multiplexing STR or SNP. In order to verify the results, two various tests which ranges overlaped, were used. In Cytogenetics the specific structure of chromosomes is routinely identified The obtained results allow to accept these method as reliable. This approach by expensive and time consuming staining techniques like GTG (G- banding may be useful for researches as well as for museum curators because reco- by trypsin using Giemsa) banding or FIS EH S ( HFlu Go r 2e 0sc 1en 3c e | PIn Asi Rtu I SH ,y b Fr Rid Ais Na- CEv |e Wry Wof DWN.AE mSHayG be.O coRnGnected with necessary periodical conservation 3 a 5n 9d tion). In both cases a broad expert knowledge is necessary to understandABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 2Functional Genomics Center Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Department of Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research, Neurology Clinic, University complementation of conservation fluids. The conclusion: it is possible to ob- Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Department of Mathematical and Statistical Methods, tain valuable researching genetic material without the necessity to damage Poznan University of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 5Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, o Tr.M d.e Dstorbooys tzh:e N monues.eum exhibits. California, CA, United States. The characterization of large deletions identified by multiplex ligation-de-  P14
.29 pendant probe amplification (MLPA) or microarray analyses can be chal- Ravine syndrome: a mutation in a degenerated LINE-1 element lenging. Here, we present the applicability of single-molecule (PacBio RS) harbored by a long intragenic non-coding RNA and second-generation (Illumina) sequencing technologies to the charac- A. Henrion Caude1, P. Munier1, E. Benko2, S. Hanein1, S. Bandiera1, E. Westof3, M. Girard1, R. Mategot1, M. Fahling2, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1, F. Cartault4; terization of large genomic deletions. The three DNA samples used in this 1Inserm U781, Paris, France, 2Institut fuür Vegetative Physiologie, Charité- study harbor hemizyFgBouNs1 deletions previously characterized using a Sanger Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et approach. Deletions in two samples of length 26,8 C8
O7L b3pA a1nd 302,580 bp, re- Cellulaire du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Strasbourg, spectively, affect the gene in patients with Marfan syndrome, whereas Strasbourg, France, 4Department of Genetics, Université de La Réunion, Centre a deletion of 3,408,306 bp comprises the entire gene in a patient Hospitalier Régional de La Réunion, Saint-Denis, Réunion. with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome vascular type (EDS IV). By testing these DNA samples, our methods determined that both next-generation sequencing platforms were able to identify the position of deletion breakpoints. Our re- Familial recurrence of an extreme phenotype of infantile anorexia in a Cau- sults point out various advantages of next-generation sequencing platforms casian isolate in Reunion Island led us to suspect autosomal recessive inhe- when characterizing genomic deletions. However, special attention must be ritance of this rare progressive encephalopathy. Here, we report homozy- paid to identical sequences flanking the breakpoints, such as poly(N) mo- gosity mapping of the locus of this syndrome, called Ravine. Complete DNA tifs. Consequently, for the characterization of large deletions an alternative sequencing of the 400-kb linkage locus reveals a point mutation in a prima- procedure is provided by our approach, which can be performed with rea- te-specific retrotransposon that is transcribed as part of a unique long non- sonable DNA amount and is less work intensive and time consuming than a coding RNA, SL C7
A2-IT1A/B, which is expressed in the brain. Silencing this S Ja. nMgeeire napbperrgo:a Ncho.ne. M. Okoniewski: None. A. Patrignani: None. A. Szabelska: RNA whether by siRNA or antisense leads to increased neuronal apoptosis, None. Y. Tsai: None. S.W. Turner: None. J. Korlach: None. R. Schlapbach: consistent with the inappropriate dosage of this RNA in vivo and with the None. G. Matyas: None. phenotype. Structural analysis of the sequence reveals homology to piRNA as well as a small RNA-like hairpin. We assess the global impact of the mu- tation by transcriptomic analysis of brain samples, and discuss the different  P14
.32 mechanisms that could underlie the effect of the mutation. We believe that Next generation sequencing: aligning the futures of genomic medicine this work could contribute in the understanding of the significance of subtle A. Blasimme; v Aa.r Hiaetniorniosn i nC areutdreo:t rNaonnsep. oPs. oMnusn.ier: None. E. Benko: None. S. Hanein: INSERM, toulouse, France. None. S. Bandiera: None. E. Westof: None. M. Girard: None. R. Mategot: None. M. Fahling: None. A. Munnich: None. S. Lyonnet: None. F. Cartault: None. Genomic approaches to cancer treatment are already informing a number of clinical trials in oncology (e.g. microarray-based cancer signatures trials). This is animating powerful visions about the development of increasingly  P14
.30 personalised and effective cancer therapies. Towards a Theory of Science Policy for Genetics However, in this paper we show that next-generation high-throughput tech- E. M. Meslin1,2, A. Blasimme2; nologies, offering an unprecedented level of genomic resolution, are likely 1Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, United States, 2UMR U 1027, Inserm, Université to steer the emergent sociotechnical phenomenon of cancer genomics even Toulouse III - Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France. further into as yet uncharted territories. Our paper will draw on the authors’ direct engagement with an Interna- tional Cancer Genome Consortium project (CAncer GEnome of the KIDney Many politically charged topics in Western liberal democracies have science - CAGEKID) and a number of other European projects in the field of high- at their core: embryonic stem cell research, climate change, GM crops, or al- throughput genomics. We will provide first-hand ethnographic analyses of ternative energy strategies. But science has always been politically charged the anticipatory orientations of early actants in cancer post-genomics. -- from the early 17th century academies advising governments, to the Hori- What are the traces of this imagined future in present day practices of cancer zon 2020 budget debate in Europe and the “fiscal cliff” in the United States. post-genomic research? What sociotechnical relationships are being recon- We argue that science has become especially challenging for policy-making figured, and how? What material practices, biomedical platforms and actor- precisely because liberal democracies lack a coherent way to accommodate networks are being mobilized to design the future of post-genomic clinical pluralistic views about scientific innovation. Indeed, given the importance oncology? Our inventory will reconstruct the assemblage of a sociotechnical of science in society, it is surprising that so little attention has been given infrastructure made of new actors, circulating samples, shared databases, to providing a coherent approach that would explain the way science poli- collaborative projects, but also of restructured ordering tools such as new cy works. Such an approach, if it could be developed as theory, might help i nAf.o Brmlaesdim cmones: eBn. tR feosremasrc ahn Gdr faenet d(pbrainccki pparla inctviecsetsig.ator, collaborator or systematize public decision making about science and more effectively con- consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; F P7
 tribute to desirable social goals. Human genetics is only the most recent of projects: CAGEKID and ESGI. many science policy topics where comprehensive ethical analysis has been brought to bear (rightly) on key issues such as informed consent, privacy, and governance. This may be why regulation of direct-to-consumer genetic  P14
.33 testing, establishing consent protocols for biobanks, or constructing privacy The challenges of quantifying the use of bioresources in genetic protections for GWAS studies does not admit of harmonized policy. It may research also be that insufficient effort has been made to articulate the fundamental A. Cambon-Thomsen1,2, L. Mabile1,2, M. Thomsen1,2, E. Rial-Sebbag1,2, &. BRIF working political values that underpin progress in science policy. To supplement the group3; role that ethical theory has played in genetics, we sketch the basic features 1Inserm, UMR1027, Epidemiology and analyses in public health, Toulouse, France, of a theory of science policy using political philosophy to engage these nor- 2Université de Toulouse III Paul Sabatier, UMR 1027, Toulouse, France, 3The GEN2PHEN m Ea.Mtiv. eM persolibnl:e Fm. Cs.onsultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Eli Lilly. A. Blasimme: and the BioSHaRE-EU consortia, Toulouse, France. None. Sharing data and bioresources is essential for optimising knowledge pro-  P14
.31 duction. However, establishing a valuable bioresource that can be used for Breakpoint characterization of large deletions using PacBio and various genetic researches over time requires considerable time and efforts Illumina sequencing technologies that often lack proper recognition. To address this issue, one approach is to J. Meienberg1, M. Okoniewski2,3, A. Patrignani2, A. Szabelska2,4, Y. Tsai5, S. W. Turner5, J. develop adequate tools to assess bioresource uses and their specific contri- Korlach5, R. Schlapbach2, G. Matyas1; bution in the development of novel scientific knowledge. The concept of a 1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Schlieren ZH, Switzerland, Bioresource Research Im1pact Factor (BRIF) was introduced in 2003 ], and 360 ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRlaAteNr CfuErt h| eWr dWevWelo.pEeSdH . GBR.OIFR aiGmed to be a quantitative indicator filling aABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P14
.35 New simple method for TPMT alleles determination using multiplex gap in the complex environment of scientific production assessment. Rather HRMA than a fixed indicator we tend to propose a framework for measuring biore- M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, P. Borun1, A. Bartkowiak1, M. Kliman2, O. Zakerska- source impact that could be used for valuing the activity of a bioresource Banaszak3, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja4, M. Kurzawski5, M. Szalata1,2, A. Plawski1, R. over time. Slomski1,2; The methodology of Requirement Engineering (RE) was used to formalise 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3The the steps towards the development of a BRIF instrument. The requirement NanoBioMedical Centre, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of analysis resulted in the following entities/ideas to be assessed: Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical - Defining obstacles to sharing samples and data Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 5Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, - Pointing to specific issues regarding genetic use Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. - Choosing adequate identifier scheme for bioresources - Identifying and weighing parameters to be considered in various metrics - Analysing the role of Journal guidelines and policies for resource citing and The thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is a crucial enzyme in metabolism referencing of thiopurine drugs: azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine which are used in - Assessing policies for resource access and sharing and how they influence the treatment of leukemia or inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). Genetic the bioresource use. polymorphism of the TPMT gene correlates with activity of this enzyme This work allows propos4in3g a framework for the operational development which determines an individual reaction and dosing of thiopurines. The of BRIF. It still requires input from stakeholders within the biomedical com- three main TPMT alleles: TPMT*2 (c.238G>C), *3A (c.460 G>A, c.719A>G) m Au. nCiatym. Nboant -GTehnoemt s2e0n1:1 B, . Re(s6e)a:5rc0h3 G-4r.ant (principal investigator, collaborator and *3C (c.719A>G) accounting for 80% to 95% of inherited TPMT defici- or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; ency in different populations in the world. The aim of the study was to esta- European Commission. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Congress of genetics, ESHG, EFI. F. blish a rapid and highly sensitive method for analysis of these three major Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Projects supported by Eu Commission, UK TPMT alleles. Here we present the molecular test based on multiplex high Wellcome trust, Genome Canada. L. Mabile: None. M. Thomsen: None. E. Rial- melting resolution analysis (HRMA) for genotyping of c.238G>C, c.460 G>A Sebbag: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and c.719A>G. and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; European We analyzed DNA samples from 100 clinically diagnosed IBD patients Commission. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; several EU projects. &. treated with thiopurine drugs and known genotypes at codons 238, 460 BRIF working group: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or and 719 of the TPMT gene. One probe was TPMT *1/*2, one *3A/*3A, seven consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; EU Commission. *1/*3A and other 91 wild type *1/*1. Our results obtained with multiplex HRMA indicated 100% accuracy compared to data from classical sequen- cing and RFLP. We conclude that multiplex HRMA can be used as a sensitive and efficient alternative diagnostic method compared to conventional tech-  P14
.34 n Miq. uSeksr zfyopr cdzeatke-rZmieilninastkioan: Nofo nTeP.M P.T B*2o raunnd: N*3o naell.e Ale. sB.artkowiak: None. M. Detection of mRNA knockdown in live cells using a novel nano- Kliman: None. O. Zakerska-Banaszak: None. A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja: particle technology None. M. Kurzawski: None. M. Szalata: None. A. Plawski: None. R. Slomski: D. Weldon1, D. Giljohann2, A. Ko1, L. White1, Y. Williams1, S. Le Dall3, G. Johnston1; None. 1Merck Millipore, Temecula, CA, United States, 2AuraSense, Skokie, IL, United States, 3Merck Millipore, Molsheim, France.  P14
.36 Whole Genome Sequencing of a Family Trio Using DNA Extracted from Modulation of gene expression using techniques such as RNAi has become Saliva a fundamental tool in the study of gene function and biological pathways. M. Tayeb, S. Rabuka, R. M. Iwasiow; To determine the efficiency of gene knockdown using most widely used de- DNA Genotek Inc, Ottawa, ON, Canada. tection methods, cell samples must be sacrificed by lysis or permeabiliza- tion and fixation. In addition to sample destruction, another disadvantage of these techniques is that they yield results that only reflect the average Saliva collected using Oragene is a non-invasive sample type and an alter- expression of the gene in the collected cell population. One nondestructive native to blood that provides large amounts of high quality genomic DNA, option is the use of transfected reporter constructs. However, although the as demonstrated through published GWAS studies over the last 10 years. In cells remain alive, the technique cannot reveal endogenous gene expression this study we show that DNA extracted from saliva is a reliable sample for and can have negative effects on cell health. An ideal RNA detection agent whole genome sequencing and performs similarly to DNA from blood. Saliva provides a noninvasive approach to interrogating gene expression while en- samples were collected from a family trio consisting of a mother, father and abling sorting of live cells that can be separated and directly used for down- male child. Saliva was collected using Oragene self-collection kits. The DNA stream studies. was extracted using the prepIT• L2
P kit, an alcohol precipitation-based ex- Here we describe the detection of Survivin mRNA levels in LNCap and SC C12
 traction kit that yields high quality, high molecular weight DNA. Library pre- with and without the presence of Survivin siRNA treatment. The changes in paration, sequencing and assembly were performed at Complete Genomics gene expression can be determined in the cells while they remain in cell cul- (CGI). Sequencing performance of DNA from saliva was compared against ture in real-time, providing more physiologically relevant data in living cells. a publicly available trio data set sequenced from blood DNA, sequenced This technique utilizes a fluorescent reporter that can be detected using by CGI. There was no statistical difference between the number of known fluorescent microscopy for visualization or flow cytometry for single cell re- variants (p=0.064), novel variants (p=0.243), indels (p=0.069) and frames- solution and quantification. This allows for a more dynamic understanding hifts (p=0.075) called among saliva samples compared to blood samples on of knockdown efficiency. average. In saliva, we observed minor differences in synonymous reference The ability to specifically detect RNA levels in live cells on a cell–by-cell basis mismatch calls, missense variants and total sites called. These differences provides new opportunities to link biological pathways and physiological are likely due to differences in donors and sequencing coverage between p Dro. cWeessldeos nto: A g.e Enme pfulonycmtieonnt s(f.ull or part-time); Significant; Merck Millipore. the saliva and blood samples, work is ongoing to determine the cause. Data D. Giljohann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; AuraSense. A. Ko: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Merck Millipore. L. White: obtained from the family trio indicated excellent sequencing performance of A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Merck Millipore. Y. Williams: all three samples confirming that saliva collected using Oragene is an excel- A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Merck Millipore. S. Le Dall: A. lent source of DNA for whole genome Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Merck Millipore. G. Johnston: A. s eMq. uTeanyceibn:g A.. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; DNA Genotek Inc. S. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Merck Millipore. Rabuka: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; DNA Genotek Inc. R.M. Iwasiow: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; DNA Genotek Inc. ESHG 2013 | PARIS, FRANCE | WWW.ESHG.ORG 361ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P14
.37 Computer-aided facial recognition of individuals with X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia Human venous blood samples will be collected from 3 healthy volunteers on K. M. Huttner1, L. Karlinsky2, S. Hadj-Rabia3, L. Wolf2,4, M. Shohat2,4,5, D. K. Grange6, a day to day, week to week and month to month basis over 2 years. Multi- O. D. Klein7, H. Schneider8, E. Navarro9, V. López-González9, C. Bodemer3, L. Basel- plexed polyadenylated RNA samples were run on the Illumina HiSeq system Vanagaite2,4,5; and analyzed with a Tophat Cufflinks pipeline. 1Edimer Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States, 2FDNA Ltd., Herzlyia, Israel, 3Department of Dermatology, French reference centre for genetic skin disorders (MAGEC) Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, APHP, Paris Descartes University, INSERM Characterizing the dynamic range of intra-individual transcriptomes on U 781, Paris, France, 4Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5Schneider Children‘s Medical the basis of statistical, chemical and biological variations is a crucial step in Center of Israel, Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Ctr and and applying RNA-Seq in diagnostics. Here, we will analyze if current statistical Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 6Washington Univeristy in St. methods can result in biological different answers within one individual and Louis, St. Louis, MO, United States, 7University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, will provide recommendations for RNA-Seq studies. CA, United States, 8University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 9Hospital S. Lehnert: None. M. Jaspers: None. H. Cuppens: None. Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain. X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED) is a genetic disorder  P15
.02 characterized by hypohidrosis, hypotrichosis and hypodontia. Early diagno- Comparative genome-wide analysis using whole-genome sequencing sis of XLHED is a key factor in reducing the risk for severe hyperthermia and and high-density SNP genotyping array data pulmonary infections. Patients display a distinct craniofacial phenotype cha- M. Noukas1,2, K. Mannik1,3, R. Magi2, R. Tamm1,2, A. Macé4,5, A. Kurg1, Z. Kutalik4,5, A. racterized by retruded appearance of the midface with maxillary hypoplasia Reymond3, A. Metspalu1,2; 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian and mandibular prognathism. In this study, a novel facial dysmorphology Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Center of Integrative Genomics, analysis system based on 2D photographs (FDNA®) was used to identify University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, XLHED-affected individuals. University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Following photograph acquisition from male patients with clinically and/ University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. or genetically-confirmed XLHED (n=27 newborns, n=64 age 1-10 yrs, n=42 age 11+ yrs, plus controls), 130 facial fiducial points were localized per photograph and their geometrical relationships determined. The final clas- Next-generation sequencing and array-based high-density genotyping are sification was based on these measurements as well as on a global „gestalt“ both powerful approaches to study genetic variation that affect disease de- detector. Cross validation of the recognition capability involved 20 rounds of velopment, tumorigenesis, response to drugs etc. analysis with the data split randomly to training and testing data. In our study, the aim is to (i) develop a workflow to compare CNVs obtained In this proof-of-concept study, the statistical power of the test in identifying from high-coverage whole-genome sequencing to the ones from high-densi- XLHED patients using average area under the ROC curve was 96% for indivi- ty SNP genotyping array data; (ii) accurately detect rare CNVs with effect on duals >11 years; 97% for children 1-10 years, and 98%-99% for newborns. health in a longevity cohort collected by Estonian Genome Center of Tartu Overall, the system had a high level of specificity (97-100%) at 90% sensiti- University of Estonia. vity across all age groups. We report a cohort of 49 unrelated individuals older than 83 years. Whole- These results demonstrate the strength and utility of computer-based fa- genome sequencing experiment was performed using TruSeq DNA Sample cial analysis utilizing ordinary photographs in the identification of XLHED- Preparation Kit and HiSeq 2000. For genome-wide SNP genotyping we used affected patients. With further refinement, a universal newborn screening HumanOmni2.5-8v1 BeadChips (Illumina, Inc). platform is plausible that will alert families to this clinical condition. Early Our study includes the estimation of efficiency and accuracy of calling struc- diagnosis may also be critical for successful ectodysplasin therapy in this tural variants from sequencing data and comparison of the concordance d Kis.oMr.d Heur t(tNneCrT: 0A1. 7 E7
