L2 .1 Early-Onset Stroke and Vasculopathy Associated with Mutations in ADA2 P
L1 .1 I. Aksentijevich1, Q. Zhou1, A. K. Ombrello1, D. Yang2, A. V. Zavialov3, R. Sood1, M. Boehm2, D. RASopathies. The other face of RAS signalling dysregulation L. Kastner1; M. Tartaglia; 1NHGRI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2NHLBI/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. 3University of Turku, Turku, Finland. RAS proteins are small monomeric GTPases that function as molecular swit- We initially observed 3 unrelated patients with fevers, livedo reticularis, vas- ches controlling a major intracellular signaling network that, depending on the culopathy, and early-onset recurrent ischemic strokes. We performed exome cellular context, guides diverse biological functions, including proliferation, cell sequencing on affected patients and their unaffected parents that pointed to fate determination, survival, migration, differentiation, and senescence. RAS recessively inherited predicted-deleterious mutations in CECR1, encoding signaling is switched on upon stimulation by numerous cytokines, hormones, adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2). All mutations are either novel or present at and growth factors, and mediates the appropriate cell response to external sti- low frequency (<0.001) in several large databases, consistent with the reces- muli through the regulation of transcription, cytoskeletal rearrangement, and sive inheritance. Candidate gene screening was done in additional 6 patients. metabolism. Within this network, signal flow through the RAF-MEK-ERK pa- Nine patients shared 4/9 missense mutations in CECR1 along with conserved thway, the first identified mitogen-associated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, haplotypes. Computer modeling based on the crystal structure of the human mediates early and late developmental processes, including determination of ADA2 suggests that CECR1 mutations either disrupt protein stability or impair morphology, organogenesis, synaptic plasticity, and growth. enzyme activity. All patients had at least a 10-fold reduction in serum and plas- Signaling through the RAS-MAPK cascade is tightly controlled, and its enhanced ma concentrations of ADA2, and reduced ADA2-specific adenosine deaminase activation has been known for decades to represent a major event in oncoge- activity. ADA2 is expressed predominantly in myeloid cells and is a secreted nesis. Activating somatic RAS gene mutations occur in approximately 30% of protein. Animal models suggest that ADA2 is the prototype for a family of grow- human cancers, and upregulation of this signaling pathway can also result from th factors (ADGFs). Although there is no murine homolog of CECR1, there are enhanced function of upstream signal transducers or RAS effectors, and inef- 2 zebrafish homologs, Cecr1a and Cecr1b. Knockdown of a zebrafish ADA2 ficient function of feedback mechanisms. homolog caused intracranial hemorrhages and neutropenia, phenotypes that Unexpectedly, discoveries derived from a massive disease gene hunting effort were rescued by wild type but not mutant human CECR1. Skin, liver, and brain have recently established a novel scenario in which the upregulation of this biopsies from patients demonstrated vasculopathic changes characterized by signaling cascade underlies a group of clinically related developmental disor- compromised endothelial integrity, endothelial cellular activation, and inflam- ders, the RASopathies, characterized by facial dysmorphism, cardiac defects, mation although ADA2 is not expressed in the endothelial cells. Our data sug- reduced postnatal growth, variable cognitive deficits, ectodermal and muscu- gest that loss-of-function mutations in CECR1 are associated with a spectrum loskeletal anomalies, and increased risk for certain malignancies. These dis- of vascular and inflammatory phenotypes ranging from early-onset recurrent orders are caused by mutations in genes encoding RAS proteins, regulators s Pt Lr 2ok .2e to systemic vasculopathy and/or vasculitis. of RAS function, modulators of RAS interaction with effectors or downstream Disrupted auto-regulation of SNRPB causes cerebro-costo-mandibular signal transducers. Based on the relatively high prevalence of some of these syndrome disorders (i.e., Noonan syndrome and neurofibromatosis type 1), the dysregu- D. C. Lynch1, T. Revil2, J. Schwartzentruber3, E. J. Bhoj4, A. M. Innes1, R. E. Lamont1, E. G. lation of this signaling pathway represents one of the most common events af- Lemire5, B. N. Chodirker6, J. P. Taylor7, E. H. Zackai4, D. R. McLeod1, E. P. Kirk8, J. Hoover-Fong9, fecting developmental processes. These discoveries have also provided us with L. Fleming10, R. Savarirayan11, .. Care4Rare Canada12, J. Majewski13, A. Jerome-Majewska14, J. unpredicted molecular mechanisms converging toward the dysregulation of S. Parboosingh1, F. P. Bernier1; this signaling network. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Department P
L1 .2 of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3McGill University and Génome Evolution of the HD gene Québec Innovation Centre, Montréal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Genetics, The Children‘s E. Cattaneo; Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Bioscience, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. Department of Pediatrics, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, 6Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 7Genetic Hdh Dictyostelium discoideum Dd Health Service, Auckland, New Zealand, 8Sydney Children‘s Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 9Greenberg Center for Skeletal Dysplasias,McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, The gene arose with no CAGs in ( ), around 800 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 10McKusick-Nathans Institute of million-year ago before the protostomeH-ddheuterostome divSetrrgoenngcyelo c(Zenutcrcoattuos, Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 1112Victorian Ppuhrypsuiorla Rtuesv, 
S2 p010). The CAG then has appeared in and is unique to the deute- Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, rostome branch. Two CAGs are foBurnadn cihni ostom ina sfeloar iudraceh,i Bn f( 12Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 13Department of Human ), the first specie to carry a primitive nervous system, and two Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 14Department of Pediatrics, McGill CAHGsd hare present in amphioxus ( ), the first specie to University, Montréal, QC, Canada. exhibit a rudimental hollow nerve tube and cephalization. Four CAG are found in from the more evolved fishes, amphibians, and birds. The CAG further expands in mammals and reaches its maximum length in human. A study of 278 The discovery of highly conserved non-coding elements has unleashed a race normal subjects revealed an increase in grey matter with increasing length of to elucidate their functional significance. A class of intragenic highly conserved the CAG repeat (MuhHladuh, PlosOne 2012), indicating that CAG size could influ- non-coding elements has previously been associated with regulating levels of ence normal brain structure. Our hypothesis is that the progressive increase core spliceosomal components, which affects the alternative splicing of down- in CAG length in the gene observed during evolution may be implicated in stream genes. These regulatory exons contain a premature termination codon, the evolutionary changes that have occurred in the developing and adult ner- and trigger nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) when included in the as- vous system tHhrdohu ghout vertebrate phylogeny, with a possible role for the CAG sociated transcript. In this study we identify mutations in one such exon in SN- in newly emerging cognitive functions in the mammalian brain. We have now RPB as the cause of cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome (CCMS). CCMS, one collected the gene from new species both in the protostome and deutero- of the last unsolved classical Mendelian disorders, is a multiple malformation stome branch. In addition to further analyze the CAG tr.act during mammalian syndrome characterized by posterior rib gaps and micrognathia. The identi- evolution we have collected genomic DNA and amplified the CAG tract from fied mutations fall within exonic splicing silencer sequences. We show by both non-anthropomorphic and anthropomorphic primates Our reconstruction of qRT-PCR and a minigene reporter assay that these mutations cause increased htt phylogeny supports further that the CAG tract expands during deuterosto- inclusion of the alternative exon and decreased overall expression of SNRPB. me evolution and seems to correlate with the appearance and/or evolution of This decrease is predicted to influence the splicing of a diverse but limited progressively more complex nervous systems. number of downstream target genes. Our data provide the first evidence for P
L1 .3 the functional importance of this class of conserved elements in the regulation Genetic engineering of hematopoietic stem cells for the treatment of of human development. We suggest that this exon, which is highly conserved inherited diseases across placental mammals but not other vertebrates, accords a subtle regulato- L. Naldini; Milan, Italy. ry role to SNRPB which may have contributed to the complexity of mammalian development. P
L2 .3 The First 100 patients diagnosed by whole-exome sequencing through No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at FORGE Canada: Insights for Clinical Translation www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. S. L. Sawyer1, C. L. Beaulieu1, T. Hartley1, D. Bulman1, J. Majewski2, FORGE Canada Consortium, K. M. Boycott1; 1Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index 2Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada. further highlighting that chrX warrants attention. An accurate genetic diagnosis is fundamental for pediatric patients with rare We investigated the contribution of >400,000 chrX SNPs to the levels of twelve genetic disorders to improve disease management, access to resources, and common quantitative phenotypes in almost 25,000 individuals from Finland recurrence risk counseling. A diagnosis also provides psychosocial benefits to and Sweden. ChrX-wide association analysis pinpointed three new loci: two for families. The Finding of Rare Disease GEnes (FORGE) Canada project, which height (FGF16/ATRX/MAGT1, P-value=2.71×10-9; ITM2A, P-value=3.03×10- sought to identify novel rare disease genes by whole-exome sequencing (WES), 10) and one for fasting insulin (Xq23, P-value=5.18×10-9), the first X-chromo- shows that 36% of the solved disorders were secondary to mutations in known somal ones for these traits in Europeans. Interestingly, the genetic effects for genes; 95 known disease genes were identified out of 264 total disorders stu- height near ITM2A, a gene implicated in chondrogenesis and know to escape died. All patients had undergone standard of care genetic testing in Canada and from XCI, showed sex-heterogeneity in a manner consistent with no dosage no diagnosis was forthcoming. Thus, for 104 families, WES provided a clinical compensation between men and women, observation further supported by diagnosis; 24 of these were dominant (most de novo), 68 were autosomal reces- statistical model comparison and female-bias in ITM2A expression. Given the sive, four were X-linked mutations and one family had two disorders. Although converging evidence, this height locus likely represents the first link between many of the 104 families who received a clinical diagnosis were ascertained an XCI-escaping gene and phenotypic variation in a population sample, and we because of familial recurrence or consanguineous parents, 91 single affected estimate it explains approximately 1.5% of the height difference between men patients without a family history were also included for WES. This latter subset and women. of the above 264 disorders are representative of what geneticists often see in Together our findings underline the value of including chrX in large-scale gene- the clinic and had a diagnostic rate of 43%. Thus, WES would seem to be an ef- tic studies of complex diseases and traits. Our estimate that chrX accounts on ficient and cost-effective means of clinical diagnosis for many patients who are average 2.6% of complex trait heritability, suggests there are tens of associated currently undiagnosed. Our findings suggest that patients with genetically he- chrX loci to be discovered, with the intriguing possibility that some of the loci terogeneous disorders or sibling recurrence are the most likely to be diagnosed can also contribute to sexual dimorphisms. by WES. Canada is building on the success of these 104 diagnosed families to R Pe Lf 2. .T 6ukiainen et al. PLoS Genet. 2014 d Pe Lv 2e .4lop a national framework for clinical exome sequencing. Genome sequencing identifies major causes of severe intellectual Transcriptomes of individual cells disability C. Borel, P. G. Ferreira, M. Garieri, F. A. Santoni, O. Delaneau, E. Falconnet, P. Ribaux, P. C. Gilissen1, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, D. T. Thung1, M. Van de Vorst1, B. W. M. van Bon1, M. H. Makrythanasis, M. Guipponi, E. T. Dermitzakis, S. E. Antonarakis; Willemsen1, M. Kwint1, I. Janssen1, A. Hoischen1, R. Leach2, R. Klein2, R. Tearle2, T. Bo3, R. University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. Pfundt1, H. G. Yntema1, B. B. A. De Vries1, T. Kleefstra1, H. G. Brunner1,4, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, J. A. Veltman1,4; 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Complete Genomics Inc, Mountain View, CA, United States, 3State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central We sequenced hundreds of single-cell transcriptomes to decipher the cell-to- South University, Changsha, China, 4Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, cell transcriptional variation. Starting from a homogeneous cell population of Netherlands. human female primary fibroblasts from one individual, we used the 
C1  Single- Cell-Auto-Prep-System to capture individual cells and to generate pre-amplified cDNA for next-generation sequencing. On average, 9322 genes per single-cell Severe intellectual disability (ID) occurs in 0.5% of newborns and is thought (RPKM >0.3) were detected, representing ~50% of the total genes detected by to be largely genetic in origin. The extensive genetic heterogeneity of the dis- the bulk sample containing millions of cells. We noted a wide spectrum of tran- order requires a genome wide detection of all types of genetic variation. Mi- scriptional heterogeneity. Correlation analysis between single-cells showed croarray studies and more recently exome sequencing have demonstrated the an average coefficient of 62% (0.3-0.9). A large number of detected genes are importance of de novo copy number variations (CNVs) and single nucleotide cell-specific with gene mRNA levels variable between single-cells. Moreover, we variations (SNVs) in ID, but the majority of cases remains undiagnosed. Here identified cell-specific novel exons, multitude of alternative spliced isoforms we applied whole genome sequencing (WGS) to 50 patients with severe ID and 3’UTR isoforms due to alternative polyadenylation. Hence, 1% of exons and their unaffected parents. All patients were negative after extensive genetic showed difference for exon inclusion between single-cells and 10% of 3’UTR prescreening, including microarray-based CNV studies and exome sequencing. contained alternative transcript termination sites. Notwithstanding this prescreening, de novo SNVs affecting the coding region To further assess the differential allelic expression at the single-cell level, WGS provided a conclusive genetic cause in 13 patients and a possible cause for ano- has been performed on this sample. Our data revealed that both alleles are ac- ther 8 patients. In addition, we identified 7 clinically relevant de novo CNVs tively transcribed for most of the detected genes. Interestingly, we observed a as well as one recessively inherited compound heterozygous CNV. These CNVs skewed monoallelic distribution in single-cells in a given snapshot of time. In- included single exon and intraexonic deletions of known ID genes as well as in- deed, for most of the genes, we detected one transcribed allele at the time in an terchromosomal duplications. Local realignment of sequence reads allowed the individual cell. For a specific gene, rare are the individual cells expressing both mapping of most of these CNVs at single nucleotide resolution level and provi- alleles simultaneously. The results were validated in fibroblasts from a second ded positional information for duplicated sequences. These results show that individual. We will also provide a comprehensive survey of imprinted genes, X de novo mutations and CNVs affecting the coding region are the major cause of inactivation and escape. severe ID. Genome sequencing can be applied as a single genetic test to reliab- S P. LE 2.A .5 and E.T.D. laboratories contributed equally. ly identify and characterize the comprehensive spectrum of genetic variation, Chromosome X-wide association analysis discovers new loci for complex p Pr Lo 3v .i 1d -in Sg u a m g men ae rt yic diagnosis in the majority of patients with severe ID. traits including a height locus not dosage compensated between men Incidental findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing and women T. Tukiainen1,2,3, M. Pirinen3, A. Sarin3,4, C. Ladenvall5, J. Kettunen3,4, T. Lehtimäki6, M. Lokki7, M. Perola3,4,8, J. Sinisalo9, E. Vlachopoulou7, J. G. Eriksson4,10,9, L. Groop11,3, A. Jula12, M. Diagnostic exome and genome sequencing data can be interrogated for clini- Järvelin13,14, O. T. Raitakari15, V. Salomaa4, S. Ripatti3,16,17; cally relevant variants other than those relevant for a diagnostic request. There 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Broad Institute of Harvard are different opinions on the way to deal with these „incidental findings“ in the and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, clinic, on the potential benefits and risks to patients, on patient autonomy and Finland, 5Lund University and Lund University Diabetes Centre, CRC at Skåne University on the obligation of laboratories to report these findings. These will be debated Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 6University of Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere, Finland, with representatives from both sides of the Atlantic. P
L3 .1 7Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 8Estonian Genome Center, Incidental findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing University of Tartu, Taru, Estonia, 9Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 10Department of General Practice and Primary Healthcare, University of Helsinki, Finland, R. Green; 11Lund University and Lund University Diabetes Centre, CRC at Skåne University Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. Malmö, Finland, 12National Institute for Health and Welfare, Turku, Finland, 13School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 14Institute of Health Sciences and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Finland, 15University of Turku and Turku In 2013, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) is- University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 16Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, sued Recommendations for incidental findings in clinical exome and genome United Kingdom, 17Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. sequencing. The Recommendations were written by a Working Group of 14 me- dical geneticists, laboratory geneticists, genetic counselors and ethicists who met regularly for 14 months to draft them. The draft Recommendations were The X chromosome (chrX) has often been overlooked in genetic association presented for commentary in a public forum at the 2012 Annual Meeting of the studies, thus representing one potential source for the “missing heritability” ACMG, reviewed by 15 additional experts, and reviewed several times by the for complex phenotypes. Additionally, as up to 15% chrX genes escape from ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |B WoarWd oWf t.hEe SAHCMGG. ObeRfoGre being issued in March, 2013. The Recommendati 5ons X inactivation (XCI), chrX may be enriched in sexually dimorphic associations,ABSTRACTS PLENARY LECTURES Back to index in the clinical setting were recently amended in March, 2014. When either targeted sequencing or analysis of genome The Recommendations were consensus-based, as empirical data on populati- data is possible, it is preferable to use a targeted approach first in order to avoid on penetrance and medical outcomes of identifying incidental variants are not unsolicited findings or findings that cannot be interpreted. The ACMG advoca- available. The Recommendations called for molecular laboratories performing tes (Genet Med 2013;15:565-74) that there is a potential for the recognition clinical sequencing for any indication on patients of any age to examine 56 ge- and reporting of incidental or secondary findings unrelated to the indication nes associated with 24 actionable conditions for pathogenic variants. The Re- for ordering the sequencing but of medical value for patient care. The ESHG commendations now suggest that patients be offered an option to decline these position is that whenever possible, such testing should be targeted to genome tests as a group at the time they are ordered. regions linked to the indication. Wider testing requires a justification in terms Several clinical sequencing laboratories in the US have adopted the Recom- of necessity and proportionality. Adding screening targets to a diagnostic test mendations and over 1000 reports of incidental findings have been issued. The violates the necessity criterion. Imposing this extra testing upon patients who incidence of the ACMG variants in unselected populations appears to be 2-4%. need an answer to their clinical problem is at odds with respect for autonomy Additional data from our experimental laboratory of translational genomics on (Science 2013;341:958-9). Guidelines for the informed consent procedure in the issue of incidental findings will be presented. WGA must be developed (Hum Mutat. 2013;34:1322-8). P
L3 .3 Also in a targeted analysis it is possible to detect an unsolicited genetic variant, Debate: Active search for clearly pathogenic variants that require direct indicative of serious health problems (either in the person tested or his or her clinical intervention; When related to late onset disorders, adults only. M. Kriek; close relatives) that allow for treatment or prevention. In principle, a health- Clinical Geneticist, Department of Clinical Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, Leiden care professional should report such genetic variants (EJHG 2013;21:580-4). University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. To prepare the health care professionals for WGS in health care, a sustained effort at genetic education is required at various levels: in primary care to in- form and refer people appropriately, and in specialized care to counsel or refer In 2013 the ‘American College of Medical GeneGtrieces na netd a Gl.enomics’ (ACMG) pu- patients, and to discuss and interpret genetic test results adequately. Genetic blished a list of 56 genes that are proposed specific targets of a search for pa- experts should engage in discussing new developments in genetics, and explain thogenic variants in both children and adults ( ). These genes are as- the pros and cons of genetic testing and screening in clinical and commercial sociated with diseases with an indication for immediate medical intervention of settings to inform the public and raise public awareness. Enhancing genetic li- the patient or of a family member. The publication asserts that, in principle, the teracy in patients and the lay public will help to involve wider society in this necessary patient data are available following a NGS procedure and therefore d Pe Lb 4a .1te. cannot be ignored. For purposes of clarity, the vast majority of these variants Gene Targeting into the 21st Century: Mouse Models of Human Diseases are removed during the various filtering stages of the normal trio analysis pro- from Cancer to Neuropsychiatric Disorders cess and that identification of these variants will reqvuairriea natdsditional actions. M. Capecchi; During the American Society of Human Genetics meeting 2013, it was argued Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, that consensus on a basic list of clearly pathogenic in the relevant ge- United States. nes is essential if this form of diagnosis is to be implemented in genetic diagno- stics. A disadvantage of the approach as proposed by the ACMG (analysis of the entire gene, rather than focusing on known pathogenic gene variants) is that Gene targeting provides the means for modifying any gene in any desired man- variants will be detected that have not been previously reported and/or are ner in an intact, living animal, the mouse. This technology permits the evalua- of undefined pathogenicity. This could result in considerable distress for the tion of the function of genes in mammals. Because nearly all biological phe- patient and family. To avoid this, only selected variants in the genes nominated nomena are mediated or influenced by the activity of genes, this methodology by the ACMG will be analysed. Ploem et al. permits the analysis of the most complex biological processes such as develop- Another point of discussion is whether conditions that manifest later in life ment, learning, normal and aberrant behavior, cancer, immunology and a mul- should be investigated in children. While the ACMG is in favour, are titude of congenital human diseases. In the past, gene targeting has been used of a different opinion: „When it comes to the unsolicited findings of NGS diagno- primarily to generate ‚knockout‘ mice, that is mice in which the chosen gene has stics in a young child, the interests of the child prevail over any wishes of the been disrupted in the germline, such that every cell in the mouse carries the p‘Inar ceanstes o(fn toets)t itnog r mecieniovres ,c geurtidaienli ninefso nremeadt tioo nb.“e (eNstTaVbGlis 2h0e1d 4a;s1 t5o8 w:Ah6a7t5 u7n)s.o Tlihciiste ids mutations. This methodology permits evaluation of the function of that gene in cinofnosrimstaetniot nw sihtho uElSdH bGe dreisccolomsemde innd oartdioern sto ( EbaJHlaGn c2e0 t1h3e; 2a1u:t5o8n0om-4y) )a.nd interests of the intact mouse. However, many, if not most, genes have multiple functions. If the child and the parental rights and needs (not) to receive information that may one of those functions is critical to the survival of the mouse, then subsequent be in the interest of their (future) family’ functions of that gene in the mouse cannot be evaluated by the above means. This problem can be circumvented by generating conditional mutations, that restrict the effects of the mutation temporally, spatially (to defined sets of cells A solution to these conflicting interests is as follows: where the index patient or tissue), or both. In mice, conditional mutagenesis is achieved by combining is a minor, a genetic predisposition for ‘late onset’ diseases for which immedi- gene targeting, which is achieved through homologous recombination, with a ate medical treatment is indicated will only be sought in parents. This is made site-specific recombination system, such as Cre/loxP or Flp/FRT. Cre and Flp possible by the setup of trio analysis in which variant lists are available for each are recombinases that mediate recombination between specific, short DNA se- parent. quences, loxP and FRT, respectively. Gene targeting is used to flank your chosen Genetic variants that result in clinical manifestations that in require direct in- gene with either loxP or FRT sites in the mouse germline. By restricting the tervention during childhood will be analysed in the index patient, even when production of the Cre or Flp recombinase to either a specific set of cells, a cho- a minor. sen temporal period, or both, within the developing or adult mouse, the gene P
L3 .4 is only excised from the genome of the mouse, in those selected cells, during Debate: Whole-genome sequencing in health care: proceed with caution that chosen temporal period, or both. I will describe a number of applications and avoid incidental findings M. C. Cornel; of gene targeting and conditional mutagenesis derived in our laboratory that VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. address interesting biological questions from modeling human cancer to neu- ropsychiatric disorder in the mouse. P
L5 .1 Signatures of Mutational Processes in Human Cancer Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of the human genome has a great potential M. Stratton; to identify the genetic component of health problems, and probably, in the near Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. future, at a lower cost than that of the current techniques. Proof of principle regarding the clinical utility of WGS followed by whole genome analysis (WGA) has been reported, especially for rare diseases. The Public and Professional All cancers are caused by somatic mutations. However, the processes under- Policy Committee of ESHG developed recommendations on whole genome se- lying the genesis of somatic mutations in human cancer are remarkably poorly quencing for health care (EJHG 2013;21:580-4). understood. Recent large-scale cancer genome sequencing initiatives have pro- As a first element of the discussion, we have to consider all stakeholders invol- vided us with new insights into these mutational processes through the muta- ved: patients looking for a diagnosis, primary care physicians referring patients tional signatures they leave on the cancer genome. In this talk I will review the and following them for many years after the diagnosis, laboratory experts and mutational signatures found across cancer and consider the underlying muta- clinical geneticists, legal and ethical experts. If a new technology is being im- tional processes that have been operative. plemented, a mutual learning process starts. Structures are needed for sharing experiences and establish testing guidelines at local, national and international lev6els. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index SYMPOSIA 
S01 .1 in the context of studying neuronal cell types, including olfactory neurons. 
S03 .1 From rare disease to management of common disorders Pontocerebellar hypoplasia M. Summar; Washington, DC, United States. K. Kutsche; Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 
S01 .2 Pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCH) constitute a group of autosomal reces- Breast cancer genes: beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 sively inherited neurodegenerative disorders with prenatal onset. Classi- P. Pharoah; fication based on clinical, neuroradiological and neuropathological charac- Dept of Oncology, Cambridge, United Kingdom. teristics divided PCH into eight subtypes; the underlying genetic cause has been identified in six PCH types (PCH1, PCH2, and PCH4-6 and 8). PCH2 represents the most frequent form of PCHs and typical clinical features are No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at respiratory and feeding difficulties at birth, dyskinesia and chorea, severe w 
S0 w 1w .3.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. impairment of cognitive and motor development, progressive microcepha- Age-related Macular Degeneration ly, and frequent death in late infancy or early childhood. MRI imaging in C. Klaver; PCH2 shows brainstem and cerebellar hypoplasia, with the cerebellar he- Rotterdam, Netherlands. mispheres more affected than the vermis. In patients TwSiEthN 5
P4 CHT2S,E 4N a2nd 5, bTiSaEllNe3li4c mutations in genes encoding three subunits of the heterotetrameric transfer RNA (tRNA) splicing endonuclease complex, , , and No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at have been identified. PCH shCoAwSKs significant overlapping features www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. with microcephaly with pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia (MICPCH), gene- 
S02 .1 rally associated with loss-of-function mutations. The classical MICPCH Variation and genetic control of chromatin in humans B. Deplancke; phenotype can be found in females who typically have moderate to severe Lausanne, Switzerland. intellectual disability and progressive mCAicSrKo cephaly with pontine and cere- bellar hypoplasia. Possible findings are ophthalmologic anomalies and sen- sorineural hearing loss. Males with a mutation have also been iden- Understanding how a genome gives rise to complex phenotypes is one of the tified. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from severe intellectual disability key unresolved questions in biology. In this talk, I will present results from and MICPCH, or early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy to mild X-linked our study aiming to examine the mechanistic relationship between genomic intellectual disability (XLID) with or without nystagmus. I will present an and molecular phenotypic variation. Specifically, we profiled three histone oCvAeSrKview on clinical and genetic data of patients with PCH and MICPCH and modifications (H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K27ac), two DNA binding factors how to discriminate the two conditions. My focus will be on the different (PU.1, RNA polymerase II), and gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines mutations in females and males and their associated phenotypes to from 50 European individuals, reasoning that an integrated analysis of in- h 
S0 el 3p . 2understanding genotype-phenotype relationships. termediate molecular phenotypes coupled with personal genome informati- The neurobiology of lissencephal on might enable an in-depth characterization of non-coding variation. I will A. Wynshaw-Boris; discuss how the resulting data allowed us to measure inter-individual va- Cleveland, OH, United States. riation in chromatin states, to predict sex-biased regulatory regions, and to map the regulatory architecture behind gene expression variation. As such, I will argue that we were able to provide a comprehensive view of chroma- No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at tin state variation in a human population and to generate novel molecular www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 
S03 .3 insights into the propagation of genetic signals along the complex chain of Neuronal migration defects associated with mutations in tubulins and molecular, regulatory events. 
S02 .2 MT Control of gene expression in disease L. Broix, K. Poirier, Y. Saillour, N. Bahi-Buisson, J. Chelly; M. Georges; Coch‐irne Ilnastteitdu tper, oINteSiEnRsM Unit 1016, CNRS –UMR 8104, Paris Liège, Belgium. ‐Descartes University, Paris, France. No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at Neuronal migration disorders such as malformations of cortical develop- www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. ment are frequent causes of epilepsy and intellectual disability. Disrupted 
S02 .3 biological and cellular processes such as neuronal progenitors proliferation, Computational challenges in single-cell transcriptomics neuronal migration, and cortical organization, are traditionally used as a J. Marioni; EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, United Kingdom. basis for the classification of MCD. Etiologies of these disorders are hetero- geneous and genetic studies in humans and mice have identified a spectrum of mutations in genes involved in an array of crucial processes that often disrupt the development of the cerebral cortex. Aside from genes such as Recent technical developments have enabled the transcriptomes of ARX, GPR56 and WDR62, the importance of genes encoding cytoskeletal hundreds of cells to be assayed in an unbiased manner. These approaches proteins has become evident. For example, mutations in DCX and LI
S1 , both have enabled heterogeneity in gene expression levels across populations of of which encode proteins involved in MT homeostasis, are associated with a cells to be characterized as well as facilitating the identification of new, and large spectrum of neuronal migration disorders. Moreover, MCD associated potentially physiologically relevant, sub-populations of cells. with mutations in α- or β-tubulin-encoding genes such as TUBA1A, TUBB2B, However, to fully exploit such data and to answer these questions, it is ne- TUBB3 and TUBB5, have been also described. These tubulin-related corti- cessary to develop robust computational methods that take account of both cal dysgenesis are thought to involve a combination of abnormal neuronal technical noise and underlying, potentially confounding, variables such as proliferation, migration and differentiation. More recently, we reported the the cell cycle. association between mutations in TUBG1, DYN
C1 H1, KIF2A and KIF5C, and In this presentation I will begin by briefly describing how we used spike-ins diverse forms of malformations of cortical development with or without to quantify technical noise in single-cell RNA-seq data, thus facilitating iden- microcephaly. We further showed that the mutations in these MTs-related tification of genes with more variation in expression levels across cells than proteins: KIF5C, KIF2A and DYN
C1 H1 affect ATP hydrolysis, productive pro- expected by chance. Subsequently, I will discuss a computational approach tein folding and microtubule binding, respectively. In addition, we showed that uses latent variable models to account for potentially confounding fac- by in utero electroporation that in vivo downexpression by shRNA of mouse, tors such as the cell cycle before applying it to study the differentiation of Tubb3 and Tubg1, as well as expression of Kif2a mutants, interferes with Th2 cells. I will show that accounting for cell-to-cell correlations due to the proper neuronal polarization and migration, morphogenesis and intermedi- cell cycle allows identification of otherwise obscured sub-populations of ate progenitor proliferation. cells that correspond to different stages along the path to fully differentiated Altogether, these findings together with literature data support the hypo- Th2 cells. thesis that proliferation and migration are genetically and functionally in- To conclude, I will briefly discuss further apEpSliHcaGtio 2ns0 o1f 4si n| gMle-IcLeAll RNN,A I-TsAeqL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 7 terdependent. Finally, they reinforce the importance of centrosomal andABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S05 .3 Preimplantation genetic diagnosis MT-related proteins in cortical development and strongly suggest that MT- T. Voet; dependent mitotic and post-mitotic processes are major contributors to the Leuven, Belgium. pathogenesis of MCD. 
S04 .1 Disease, networks and epistasis No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at C. Webber; www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. Neurological Disease Genomics, MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of 
S06 .1 Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom. Risk is More Than a Number: About Risks and Probabilities and People’s Perceptions of Genetic Risks D. R. M. Timmermans1,2; I will give an overview of our recent work in identifying the pathways and 1Department of Public and Occupational Health, EMGO Institute, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2National Institute for Public Health and the processes underlying complex disorders, illustrating how different functio- Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands. nal genomics resources can each provide novel biological insights into the same phenotype-influencing gene network. The topologies of the identified networks can identify pathway loading (both additive and epistatic) along Risk communication is an essential component of genetic counseling . Ge- with the direction in which the pathway is perturbed, thereby inviting drug netic testing and providing information about genetic predisposition may repurposing. I will also illustrate some of the novel integrative approaches enable early disease detection, targeted surveillance, and may lead to effec- that we’ve been applying in GWA/exome studies and used to determine the tive prevention strategies and behavioral change. However, the impact of ge- significance of a functionally-clustered genome. 
S04 .2 netic information on people’s perceptions may be limited. Most people are Understanding molecular mechanisms of human disease mutations unfamiliar with probabilistic thinking and find it hard to understand risks. and coding variants through 3D protein networks Moreover, risks are experienced differently depending on the characteristics H. Yu; of the risk. A risk is more than a number. It is not only the probability, the Ithaca, NY, United States. quantification of the uncertainty, but also the nature of the risk, the severity of the consequences and the degree of control what matters. People process and evaluate information about potential risks in two different ways: analy- To better understand the molecular mechanisms and genetic basis of hu- tical-rational if possible, but always intuitive-affective. The characteristics man disease, we combined the massive scale of network systems biology of the risks as well as the way risk information is processed impact people’s with the supreme resolution of traditional structural biology to generate understanding and perception of risks. This perception may be in discor- the first comprehensive atomic-resolution 3D interactome-network com- dance with the way experts’ perceive genetic risks. In order to enable people prising 3,398 interactions between 2,890 proteins with structurally-defined to make informed decisions, information about (genetic) risks should not interface residues for each interaction. We found that disease mutations are only be adequate but should also be in line with people’s perceptions or significantly enriched both among interface residues and other non-inter- mental model. Discrepancies with people’s mental model of genetic risks as face ones within the same domains, contradicting the previous assumption well the abstractness of the risk information may hamper people’s informed that only a few interface residues are mutation hot spots for disease. We decision making. In this presentation I will discuss the factors affecting the further classified 94,476 disease-associated mutations according to their in- perception of health risks and genetic risks in particular, the way people heritance modes and found that the widely-accepted “guilt-by-association” understand the risks communicated to them and what this means for risk principle does not apply to dominant mutations. Furthermore, recessive communication 
S06 .2 truncating mutations on the same interface are much more likely to cause Risk perception: what could be at stake in multiple genetic testing? the same disease, even if they are close to the N-terminus of the protein, C. M. Julian-Reynier; indicating that a significant fraction of truncating mutations can generate Institut Paoli-Calmettes, UMR912 Inserm, Marseille, France. functional protein products. 
S04 .3 From protein networks to disease mechanisms R. Sharan; First the concept of risk perception will be introduced, highlighting its inter- Tel Aviv University, Department of Computer Science, Tel Aviv, Israel. est for clinical practice or various research fields. We will focus on associated factors and in particular on the potential role of emotions in risk perception. Then the evidence for the relevance of previous findings will be reviewed in In recent years, there is a tremendous growth in large scale data on human the context of genetic risk assessment and genetic test result disclosure such proteins, their interactions, and their relations to diseases. These allow for as investigated in clinical genetics/genetic counseling. Different application the first time a systems-level analysis of the molecular basis of disease. In fields such as cancer genetics will be selected as illustrations of different my talk I will describe several recent works in this direction, aiming to unco- situational contexts. Finally the way these previous experiences and body of ver novel disease proteins and their underlying pathways with implications knowledge could help to anticipate the potential consequences of multiple t So 0 d 5i .a 1gnosis and therapy. risk information disclosure and to document specific recommendations in Dynamic blastomere behaviour the context of the process of multiple genetic testing or next generation se- R. Pera; quencing will be discussed. 
S06 .3 Stanford, CA, United States. Risk Communication Methods for Helping Patients Understand the Risks and Benefits of Genetic Testing A. Fagerlin; No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor VA Center for Clinical Management Research, Ann w 
S0 w 5w .2.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. Arbor, MI, United States. 24 chromosome copy number analysis for preimplantation genetic screening A. H. Handyside; Making decisions about whether to undergo genetic testing or how to use Illumina, Cambridge, United Kingdom. information from genetic tests is exceedingly complex. The complexity is due, in part, to the numeracy demands required of patients to understand the information being presented. In this talk, I will discuss methods for im- Chromosome aneuploidy in human gametes and embryos is a major cause proving patients understanding of risk and benefit information. Furthermo- of IVF failure and miscarriage and can result in affected live births. To avoid re, I will discuss how different risk communication methods can influence these outcomes and improve implantation and live birth rates, preimplanta- risk perceptions. Finally, I will discuss the role of family history and how that tion genetic screening (PGS) aims to identify any euploid embryos prior to affects patients’ (hypothetical) perception of risk and how patients weigh transfer but has been restricted to analysis of a limited number of chromoso- information about their family history and their risks to make screening de- mes. Over the last 15 years, various technologies have been developed which cisions. allow copy number analysis of all 23 pairs of chromosomes, 22 autosomes and the sex chromosomes, or ‘24 chromosome’ copy number analysis in sin- gle or small numbers of cells. The pros and cons of these technologies will be reviewed and evaluated for their potential as screening or diagnostic tests wh8en used in combination with oocyte or embryo bEioSpHsyG at 2di0ff1er4en |t MstaIgLeAs.N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S07 .1 Gene therapy of human genetic diseases with AAV vectors A. Auricchio; le differences between the groups involved. We apply a set of approaches Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Napoli, Italy. based on “painting” the genomes of people as haplotypic mosaics and de- scribe insights into the existence and nature of extremely fine-scale diffe- rences among people from different regions of the UK, and Spain, as well as No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at elsewhere in Europe. In the case of the UK, we show how these differences www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. relate directly to specific historical migration events from other European 
S07 .2 countries, including invasions by Angles, Saxons and Jutes, and the Vikings. Epithelial stem cell in cell and gene therapy The groups involved in, genetic contributions, and dates, of these migrations M. De Luca; Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita sede ex-Scienze Biomediche, Modena, Italy. a Sr 0e 8 c .3haracterized based on genetic information alone. The role of population isolates in understanding genetic and complex diseases Adult stem cells are cells with a high capacity for self-renewal that can pro- P. Gasparini; duce terminally differentiated progeny. Stem cells generate an intermediate Trieste, Italy. population of committed progenitors, often referred to as transit amplifying (TA) cells, that terminally differentiate after a limited number of cell divisi- ons. Human keratinocyte stem cells are clonogenic and are known as holo- The use of isolated populations to reduce disease heterogeneity of complex clones. Human corneal stem cells are segregated in the limbus while limbal- disorders has already proven very useful in identifying DNA polymorphis- derived TA cells form the corneal epithelium. Self-renewal, proliferation and ms associated with complex diseases and quantitative traits. The study of differentiation of limbal stem cells are regulated by the ΔNp63 (α, β and γ), complex traits in geographically and culturally isolated populations is par- C/EBPδ and Bmi1 transcription factors. Cultivated limbal stem cells gene- ticularly useful because the entire population can be analyzed, the relative rate sheets of corneal epithelium suitable for clinical application. We report weight of environmental variation can be controlled and genetic factors can long-term clinical results obtained in an homogeneous group of 154 patients be more easily identified. In these genetically and culturally homogeneous presenting with corneal opacification and visual loss due to chemical and populations, a large proportion of individuals presenting a given trait is li- thermal burn-dependent limbal stem cell deficiency. The corneal epitheli- kely to share the same trait-predisposing gene inherited from a common um and the visual acuity of these patients have been restored by grafts of ancestor. Furthermore, inbreeding, typical of small communities, reduces autologous cultured limbal keratinocytes. In post hoc analyses, success was genetic heterogeneity and increases homozygosity, providing greater power associated with the percentage of p63-bright holoclone-forming stem cells for detection of susceptibility genes. We have created the Italian Network of in culture. Graft failure was also associated with the type of initial ocular Genetic Isolates (INGI) that collects the samples coming from several villa- damage and postoperative complications. Mutations in genes encoding the ges from 5 different Italian regions for a total of more than 6000 samples. basement membrane component laminin 5 (LAM5) cause junctional epider- Moreover, additional 1500 samples have been collected along the Silk Road. molysis bullosa (JEB), a devastating and often fatal skin adhesion disorder. For all of them a great number of information regarding medical records, Epidermal stem cells transduced with a retroviral vector expressing the β3 hematological parameters and lifestyle has been collected as well as DNA cDNA can generate genetically corrected cultured epidermal grafts able to samples which have been genotyped with high density chip arrays. To eva- permanently restore the skin of patients affected by LAM5-β3-deficient JEB. luate the power to detect association in our cohorts we aimed at replicating The implication of these results for the gene therapy of different genetic skin several already published results and to verify if any new Italian specific loci diseases will be discussed. were present. For example, GWAS were carried out on several hematological 
S07 .3 and serum lipids traits, blood glucose levels, blood pressure and anthropo- Therapeutic targeting of Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/AKT/mTOR metric measures leading to the replication of 206 loci and to the discovery signalling in segmental overgrowth disorders of some novel associations for BMI and weight. For 12 of these loci the top R. Semple; University of Cambridge, Metabolic Research Laboratories, Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, associated SNP was different from the one previously published highlighting Cambridge, United Kingdom. the importance of having a population specific reference panel for persona- lized medicine. Moreover, specific genes/variants associated to phenotypes such as hearing, smell, taste and food preferences have been identified. More The type 1A phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) enzyme complex serves recently, new data have been obtained using whole genome sequencing data as a signal transducer for a diverse range of hormone and growth factor re- that allow refining the results previously obtained and will lead to the dis- ceptors, and harbours somatic activating mutations in a large number of can- covery of even more population specific genetic variants. Our results show cers. We and others have recently established that mosaicism for many of the that genetic isolates are a powerful resource for studying complex traits and same mutations underlies a spectrum of disorders of segmental overgrowth, thus to create genetic risk profiles which will be the bases for personalized ranging from isolated macrodactyly to catastrophic overgrowth affecting lar- m 
S0 e 9d .i 1cine in Italy. Updated data will be presented and discussed. ge parts of the body and several tissues, and commonly associated with com- Twenty-five years of research in sarcomeric cardiomyopathies and plex vascular anomalies. Identification of the underlying signalling defect in therapeutic perspectives affected tissues has immediately suggested that pharmacological targeting H. Watkins; of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway may offer the first rational, effective thera- University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. peutic approach for these disorders. The effect of mTORC or PI3K inhibition in dermal fibroblasts from affected patients will be discussed, as well as the e Sa 0r 8ly .1 experience of sirolimus treatment in a severely affected proband. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was one of the first monogenic cardiovascu- Demographic inference from identity by descent lar disorders to be understood at the molecular level. Twenty years after I. Pe’er; the discovery of the first disease gene, HCM is still seen principally to be a New York, NY, United States. disease of the sarcomere. At the biophysical level, the contractile protein mutations that cause HCM are seen to be activating in that they enhance Ca(2+) sensitivity, maximal force production, and ATPase activity. These No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at defects then entrain secondary disturbances of energy deficiency and alte- www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. red Ca(2+) handling that appear to be major common paths leading to the 
S08 .2 phenotype of hypertrophy and risk of sudden cardiac death. Importantly, Insights into European genetic history at fine geographic scales using these functional consequences of HCM mutations may lend themselves to haplotype-based approaches specifically targeted approaches to disease modifying therapy for HCM, and S. Myers; phase I/II clinical trials have been completed or are underway. Dept of Statistics, Oxford University, United Kingdom In contrast, dilated cardiomyopathy is caused by mutations in genes enco- Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford University, United Kingdom ding many different classes of proteins with very diverse roles in cardio- myocyte function, e.g. ranging from the nuclear envelope through to the contractile and force transduction apparatus. This indicates that the DCM Modern genetic datasets are revealing features of our genetic history, and phenotype is the end result of disparate pathways that lead to myocyte loss how this has shaped our genomes, in unprecedented detail. Across Europe, and fibrous replacement, suggesting that finding broadly applicable approa- multiple invasions and migrations have taken place over the past several ches to disease-modifying therapy may be difficult. In the subset of DCM millennia, but the possible genetic effects of these and of subsequent re- caused by sarcomeric mutations the picture is clearer, and may lead to ap- gional isolation remain uncharacterised, pEaSrtHly Gdu 2e 0to1 t4h e| eMxtIrLemAeNly, sIuTbAt-LY |p WroaWchWes .tEo SthHerGap.Oy, aRsG DCM alleles result in functional changes that are9 theABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S10 .2 Kataegis: a mutation signature identified through whole-genome opposite of the changes seen with HCM alleles: depressed motor function sequencing of human cancers and reduced Ca(2+) sensitivity. S. Nik-Zainal1,2, L. B. Alexandrov1, B. J. Taylor3, Y. Wu3, D. Wedge1, C. Rada3, P. J. Campbell1, 
S09 .2 M. Neuberger3, M. R. Stratton1; Mendelian Randomization 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2East Anglian Medical M. V. Holmes; Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. United Kingdom, 3Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Identifying causal biomarkers is important in the quest to prevent and treat Cancer is the ultimate disorder of the genome, characterised by not one or cardiovascular disease. Mendelian randomization is a genetic epidemiologi- two substitutions, indels or copy number aberrations, but hundreds to thou- cal technique that can be used to make causal inference about biomarkers sands of acquired mutations that have been accrued through the develop- and environmental exposures. ment of a tumour. The set of mutations observed in a cancer genome is not I will talk about recent applications of Mendelian randomization with a fo- simply a random accumulation of variants. It is the aggregate outcome of se- cus on identifying potential therapeutic targets and understanding the role veral biological mutational processes comprising an underlying mechanism of physiological traits and environmental exposures in cardiovascular disea- of DNA damage mitigated by the DNA repair pathways that exist in human se pathogenesis. cells. Each mutational process will leave its distinctive mark or mutational 
S09 .3 signature on the cancer genome. Genetic testing in the clinical arena, current and future perspectives Recently, we set out to extract the mutational signatures characterizing P. Charron1,2,3; 1Depart. of genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2INSERM UMR1166, the mutational processes that have been operative in 21 whole-genome Paris, France, 3University UPMC Paris 6, Paris, France. sequenced breast cancers. Multiple distinct known and novel substitution, insertion/deletion and rearrangement signatures were unearthed by these analyses. Here, I will describe one particularly intriguing signature of locali- The recent development of molecular genetics in cardiovascular diseases zed regions of dense somatic hypermutation, called kataegis, in which sub- has created a new understanding of their pathogenesis and natural histo- stitutions at C:G base pairs occurring within a distinctive sequence context ry, and also new possibilities for the diagnosis of these genetic disorders were found associated with clusters of genomic rearrangements. Using an through genetic testing. This has induced new expectations, and new de- algorithm developed to allow efficient detection of kataegis, we investigate mands, from both families and physicians regarding genetic counselling, other whole-genome sequenced cancers to show that this phenomenon is DNA testing and application of this knowledge in clinical practice. The in- not restricted to breast cancer. These studies harness the full scale of who- tegrated use of genetic testing in routine practice developed rapidly in the le-genome sequencing. Furthermore, detailed and considered analyses of context of monogenic cardiovascular disorders (such as cardiomyopathies, genomic data can provide biological insights that would otherwise remain channelopathies, Marfan syndrome) with significant medical impacts on the buried. management of patients or their families. This refers to diagnostic testing as The mechanism of kataegis however, is unknown. On the basis of similarities well as predictive testing, prognostic evaluation and, rarely, prenatal or pre- in mutation class and sequence context in experimental systems, members implantation diagnosis. Encouraging data were also identified in the context of the AID/APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases were implicated. Using of pharmacogenetic interactions (such as Vitamin K antagonists, antiplate- whole-genome sequencing approaches in model organisms, the mechanism let treatment) and multifactorial diseases (such as coronary artery diseases u 
S1 n 0de .3rlying kataegis is slowly being unraveled. and heart failure). Medulloblastoma links chromothripsis with T
P53  mutations The clinical utility of genetic testing was acknowledged through the produc- J. O. Korbel; tion of international or national guidelines recommending routine genetic Heidelberg, Germany. testing in monogenic disorders. However, its use in everyday clinical prac- tice has been limited by the cost and complexity of conventional sequencing technologies. Advances in next generation sequencing technology (NGS) No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at have the potential to solve this problem by analyzing substantially larger www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 
S11 .1 genomic regions at a lower cost than conventional capillary Sanger sequen- Copy number alterations in skin disorders cing. But they may also pose new challenges. This was already obvious in X. Zhang; preliminary studies that compared a number of variants found in cardiova- Beijing, China. scular diseases with exome or genome data from general population, and questioning the pathogenicity of variants previously considered as disease- causing. We will review the advantages, pitfalls, and clinical utility of NGS in No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at the clinical setting of cardiovascular disorders, especially in the context of www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 
S11 .2 monogenic disorders. Congenital heart disease Email : philippe.charron@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr 
S10 .1 B. Keavney; Chromotrypsis Manchester, United Kingdom. E. Cuppen1, W. Kloosterman2; 1Hubrecht Institute and Center for Molecular Medicine UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Center for Molecular Medicine UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 
S11 .3 De novo genomic rearrangements are a common cause of congenital ab- Copy number variants are a common cause of short stature normalities and mental retardation. However, in the majority of patients a C. T. Thiel1, A. Reis1, H. Dörr2, A. Rauch3; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, molecular mechanism linking rearranged chromosomes to disease pheno- Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Friedrich- type is lacking. This is particularly true for ultra-complex genomic rearran- Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Medical gements, such as those resulting from catastrophic chromosome shattering Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. termed chromothripsis. We developed a family-based approach for dissec- ting the functional consequences of (complex) genomic rearrangements in patients with congenital disease. This approach combines gene-expression Shortness of stature is one of the most common pediatric concerns and has and chromatin profiling with functional studies in patient-derived cell lines an incidence of 3 % in the general population. In the majority of patients and model organisms. We highlight two cases where family-based analysis with idiopathic growth deficit the etiology remains elusive in the absence of and functional follow-up studies were instrumental to reveal the drivers of morphological details. This unknown etiology prevents a sufficient medical the disease phenotype. The described methodology is key for understan- care in most cases. ding disease in a large and broad category of patients with chromosomal As it has been proposed that the growth fundamentally regulated by gene- aberrations of unclassified significance and thereby improves diagnosis and tic factors, GWAS found significant evidence for both single nucleotide and clinical decision-making. copy number polymorphisms associated with height variation in the general population. However, these associations explain only a small fraction of the overall variability of human height. 10 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, BITaAseLdY on | tWheW eaWrly. iEdSenHtiGfic.aOtioRnG of SHOX gene deletions as a common causeABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index of idiopathic and syndromic (Leri-Weil syndrome) short stature as well as histone modifications and the positioning of nucleosomes to profoundly copy number variation (CNV) as a common cause of intellectual disability, alter gene expression in cancer. Mutations in these genes can therefore the hypothesis of a “rare variant - frequent disease” hypothesis seemed to be contribute to cancer just as epigenetic processes can cause mutations in tu- feasible for short stature. To address this hypothesis we thoroughly build a mor suppressor genes and disable DNA repair enzymes such as MLH1 and study group of more than 400 families with idiopathic short stature and con- MGMT. The cross talk between the genome and the epigenome is therefore ducted SNP array analysis to demonstrate the presence of CNVs as a common a fascinating new area of research which gives us unprecedented opportu- underlying cause of short stature. Molecular karyotyping was performed and nities to understand carcinogenesis. Because many of the genes which are CNVs of a minimum size of 50kb scored and compared to healthy controls. mutated are enzymes, these findings may also lead to new avenues for drug Based on this technique we found a significant odds ratio for aberrations discovery. Epigenetic therapies are already a reality and we can expect great above 100 kb only. Due to the number of potential disease causing CNVs a progress to be made over the next few years as new targets are identified gene-centric analysis comparing known CNVs, gene functions, tissue expres- and tested for their potential new cancer targets. 
S13 .1 sion and murine knock-out phenotypes was neccessary. We confirmed that State of the Art of Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing 10 % of the patients had de novo and inherited CNVs in agreement to the L. S. Chitty; segregation of the short stature phenotype in the families. These CNV regions London, United Kingdom. include known microdeletion/duplication loci expanding the phenotypical spectrum of these entities. The pathogenicity of novel loci was substantiated by comparison to available information, especially the overlap with loci of Traditionally definitive prenatal diagnosis of genetic and chromosomal genome wide association for short stature. Our data showed a clear connec- disorders has required analysis of fetal tissue obtained by invasive testing tion between the prenatal onset of short stature as well as the severity of (usually chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis) which carries a small the growth deficit with the likelihood of the identification of causal CNVs. but significant risk of miscarriage. The identification of cell free fetal DNA Thus, we confirmed CNVs as a main cause of idiopathic short stature. Further (cffDNA) in maternal plasma from four weeks gestation offered an alterna- improvement of the array technology as well as the application of CNV iden- tive source of fetal genetic material for testing based on a simple maternal tification based on next generation sequencing will lead to a more elaborate blood sample, thereby allowing earlier and safer prenatal diagnosis. and detailed view on even smaller CNVs. Application of these methods can The majority of cell free DNA in maternal plasma emanates from the mother h 
S1 el 2p . 1to illuminate the complex heterogeneity of short stature. herself. This high background of maternal cfDNA meant that early applica- The Epigenetic Basis of Common Human Disease tions were based on the detection of exclusion of alleles that were inherited A. P. Feinberg; from the father, e.g. SRY, or that arose de-novo, e.g. achondondroplasia. Fe- Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States. tal sex determination based on analysis of cfDNA is now widely available in Europe in pregnancies at risk of sex-linked disorders, where it is used to di- rect invasive testing. It is also available clinically in the UK for the definitive Although epigenetic changes in the cancer genome have been known for 3 diagnosis of a number of conditions including some skeletal dypslasias and decades, the role of epigenetics in common human disease generally and Apert syndrome, as well as for the exclusion of the paternal allele in families its relationship to genetic variation has only recently begun to be explored. at risk of cystic fibrosis where parents carry different mutations. Elsewhere We have been developing whole-genome approaches to epigenetic analysis in Europe it has been used for the non-invasive diagnosis of other conditions of human disease. Surprising results have been the discovery of CpG island such as Huntingdon Disease, but invasive testing has been required to con- shores and large hypomethylated blocks corresponding to nuclear lamina firm the fetal mutation status. The other major application is fetal Rhesus-D / heterochromatin lysine-modification regions (LOCKs), and accounting for typing in RhD negative mothers where it is used both to inform pregnancy the vast majority of epigenetic changes in cancer. We have also been contri- management in women with a history of haemolytic disease of the newborn, buting to a new field of epigenetic epidemiology that integrates genetic, epi- as well as to direct routine immunoprophylaxis with anti-D immunoglobulin genetic, and environmental factors, and we are applying these approaches to those RhD negative mothers carrying an RhD positive baby. to the study of autoimmune and neuropsychiatric disease. One of the most With the advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) it has become possible exciting developments in this recent work is the idea that epigenetic plasti- to estimate the proportion of sequence aligning to different chromosomes city under genetic control may itself confer a survival advantage in evoluti- present in maternal blood and thereby detect fetal aneuploidy. This is now on, and may also be important in normal tissue differentiation and response widely available in the private sector with detection rates for trisomies 13, to the environment. In support of this idea, we have identified variably me- 18 and 21 in excess of 99% with similarly high specificities. However dis- thylated regions (VMRs) in normal development. These same VMRs appear cordant results are regularly reported and this test can only be considered to be targets for disrupted methylation in cancer, pointing to a unifying mo- a highly predictive screening test with invasive testing required to confirm del of cancer in which epigenetic dysregulation allows rapid selection for positive results. tumor cell survival at the expense of the host. We have also identified gene- The potential for easy access to non-invasive prenatal diagnosis and testing tic variants that increase epigenetic plasticity in patients with autoimmune has raised significant ethical concerns, largely with regard to maintaining disease. Thus, will need to integrate genetic and epigenetic analysis in com- informed parental choice, and the need for good health professional and mon disease risk assessment, prevention, and treatment, and also consider public education. The huge commercial drive to implement NIPT for an- the role of epigenetic plasticity itself in disease pathogenesis. euploidy serves to heighten the need for early introduction of educational 
S12 .2 programmes and careful consideration of strategies required to facilitate Intergenerational epigenetic programming in a mouse model of appropriate implementation into public health services. undernutrition 
S13 .2 A. C. Ferguson-Smith; Noninvasive prenatal testing creates an opportunity for antenatal University of Cambridge, Department of Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom. treatment of Down syndrome D. W. Bianchi1, T. Tarui1, M. Ferres1, J. Pennings2, D. Slonim3, F. Guedj1; 1Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 2National Institute for Public Health Environmental factors during early life are critical for the later metabolic and Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands, 3Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States. health of the individual and of future progeny. In a mouse model of maternal caloric restriction during pregnancy the metabolic physiology of offspring over two generations is affected, including via paternal transmission to the Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for Down syndrome (DS) using massively second generation. Here we explore whether the paternal experience of in parallel sequencing of maternal plasma DNA facilitates early detection of affec- utero undernutrition, with an impact on the health of his offspring, is an ted fetuses. If NIPT is performed at ~ 12 weeks of gestation it creates a potenti- epigenetically inherited memory transmitted via his sperm methylome. al 28-week window of opportunity in which to treat the fetus by orally admini- 
S12 .3 stering small molecules to the mother. Our laboratory is using a 4 phase trans- Cancer Genetics and Epigenetics: Two Sides of the Same Coin? lational approach that involves human biomaterials (amniocytes and amniotic P. A. Jones; fluid), a mouse model of DS, and living human fetuses. In phase 1 we compared Chief Scientific Officer, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, United States. the transcriptome of fetuses with and without DS by analysis of cell-free RNA in amniotic fluid and showed that oxidative stress was a significant difference in the affected fetuses. In phase 2 we uploaded differentially-regulated genes Genetic and epigenetic alterations used to be considered as providing two into the Connectivity Map to identify candidate FDA-approved therapeutic separate pathways leading to cancer. However, recent whole exome sequen- molecules. In phase 3 drugs that had high efficacy in negating oxidative stress cing of a large number of human cancers has led to the realization that many and showed low toxicity were selected for further studies in an animal model. previously unknown mutations occur in genes which regulate the epige- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |W We uWseW th.eE TSsH1CGje. OmoRuGse model of DS because affected males are fertile1, y1et nome. These mutations could potentially alter DNA methylation patterns,ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index cognition is significantly impaired. We can therefore use wild type females for hair bundle or its ionic environment necessary to drive hair cell depolariza- the treatment experiments, ensuring both a normal intrauterine environment tion, also perturbs MET. For each of these contributors to the MET, several and normal postnatal nurturing behavior. Treated and untreated affected pups key components have been identified by studying inherited deafness forms; and littermate controls are then evaluated using a variety of brain studies that they are used as entry points to decipher the involved molecular networks. include analyses of gene expression, histology, cellular proliferation and migra- The presentation will illustrate how the genetic approach led to the discove- tion, and neurobehavior. In parallel, in phase 4 we are preparing for a human ry of molecules controlling the development, maturation and maintenance clinical trial by analyzing fetal brain growth using quantitative fetal magnetic of the correct structurien ovfiv tohe hair bundle and the MET process. It will illu- resonance imaging (MRIs). To date, we have identified significant phenotypic strate how it enlightens our understanding of the way these proteins form differences in Ts1Cje embryos and neonates as endpoints to evaluate thera- molecular complexes and how these complexes work and cooperate py. We have also shown encouraging, statistically-significant improvement in together. A special emphasis will be put on the networks composed of prote- some neurobehavioral tests in adult mice. These results suggest that prenatal ins encoded by the genes responsible for the Usher syndrome, the most fre- treatment in DS is an achievable goal. quent cause of hereditary sensorineural deafness associated with retinitis 
S13 .3 pigmentosa. Usher genes are critically involved in hair bundle development Clinical and social implications of NIPT and the MET machinery as well as the functioning of the photoreceptor K. E. Ormond; cells. Recent results based on mouse and human genetics, which provide Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. evidence for a molecular maturation of the auditory MET machinery, will be discussed. 
S15 .2 Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) became clinically available in late 2011. Genes and cellular pathway of Fanconi’s anemia Since that time, hundreds of thousands of pregnant women have undergone J. Surrallés; NIPT. This talk will discuss the social and ethical concerns that preceeded Group of Genome Instability and DNA Repair, Department of Genetics and Microbiology, the clinical use of NIPT, as well as the data that exists on patient, provider Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) and Center for Biomedical Network Research and stakeholder attitudes towards NIPT now that it is in use. on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. 
S14 .1 Developments in rapid DNA sequencing technology J. O’Halloran1, J. Tyson2; Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disease characterized by bone mar- 1Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2QuantuMDx, Newcastle upon Tyne, United row failure, malformations, chromosome fragility, hypersensitivity to DNA Kingdom. interstrand cross-linking (ICL) chemotherapy and a high predisposition to cancer, including leukemia and solid tumors such as head-and-neck and gynecological carcinomas. The only cure of the hematological disease, which No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at is the major cause of early death, is bone marrow transplantation using an w 
S1 w 4w .2.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. HLA compatible donor. Those families with unavailable donor rely on pre- DNA sequencing in neonatal intensive care units implantation genetic diagnosis with selection of an HLA related embryo and S. Kingsmore; in the future implementation of advanced gene and cell therapies. All these Kansas City, MO, United States. novel therapeutic applications to human health are further complicated by the fact that at least 16 genes, from FANCA to FANCQ, are involved in this disease and their products interact in a complex genome stability and tu- No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at mor suppression network. Notably, 4 out of 16 FA genes (FANCD1/BRCA2, www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. FANCN/PALB2, FANCJ/BRI
P1  and FANCO/Rad51C) are breast cancer sus- 
S14 .3 ceptibility genes in otherwise unaffected mutation carriers. Therefore, the Impact of rapid DNA sequencing on diagnostic and public health discovery of novel Fanconi anemia genes is important not only for the affec- microbiology C. U. Köser; ted patients but also for the general population. In this context, I will pre- University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. sent data on the discovery of a novel Fanconi anemia gene by whole exome sequencing. Interestingly, this gene (ERC
C4  o FANCQ) is involved not only in FA but also in xeroderma pigmentosum, a melanoma susceptibility disorder Whole genome sequencing (WGS) promises to be transformative for the with defective nucleotide excision repair (NER), and in XFE-type progeria. practice of clinical microbiology, and the rapidly falling cost and turnaround Our genetic and biochemical results indicate that depending on the balance time mean that this will become a viable technology in diagnostic and refe- between ICL repair and NER, mutations in the same gene lead to clinically rence laboratories in the near future. The objective of this talk is to provi- t Sh 1r 5e .e 3 distinct disorders. de an overview of a modern diagnostic microbiology laboratory in order to Analysis of signalling pathways in Tbx1 mutants identifies a novel analyse at a very practical level where WGS might be cost-effective compa- mechanism in coronary artery Morphogenesis red to current alternatives. I propose that molecular epidemiology perfor- P. J. Scambler1, S. Ivins1, J. Chappell1, J. Suntharalingham1, B. Vernay1, T. Mohun2; med for outbreak investigations and genotypic antimicrobial susceptibility 1UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2MRC National Laboratory for testing for microbes that are difficult to grow represent the most immediate Medical Research, London, United Kingdom. areas for application of WGS, and discuss the technical and infrastructure requirements for this to be implemented. 
S15 .1 Much of the phenotype of 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is secondary Signaling networks in the auditory sensory cells unveiled by to haploinsufficiency of the transcription factor TBX1. Several studies have hereditary deafness demonstrated distinct temporal and tissue-specific requirements for Tbx1 N. Michalski1,2,3, C. Petit1,2,3,4,5; 1Unité de Génétique et Physiologie de l’Audition, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 2UMRS during development. Identification of candidate targets has led to new in- 1120, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Paris, France, sights into cardiovascular morphogenesis. One such potential target is the 3Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, 4Syndrome de Usher et autres signalling protein CXC
L12  and its receptor CXCR4. This pathway is invol- Atteintes Rétino-Cochléaires, Institut de la vision, Paris, France, 5Collège de France, Paris, ved in collective cell migration, initiating contact inhibition of locomotion France. (CIL-“chase and run”) between NCC and ectodermal placode. We predicted that disruption of this pathway in Tbx1 null mice would lead altered NCC patterning, and therefore conditionally mutated the receptor in cardiac neu- The biochemical study of the components and associated molecular net- ral crest cells. However, no defects were observed suggesting major species works of the auditory sensory cells, the hair cells, are strongly impeded by differences in the role of CXC
L12 -CXCR4 signalling. Rather, we showed that the small number of these cells. In contrast, human and mouse genetic ap- CXCR4 positive endothelial cells were the main target cell population, and proaches have proven to be powerful to identify such components. that disruption of signalling led to VSDs, great vessel defects, and semilunar The presentation will focus on the hair bundle of the hair cells that operates valve defects. In addition, lack of CXC
L12 -CXCR4 signalling led to a major the mechano-electrical transduction (MET). This sensory antenna is com- failure in the elaboration of mature coronary arteries from the coronary en- prised of several rows of rigid microvilli, known as stereocilia of a few fem- dothelial plexus. This deficiency could be traced to a failure of invasion of toliters in volume, that are organised in a staircase pattern. The MET process the aortic root by endothelial cells and subsequent anastomosis of plexus relies not only on the MET machinery but also on the proper architectural vessels with the aorta. Reduction of Cxcl12 expression in the outflow tract and biophysical properties of the hair bundle. In addition, any defect that of Tbx1 null embryos may therefore underlie the minor coronary artery dys- a1ffe2cts the mechanical elements involved in sound-iEndSuHceGd o2s0ci1lla4ti o| nM ofI LthAe N, mIToArpLhYo g|e WneWsis Wse.eEnS inH tGhe.sOe RanGimals. Others have implicated the CXC
L12 -ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S17 .1 Cancer genetic heterogeneity: implications for therapy CXCR4 pathway in some of the neurological deficits observed in chromoso- responsiveness and acquisition of therapy resistance mally engineered mouse models of 22q11DS, suggesting multiple, indepen- A. Bardelli; dent roles for this pathway in 22q11DS. Candiolo, Italy. 
S16 .1 SINEUPs: a new functional class of antisense non-coding RNAs that activate translation S. Gustincich; No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at Trieste, Italy. w 
S1 w 7w .2.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. Non-cell autonomous interactions promote sub-clonal heterogeneity A. Marusyk1,2, D. Tabassum1,2, V. Almendro1,2, P. Altrock1,2, F. Michor1,2, K. Polyak1,2; No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at 1Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical School, www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. Boston, MA, United States. 
S16 .2 Molecular function of the repetitive (epi)genome in normal physiology and in disease Cancers arise and progress due to the underlying Darwinian somatic evo- D. Gabellini; Dulbecco Telethon Institute and San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. lution. It has been commonly accepted that biological and clinical behavi- ors of individual tumors reflect properties of the most abundant cells that have achieved clonal dominance by virtue of carrying the most “advanced” Only about 1% of the genome encodes for the ~20000 human proteins, complement of oncogenic driver mutations. However, the recent influx of which are similar in number and largely orthologous to those found in orga- data from tumor genome sequencing has revealed a remarkable degree of nisms of significant lower complexity. On the contrary, the proportion of non genetic divergence within tumors, including sub-clonal differences in mu- protein-coding DNA has increased with developmental complexity reaching tational status of key driver genes. This clonal heterogeneity begs obvious 98.5% in humans. Interestingly, up to two thirds of the human genome is questions: i) what are the mechanisms that enable co-existence of geneti- composed of non protein-coding repetitive sequences. Furthermore, a signi- cally distinct populations, and ii) what are the biological consequences of ficant portion of the epigenetic modifications is present in these regions and this co-existence? Microenvironmentally constrained tumors represent a DNA repeats are dynamically transcribed in different cells and developmen- particularly interesting scenario: overcoming the bottleneck requires chan- tal stages producing a vast pool of non protein-coding RNA (ncRNA) molecu- ges in the tumor environment induced by secreted factors, but it is not clear les. Thus, ncRNAs produced by DNA repeats may hold the key to understan- a priori whether the expression of a secreted factor capable of driving tumor ding the regulatory complexity inherent in advanced biological networks. outgrowth can provide an autonomous fitness advantage. To address this Long ncRNAs (lncRNAs) represent the most numerous and functionally di- scenario, we have developed a mouse xenograft model of microenvironmen- verse class of RNA produced by mammalian cells. Despite the growing inte- tally-constrained tumors. Using this model, we have interrogated the impact rest on lncRNAs, they still remain poorly explored in terms of biological re- of sub-clonal expression of secreted factors in contexts of either competition levance, cellular function, mechanism of action and involvement in disease. against the parental clone or that of polyclonal tumors. We found that tumor We have recently contributed to this field through the identification of the progression can be driven non-cell autonomously by a sub-population of first activating lncRNA involved in a human genetic disease: facioscapulohu- cells that is unable to achieve clonal dominance. This non-cell autonomous meral muscular dystrophy (FSHD). driving of tumor growth is predicted to stabilize sub-clonal heterogeneity FSHD is one of the most important genetic diseases affecting the skele- within tumors throughout clinically relevant time frames. This co-existence tal muscle. It is an autosomal dominant disorder with a strong epigenetic of biologically distinct sub-populations enables inter-clonal interactions component. Unlike the majority of genetic diseases, FSHD is not caused by t Sh 1a 7t . 3can affect clinically important phenotypes mutation in a protein-coding gene. Instead, the disease is associated with a Circulating tumor cells: Detection, biology and clinical implications reduced copy number of the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat mapping to 4q35. K. Pantel; Despite years of intensive research, the molecular pathogenesis of FSHD Institute of Tumor Biology, University Cancer Center Hamburg, University Medical remains largely unknown. We recently identified DBE-T, a chromatin-asso- Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. ciated lncRNA produced preferentially in FSHD patients. DBE-T mediates a Polycomb to Trithorax epigenetic switch at the FSHD locus, driving chroma- tin remodeling and transcription of FSHD candidate genes. Sensitive methods have been developed to capture circulating tumor cells Here, I will discuss our recent results regarding the regulation of DBE-T ex- (CTCs) in the peripheral blood at the single cell level (Pantel et al., Nat Rev pression, the mechanism responsible for DBE-T tethering to chromatin and Cancer 2008). CTCs are usually detected by immunostaining or RT-PCR as- how this lncRNA regulates the epigenetic status of the FSHD locus. says, and more recently by the EPISPOT assay which measures the number 
S16 .3 of cells releasing/secreting tumor-associated marker proteins. Interestingly, The SMN complex: RNA processing and motor neuron disease detection of cell-free nucleic acids released by tumor cells into the blood L. Pellizoni1,2; might become an indirect way to detect micrometastatic disease (Schwar- 1Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 2Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, Columbia University, New York, zenbach et al, Nat Rev Cancer 2011). At present, most CTC assays rely on NY, United States. epithelial markers and miss CTCs undergoing an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). New markers such as the actin bundling protein plastin-3 (Yokobori et al., Cancer Res. 2013) are not downregulated during EMT and At the post-transcriptional level, expression of protein-coding genes is con- not expressed in normal blood cells might overcome this important limita- trolled by a series of RNA regulatory events including nuclear processing of tion and, therefore, increase the sensitivity of CTC assays. Recently, in vivo primary transcripts, transport of mature mRNAs to specific cellular compart- capture of CTCs with an antibody-coated wire placed into the peripheral ments, translation and ultimately, turnover. These processes are orchestra- arm vein has become feasible and allows now the “fishing” for CTCs from ted through the dynamic association of mRNAs with RNA binding proteins approx. 1.5 liters of blood within 30 minutes. CTC enumeration and charac- and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. Accurate formation of RNPs in vivo terization with certified systems provides reliable information on prognosis is fundamentally important to cellular development and function, and its im- and may serve as liquid+ biopsy+ (Alix-Panabieres & Pantel, Clin. Chem. 2013; pairment often leads to human disease. The survival motor neuron (SMN) Pantelolw & Alix-hPigahnabieres, Cancer Res., 2013). Interestingly, the subset of Ep- protein is key to this biological paradigm: SMN is essential for the biogenesis CAM , CD44 , CD47, c-Met CTCs obtained from the peripheral blood of of various RNPs that function in mRNA processing, and genetic mutations breast cancer patients might represent metastasis-initiator cells (Baccelli et leading to ubiquitous SMN deficiency cause the neurodegenerative disease al, Nature Biotech. 2013). Moreover, monitoring of CTCs before, during and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). I will discuss the expanding role of SMN in after systemic therapy (e.g., chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, antibody the- the regulation of gene expression through its multiple functions in RNP as- rapy) might provide unique information for the future clinical management sembly and advances in our understanding of how disruption of SMN-depen- of the individual cancer patient. This information can be used as companion dent RNA processing pathways can cause motor neuron disease. diagnostics to improve the stratification of therapies and to obtain insights into therapy-induced selection of cancer cells. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 13ABSTRACTS SYMPOSIA Back to index 
S18 .1 
S19 .2 Glyco-lipophobia: association with disorders of glycolipid and Using transcriptome sequencing to understand mechanisms of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor synthesis disease H. H. Freeze; T. Lappalainen; Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States. New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United States. Thankfully, DNA and protein sequencing technologies revolutionized gene- Detailed characterization of cellular effects of genetic variants is essential tics and proteomics. Sadly, the two other macromolecules, carbohydrates for understanding biological processes that underlie genetic associations to and lipids, missed that technical revolution creating a malady called Glyco- disease. This is a particularly pressing question in the interpretation of per- lipophobia. Perhaps its development was predictable based on their mole- sonal genomes that necessitates accurate prediction and measurement of cular complexity, template-independent biosynthesis, and structural analy- genome function. One approach to address this challenge is to combine ge- sis without having defined functions. Fortunately, this condition is treatable, nomic data to a cellular phenotype, such as the transcriptome measured by and given the discovery of over 100 genetic disorders in these pathways, RNA-sequencing. The early population-scale RNA-seq studies such as GEU- treatment should not be delayed. VADIS are now being complemented by Genotype-Tissue Expression project Glycosylation related genes comprise 1-2% of the human genome and (GTEx), where we are creating a comprehensive public atlas of genetic effects those genes often fall into a series of distinct (sometimes overlapping) pa- on the transcriptome across multiple human tissues. These data have been thways. Each pathway generates sugar chains (glycans) for typical “clients”. used to characterize regulatory and loss-of-function genetic variants as well The best-known pathway is N-glycosylation found in secreted proteins, as imprinting both at the population and individual level. Common expres- membrane-bound receptors, and signaling molecules. Some glycosylation sion quantitative trait loci that associate to gene expression levels provide a disorders involve addition of glycans to lipids, not proteins. A few glycoli- powerful tool to understand genetic architecture of regulatory variation and pids are biosynthetic precursors of other pathways, but two define distinct its role in GWAS associations. Furthermore, allele-specific expression driven pathways: glycosylphosphatidylinolsitol (GPI) anchors and glycosphingoli- by regulatory variants and imprinting can impact on penetrance of coding pids (GSL). These molecules are often located in lipid rafts. Fifteen distinct variants. Finally, we systematically analyzed transcriptome effects of pro- disorders disrupt these pathways. All cells contain GPI and GSL, and affected tein-coding loss-of-function variants. Measuring nonsense-mediated decay patients display a range of mostly severe phenotypes that can include intel- (NMD) triggered by SNPs and indels allowed us to understand and better lectual disability, seizures, ophthalmologic abnormalities, heart defects, and predict NMD trigger and escape. Importantly, effects of loss-of-function va- often plasma hyper- or hypo-phosphatasia. Simple biochemical indicators riants appear highly context-dependent with frequent tissue-specific effects can help identify likely candidate genes from exome sequencing, and then and dosage compensation. Altogether, our results demonstrate the power of also confirm those candidates. Cellular assays based on the established pa- integrating genome and transcriptome data not only to improve our general thways can help design potential therapeutic screens. understanding of genetic variants, but also as a practical approach in future Understanding the biosynthetic pathways not only suggests, and then con- medical and clinical applications of personal genomics. 
S19 .3 firms, candidate genes, but it creates avenues for therapy, based on the re- High resolution genetic analysis to detect variants associated with storation of functional readouts. The powerful partnership of biochemistry quantitative traits and diseases in the founder Sardinian population and genetics can help eradicate or reduce Glyco-lipophobia. Patients and fa- F. Cucca; milies have a vested interest in that victory: they need us to collaborate and Sassari, Italy. cooperate, regardless of the target molecules and genes. Supported by The Rocket Fund and R01DK55615 
S18 .2 No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at Disorders of phospholipids, sphingolipids and fatty acids biosynthesis www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. F. Mochel; Paris, France. No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 
S18 .3 Update on lipidomic approaches in disorders affecting complex lipids metabolism: the example of cardiolipin F. M. Vaz; Academic Medical Center, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Disease, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Lipids are important components of cellular membranes but also function as signal molecules in many cellular processes including apoptosis, autophagy and inflammation. In the last decade many new inborn errors of metabolism have been identified, many by next generation sequencing, that are caused by a deficiency of genes involved in phospholipid metabolism. A complemen- tary technique that is frequently applied to investigate the functional defect in these disorders is lipidomics, which strives to measure and quantitate as many lipids as possible by (tandem) mass spectrometry. This technique will be introduced followed by different examples that show that combining next generation sequencing and lipidomics is a synergetic combination that yields novel biomarkers for inborn errors of phospholipid metabolism. 
S19 .1 Whole genome sequencing of 4000 individuals provides insight into genetic architecture of complex traits N. Soranzo; Hinxton, United Kingdom. No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. 14 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS E
S1 .1 other modulators, including FLI1, whose haploinsufficiency due to 11q23- Genetics of familial forms of thrombocytopenia ter deletions determines TCPT or JBS. In case of mutations of GATA1 or A. Savoia1,2; GFI1B, another two hematopoietic transcription factors, thrombocytopenia 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo associates with red cells defects and reduction of alpha-granules. Absence Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. of alpha-granules resulting typical gray appearance of platelets is a patho- gnomic feature of GPS. NBEA
L2 , the causative gene in this form, is likely to function in vesicle trafficking and generation of platelet granules. Inherited thrombocytopenias (ITs) are a heterogeneous group of rare di- The largest group of ITs could be related to defects of proplatelet formation, seases characterized by bleeding risk sometimes associated with platelet a process involving dynamic reorganization of the cytoskeleton, signaling dysfunction or other clinical features. More than twenty different forms pathways or apoptosis. Regarding the first aspect, mutations in genes en- have been characterized (Table 1). They account for almost 50% of the IT coding for components of the cytoskeleton (MYH9, ACTN1, TUBB1, WAS or patients, suggesting that many forms are still unrecognizable. FLNA) are likely to interfere with the correct proplatelet extension and pla- The IT genes play a variety of roles in the complex process of megaka- telet release. Of note, FLNA interacts with the C-terminus of GPIbalpha, one ryopoisis and platelet production though their function is often unclear. In subunits of the von Willebrand factor receptor (GPIb/IX/V). Alterations of the rare forms of CAMT, CTRUS and TAR, thrombocytopenia is severe be- GPIb/IX/V cause BSS characterized by mild thrombocytopenia associated cause of absence or reduction of megakaryocytes (MKs). Whereas in TAR, with reduction of platelet aggregation. Finally, defects of cytochrome c the platelet count tends to rise during life, in CAMT and CTRUS the disease (CYCS) could be associated with increased apoptosis and premature release progresses to bone marrow failure. Loss of function of MPL, the receptor of platelets into bone marrow instead of blood stream. of thrombopoietin, prevents production of Mks in the bone marrow of the This heterogeneity makes the molecular diagnostic testing a complex and CAMT patients. Less certain is instead the role of HOXA11 and RBM8A in time-consuming process. Next generation sequencing strategies will have CTRUS and TAR, respectively. a strong impact in the diagnosis of the known forms and cloning novel IT In another group of ITs there is a defect of MK maturation. In two of these genes. forms, ANKRD26RD and PFD/AML, patients are also at risk of developing Table 1. Features of inherited thrombocytopenias classified according to leukemias. Whereas the role of ANKRD26 remains obscure, RUNX1 is a ma- possible defective processes of megakaryopoisis and platelet production. ster transcription factor regulating hemaOtoMpINo iesis. RUNX1 Gbeinned s several Disease Abbreviation Inheritance (chromosome Platelet size Other features References entry localization) MPL Congenital amegakaryocytic Reduced megakaryocytes, evolution into Ballmaier et al. Semin Thromb CAMT 604498 AR HOXA1(11p34) Normal thrombocytopenia bone marrow aplasia Hemost 37:673, 2011 Amegakaryocytic Reduced megakaryocytes. Possible evolution (7p15- Balduini et al. Hum Genet thrombocytopenia with radio- CTRUS 605432 AD Normal into aplastic anemia. Radio-ulnar synostosis 14) 131:1821, 2012 ulnar synostosis RBM8A +/-other defects Reduced megakaryocytes. Platelet count Thrombocytopenia with absent Albers et al. Nat Genet 44:435, TAR 274000 AR (1q21.1) Normal tends to normalize in adult life. Bilateral radii 2012 RUNX1 radial aplasia +/-other malformations Familial platelet disorder Balduini et al. Hum Genet aAnNdK pRrDe2d6isposition to acute FPD/AML 601399 AD (21q22) Normal Increased risk (40%) of leukemia or MDS TH
C2  ANKRD26 131:1821, 2012 myelogenous leukemia -related Noris et al. Blood 117:6673, 188000 AD (10p2) Normal Increased risk of leukemia or MDS thrombocytopenia 2011 Paris-Trousseau 188025 TCPT Large deletion Cardiac and facial defects, developmental Balduini et al. Hum Genet thrombocytopenia 600588 AD Large (11q23-ter) delay +/-other defects 131:1821, 2012 Jacobsen syndrome JBS 147791 GATA1 Dyserythropoietic anaemia with 300367 Haemolytic anaemia, possible unbalanced thrombocytopenia Balduini et al. Hum Genet GATA1RD XL (Xp11) Large globin chain synthesis, possible congenital X-linked thrombocytopenia with 131:1821, 2012 314050 erythropoietic porphyria thalassemia NBEA
L2  Pale platelets, evolutive Bottega et al. Gray platelet syndrome GPS 139090 AR (3p21.1) Large myelofibrosis, splenomegaly, Haematologica. 98:868, GFI1B high serum vit B12 2013 Red cell anisopoikilocytosis, Stevenson et al. J Thromb GFI1B thrombocytopenia GFI1B nd AD (9q34.13) Large platelet aggregation defects, Haemost 11:2039, 2013 α-granules reduction ABCG5ABCG8 Stomatocytosis, possible anaemia, tendon xanthomas, Thrombocytopenia associated with Balduini et al. Hum Genet STSL 210250 AR , (2p21) Large atherosclerosis. Defective MKs sitosterolaemia 131:1821, 2012 in a mouse model (Chase et al. Blood 115:1267, 2010) MYH9 155100 MYH9 153640, leukocyte inclusions, cataracts, Balduini et al. Br J -related disease MYH9RD AD (22q12-13) Giant 153650, nephropathy and/or deafness Haematol 154:161, 2011 605249 Kunishima et al. Am J ACTN1-related thrombocytopenia ACTN1RD 615193 AD ACTN1 (1q24.1) Large Anisocytosis FLNA FLNA Hum Genet 92:431, 2013 May be associated with Berrou et al. Arterioscler TUBB-1related thrombocytopenia FLNARD nd XL (Xq28) Small/giant periventricular nodular Thromb Vasc Biol TUBB1RD TUBB1 heterotopia (MIM 300049) 33:e11-8, 2013 -related Kunishima et al. Blood 613112 AD (6p21.3) Giant None macrothrombocytopenia 113:458, 2009 WAS Severe immunodeficiency. Mahlaoui et al. Blood Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome WAS 301000 Platelets have reduced life span121:1510, 2013 XL (Xp11) Small Albert et al. Bood X-linked thrombocytopenia XLT 313900 No or mild immunodeficiency 115:3231, 2010 G
P1 BA Savoia et al. GPIBB G
P9  Biallelic 231200 AR Giant Haematologica 96:417, (17p13), Bernard-Soulier 2011 BSS (22q11), None syndrome Noris et al. (3q21) Monoallelic nd AD Large Haematologica 97:82, GPIBA 2012 ITGA2 ITGB3 Platelet count goes down Balduini et al. Hum Genet Platelet-type von Willebrand disease VWndDP 177820 AD (17p13) Possiblly giant under stress 131:1821, 2012 / -related ITGA2B (5q23-q31), Platelet anisotropy, possible Balduini et al. Hum Genet CYCS TH
C4  187800 AD CYCS Large thrombocytopenia ITGB3 (17q21.32) defects of platelet function 131:1821, 2012 Morison et al. Nat Genet -related thrombocytopenia ESHG 2610210044 | MILAAND, ITALY | W (W7p1W5.3.)ESHG.NOorRmGal None 40:387, 2008 15ABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index E
S1 .2 E
S2 .1 Diagnosis and management of inherited thrombocytopenias Using prediction scores in cardiovascular medicine C. L. Balduini, P. Noris, A. Pecci; S. Ripatti1,2,3; IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 1Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Until the end of the last century, a few forms of inherited thrombocytope- nia (IT) were known and these disorders were considered exceedingly rare. Spontaneous bleeding was considered as a feature common to all patients Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have provided hints and pointers and as the main clinical consequence of these disorders. Recently, many new towards causes of many common complex diseases and the current wave of forms of ITs have been identified and our view of these disorders has consi- large-scale sequencing efforts is likely to refine many of these signals. Using derably changed. We realized that ITs are less rare than previously thought cardiovascular diseases (CVD) as an example, I will describe efforts to turn and that most patients have mild or no spontaneous bleedings. In many the association results into risk evaluations and efforts towards developing cases thrombocytopenia is discovered incidentally during adult life and its tools to help in preventive medicine. genetic origin is missed, exposing patients to the risk of misdiagnosis with Almost two thirds of the incident CVD cases are not identified as high-risk immune thrombocytopenia. To avoid this mistake, it is therefore essential individuals using the currently widely used risk scores, such as the Framing- that ITs are considered in the differential diagnosis of any thrombocytope- ham risk score. Almost 50 genetic loci have been indentified for coronary nia of unknown origin both in children and adults. Family history, to search artery disease and even though the effect sizes of individual common vari- for other affected family members, and physical examination, to identify the ants identified by GWA studies are small, the large number of loci provide defects that typically associate with thrombocytopenia in syndromic forms, an opportunity to use the SNPs jointly in genetic risk scores (GRS). These are useful tools in this respect, although negative results do not exclude the scores have comparable risk profiles with quantitative risk factors like genetic origin of platelet deficiency. Microscope evaluation of blood films is blood pressure or LDL cholesterol and have a potential to identify high risk another key element for differential diagnosis, as morphological anomalies individuals missed by the traditional risk factor screens. of platelets (increased or reduced size, defects of granules or vacuolization), Using results from prospective cohorts, I show how the genetic risk scores leukocytes (Döhle-like bodies in neutrophils) or red cells (anisocytosis) are provide complementary information for prediction over the traditional risk observable in many ITs. factors and show how GRS help in identifying individuals with high risk. I Once an IT is suspected, a diagnostic algorithm can guide further investi- discuss the potential benefits of targeted interventions using both tradi- gation toward the specific patient’s disease. It is likely that next generation tional risk factor and genetic risk score information and show how already sequencing techniques will simplify this process in the near future. using the currently known risk loci provide an opportunity to prevent disea- A definite diagnosis is essential for proper patient management. In some se events. Finally, I discuss the need for developing tools to communicate the forms of IT, the major risk for affected subjects does not derive from blee- genetic risk to medical community and citizens, and the need to test the risk dings, but from the increased propensity to develop additional disorders, as s Ec So 2r .e 2s in clinical settings. hematological malignancies or kidney failure. In syndromic ITs, associated The benefits of using genetic information to design prevention trials extra-hematological defects often have a much higher impact on patients’ A. Hingorani; quality of life than the reduced platelet count. The identification of geno- London, United Kingdom. type-phenotype correlations for same disorders made feasible to identify and quantify the risks affecting each patient and to design personalized follow-up protocols. No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at A definite diagnosis is also required to personalize treatment, as platelet www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. E
S3 .1 transfusions are no longer the only remedy for ITs (Table 1). Novel sequencing approaches in genetic disease research Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation can cure ITs and this treatment is A. Hoischen; the best option for a few disorders that invariably lead to death during child- Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud hood. The thrombopoietin mimetic eltrombopag is effective in increasing university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Nijmegen, Netherlands. platelet count in the IT induced by MYH9 mutations, the most frequent form of IT, and this drug has been successfully used instead of platelet transfu- sions to prepare patients for elective surgery. Splenectomy has no role in Over the past decade the next generation sequencing has led to a revoluti- ITs, except for patients with WAS mutations, whose platelet counts increase on in human genetics and in disease gene identification in particular. This after spleen removal. Finally, effective treatments are available also for some revolution was driven by new technologies that allowed new applications. extra hematological defects of syndromic ITs. But what’s next? In this educational session I will address the latest technological develop- Table 1. Treatments for inherited thrombocytopenias ments, for example: What to do with more and less expensive sequencing Indications Comments data? What do longer sequencing reads offer? Can we detect mosaicism re- All ITs. To stop bleedings when Platelet Use HLA-matched donors to reduce liably? I will also show new applications, for example the benefits of whole local measures failed or are transfusions the risk of alloimmunization genome sequencing, new developments for exome sequencing and also new not possible Successfully used also in a few m ESe 3th .2ods for highly multiplexed targeted re-sequencing. Hemopoietic - Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome patients with biallelic Bernard Stem Cell - Congenital amegakaryocytic Single cell genome and transcriptome sequencing Soulier syndrome and life threatening Transplantation thrombocytopenia J. Lundeberg; hemorrhages Used instead of platelet transfusions SciLifeLab, KTH- Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. for preparing patients to surgery. Eltrombopag - MYH9-related disease Efficacy in other conditions to be tested Cells in a particular tissue are not identical. Instead, cells that are identi- - Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome It increases platelet count but also the Splenectomy cal from a genomic point of view may have considerable variation in gene - X-linked thrombocytopenia risk of infections Experimental. A test dose is expression profile and protein levels, giving rise to a heterogeneous coll- - All mild forms of IT. To stop recommended to identify patients who ection of cells with different behavior and appearance. Even the genomic Desmopressin bleedings and to prepare might benefit from this treatment for DNA sequence may vary slightly between neighboring normal cells within patients to surgery future bleedings-surgery a tissue albeit the differences are can be significant in adjacent tumor cells. All mild form of IT. To stop Antifibrinolytic Experimental (anecdotal evidence of In order to get information from single cells one need to isolate, study, and or prevent bleedings, and to agents prepare patients to surgery efficacy) sometimes culture them, separately. This lecture will describe some of the All inherited advancements in genome and transcriptome analysis of single cells using Recombinant thrombocytopenias. To stop Experimental (anecdotal evidence of massively parallel DNA sequencing and describe in more detail an approach factor VIIa bleedings when all other efficacy). Risk of thrombosis to spatially identify gene expression in single cells in a tissue sections. treatments failed 16 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index E
S4 .1 E
S5 .2 Protein replacement system: the case of polymerase-delta and MLH1 Revertant mosaicism in skin disease mutations in colon cancer. M. F. Jonkman, A. M. G. Pasmooij; J. Jiricny; University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, Zurich, Switzerland. Revertant mosaicism (RM) refers to the co-existence of cells carrying disea- Next generation sequencing has revolutionized the search for disease-cau- se-causing mutations with cells in which the inherited mutation is geneti- sing genetic alterations. Unfortunately, the task of distinguishing the hand- cally corrected by a spontaneous post-zygotic event. RM in skin was first ful of causative mutations from the multitude of harmless polymorphisms reported by us in 1997 in the genetic disorder epidermolysis bullosa (EB), remains daunting. We have developed a system that permits the study of all which is characterized by lifelong fragile skin that easily forms blisters and types of mutations in any gene of choice. The system is based on the gene- erosions. In a patient with generalized atrophic benign EB, caused by com- ration of stable human cell lines that simultaneously and inducibly express pound heterozygosity at the CO
L17 A1 locus, we found several patchy areas a cDNA encoding the protein carrying the mutation of interest and shRNA of healthy skin and provided molecular proof that the keratinocytes in the against the endogenous mRNA. In this way, the endogenous wild type pro- clinically unaffected skin were corrected by a gene conversion event, and tein can be replaced with a variant expressing any mutation and, if desired, consequently produced normal type XVII collagen. Mutations in as many as also a tag for affinity purification or visualization. In this presentation, I shall 18 genes can result in EB. Five of these genes have shown to revert: KRT14 focus on polymerase-delta and MLH1, which have been found to be mutated encoding keratin 14 in EB simplex, LAMB3 encoding the β3 chain of laminin- in familiar and sporadic colon cancers. 332, and CO
L17 A1 encoding type XVII collagen in junctional EB, CO
L7 A1 en- E
S4 .2 coding type VII collagen in dystrophic EB, and FERMT1 encoding kindlin-1 Aging and cancer: The impact of DNA damage J. H. J. Hoeijmakers; in Kindler syndrome. RM was also found in other heritable skin diseases: Dept. of Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. dyskeratosis congenita, and in ichthyosis in confetti (ichthyosis variegata) induced by increased homologous recombination of KRT10. Similar examp- les of “natural gene therapy” by RM have been described in Bloom syndro- Inherited defects in nucleotide excision repair (NER) removing helix-distor- me, leukocyte adherence deficiency type 1, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and ting DNA lesions are associated with cancer predisposition in xeroderma RAG1-deficient severe combined immunodeficiency. This „natural gene the- pigmentosum and neurodevelopmental deficits and segmental progeria in rapy“ phenomenon manifests as normal appearing skin areas surrounded Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy (TTD). Mutations in single by affected skin. Although initially thought to be rare, RM is now considered NER genes, such as XPD, are linked with all three disorders. Various sin- relatively common in genetic skin diseases. To address the issues relevant gle and double NER mouse mutants reveal that the severity of specific re- to RM, we will discuss the following questions: 1) What is the incidence of pair defects strictly correlates with the acceleration of selective premature RM in heritable skin diseases? 2) What are the repair mechanisms in RM? 3) aging features, whereas the type of DNA repair defect determines the kind When do the revertant mutations occur? 4) How do you recognize revertant of progeroid symptoms and/or cancer susceptibility. Microarray, functional skin? 5) Do the areas of RM change in size? The answers to these questi- and physiological studies revealed that persistent DNA damage, like caloric ons allow us to acquire knowledge on these reverted cells, the mechanisms restriction, down-regulates the IGF1/GH-, lacto- and thyrotropic hormonal of RM, and utility of the reverted cells to the advantage of the patient. The axes and upregulates anti-oxidant defenses, favoring maintenance at the revertant skin could potentially be used to treat the patient‘s own affected expense of growth. This ‘survival response’ links accumulation of DNA da- skin. Revertant skin cells can be used for transplantation by means of: 1) mage and IGF1 control of life span. Micro- and mRNA expression profiling of own skin biopsies, 2) cell suspension, 3) cultured epithelial cell sheet, 4) in- normal, accelerated and delayed aging also revealed a clear parallel with the duced pluripotent stem cells reprogrammed as epithelial sheet for skin graf- expression changes triggered by persistent transcription-blocking DNA le- ting or as haemopoietic stem cells for infusion. Transplantation of revertant sions. These findings strongly support the DNA damage theory of aging. We s Ek Si 6n . 1biopsies has already succesfully been performed in a patient with EB. will present phenotypes of conditional DNA repair models targeting aging to Strategies for rare disease gene discovery in the era of next- selected organs, parallels with Alzheimer’s disease and the effect of nutritio- generation sequencing n Ea Sl 5 i .n 1terventions on the life span of progeroid repair mutants. K. M. Boycott1, F. S. Alkuraya2; 1Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Genomic View of Mosaicism and Disease ON, Canada, 2King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi N. B. Spinner, L. K. Conlin; Arabia. The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and The Perelman School of Medicine, at The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Assigning medically-relevant roles to human genes is at the core of medical genetics as a field. In the area of Mendelian genetics, such assignment should Mosaicism refers to the presence of two or more populations of cells with be relatively straightforward since the phenotypic effect of Mendelian genes different genotypes within an organism, The timing of the events that lead to is usually large and measurable. The recent ability to interrogate the entire various mosaic genomic alterations can vary widely, leading to many diffe- genome (or its coding portion) has provided an unprecedented opportunity rent patterns of mosaicism. Mosaicism can result from abnormalities arising to rapidly discover disease-causing genes by circumventing historical road- during meiosis, with correction during earliest development in some cells, blocks that characterized previous approaches. However, even this cutting- or it may arise postzygotically, during early mitotic divisions. Mosaicism has edge tool has its own set of challenges. In this session, the two presenters been detected at surprisingly high frequency in the very early embryo, in will share with the audience the lessons they learned from their ongoing miscarriages, in a wide variety of patients with clinical abnormalities and in effort to unravel the “Mendeliome”, one gene at a time. They draw from their normal individuals. In some cases, the clinical presentation might suggest combined experience not only in the successful identification of >120 Men- mosaicism, as for example, in cases of ambiguous sex in an individual with delian genes, but also, and as importantly, from the many unexpected results XX/XY mosaicism, or in individuals with patchy pigmentation where lighter they encountered in their research programs. The first presenter will provi- and darker skin may have different genotypes. However, in many cases mo- de an overview of the recent successes and pace of novel gene discovery and saicism cannot be discerned at the clinical level. Mosaicism can be restricted discuss the implementation of next-generation sequencing tools alone, or in to somatic tissues only, in which case it is unlikely to be inherited, or it can combination with autozygosity positional mapping, to identify autosomal occur in both somatic and germline tissues, where transmission is possible, recessive Mendelian genes. The second presenter will continue the same and in some cases it may be present in germ cells only, so that a normal theme by sharing experience with autosomal dominant disorders and their individual is at risk for having multiple offspring with the mosaic finding. own set of associated challenges. Both presenters will discuss in detail the Mosaicism can be restricted to a single tissue, such as the brain or heart, pitfalls of the various approaches and suggest some helpful strategies. The causing tissue limited pathology, such as autism, schizophrenia or cardiac immediate and critical need to exchange information about rare variants in disease. In this session, we will trace the history of mosaicism from earliest genes, which is likely to grow in even more importance as we start to iden- examples of chromosomal mosaicism through recognition of mosaic DNA tify genes that contribute a decreasing percentage to the overall Mendelian alterations and we will demonstrate how the utilization of SNP based chro- mutation burden, will be emphasized by both presenters. At the end of the mosomal microarray analysis and next generation sequencing have vastly session, it is hoped that interested investigators will have acquired basic improved our ability to detect mosaicism, leading to markedly increased knowledge on optimal designs of projects aimed to discover novel disease recognition of the role of mosaicism in human disease. We will discuss the genes. clinical and molecular classes of mosaicism, their detection and the biologi- cal insights gained from these studies. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 17ABSTRACTS EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS Back to index E
S7 .1 From Mutations in the Few to Drugs for the Many M. R. Hayden; on exemption should, in future, be restricted to accredited laboratories and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Petah-Tikva, Israel. should not apply to commercial laboratories. We believe that this provides an appropriate balance of test availability and patient safety. This proposal has been included in the new proposed Regulation. The ENVI Committee at Black swans have existed in the imaginations of philosophers for thousands the European Parliament has proposed that the new Regulation should in- of years as a metaphor of extreme outliers and unexpected rare events of clude far-reaching provisions that would govern and restrict the interaction large magnitude and consequence. Philosopher’s argued that even though between clinical geneticists and their patients. The ESHG has taken a strong black swans were extremely rare, collectively they had a vastly larger im- stance against these proposals and has commissioned a legal opinion that pact than common, regular occurrences. In genetics and drug discovery, the demonstrates that they breach the principle of subsidiarity and are beyond exceptional black swans of rare genetic illnesses can lead to high-impact the legal competence of the European Union. We will report on progress in discoveries beyond the realm of normal expectations. Following „extreme t Eh Se 8s .e 2 efforts and on our plans for further action. genetics“ and “opposite phenotype” strategies, we have made inroads in stu- Data protection regulation dying many devastating rare genetic illnesses in order to decipher the basis D. Townend; for common diseases. Investigating the “Opposite Phenotype” of pain in rare Maastricht, Netherlands. patients who are unable to perceive or understand pain, we have developed new drugs that may be able to treat pain in a profound way for the general population. The importance of the rare patient and clinical genetics is cru- No abstract received at production date. Check the online database at c Ei Sa 7l .i 2n the identification and validation of novel drug targets. www.eshg.org/astracts2014.0.html for possible updates. Genetic, cell biological and clinical interrogation of disease-causing CFTR mutations informs strategies for future drug discovery C. E. Bear1, S. Molinski1, T. Gonska1, L. Huan1, B. Baskin2, I. Janahi3, P. N. Ray1; 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar. Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator CFTR Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a common genetic disease caused by mutations in the ( ) gene that lead to reduction of CFTR anion channel function on the surface of fluid trans- porting epithelial tissues. The clinical phenotype is variable but severely affected individuals typically suffer from airway obstruction with recurrent episodes of inflammation and infection as well as pancreatic insufficiency. The need to overcome this gap in knowledge is urgent, particularly given the recent success in developing drugs that target the basic defects caused by CFTR mutation. VX-770 (or Ivacaftor) has been approved as a drug for patients bearing the relatively rare mutation: p.Gly551Asp mutation. The most common mutation, p.Phe508del, has been studied extensively and found to impair CFTR protein folding during synthesis. Knowledge regar- ding the molecular defects caused by p.Phe508del has driven development of targeted, interventional compounds, such as VX-809. The development of these drugs highlights the therapeutic relevance of understanding the basic defects caused by CFTR mutation. Approximately 2000 different variants in the CFTR gene have been reported in the CF Mutation Database, yet, the molecular consequences of less than 10% of these variants are understood. In this presentation, our interrogation of a rare variant, c.3700 A>G, will be discussed. This mutation leads to aberrant splicing and the in-frame deleti- on of six amino acids (p.Ile1234_Arg1239del) in a conserved region of the CFTR protein. The deletion of these residues, caused protein misfolding as in the case of p.Phe508del. These insights led us to test the efficacy of an inve- stigational compound in trials for p.Phe508del and found that, in cell cultu- re, VX-809 partially ameliorated the folding defect of p.Ile1234_Arg1239del- CFTR. Hence, these studies support the rationale for defining the molecular consequences of rare CFTR mutations in guiding decisions regarding future drug discovery efforts. E
S8 .1 New Proposals for the Regulation of in vitro Diagnostic Devices (IVDs) D. E. Barton1,2, S. Hogarth3; 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2School of Medicine & Medical Sciences, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 3Department of Social Science, Health and Medicine, King‘s College, London, United Kingdom. The 1998 IVD Directive regulates the market for diagnostic tests within the EU, setting out standards for the design and manufacture of in-vitro dia- gnostic devices (IVDs) and providing mechanisms for the oversight of these standards. The current system is inflexible, unresponsive and does not do a good job of protecting patients from harm. In September 2012, the Euro- pean Commission launched a proposal for a complete overhaul of the IVD regulations. While welcoming these proposals as a move towards a flexible, transparent and proportionate system which would bring the EU closer to international best practice, EuroGentest and ESHG have also expressed con- cerns about a number of provisions which do not provide effective regulati- on of the burgeoning commercial market for genomic diagnostics, including direct-to-consumer genetic testing. We have made detailed submissions to the Commission, to MEPs and to regulatory bodies to improve the proposed regulation in these areas. Tests manufactured and used within health insti- tution labs are exempt from the current IVD Directive - the so-called “health in1s8titution exemption”. EuroGentest has proposed EthSaHt tGhe 2he0a1lt4h i|n MstiItuLtAi-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index CONCURRENT SESSIONS 
C01 .1 inherited with high transmission risk, resulting in requests for preimplan- Clinical implementation of non-invasive prenatal aneuploidy tation or prenatal diagnoses. These procedures are hampered by our poor detection knowledge on the pathophysiology of mtDNA mutations during human de- N. Brison, B. Bayindir, P. Brady, L. Dehaspe, S. Ardui, J. Van Houdt, H. Van Esch, E. Legius, velopment. Specifically, how mtDNA mutations impact the mMtTDTNLA1 ,c ontent? T. De Ravel, K. Devriendt, J. R. Vermeesch; We collected oMoTcTyKte, s, embryos, placentas and feMtaTlA tTiPss6u, es at various stages Center for Human Genetics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. of development, from controls and carriers of m.3243A>G ( MELAS), m.8344A>G ( MERRF) and m.8993T>G ( NARP). We devised a test assessing simultaneously mtDNA copy number (CN) and mutant load The presence of cell-free fetal DNA in the maternal circulation has allowed in single cells. for the development of methods for non-invasive detection of fetal chro- MtDNA CN increased from the germinal vesicle to the blastocyst stage in mosomal aneuploidies. Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) thus avoids m.3243A>G cells, suggestive of a mutation-dependent induction of mtDNA miscarriages due to invasive sampling of fetal material. We developed an replication, that may compensate for the respiratory chain dysfunction. innovative, fast, cost efficient workflow and high throughput analysis pipe- Analyses of placentas showed that mtDNA CN significantly increased in line. For validation, cell-free DNA of 297 maternal blood samples were coll- m.3243A>G at 11-GW, becoming identical to controls at deliversyt, probably ected from women between 9-15 weeks of gestational age who were also owing to a placental energy demand maximal at the end of the 1 trimester. undergoing invasive sampling for increased risk of fetal aneuploidy. Whole Analyses of fetal tissues showed that mtDNA CN was similar in m.3243A>G genome sequencing was performed on cell-free DNA sequencing libraries vs control tissues apart from the lung; lower in m.8993T>G muscle, heart, on a HiSeq2500 using the fast mode 50bp single-ends. In addition to the and liver vs control. Mutant loads were identical in all tissues from a given Z-scores, traditionally the main measure for non-invasive aneuploidy detec- fetus, indicating an absence of mutant load/mtDNA content correlation. tion, we defined different new parameters which allow for a higher accura- These data highlight the complex relationships between mtDNA mutations cy aneuploidy detection. Moreover, the use of Z-scores across sliding bins and mtDNA content, depending on mutation types, mutant loads, cell types enables the distinction to be made between maternal and fetal CNVs. This and development stages. Transcriptome and mtDNA replication studies approach resulted in 100% specificity and sensitivity for trisomy 21 and 18 should help us in unravelling the molecular bases of these observations, of detection (trisomy 21, n=17; trisomy 18, n=7). This analysis pipeline has particular relevance for therapeutic approaches in mtDNA disorders. 
C01 .4 been clinically implemented and accredited (ISO15189). An overview of our Whole-genome single-cell haplotyping, a generic method for clinical experience, currently standing at 500 samples, will be provided. In preimplantation genetic diagnosis addition to the traditional trisomies, we will present data on other aneuploi- M. Zamani Esteki1, E. Dimitriadou1, L. Mateiu1, C. Melotte1, N. Van der Aa1, P. Kumar1, d Ci 0e 1s .a 2nd clinical management thereof. R. Das1, J. Cheng1, E. Legius1, Y. Moreau2, S. Debrock3, T. D’Hooghe3, P. Verdyck4, M. De Clinical Validation of Noninvasive Prenatal risk assessment for fetal Rycke4,5, K. Sermon5, J. Vermeesch1, T. Voet1,6; 1Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Department of Human Genetics, sex chromosome aneuploidies in maternal plasma using Direct KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Electrical Engineering, ESAT-SISTA, ANalysis of Selected Regions (DANSR™) assays KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Leuven University Fertility Center, University Hospital K. H. Nicolaides1,2, T. Musci3, C. Struble3, E. Wang3, J. Hooks3, A. Syngelaki1, M. del Mar Gil1, Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 4Centre for Medical Genetics, Universitair Ziekenhuis A. Oliphant3, A. Wolfberg3; Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 5Research group Reproduction and Genetics (REGE), Vrije 1Harris Birthright Research Centre of Fetal Medicine, Kings College Hospital, London, Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 6Single-cell Genomics Centre, Welcome United Kingdom, 2Department of Fetal Medicine, University College Hospital, London, Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. United Kingdom, 3Ariosa Diagnostics, San Jose, CA, United States. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is the genetic testing of embryos Fetal cell-free DNA (cffDNA) in maternal plasma enables screening for fe- prior to implantation to avoid the transmission of germline genetic disor- tal aneuploidy using next generation sequencing technologies. We have ders or of unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements when a parent is a previously described using DANSR assays for biochemical analysis of chro- balanced carrier. Current single-cell PCR or FISH PGD-assays require family- mosomes 13, 18, and 21, combined with the Fetal fraction Optimized Risk specific designs and labor-intensive workup. Array comparative genomic for Trisomy Evaluation (FORTE™) algorithm to compute the risk of trisomy hybridization (aCGH)-based methods, which are mainly applied for preim- with high sensitivity and specificity. We have developed additional DANSR plantation genetic screening (PGS) to discern diploid from aneuploid em- assays for the X and Y chromosomes and have applied the FORTE algorithm bryos, enable genome-wide aneuploidy detection but do not allow diagno- on a two blinded sets of samples with and without sex chromosome aneu- sing single gene disorders. Here, we present a generic method that detects ploidies (SCA). We report clinical validation results on HarmonyTM Prenatal in single blastomeres not only the presence of Mendelian disorders genome Test’s ability to detect fetal SCA. wide, but also chromosomal rearrangements and aneuploidies, including 609 samples comprised the two sets. All subjects provided informed con- their parental origin as well as the meiotic or mitotic nature of chromoso- sent. Matching fetal karyotype results from invasive testing were available mal trisomies. The method interrogates single nucleotide polymorphisms for all subjects. Samples were processed as previously described with lab (SNPs) and uses a novel computational pipeline for single-cell genome-wide and analysis personnel blinded to fetal karyotype. FORTE models were built haplotyping and imputation of linked disease variants (siCHILD). Following against monosomy X, XXX, XXY, XYY, and XXYY genotypes. Harmony results stringent single-cell QC-metrics, a bimodal approach, based on discrete were compared against fetal karyotype. SNP-calls and continuous SNP B-allele fractions, respectively, reconstructs All samples that passed standard Harmony QC metrics generated a sex chro- the parental haplotypes of the biopsied single cell. The approach proved ac- mosome result (100%; 95% CI: 99.4-100%). All were concordant with ka- curate on 55 embryos from 12 couples carrying either autosomal dominant, ryotyping for fetal sex (100%; 95% CI: 99.4-100%). recessive or X-linked Mendelian disorders, or simple or complex transloca- Directed analysis of cffDNA is accurate for risk assessment of non-mosaic tions. The method allowed diagnosing an embryo for multiple monogenic fetal SCA. This is the largest fetal SCA validation study to-date. This demon- disorders at once, and, in contrast to current PGD for translocation cases, it strates ability to expand Harmony to genetic conditions besides trisomies enabled distinguishing embryos that inherited normal chromosomes from 13,18 and 21. embryos that inherited a balanced configuration of the rearranged derivati- Harmony with XY Analysis performance Karyotype 45, X 47,XXX 47, XXY 47, XYY ve chromosomes. The method facilitates genetic selection of embryos, and 93%(85.1- 100%(60.1- 100%(64.6- 100%(43- broadens the range of classic PGD. Sensitivity (95% 
C01 .5 97.1%) 100%) 100%) 100%) CI) 69 of 74 6 of 6 7 of 7 3 of 3 Scenarios for implementation of noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) Specificity (95% 99.6%(98.6- 99.4%(98.3- 100%(99.3- 100%(99.3- for Down syndrome in a national health care system CI) 99.9%) 99.9%) 100%) 100%) E. Mersy1, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders1, A. B. C. Coumans2, L. J. M. Smits3, G. M. W. R. de 
C01 .3 Wert4, S. G. M. Frints1, J. A. Veltman1,5; mtDNA mutations variously impact mtDNA maintenance throughout 1Department of Clinical Genetics, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental the human embryofetal development Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department S. Monnot1, S. Rondeau1, P. Vachin1, E. Herzog2, B. Bessieres1, N. Gigarel1, D. Samuels3, of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, L. Hesters2, N. Frydman2, G. Chalouhi1, M. Rio1, A. Rotig1, A. Benachi2, L. Salomon1, A. Netherlands, 3Department of Epidemiology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Munnich1, J. Bonnefont1, J. Steffann1; Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Health, Ethics and Society, CAPHRI School for 1Hopital Necker, Paris, France, 2Hopital Beclere, Clamart, France, 3Vanderbilt Medical Public Health and Primary Care and GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Center, Nashville, TN, United States. Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Department of Human Genetics, Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Radboud university medical center, ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 19 Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations cause serious disorders maternallyABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Nijmegen, Netherlands. ted from HC. For this reason we performed a trans eQTL analysis in 211 The implementation of non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) of Down syn- CD14+ monocytes isolated from HC followed by pathway analyses using drome (DS) in national health care systems requires decision-making about three independent softwares. All of them enlighten an enrichment of IFNβ- the possible restriction of NIPT to high-risk pregnancies, the timing of NIPT, related pathways of genes trans-regulated by rs9828519. We observed in and the combination with other tests. In this study, we combined ethical ex- the rs9828519GG samples an up-regulation of genes involved in IFNβ si- ploration with a decision-analytic model. We compared three implementa- gnalling, including STAT1, JAK1, STAT5B, but also an impairment of the final tion strategies: (1) restriction of NIPT to high-risk pregnancies on the basis effects of IFNβ, with an upregulation of osteopontin and a downregulation of the combined test (CT) (risk for DS ≥ 1:200); (2) NIPT for all women at 13 of I
L10 . Here we report a new genetic marker that affects the response to weeks of gestation; (3) NIPT for all women at 10 weeks of gestation. Compa- IFNβ in MS patients supported by experimental evidences of the involve- ring stratestgy 1 to strategy 2, 95% fewer women underwent NIPT, and false m 
C0 e 2n .t 2 in the IFNβ pathways. positive 1 trimester screening results and invasive procedures were redu- High throughput sequencing in sporadic forms of steroid-resistant ced by 95% and 37%, respectively. This was at the expense of a decrease in nephrotic syndrome: heterogeneous genetic alterations can predict DS detection of 11% before 15 weeks of gestation and 4% throughout the resistance to treatments entire pregnancy (3 DS cases/100,000 pregnancies). Comparing strategy A. Provenzano1, B. Mazzinghi2, F. Becherucci3, L. Giunti2, G. Sansavini3, F. Ravaglia3, R. 2 to strategy 3, NIPT was avoided in an additional 4% of pregnancies that Roperto3, S. Farsetti3, E. Benetti4, M. Rotondi5, L. Murer4, L. Lasagni6, M. Materassi3, P. would have resulted in miscarriage. Furthermore, delaying NIPT to 13 weeks Romagnani6, S. Giglio1; allows for immediate confirmation by amniocentesis, and masyt be beneficial 1Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences Medical Genetics Unit- Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit-Meyer to women who may feel overloaded with information in 1 trimester. As Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Pediatric Nefrology Unit-Meyer Children‘s NIPT currently does not detect all prenatal abnormalities, it should be offe- University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 4Pediatric Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation red subsequent to or alongside a nuchal translucency (NT) measurement. In Unit Department of Pediatrics, Universisty of Padua, Padua, Italy, 5Unit of Internal all cases of fetal anomaly on ultrasound (including NT enlargement), broad Medicin and Enodcrinology University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Excellence centre for genetic testing after invasive procedure should still be performed. research, transfer and high education for the development of de novo therapies, 
C01 .6 University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. Whole genome sequencing and analysis in prenatal screening: ethical reflection G. de Wert, W. Dondorp; Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. Steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) is a disorder that results in end-stage renal disease and can be potentially related to a genetic cause, es- pecially when it occurs in children. However, because of genetic heterogenei- ty, the real burden of genetic alterations in sporadic cases is unknown. In Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for fetal abnormalities currently focu- this study, we explored the possibility that genetic alterations of podocyte’s ses on Down’s syndrome. It is to be expected, however, that it will become structure may explain lack of response to steroid treatment in children af- possible to broaden the scope of screening with NIPT. As proof of principle, fected by sporadic childhood-onset nephrotic syndrome (NS), not only in a it has been demonstrated that the complete fetal genome can be sequenced causative manner, but also as critical disease modifiers that influence re- using fetal DNA from maternal plasma, potentially allowing prenatal whole sponse to steroid treatment and immunosuppressive agents. genome analysis. We designed a custom sequencing array to target all exons and part of flan- This scenario makes a proactive ethical reflection of utmost importance. king sequences for known podocyte genes responsible for SRNS, that was Normative issues to be addressed include the following: First, the prerequi- applied through next generation sequencing to a selected cohort of 50 pati- site of proportionality. Do the possible benefits of whole genome sequen- ents with sporadic NS and variable response to steroid treatment. cing and analysis in prenatal screening outweigh the possible harms and We identified a genetic cause in 40% of the 19 SRNS patients analysed. Mo- disadvantages? Secondly, would it be possigbelen etroic fulfill the requirement difier genes were observed in an additional 25% of patients exhibiting re- of informed consent, given the wide range of possible outcomes of whole sistance to steroid, but nor disease causing neither disease modifier genes genome prenatal screening? Could so-called consent, based on pre- were observed in podocyte’s genes of 30 additional children that were sen- test information about general categories of test outcomes, be accepted as a sitive to steroids. Treatment with immunosuppressive agents was effective sound variant of informed consent ? Anndo tthirdly: if whole genome prenatal only among patients that were negative to the test, while none of the pa- screening would result in the birth of children whose genotype has been tients displaying genetic alterations responded to any immunosuppressive elucidated prenatally, the child’s right to know may be violated, i.e. the agent. right of the future, competent, person to decide about predictive testing for The results of this study suggest that in children affected by sporadic NS, re- later onset diseases. How to handle, then, possible conflicts between future sistance to steroid treatment may be related to genetic alterations in genes parents’ right to know and future children’s right not to know? that control structure and function of the podocyte. This presentation offers a systematic exploration of these issues, aimed at 
C02 .3 contributing to adequate ethical guidance for whole genome prenatal scree- Personalized thiopurine dosing based on TPMT genotyping reduces ning. leucopenia occurrence and results in cost-savings in IBD patients; 
C02 .1 results from a randomized trial in the Netherlands A novel variant in the SL
C9 A9 gene influences disease activity in M. J. H. Coenen1, D. J. de Jong1, C. J. van Marrewijk1, L. J. J. Derijks2, S. H. Vermeulen1, interferon-beta treated multiple sclerosis patients D. R. Wong3, O. H. Klungel4, A. L. M. Verbeek1, P. Hooymans3, W. H. M. Peters1, R. H. M. M. Sorosina1, F. Esposito1,2, C. Guaschino1,2, G. Liberatore1,2, A. Osiceanu1, V. Martinelli2, D. te Morsche1, TOPIC recruitment team, W. G. Newman5, H. Scheffer1, H. Guchelaar6, B. Brassat3,4, G. Comi2, P. L. De Jager5,6, F. Martinelli Boneschi1,2; Franke1; 1San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Laboratory of genetics of complex neurological 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Máxima Medical Centre, disorders, Milan, Italy, 2San Raffaele Hospital, Department of Neurology, Milan, Italy, Veldhoven, Netherlands, 3Orbis Medical Centre, Sittard-Geleen, Netherlands, 4Utrecht 3Hopital Purpan, Department of Neurology, Toulouse, France, 4University of Toulouse, University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5University of Manchester, Manchester, Netherlands, Toulouse, France, 5Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 6Program in 6University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. More than 20% of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients discontinue Aimed to identify genetic variants able to predict response to interferon beta thTiPoMpuTrine therapy due to severe adverse drug reactions, among which (IFNβ), we performed a genome-wide association study in Italian relapsing- leucopenia is one of the most serious. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) patients treated with IFNβ. Rs9828519, ( ) pharmacogenetic testing can be used to optimize thiopurine safe- achieved genome-wide significance (p=4.43x10^-8), and its effect was re- ty and efficacy. Nonetheless, in clinical practice it is only used on a limited plicated in three independent cohorts of American, Italian and French pati- scale. We performed a randomized controlled trial including 769 IBD pa- ents (meta-analyzed p=7.78x10^-4). Rs9828519 is intronic of SL
C9 A9 gene, tients starting on tThPioMpTurine treatmTPenMtT. Patients were randomly assigned codifying for a sodium/hydrogen exchanger localised in the endosomes, not to standard trTePaMtmTent (control) or pre-treatment screening (intervention) known to be involved in MS or in IFNβ pathways. With in vitro experiments, for three common -variants ( *2, *3A and *3C); patients hetero- we observed an upregulation of SL
C9 A9 expression after IFNβ stimulation zygous for a -variant received 50% of the standard thiopurine dose, in PBMCs of 20 healthy controls (HC, p=4.01x10^-7) which was unrelated and patients homozygous for the variants received 0-10%. Intervention and to the genotype status. Such upregulation was confirmed also in IFNβ- control g9roups were compared for leucopenia occurrence (leucocyte count treated MS patients (GS
E24427  and GS
E26104  experiments: p=3.8x10^-3 <3.0*10/l) in the first 5 months after treatment initiation. Cost-effectiveness and 0.030). No cis-effect of rs9828519 was observed in whole blood of MS analysis included complete cases (patients with outcome (EQ-5D) and self- p2at0ients, nor in PBMCs, CD14+ monocytes or CD4E+ STH lyGm p2h0o1cy4te |s McoIllLeAc-N, rI eT pA oL rtY | cW osW ts).W Th.E irS tyH -nG in. eO (9R .8G ed %) patients in the intervention and 35 pa-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index TPMT TPMT 
C02 .6 Collaboration to integrate genomics into clinical care: a tients (9.5%) in the control group carried a -variant. Among - demonstration evaluation variant carriers, leucopenia occurrence was significantly reduced in the in- C. Gaff1, N. Thorne1, I. Macciocca1, P. Waring2, S. Forrest3, P. Ekert4, I. Winship5, T. tervention compared to the control group (2.6% versus 22.9%, relative risk Lockett6, M. South7, A. Sinclair8, Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance; 0.11, 95%CI=0.01-0.85).Overall, no difference in leucopenia occurrence was 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Melbourne, observed between the intervention and control group (7.3% versus 7.8%). Melbourne, Australia, 3Australian Genome Research Facility, Melbourne, Australia, 4The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 5Royal Treatment efficacy (∆EQ-5D) was similar for both study arms. Average costs Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 6The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial (direct medical costs and indirect costs) were lower for patients in the inter- Research Organisation (CSIRO), Melbourne, Australia, 7The Royal Children’s Hospital, vention (n=238) compared to the controls (n=216): €4433 versus €6150, Melbourne, Australia, 8Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. p=0.023. Prior-to-treatment TPMT screening reduces leucopenia risk in IBD patients treated with thiopurines without impeding treatment efficacy and results in substantial cost-savings. 
C02 .4 Genomic technologies are proving transformative, but ensuring full clinical Genome-wide identification and phenotypic validation of loss of and research benefit from their application in clinical settings requires plan- function mutations ning and collaboration. Working to a five year vision, seven research and L. G. Biesecker, K. Lewis, D. Ng, J. Johnston, J. Mullikin; healthcare organisations are conducting a demonstration project to test an National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. ambitious, unified approach to meeting their diverse needs. Demonstrati- on projects examine the application of structural innovations such as tech- nology and non-structural innovations like health programs. They provide A typical human genome includes numerous apparent loss of function (LOF) new insights into the process and value of implementing innovation, the- variants, which may be attributed to sequencing or alignment errors, car- reby informing decision-making about future implementation. Our highly rier states, hypomorphic alleles, gene redundancy, and true LOF alleles for novel, prospective project evaluates the feasibility of whole exome/genome haploinsufficiency-sensitive genes. It is critical for understanding gene func- sequencing as a single common assay for germline and somatic conditions, tion and for predictive medicine to assess the consequences of LOF variants. replacing current tests, for use in clinical and predictive care. Mimicking Prior efforts to understand the genotype-phenotype relationships were limi- usual clinical practice, patients with one of five diverse germline or somatic ted by ascertainment biases and the limitations of deidentified data. To ap- conditions are being offered whole exome sequencing in parallel to routine proach this problem, we characterized the phenotypic consequences of LOF investigations. Sequence data is generated by multiple diagnostic laborato- variation in an exome cohort of 950 individuals and iteratively validated the ries, analysis is then targeted to genes known to be related to the clinical phenotypes. Exomes were generated by targeting and Illumina sequencing. condition using a common analytic pipeline. Data is available for reanalysis Potential LOF variants were defined as nonsense, frameshift, and essential and research. Patient and clinician engagement in this clinically-led project splice site variants. Analysis was restricted to HGMD genes. Variants with is paramount. The demonstration project is being evaluated in terms of fea- maf >0.005 in ClinSeq or dbSNP were excluded. We filtered for genes that sibility (can the model be built?), requirements (what does it take to build?), cause disease in an autosomal dominant pattern by haploinsufficiency. Re- and impact (can it make a difference?) across all processes and with feed- maining variants were considered variants of interest, 87 were identified in back from patients, clinicians and scientists supplementing data collection. 112 individuals. 85 of these individuals were evaluated for these disorders. We will describe the ‘real world’ strengths, weaknesses and barriers iden- We used stringent criteria for phenotyping and family history to identify va- tified during collaborative implementation of the demonstration project riants that were causing disease. Of the evaluated patients, half (38/85) had across the seven organisations. 
C03 .1 evidence of disease. The negative cases illustrated issues with gene model Dominant β-catenin mutations cause a recognizable syndrome with errors, mechanisms of alternative translation starts, etc. The positive cases intellectual disability, and are associated with learning deficits and demonstrate the ability to perform predictive medicine and to use filtering structural and functional brain abnormalities in mice methods to identify inapparent genetic disorders. These data also point to M. H. Willemsen1, V. Tucci2, T. Kleefstra1, A. Hardy3, I. Heise3, S. Maggi4, W. Wissink- approaches that could unravel the functional consequences of genes not yet Lindhout1, A. Vulto-van Silfhout1, B. de Vries1, Z. Iqbal1, H. Brunner1, W. Nillesen1, H. k Cn 0o 2w .5n to cause human phenotypes. Yntema1, H. Hilton3, M. Simon3, S. Tsaftaris5, H. van Bokhoven1, A. Constestabile6, T. Nieus6, A. Raimondi6, B. Greco6, D. Cantatore6, L. Gasparini6, L. Berdondini6, A. Bifone7, J. The SickKids Genome Clinic: Developing and evaluating a pediatric Veltman1, L. Peart-Vissers1, A. Gozzi7, S. Wells3, P. Nolan3; model for individualized genomic medicine 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Istituto Italiano M. S. Meyn1,2, S. Bowdin1,2, N. Monfared1, D. Merico1, D. J. Stavropoulos1,2, M. Girdea1,2, di Tecnologia, partment of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Genova, Italy, 3MRC R. Hayeems1, M. Szego2,3, G. Bader2, R. D. Cohn1,2, J. A. Anderson1, R. Zlotnik-Shaul1,2, M. Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, Brudno1,2, C. Shuman1,2, C. R. Marshall1,2, P. N. Ray1,2; 4Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Genova, Italy, 5Instituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Center for Nanotechnology Innovation, Canada, 3St. Joseph‘s Health Centre and St. Michael‘s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. Pisa, Italy, 6Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies - Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy, 7IMT Institute for Advanced Studies Lucca, Lucca, Italy. Genomic medicine is a clinical paradigm in which knowledge gained from analyzing an individual’s genome is used to guide health care decisions Introduction: The recent identification of multiple dominant mutations in throughout life, in order to anticipate, diagnose and manage disease. To pilot both humans and mice has enabled us to explore the molecular and cel- the implementation of genomic medicine in paediatrics we have developed lular basis of beta-catenin function in cognitive impairment. Mudtea tnioonvos the SickKids Genome Clinic, a multidisciplinary test bed that supports a wide in human beta-catenin have been identified as causative in a spectrum of range of research into the clinical uses of whole genome sequencing (WGS), neurodevelopmental disorders. Methods and Results: In identifying from development of new bioinformatics pipelines and counselling models beta-catenin mutations in patients with intellectual disability and careful to health economics and bioethics studies. We are enrolling 150+ children/ characterization of their phenotype, we were able to define a recognizable year who are undergoing diagnostic microarray analysis or multigene panel intellectual disability syndrome. We have collected detailed clinical informa- sequencing. Participants undergo WGS after their parents are counselled tion of 7 patients with this novel syndrome. In parallel, the characterization about WGS and have declared their preferences for learning their child‘s of a chemically-mutagenized mouse line displaying features that are similar pharmacogenetic variants, adult-onset incidental/secondary medically-ac- to these human mutations has enabled us to investigate the consequences tionable variants (MAVs) and carrier status variants. Of the first 200 families of beta-catenin dysfunction through development and into adulthood. The approached, 117 agreed to participate, with ~75% of participants electing to mouse mutant, batface, carrying a Thr653Lys substitution in the C-terminal learn about all available adult-onset secondary MAVs and carrier variants. Of armadillo repeat in beta-catenin, displays a reduced affinity for membrane- the parents who decide to learn of their child’s adult-onset secondary MAVs, associated cadherins. In association with this decreased cadherin inter- approximately 60% also choose to learn if they carry the same variants. The action, we found that the mutation results in decreians evdiv ointrahemispheric most frequent concerns of parents are psychological burdens of identifying connections with deficits in dendritic branching, long-term potentiation their child’s secondary MAVs and fear of insurance discrimination. WGS data and cognitive function. Conclusion:For the first time we showed how are analyzed using separate bioinformatics pipelines for primary disorder dominant mutations in beta-catenin underlie losses in its adhesion-related variants, structural variants and secondary variants. Initial WGS analyses functions leading to severe consequences including intellectual disability, have already yielded clinical diagnoses not revealed by conventional testing childhood hypotonia, progressive spasticity of lower limbs and abnormal and support our hypothesis that WGS is superior to conventional multi-gene craniofacial features in adults. panels and clinical microarrays for identifying pathologic variants. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 21ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C03 .2 
C03 .4 De Novo loss of function mutations in SETD5, a novel methyltransferase The significance of small copy number variants in neuro- gene within the 3p25 microdeletion syndrome critical region, cause developmental disorders intellectual disability R. Asadollahi1, B. Oneda1, P. Joset1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, D. Bartholdi1, K. Steindl1, M. K. J. Carss1, D. Grozeva2, O. Spasic-Boskovic2, M. J. Parker3, H. Archer4, H. V. Firth5, S. Vincent1, J. Cobilanschi1, H. Sticht2, R. Baldinger1, R. Reissmann1, I. Sudholt1, C. T. Thiel3, Park5, N. Canham6, S. E. Holder6, M. Wilson7, A. Hackett8, M. Field9, J. A. B. Floyd1,10, UK10K A. B. Ekici3, A. Reis3, E. K. Bijlsma4, J. Andrieux5, A. Dieux5, D. FitzPatrick6, S. Ritter7, A. Consortium, M. E. Hurles1, F. L. Raymond2; Baumer1, B. Latal7, B. Plecko8, O. Jenni7, A. Rauch1; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Biochemistry 2Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Sheffield Department, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Children‘s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Department United Kingdom, 5Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, of Clinical Genetics, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical United Kingdom, 6North West London Hospitals NHS Trust, Harrow, United Kingdom, Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Institut de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, 7Children‘s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia, 8Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Lille, France, 6MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute for Genetic and Molecular Australia, 9Royal North Shore Hospital, St. Leonards, Australia, 10Queen Mary University Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 7Child Development of London, London, United Kingdom. Center, University Children‘s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 8Divison of Neuropediatrics, University Children‘s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. To identify further Mendelian causes of intellectual disability (ID), we screened a cohort of 996 individuals with ID for variants in 565 known or Despite abundant evidence for pathogenicity of large CNVs in neuro-deve- candidate genes using a targeted next generation sequencing approach. lopmental disorders (NDDs), the individual significance of genome-wide Seven loss of function mutations (four nonsensSeE TvDa5ri, ants- c.1195A>T, rare CNVs <500 kb has not been well elucidated in a clinical context. By high c.1333C>T, c.1866C>G, c.3001C>T and three frameshift variants-d ce.2 n1o7v5o-76- resolution chromosomal microarray analysis, we investigated non-polymor- delCA, c.3770insG, c.3856delT) were identified in a gene predicted phic exonic CNVs sizing 1-500 kb in a cohort of 714 patients with NDDs, of to be a methyltransferase. All mutations were compatible with do- which 8.8% had an obvious large disease causing CNV. Excluding recurrent minant inheritance. The affected individuals had moderate to severe ID with false positive sites, we detected 96 small CNVs, of which 58 (60.4%) could be additional variable features of brachycephaly; prominent high forehead confirmed by secondary testing. with synophrys or striking eyebrows that are full and broad; a long, thin and Six of thCeA cSoKn, fCirRmEeBdB Pd,e P nAoFvAoH o1rB l1ik, eSlAyT dBe2 novo CNVs were clearly pathogenic tubular nose; long narrow upslanting palpebral fissures and large fleshy low affecting the recurMreEnDt 1m3iLcrCoTdeNlNetDio2n region in 17q21.31 or OMIM morbid set ears. Skeletal anomalies were a frequent finding including significant leg genes ( ). Two further de novo CNVs affec- length discrepancy in two cases. Congenital heart defects, inguinal hernia ting single genes ( , ) were instrumentaAl CinO Tde7lineating no- or hypospadias were all reported.S BEeThDa5vioural problems were a prominent vel recurrent conditions. In addition, two unreported homozygous deletions feature including an obsessive-compulsSivEeT Dd5isorder, hand flapping with wPReEreP Lfound Cli2koerlfy3 p4athogenic: An intragenic deletion of which likely ritualised behaviour and autism. lies within the critical interval for defines a novel autosomal recessive disorder, and a deletion of the genes the 3p25 microdSeElTeDti5on syndrome. The mutation individuals have andA UT
S2  NR rXeNpr3e sGeRnMtin8g a new variant of the hypotonia-cystinuria phenotypic similarity to those previously reported with a deletion in 3p25 syndrome. Four of the inherited CNVs affecting previously reported sites and thus loss of may be sufficient to account for the clinical features (16p11.2, , , ) were also considered likely pathogenic. In observed in this condition. Our findings add to the growing evidence that total 14 (24.1%) of the small CNVs were categorized as pathogenic or likely mutations iSnE mTDet5hyltransferases that regulate histone modification are im- pathogenic (median size 130 kb), nine (15.5%) as likely benign and the rest portadnet n coavuoses of ID. This analysis provides sufficient evidence that loss of remained unclear. These results verifies the diagnostic relevance of geno- function of is a relatively frequent cause of ID (0.7%) and occurs as a me-wide rare CNVs <500 kb (overall ~2%; 1.1% de novo, 0.3% homozygous, rare mutational event. 0.6% inherited) and their inherent potential for discovery of new conditions 
C03 .3 enabling better characterization of NDDs. Genetic heterogeneity in Hyperphosphatasia with Mental Retardation 
C03 .5 Syndrome due to mutations in PGA
P3 , a member of the GPI anchor Rare large CNVs are associated with intellectual disability, education synthesis pathway level, and female fertility in general population D. Horn1, Y. Murakami2, C. Daumer-Haas3, B. Fischer1, J. Hecht1, U. Kölsch4, S. Leiz5, Y. A. Reymond1, K. Männik1, R. Mägi2, A. Mace3, A. Maillard3, H. Alavere2, A. Kolk2, L. Maeda2, D. Mitchell6, J. Phillips6, S. Mundlos1,7, P. N. Robinson1, P. M. Krawitz1; Leitsalu2, A. Ferreira1, M. Noukas2, J. S. Beckmann3, S. Jacquemont3, Z. Kutalik3, A. 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department Metspalu2; of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, Osaka, Japan, 3Pränatal-Medizin München, München, Germany, 4Institute of Medical 2Estonian Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Medical Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 5Klinikum Dritter Orden, Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. München, Germany, 6Division of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Tennessee, TN, United States, 7Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. To investigate the burden of the rare large CNVs in the general populati- on, we analyzed the Estonian Genome Centre cohort. It is a longitudinal, prospective, population biobank linked to comprehensive personal, educa- Different genes of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor synthesis pa- tional, medical and daily life data of 5% of the Estonian adult population. thway, PIGV, PIGO, and PGA
P2 , have recently been implicated in hyperphos- Within a subset of 6819 individuals, we identified 60 carriers of known phatasia-mental retardation syndrome (HPMRS), also known as Mabry syn- genomic disorder lesions, equivalent to a prevalence of 1% in the general drome, a rare autosomal recessive form of intellectual disability with cha- adult population. Their phenotypes are reminiscent of those of carriers of racteristic additional phenotypic features. We developed a diagnostic gene identical rearrangements identified in disease cohorts. Importantly some of panel for targeting all known genes of the GPI-anchor synthesis pathway the associated traits appear to have been previously overlooked due to age- to screen patients matching these features, and detected compound hete- dependent penetrance. rozygous and homozygous mutations (c.439dupC, c.914A>G, c.314C>G) in We then generated the genome-wide map of rare autosomal CNVs and iden- PGA
P3 , a gene that is involved in the GPI-anchor maturation, in two unrela- tified a total of 697 carriers of CNVs ≥ 250 kb with MAF ≤ 0.05%. While ted patients with developmental delay, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, duplication carriers are equally distributed in both sexes, we observe a si- seizures and particular facial anomalies. Our functional studies show that an gnificant bias towards female carriers of deletion. This biased mutational impairment of the later GPI-anchor remodeling steps also causes HPMRS. In burden supports the notion that females are somewhat “protected” from addition we analyzed the mutation spectrum of all four genes as well as the neurodevelopmental disorders. Cumulatively, these CNV carriers show a associated phenotypic spectrum in a large cohort of individuals diagnosed significant increase in the prevalence of intellectual disability and a decrea- with HPMRS. Among this cohort biallelic PIGV mutations were identified in se in the rate of higher-achieved education level, as well as a decrease of about 50 % of unrelated families whereas mutations of the other involved female carriers’ fertility. In addition to CNV size, these effects are associated genes are less frequent. Our findings demonstrate that the severe end of the with the number and “quality” of encompassed genes and pronounced in clinical spectrum presents as a multiple congenital malformation syndrome carriers of deletions and duplications that encompass ≥3 and ≥10 genes, with a high frequency of Hirschsprung disease as well as vesicoureteral, re- respectively. Our results suggest that large rare variants significantly impact nal, and anorectal malformations. At the other end of this spectrum HPMRS life quality of carrier identified from non-clinical cohorts. 
C03 .6 could present as apparently non-syndromic form of intellectual disability. Altered neuronal network in iPSC derived cortical neurons from Taken together with recent data, HPMRS displays a heterogeneous etiology patients with MEC
P2  duplication syndrome caused by impairment of different steps of the GPI-anchor synthesis and is S. Nageshappa1, C. Carromeu2, I. Espuny-Camacho3, C. Bagni1, C. Verfaillie4, C. Carvalho5, associated with a marked clinical variability regarding additional malforma- ti2on2s and growth patterns. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index M. Ramocki6, J. Lupski5, P. Vanderhaeghen3, A. Muotri2, H. Van Esch1; S. Mital3, M. E. Hurles1, D. I. Wilson4; 1Center for Human Genetics, LEUVEN, Belgium, 2University of California San Diego, 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Inst., Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Dep.of Pathology, King School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics/Rady Children‘s Hospital San Diego, Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Div.of Cardiology, Dep.of Pediatrics, Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Stem Cell Program, La Jolla, CA, United Hospital for Sick Children, Univ.of, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Human Dev. & Health Academic States, 3Institut de Recherches en Biologie Humaine et Moléculaire (IRIBHM), Université Unit, Fac.of Medicine, Univ.of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 5Dep.of Libre de Bruxelles (U.L.B.), Brussels, Belgium, 4Stem Cell Institute Leuven, Department Cardiology, Boston Children‘s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United of Development and Regeneration, Cluster Stem Cell Biology and Embryology, LEUVEN, States, 6Cardiovascular Div., Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School & Belgium, 5Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, and Human Genome Harvard Stem Cell Inst., Boston, MA, United States, 7Dep.of Congenital Heart Disease & Sequencing Center Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 6Department Pediatric Cardiol., Univ.Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 8Centre for Human of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Baylor Genetics, KU, Leuven, Belgium, 9Dep.of Congenital & Pediatric Cardiol., Univ.Hospitals, College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. Leuven, Belgium, 10Dep.of Pediatric Cardiol., Saarland Univ.Hospital, Homburg, Germany, 11Exp.& Clinical Res.Ctre (ECRC), Charité Medical Fac. & Max-Delbruck-Ctre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 12Inst.of Human Genetics, Univ.Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 13Dep.of Congenital Heart Disease & Pediatric We previouslyM shEoCw
P2 ed that increased dosage of methyl-CpG-binding prote- Cardiol., Deutsches Herzzentrum, Berlin, Germany, 14Dep.of Pediatric Cardiol., Children’s in-2 (MeC
P2 ) leads to a severe neurodevelopmental disorder in males, desi- Hospital, Friedrich-Alexander Univ., Erlangen, Germany, 15Dep.of Cardiovascular gMnEaCtePd2 as the duplication syndrome (MIM#300260). The increased Medicine, Univ.of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 16East Midlands Congenital Heart dosage of MeC
P2  is the result of a copy number gain at Xq28, including the Centre, Univ.Hospitals, NHS Trust, Leicester, United Kingdom, 17School of Life Sciences, gene and results in severe to profound neurodevelopmental delay Univ.of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 18Heart Center, AMC, Amsterdam, with onset at birth, limitedM oErC Pab2sent speech, hypotonia, epilepsy, autistic Netherlands, 19Dep.of Pediatric Cardiol., Charité Univ. Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 20MRC behavior and motor dysfunction. We developed induced pluripotent stem HumGen Unit, Inst.of Genetic & Molecular Med., Univ.of, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. cells from 3 patients with duplication syndrome carrying different duplication sizes, to study the impact of increased MeP
C2  dBoLsBaPge in hFuOmXGan1 neurons. Differentiation oRfE tLhNeseC iTPISP
C2 s iTnBtoR 1neuronVsG oLfU cTortical identity sho- Congenital heart defects are the most common birth defect worldwide and wed modulation in the expression of progenitor genes like and a leading cause of neonatal mortality. Left ventricular outflow tract obstruc- and cortical genes like , , and . Cortical neurons tion (LVOTO) is an important subtype, with lesions on the most severe end derived from Mecp2dup-iPSCs had more synapses, and altered network of this spectrum being significantly life limiting. Although mutations in seve- synchronization as well as dendritic complexity. Next, we tested a series of ral genes have been associated with LVONTRO2 iFn2 the majority of cases the cau- epigenetic drugs for the abilMitEy CtoP 2rescue neuronal defects and validated two se is still unknown. In an individual with LVOTO and a balanced chromoso- HDAC inhibitors as potential clinical candidates. Our model recapitulates me translocation, the highly conserved was found to be interrupted. early stages of the human . duplication syndrome and represents a Whole mount studies in mice showed Nr2f2 to be expressed in the atria and promising cellular tool to facilitate therapeutic drug screening for severe in human fetal samples, expression was also confirmed in the heart including neurodevelopmental disorders in atrial tissue. A further study conducted exome sequencing in 13 parent- 
C04 .1 offspring trios and 112 unrelated patients with nonsyndromic atrioven- EIF2AK4 mutations cause pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, a tricular septal ddee fneocvtso, a further impoNrtRa2nFt 2subtype of CHD for which the recessive form of pulmonary hypertension gPenetic architecture is poorly understood. Five rare missense variants (two M. Eyries1, D. Montani2, B. Girerd2, C. Perret3, A. Leroy1, C. Lonjou4, N. Chelghoum4, F. Coulet1, D. Bonnet5, P. Dorfmüller6, E. Fadel7, O. Sitbon2, G. Simonneau2, D. Tregouët3, M. of which ar-7ose ) were fouNndR 2inF 2 de ,n ao vvoery significant enrichment Humbert8, F. Soubrier1; ( =7.7×10 ) compared to 5,194 controls. A further two CHD families were 1Genetics Department, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2Département identiNfiRe2dF w2ith other variants in ; a substitution disrupting a Hospitalo-Universitaire (DHU) Thorax Innovation (TORINO), Service de Pneumologie, splice donor site andN aR 32bFp2 insertion that co-segregated in a multiplex fa- Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 3UMR_S 937, UPMC, INSERM, Paris, France, mily. encodes a pleiotropic developmental transcription factor, and 4Post-Genomic Platorm (
P3 S), UPMC,, Paris, France, 5Cardiac Surgery Department, decreased dosage of in mice has been shown to result in abnormal Hôpital Necker-enfants Malades, Paris, France, 6Department of Pathology, Centre heart deveNloRp2mFe2nt. Furthermore, using luciferase assays, it was shown that Chirurgical Marie Lannelongue, Paris, France, 7Thoracic surgery department, Centre all six coding sequence variants observed in patients significantly alter the Chirurgical Marie Lannelongue, Paris, France, 8Département Hospitalo-Universitaire (DHU) Thorax Innovation (TORINO), Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Bicêtre, Paris, activity of target promoters. France. * CT 0h 4e .3se authors contributed equally to this work Loss of alpha1 beta1 soluble guanylate cyclase, the major nitric oxide receptor, leads to moyamoya and achalasia Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a rare and devastating cause of D. Hervé1, A. Philippi2, R. Belbouab3, M. Zerah4, S. Chabrier5, S. Collardeau-Frachon6, F. pulmonary hypertension that is characterized histologically by widespread Bergametti2, A. Essongue2, E. Berrou7, V. Krivosic8, C. Sainte-Rose4, E. Houdart9, F. Adam7, fibrous intimal proliferation of septal veins and preseptal venules and is K. Billiemaz5, M. Lebret7, S. Roman6, S. Passemard10, G. Boulday2, A. Delaforge9, S. Guey2, frequently associated with pulmonary capillary dilatation and proliferation. X. Dray1, P. Brouckaert11, M. Bryckaert7, E. Tournier-Lasserve12; 1INSERM U1161 and APHP Dpt Neurology Lariboisière Hospital, Paris, France, 2INSERM PVOD presents either sporadically or as familial cases. U1161, Paris, France, 3EPH Hassen, Alger, Algeria, 4AP-HP Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, In the French referral centre for severe pulmonary hypertension, we have 5CHU de St Etienne, St Etienne, France, 6CHU de Lyon, Lyon, France, 7INSERM U770, identified 13 PVOD families: 5 with a confirmed diagnosis based on histo- Kremlin Bicetre, France, 8AP-HP HôpitalLariboisière, Paris, France, 9AP-HP Hôpital logical studies and 8 with a highly likely diagnosis, based on clinical, func- Lariboisière, Paris, France, 10AP-HP Hôpital Debré, Paris, France, 11VIB Institute, Ghent, tional, and radiological criteria. All PVOD families were characterized by the Belgium, 12Université Paris Diderot INSERM U1161 AP-HP Hopital Lariboisière, Paris, presence of at least two affected siblings and unaffected parents, suggesting France. that the disease segregates as a recessive trait. EIF2AK4 We used a whole-exome sequencing approach and detected recessive mu- tations (homozygous or compound heterozygous) in the gene that Moyamoya is a cerebrovascular condition of unknown mechanism characte- co-segEreIFga2tAeKd4 with PVOD in all 5 families initially studied. We subsequently rized by a progressive stenosis of the terminal part of the internal carotid ar- identified mutations in the 8 additional PVOD families. We also found bi- teries (ICA) and the development of abnormal “moyamoya” vessels leading allelic mutations in 5 of 20 histologically confirmed sporadic PVOD to stroke. We describe a novel autosomal recessive disease leading to severe casEeIsF. 2AAllK i4dentified mutations disrupted the function of the gene. In conclu- moyamoya and early onset achalasia in 3 unrelated families. Using genetic sion, we identified the first gene responsible for PVOD. Biallelic mutations linkage and exome sequencing we identified in all 3 families homozygous in gene were found in 100% of familial cases and in 25% of spo- mutations of GUCY1A3, the gene encoding the alpha1 subunit of soluble radic cases of PVOD, making this new gene a major player linked to PVOD guanylate cyclase (sGC), the major receptor for Nitric Oxide (NO). Platelet development. This discovery significantly contributes towards understan- analysis showed a complete loss of the mutated protein and an unexpected ding the complex genetic architecture of pulmonary hypertension. Further stimulatory role of sGC within platelets.The NO/sGC/cGMP pathway is a ma- studies are needed to decipher the molecular mechanisms underlying the jor pathway controlling vascular smooth muscle relaxation, vascular tone responsibility of the EIF2AK4 gene deficiency in the development of PVOD. and vascular remodeling. Our data suggest that alterations of this pathway 
C04 .2 may lead to an abnormal vascular remodeling process in sensitive vascular Rare variants in NR2F2 cause congenital heart defects in humans areas with low blood flow and shear stress,such as ICA bifurcations. These S. Al Turki*1,2, A. K. Manickaraj*3, C. L. Mercer*4, S. Gerety*1, M. P. Hitz1, S. Lindsay1, L. C. A. D‘Alessandro3, G. J. Swaminathan1, J. Bentham5, A. K. Arndt6,7, J. Breckpot8, J. Low8,9, B. data provide treatment options for these patients. They also suggest that in- Thienpont8, H. Abdul-Khaliq10, C. Harnack11, K. Hoffmann7,12, H. H. Kramer7, S. Schubert13, vestigation of members of this NO/sGC/cGMP pathway is warranted in both R. Siebert12, O. Toka14, C. Cosgrove15, H. Watkins15, A. M. Lucassen4, I. M. O‘Kelly4, A. P. non syndromic moyamoya and isolated early onset achalasia. Data accepted Salmon4, F. A. Bu’Lock16, J. Granados-Riveron17, K. Setchfield17, C. Thornborough16, J. D. in the Am J Hum Genet. Brook17, B. Mulder18, S. Klaassen11,19, S. Bhattacharya15, K. Devriendt8, D. F. FitzPatrick20, ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 23ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C04 .4 5McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 6Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New From Identification of Differing TI
E2  Mutations with Distinct Cellular York, NY, United States, 7University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, Characteristics in Four Types of Venous Anomalies towards a Murine 8Durrer Center for Cardiogenetic Research, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States, 10Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, Model and a Therapeutic Pilot Study United States. N. Limaye1, J. Soblet1, M. Uebelhoer1, M. Natynki2, E. Boscolo3, L. Eklund2, J. Bischoff3, L. M. Boon1,4, M. S. Vikkula1,4; 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Oulu Center for Cell-Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu & Elevated body mass index (BMI) associates with cardiometabolic traits Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, on observational analysis, yet the underlying causal relationships remain 3Vascular Biology Program and Dept. of Surgery, Boston Children‘s Hospital, Harvard unclear. We conducted Mendelian randomization analyses using 14 SNPs as- Med School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Center for Vascular Anomalies, Div. of Plastic sociated with BMI from a recent discovery analysis to investigate the causal Surgery, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. role of BMI with cardiometabolic traits. We used eight population-based co- horts, including 34,538 individuals of European ancestry with 4,407 type 2 diabetes (T2D), 6,073 coronary h2eart disease (CHD) and 3,813 stroke cases. Venous anomalies are composed of ectatic veins with irregular smooth A genetically-elevated one kg/m increase in BMI resulted in higher levels of muscle coverage. They are commonly cutaneous. They usually occur as a fasting glucose, insulin, interleukin-6 and systolic blood pressure but redu- single lesion without family history (sporadic Venous Malformation, VM). ced levels of HDL-C and LDL-C (values reported in Table). Apart from LDL-C, Some sporadic patients have multifocal lesions (Multifocal Sporadic Venous all causal estimates were directionally2 concordant to observational esti- Malformation, MSVM). In the sporadic Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus syndrome mates. A genetically-elevated one kg/m increase in BMI increased odds of (BRBN), patients also have multifocal lesions; pathognomonic are rubbery T2D but did not affect risk of CHD or stroke. A meta-analysis incorporating palmoplantar lesions and those located in the GI-track. In rare cases, venous published studies with 27,465 CHD events in 219,423 ind2ividuals yielded a malformations are multifocal because of autosomal dominant inheritance pooled odds ratio of 1.04 (95%CI: 0.97, 1.12) per 1 kg/m increase in BMI. (Mucocutaneous Venous Malformation, VMCM). VMs progressively expand In conclusion, we identified causal effects of BMI on several cardiometabolic causing deformity, pain and local intravascular coagulopathy. Despite sclero- tTraabitlse, .h Coawuesvael re wsthimetahteers B foMrI tchaeu sraelllayt iimonpsahcitps oonf BCMHDI w riistkh rceaqrudiiroems feutratbhoer- therapy or excision, lesions often progress or recur. leivci dtreanictes. and events. We have identified activating mutations in the endothelial tyrosine kinase receptor TI
E2  in all four forms. VMs are mostly due to a single somatic ami- s (units) Studies (Individuals) Regression coefficient (95%CI) no acid change 
L914 F. MSVMs and BRBNs are due to double mutations in Metabolic cis. The BRBN mutations are somatic, whereas MSVM mutations seem mo- Trait saic. Moreover, a distinct cis-mutation is seen in MSVM. The inherited VMCM is due to a germline mutation combined with a somatic second-hit. These FInafsltainmgm glautcioosne (mmol/l) 6 (20,677) 0.18 (0.12, 0.24) Fasting insulin (% difference) 3 (12,758) 8.47 (5.94, 11.06) clinico-genetic entities are reflected by phenotypic differences in cells over- expressing mutant receptors. Activation of AKT is yet a common phenome- C-reactive protein (% difference) 7 (24,319) 12.00 (7.95, 16.19) non. The capacity to form lesions clearly resides in mutant endothelial cells, IBnltoeordle purkeinss-6u r(e% difference) 5 (9,885) 7.00 (4.01, 10.08) Fibrinogen (% difference) 6 (19,041) 0.92 (0.25, 1.59) which when injected to immunodeficient mice generate lesions mimicking human VM. Interestingly, an mTOR inhibitor is able to deter lesion develop- SLyipsitdolsic blood pressure (mmHg) 6 (30,136) 0.70 (0.24, 1.16) ment. Finally, in our therapeutic pilot study comprising five patients with Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg) 6 (30,137) 0.28 (0.03, 0.52) VMs refractory to standard-of-care, an mTOR inhibitor diminished pain, in- HDL-C (mmol/l) 6 (24,943) -0.02 (-0.03, -0.01) travascular coagulopathy and improved quality of life. LSuDrLr-oCg (amtem mola/rl)ker of CHD 6 (23,364) -0.04 (-0.07, -0.01) 
C04 .5 Triglycerides (% difference) 6 (24,761) 0.82 (-0.61, 2.27) A high yield of variants with a putative role as modifiers in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy C Evar eo nt ti sd intima medial thickness Stud 3i (e 6s , 2(C 6a 0s )es/ Od1d.1s2 r (a-0ti.o4 2(9, 25.%68C)I) S. Bardi1, F. Girolami1, M. Benelli1, B. Tomberli2, E. Contini1, G. Marseglia1, C. Pescucci1, G. (% difference) Individuals) Castelli2, A. Fornaro2, F. Cecchi3, I. Olivotto2, F. Torricelli1; 1Genetic Diagnostic Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Referral Centre for Type 2 diabetes 7 (4,407/31,844) 1.27 (1.18, 1.36) Myocardial Diseases, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3University of Florence, Coronary heart disease 7 (6,073/ 26,193) 1.01 (0.94, 1.08) Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Florence, Italy. Stroke 6 (3,813/ 23,782) 1.03 (0.95, 1.12) 
C05 .1 Compound inheritance of a low-frequency promoter deletion and a Next Generation Sequencing enables simultaneous screening of multiple ge- null mutation in a new gene causes Burn-McKeown syndrome (BMKS) nes for multiple patients in a single run. We designed a panel of 111 genes D. Wieczorek1, W. G. Newman2, T. Wieland3, T. Berulava1, M. Kaffe3, D. Falkenstein1, C. Beetz4, S. Douzgou2, J. Clayton-Smith2, S. B. Daly2, S. G. Williams2, S. Bhaskar2, J. known to be associated to CMs to study 94 unrelated patients (80 with Hy- Urquhart2, B. Anderson2, J. O‘Sullivan2, O. Boute5, E. Graf3, J. C. Czeschik1, A. J. van pertrophic Cardiomyopathy, HCM; 18 with Dilatative Cardiomyopathy, DCM Essen6, F. Hazan7, A. Hing8, A. Kuechler1, J. Lemke9, C. Marques Lourenco10, U. Hehr11, B. and 6 with Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy, AC). Targeted resequencing Horsthemke1, T. Meitinger3, J. Burn12, H. Lüdecke1, T. M. Strom3; was performed on Illumina platform (98,13% of the regions with a depth of 1Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, coverage of 20X or more, mean coverage on target of 530X). A mean of 1016 Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Human Genetics, München, Germany, variants were found for each patient. Rare (frequency <0.05), non-synony- 4Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, Jena, Germany, 5Service mous, loss- of- function and splice-site variants were defined as candidates. de Génétique Clinique, Lille, France, 6Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 8Seattle Children‘s Hospital, Seattle, Pathogenic or likely-pathogenic variants were all confirmed by Sanger and WA, United States, 9Abteilung Humangenetik, Bern, Switzerland, 10Neurogenetics Unit, cosegregation was tested when possible. Excluding titin missense variants, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 11Department of Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany, 12Institute of we identified 48 variants (27 novel) in sarcomeric or associated genes in Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. 48/70 HCM patients (68%), with 14% of complex genotype. MYH7, MYB- P
C3  and TNNI3 resulted the high-yield genes; 19 additional candidate vari- ants (13 novel) in desmosomal and ion-channel genes in 14 patients (20%) Burn-McKeown syndrome (BMKS) is characterized by cardiac defects, were identified in this group. We identified 10 candidate variants (7 novel) choanal atresia, sensorineural deafness and craniofacial dysmorphism and in 7/18 DCM patients (39%) and 5 candidate variants in 3/6 AC patients seems to be rare. X-linked or autosomal recessive inheritance was sugge- (50%). A targeted protocol allowed the identification of likely pathogenic sted. variants in a large proportion of patients with CMs, irrespective of pheno- We performed exome sequencing in five patients with BMKS and identified type. The unexpected finding of rare non synonymous variants in desmo- two heterozygous nonsense mutations in an autosomal gene (p.Glu117*; somal and ion-channel genes among HCM patients raises important issues p.Glu13*) and one frameshift mutation (p.Val44Alafs*48). Screening for de- regarding their role as previously unappreciated modifiers of the disease, letions in seven additional families revealed three large deletions (0.484, p Co 0t 4e .n 6tially relevant to risk prediction and counseling. 1.164 and 4.7 MB), containing at least the entire candidate gene. Further Causal relationship of body mass index with cardiometabolic traits three patients are currently being analysed. In two patients, no mutation and events: a Mendelian randomization analysis was identified. All mutations and one deletion were inherited from a healthy M. V. Holmes1,2, L. A. Lange3, T. Palmer4, M. B. Lanktree5, IBC BMI Mendelian parent, but in no case a second mutation was found in the coding region of Randomization Group, E. E. Schadt6, F. W. Asselbergs7,8,2, A. P. Reiner9,10, B. J. Keating1; the gene. Whole genome sequencing was performed in five patients, in all a 1University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2University College London, 34 bp promoter deletion on the other allele of the same gene was identified. London, United Kingdom, 3University of North Carolina School of Medicine at Chapel Segregation analyses for the promoter deletion revealed that all patients Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 4University of Warwick, Warwick, United Kingdom, with a null mutation on one allele had the promoter deletion on the other al- 24 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, lIeTleA. WLYe s|c WreeWneWd 3.
E78 S cHoGnt.rOolsR fGor the promoter deletion and found a minorABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index allele frequency of 1% for this population. (ER) Ca2+ sensor. The effect of the mutation on the structure of STIM1 was Preliminary results of primer extension analyses of RNA from peripheral investigated by molecular modeling, and its effect on function was explored blood suggest a negative effect of the 34 bp-deletion on the expression level by calcium homeostasis experiments. We show that STIM1 p.R304W variant of this allele. Further functional analyses are currently being performed. may affect the conformation of the inhibitory helix and unlock the inhibito- In conclusion, our results indicate that BMKS is an autosomal recessive con- ry state of STIM1 molecule. Results obtained from calcium imaging experi- dition caused by an unusual mode of inheritance and highlight the impor- ments using transfected cells together with the fibroblasts from one affected tance of analyzing regulatory regions of causative genes. patient were in agreement with impairment of calcium homeostasis. The 
C05 .2 p.R304W mutation probably causes a constant Ca2+ release activated Ca2+ Genetic studies of mosaic birth defects affecting the skin by next- channels (CRAC) opening leading to a permanent entry of calcium in many generation DNA sequencing J. Rivière1,2, J. St-Onge1,2, Y. Duffourd1, J. Courcet1,3, Fédération des Centres Labellisés cell types. Our results are in agreement with already published models for « Anomalies du Développement » (FeCLAD), Filière des Maladies Rares en Dermatologie STIM1 structure and activation. We conclude that p.R304W mutation in (FIMARAD), Société française de Foetopathologie (SOFFOET), L. Faivre1,3, B. Demeer4, P. STIM1 may be the cause of the Stormorken syndrome. 
C05 .4 Vabres1,5; TashT is a novel mouse model that phenocopies both the variable 1Equipe d’Accueil 4271, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Centre Hospitalier penetrance and male sex-bias of Hirschsprung’s disease Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence N. Pilon1, K. F. Bergeron1, T. Cardinal1, A. M. Touré1, D. W. Silversides2; Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est, Centre 1Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Université de Montréal, St- Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Centre d’activité de génétique clinique, Hyacinthe, QC, Canada. Pôle pédiatrie, Hôpital Nord, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 5Service de Dermatologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France. Neural crest cells (NCC) are progenitors of diverse cell types such as peri- pheral neurons and glia as well as melanocytes. Via an insertional mutation A large group of sporadic developmental disorders involving the skin are screen for loci affecting NCC, we identified several mouse lines that combine or may be caused by postzygotic mutational events. Although mosaic birth defects in pigmentation and formation of the enteric nervous system. One of defects traditionally rank among the most complex forms of monogenic di- these lines, named TashT, displays an aganglionic megacolon phenotype in a seases for gene discovery studies due to the challenges of detecting mutati- subset of homozygotes and, most interestingly, almost exclusively in males. ons present in only a fraction of cells, exome sequencing recently emerged This is highly reminiscent of human Hirschsprung’s disease, a neurocristo- as a powerful tool in the context of postzygotic mosaicism. In recent years, pathy with an incidence of 1/5000 newborns and a currently unexplained we and others have identified mutations of PIK3CA and other PI3K/AKT/ 4:1 male-to-female bias. MTOR-pathway genes in several mosaic overgrowth syndromes including We localized the TashT transgene insertion site in a gene desert containing megalencephaly-capillary malformation, hemimegalencephaly, fibroadipo- multiple highly conserved elements on chromosome 10. Migration assays se hyperplasia, Proteus, CLOVES, and Klippel-Trenaunay syndromes. So- as well as time-lapse imaging showed that megacolon is due to defective matic HRAS and KRAS mutations were reported in isolated and syndromic NCC migration within the gut mesenchyme, a defect generally more severe sebaceous nevi, and GNAQ mutations were associated with Sturge-Weber in males than females. At the molecular level, RNAseq analysis of TashT en- syndrome and port-wine stains. To further study the genetic basis of mosaic teric NCC notably revealed upregulation of many genes encoding secreted birth defects involving the skin, we ascertained and collected blood and skin proteins and downregulation of several X-linked genes. This analysis also specimens from > 100 unrelated individuals with patterns of skin lesions identified the novel gene Fam162b as a strong candidate for being the TashT suggestive of cutaneous mosaicism. Systematic targeted deep sequencing of causative gene. Fam162b is located near the transgene insertion site and known causative genes on a MiSeq instrument (Illumina) in subjects with a reporter gene as well as 3C assays suggest that this TashT overexpressed clinical presentation consistent with the aforementioned syndromes resul- gene is normally repressed in NCC via long range interactions with some of ted in a diagnostic yield over 50% and led to identification of variants with the highly conserved elements near the transgene insertion site. allelic fractions as low as 1%. Exome sequencing studies based on paired Altogether, our results demonstrate that the TashT line represents a unique samples or trios in subjects with a clinical presentation of unknown genetic mouse model that will help understand the male sex bias of Hirschsprung’s cause led to identification of two new genes underlying two mosaic skin pig- disease. 
C05 .5 mentation syndromes. These findings highlight the value of next-generation WNT pathway downregulation and Cornelia de Lange Syndrome sequencing, both for research and genetic diagnosis of mosaic skin disor- A. Pistocchi1, G. Fazio2, L. R. Bettini2, A. Cereda2, L. Ferrari1, F. Cotelli3, A. Biondi2, A. d Ce 0r 5s .. 3 Selicorni2, V. Massa4, A. Marozzi5; 1University of Milan, Department of Medical Biotechnologies and Translational A point mutation in STIM1 (p.R304W) is associated with Stormorken Medicine, Milan, Italy, 2University of Milano-Bicocca, Department of Paediatrics, syndrome S.Gerardo Hospital/Fondazione MBBM, Monza, Italy, 3University of Milan, Department G. Morin1, N. Ortiz Bruechle2, A. Rabbind Singh1, C. Knopp2, G. Jedraszak1, M. Elbracht2, of Biosciences, Milan, Italy, 4University of Milan, Department of Health Sciences, Milan, D. Brémond-Gignac3, K. Hartmann4, H. Sevestre5, P. Deutz6, D. Hérent1, P. Nürnberg7, B. Italy, 5University of Milan,, Milan, Italy. Roméo8, K. Konrad9, M. Mathieu-Dramard1, J. Oldenburg10, E. Bourges-Petit11, Y. Shen12, K. Zerres2, H. Ouadid-Ahidouch13, J. Rochette1; 1EA 4666 & Department of Molecular and Clinical Genetics, CHU d’Amiens, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France, 2Department of Human Genetics, RWTH The cohesin complex is formed from a multi-subunit core and their asso- University Hospital, Aachen, Germany, 3Department of Opthalmology, CHU d’Amiens, ciated regulatory proteins. Amiens, France, 4Department of Ophthalmology, RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Genetic variants within components of the cohesin complex (NIPBL, SM
C1 A, Germany, 5Department of Pathology & EA4667, CHU d’Amiens, Université de Picardie SM
C3 , RAD21, PD
S5 , ESCO2, HDA
C8 ) are believed to be responsible for a Jules Verne, Amiens, France, 6Department of Pediatrics, RWTH University Hospital, spectrum of human syndromes known as “cohesinopathies” that includes Aachen, Germany, 7Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Department of Paediatric Pneumology, CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France, Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS), a multiple malformation syndrome 9Child Neuropsychology Section, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and affecting almost any organ and causing severe developmental delay. The co- Psychotherapy, RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Germany, 10Institute of Experimental hesin complex has a canonical role in cell division and a non-canonical role Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, University Clinic Bonn, Bonn, Germany, in gene expression regulation. Cohesinopathies seem to be caused by dys- 11Departement of Paediatric Cardiology, CHU d’Amiens, Amiens, France, 12Collaborative regulation of specific developmental pathways downstream of mutations in Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin) & College of Life cohesin components. However, it is still unclear how mutations in different Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, China, 13Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular components of the cohesin complex effect the output of gene regulation. Physiology, LPCM: EA 4667, UFR of Sciences, Amiens, France. In this study, zebrafish embryos and patient-derived fibroblasts were used to analyze abnormalities underlying CdLS, focusing on SM
C1 A, the second most commonly mutated gene responsible for the disease. We show that the Stormorken syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized knockdown of smc1a in zebrafish impairs neural development, increases by miosis, thrombocytopenia/thrombocytopathy, mild hypocalcaemia, mus- apoptosis and specifically downregulates the canonical Wnt pathway that cle fatigue, asplenia, dyslexia and ichthyosis. Presence of tubular aggregates can be rescued by chemical activation suggesting a therapeutic potential for has also been reported in muscle biopsies of adolescent and adult patients CdLS. The same downregulation of the WNT pathway is observed in SM
C1 A- with the disease. We diagnosed Stormorken syndromSTeI iMn1 fo ur patients from mutated patient fibroblasts. Previously we have demonstrated that the ha- two unrelated families. Using targeted sequencing and whole exome se- ploinsufficiency of NIPBL, the cohesin gene mutated in Cornelia de Lange quencing we identified the c.910C>T transition in a allele (p.R304W) Syndrome, produces a similar phenotype in zebrafish and in CdLS patients. only in patients and not in their unaffected family members. Stromal inter- Finally, the double-knockdown of nipblb/smc1a in zebrafish shows a syner- action molecule 1 protein (STIM1) is a finEelSy HtuGne d2 e0n1d4op |l aMsmILicA reNti,c uITluAmL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 25 gistic effect for the canonical role of cohesins in cell cycle and survival.ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C05 .6 
C06 .2 Trio-based exome sequencing in ten unrelated cases of atypical CdLS The long non-coding RNA landscape of autoimmune diseases M. Ansari1, A. Meynert1, H. Bengani1, D. Braunholz2, D. C. Soares1, R. C. M. Hennekam3, H. C. Wijmenga, I. Ricaño-Ponce, Y. Li, B. Hrdlickova, D. Zhernakova, J. Karjalainen, P. Kayserili4, S. Avci4, E. Wakeling5, J. Tolmie6, K. Tatton-Brown7, M. Splitt8, T. Homfray7, A. F. Deelen, S. Withoff, L. Franke, V. Kumar; Brady5, S. G. Mehta9, A. Ross10, F. J. Kaiser2, M. S. Taylor1, D. R. FitzPatrick1; Genetics Department, Groningen, Netherlands. 1Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 3University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4İstanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 5North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, We have recently shown that the majority of predisposing autoimmune di- Harrow, United Kingdom, 6West of Scotland Genetic Services, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 7St George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 8Northern Genetics sease SNPs are intronic or intergenic and have the potential to be regulatory Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 9Cambridge University Hospitals NHS (Ricaño-Ponce & Wijmenga, 2013) by affecting expression of nearby genes Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 10North of Scotland Regional Genetics (so-called eQTLs). It has become clear that non-coding RNAs are an impor- Service, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. tant class of regulatory elements. Annotating autoimmune SNPs shows that close to 10% map to long non-coding RNA genes (lncRNA). Transcriptome analysis across 11 distinct immune cell types (granulocytes, monocytes, NK Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a highly variable multisystem disor- cells, B-cells, memory-T cells, naive CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells, and four CD4+ der with a broad phenotypic spectrum. Most typically-affected individuals T-helper cell populations) revealed that these “autoimmune” lncRNAs are si- carry de novo heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in NIPBL. Mutati- gnificantly enriched in immune cell types. We also correlated the autoimmu- ons in other components of the sister chromatid cohesion system, SM
C1 A, ne SNP genotypes with expression levels (eQTLs) of both coding genes and HDA
C8 , SM
C3  and RAD21, result in phenotypes that overlap with CdLS but lncRNA genes and observed > 70% of the autoimmune SNPs to be eQTLs. which can be highly atypical. We carried out trio-based exome sequencing in Interestingly, ~16% of these eQTL SNPs also affect lncRNAs and as high as ten unrelated individuals with the diagnosis of atypical CdLS, who had pre- 6% of these eQTLs are specific to lncRNAs alone. To gain a first understan- viously been screened for intragenic mutations in the known CdLS genes and ding on the biological processes in which these “autoimmune” lncRNAs are for genomic deletions or duplications. Using a likelihood-based approach, involved we performed pathway analysis based on co-expression profiles we identified nine de novo variants in eight cases, including de novo loss- of lncRNAs and protein-coding genes using 5000 publicly available RNAseq of-function mutations in NIPBL (c.3150delA [p.Glu1050Aspfs*20]) and KM- samples. More than 90% of the autoimmune lncRNAs were significantly co- T2A (c.3649G>T [p.Glu1217*]), an essential splice-site mutation in PUF60 expressed with genes in cis (P = 0.009 to 4.64 x 10-92) that are at an average (c.604-2A>C) and a missense mutation in NAA10 (c.247C>T [p.Arg83Cys]). distance of 245 kb. Our results show that lncRNA-eQTLs represent a novel Furthermore, de novo, probably damaging missense mutations were identi- link between non-coding SNPs and the expression of genes, which can be fied in PIK3
C3 , PDCD6IP, UN
C45 A, NU
P210  and CELF3. We then re-sequen- exploited to understand the process of gene-regulation through lncRNAs in ced these genes in 85 of our mutation-negative CdLS and CdLS-like cases more detail. 
C06 .3 by AmpliSeq-Ion Torrent sequencing, which revealed three additional loss- Population Scale Comprehensive Identification and Analysis of of-function mutations in KMT2A. We also detected the aforementioned de Complex Structural Variation Using Nanochannel Array novo mutation in NAA10 (c.247C>T [p.Arg83Cys]) in a similarly-affected, H. Dai1, A. Hastie1, E. Lam1, W. Andrews1, T. Anantharaman1, A. Pang1, M. Saghibini1, H. but unrelated individual. Molecular modelling suggests that the p.Arg83Cys Sadoski1, H. VanSteenhouse1, M. Austin1, X. Yang1, T. Dickinson1, Z. Dzakula1, M. Xiao2, P. conversion is likely to alter binding of NAA10 to acetyl CoA and would re- Kwok3, H. Cao1; sult in reduced acetylation activity of the protein. Our results highlight the 1BioNano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, genetic heterogeneity in atypical CdLS. They also demonstrate the phenoty- United States, 3Univ of California - San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. pic overlap between atypical CdLS and other dysmorphic conditions such as Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome as shown by molecular data. 
C06 .1 Diseases are known to be associated with large (>1kb) genomic structural Resolving variants of unknown significance through reanalysis of variation (SV). A variety of techniques such as karyotyping, FISH and array- 4,978 public RNA-seq samples CGH have been used for SV analysis. However, population scale comprehen- P. Deelen, D. V. Zhernakova, M. van der Sijde, J. Karjalainen, J. K. van der Velde, M. de sive SV analysis remains impractical--too expensive or incomplete (exempli- Haan, K. M. Abbott, C. Wijmenga, R. J. Sinke, M. A. Swertz, J. Fu, L. Franke; University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. fied by missing inversions and balanced translocations by aCGH methods). More recently, next generation sequencing (NGS) has been shown efficient for discovery of SNPs and small indels. However, complete and accurate SV In recent years, exome sequencing has emerged as a very effective strategy discovery and analysis is complicated by the fact that variants often span for genome diagnostics. However, the functional significance is unclear for tens to hundreds of kb or are rearranged throughout the genome, difficult many of the identified variants, hindering clinical interpretation. To improve to infer from short fragment sequencing. Thus, there is a blind spot in effec- upon this, we hypothesized that if a variant of unknown significance is af- tively detecting SVs within this range (1 kb ~ 1 Mb), referred to as the “dark fecting gene expression, it is more likely to be pathogenic (similar to what is matter” of the genome, overlooked in the past due to insufficient tools. known for common disease-associated SNPs, Westra et al, Nature Genetics We demonstrate a new platform technology (Irys) to effectively linearize 2013). very long strands of gDNA (100 kb to Mbs) through nanochannels to directly We therefore analysed publicly available RNA-seq data from 4,978 human visualize SVs and rearrangements preserved within intact and unamplified samples from European Nucleotide Archive. We developed methodology genomic DNA at single molecule level. De novo genome maps are assembled to QC and harmonize the RNA-seq data and to account for differences in and hundreds to thousands of SV events are called. Data from individuals sequencing strategy, tissue differences and other (unknown) confounders. and trio families will demonstrate this highly comprehensive and cost effec- We subsequently called SNPs using GATK and imputed genotypes using tive approach, with results validated by multiple orthogonal methods. BEAGLE. We assessed genotype quality using 462 samples for which both For the first time, it is now feasible to do large population-based compre- RNA-seq data and 1000G genotypes are available (Lappalainen et al, Nature hensive structural variation studies using a single platform. This innovation 2013) and observed a 97% genotype concordance, indicating that RNA-seq will transform the diagnosis and treatment of diseases resulting from struc- is suitable for genotyping. t Cu 0r 6a .l 4 variants, particularly cancer. This enabled us not only to identify effects of common variants on the gene Chromatin loops and CNVs: the complex spatial organization of the expression levels of 6,005 genes (cis-eQTLs), but also to identify the effects 16p11.2 locus associations of rare variants and gene expression by assessing allele specific M. Loviglio1, M. Leleu2, N. Gheldof1, E. Migliavacca1, K. Mannik1, J. Beckmann3, S. expression (ASE). We observed that many rare variants known to be patho- Jacquemont4, J. Rougemont2, A. Reymond1; genic strongly associate with gene expression levels. 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service de Génétique Since the amount of RNA-seq data that is available in public repositories is Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. growing exponentially, we expect ASE analysis of rare variants will likely provide new tools to resolve many variants of unknown significance. 16p11.2 600 kb B
P4 -B
P5  deletion and reciprocal duplication have mirror impact on body mass index (BMI), head circumference (HC) and autism spectrum disorder/schizophrenia (ASD/SCZ). The nearby distal 16p11.2 220 kb B
P2 -B
P3  rearrangements are similarly associated with mirror phe- notypes such as obesity/underweight and macro-/microcephaly, as well as neuropsychiatric disorders. We demonstrated chromatin interplays bet- ween these regions, likely via long-range acting regulatory elements, using 26 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, hIT igA h-L rY es o| lW utiW on W 4C. -E seS qH teG ch.O noR loG gy using the promoters of the SH2B1, MVP,ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index KCTD13, ALDOA, TBX6 and MAPK3 genes as “viewpoints”. Between 172 and We are currently testing our approach in large-scale projects such as the 354 Blocks of Regulators in Chromosomal Kontext are found per viewpoint. Undiagnosed Disease Program and CareForRare. 
C07 .1 These 3-dimensionnally adjacent genomic regions encompass genes that en- LysoPlex: an efficient strategy to study the role of lysosomal- code proteins that interact together (P=1.69e-9) and have been associated autophagic-endocytic pathway with autism (P=0.008). A dramatic reorganization of these chromatin inter- G. Di Fruscio1,2, A. Schulz3, R. De Cegli1, M. Mutarelli1, M. Savarese1,2, V. Singhmarwah1, acting networks is displayed in cells of carriers of 600 kb B
P4 -B
P5  deletion M. Filocamo4, D. Di Bernardo1, S. Banfi1,2, T. Braulke3, V. Nigro1,2, A. Ballabio1,5,6; or duplication. In parallel, we profiled the transcriptome of lymphoblastoid 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biochimica, cell lines of 50 deletion, 32 reciprocal duplication and 29 control individuals Biofisica e Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy, and identified 2209 differentially expressed (DE) genes using a numerical 3Children‘s Hospital, Department of Biochemistry, University Medical Center Hamburg- Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4Centro di Diagnostica Genetica e Biochimica delle variable to reflect a dosage effect. 566 DE genes show a concomitant signi- Malattie Metaboliche, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 5Department of Molecular and ficant change in chromatin interaction (enrichment P=0.007). Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 6Medical Our results show that relevant chromatin conformation changes may arise Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. from copy number variants. They strongly suggest a link between the obser- ved chromatin perturbations and changes in gene expression, with a possib- le contribution of the chromosome conformation to the disease phenotype. 
C06 .5 Lysosome is a control centre for cellular clearance and energy metabolism: Informing rare disease mechanisms: informatics for the International it is responsible for the degradation of the foreign molecules and the en- Mouse Phenotyping Consortium dogenous macromolecules. The essential role of lysosomes in phagocytosis T. F. Meehan, on behalf of the MPI2 Consortium; and autophagy puts these organelles at the crossroads of several cellular European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, processes. To understand the role of the lysosomal-autophagic-endocytic Cambridge, United Kingdom. pathway in health and disease, we have developed LysoPlex, a Next Gene- ration Sequencing-based workflow to sequence at high coverage 12,786 human exons of 891 genes involved in lysosomal function, endocytosis and The International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium (IMPC) is building the autophagy pathway. We designed the enrichment probes using a Haloplex first truly comprehensive functional catalogue of a mammalian genome that custom platform targeting 99.48% of exons. To validate the methodology, will inform mechanisms of rare disease. The IMPC is coordinating efforts we created a training set of 15 DNA samples belonging to patients affected to generate a knockout mouse strain for every protein-coding gene. These by 14 different LSDs, whose the molecular diagnosis was already known. mouse strains are characterized using a standardized, broad-based pheno- Using LysoPlex, we were able to detect all the known mutations. Moreover, typing pipeline and data is collected and archived centrally by the IMPC- we used our strategy to identify disease-causing mutations in 50 patients Data Coordinating Centre. Dedicated ‘data wranglers’ are working with each clinically diagnosed as affected by neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL). phenotyping centre to ensure proper transfer and quality control of data. About 50% of samples have causative mutations and a subset of additional An automated statistical analysis pipeline identifies knockout strains with variations in other genes not directly correlated with the disease was also significant changes in phenotype parameters. Potential disease models are identified in each sample. In conclusion, LysoPlex is a cheap and fast NGS identified by orthologous gene and by orthologous phenotype features. targeted platform for the molecular diagnosis of Mendelian LSDs and it is Over 3000 IMPC mouse strains have been produced, with emerging phe- a precious tool to have a complete view of sequence variants in the genes notype data available for hundreds of these strains. Users can freely access involved in the lysosomal-autophagic pathway. Moreover, it can also be used all data including new gene-phenotype via an intuitive web portal. Anno- to identify causative or predisposing mutations in a variety of debilitating tation with biomedical ontologies allows biologists and clinicians to easily human conditions such as common neurodegenerative diseases. 
C07 .2 find mouse strains with phenotypic traits relevant to their research. Users Comparing Clinical Exome Sequencing versus Whole Exome can register interest in genes so they may be informed as mouse models Sequencing for monogenic diseases and undiagnosed patients and new phenotype data become available. The community is invited to ex- P. Joset, M. Papik, K. Steindl, S. Papuc, M. Vincent, L. Gogoll, D. Niedrist, B. Oneda, A. plore and provide feedback as we build this rich resource for rare disease Baumer, A. Rauch; research at: Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland. www.mousephenotype.org 
C06 .6 Strategies for Exome Prioritization of Human Disease Genes D. Smedley1, S. Kohler2, A. Oellrich1, J. Jacobsen1, Sanger Mouse Genetics Group, K. Since Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) demonstrated mutations in known Wang3, C. Mungall4, N. Washington4, S. Bauer2, D. Seelow2, P. Krawitz2, C. Gilissen5, M. disease genes in more than 30% of patients with severe non-specific ID Haendel6, S. E. Lewis4, P. N. Robinson2; (Rauch et al. 2012) and in 25% of mixed clinical patients (Yang et al. 2013) 1Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Charite-Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, we investigated the diagnostic yield of NGS of large gene panels including all Germany, 3University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States, 5Radboud University known disease genes (CES: “clinical exome sequencing”) versus WES. So far Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nikmegen, Netherlands, 6Oregon Health & Sciences University, we analyzed WES data of 99 unrelated patients with a variety of neurode- Portland, OR, United States. velopmental or congenital anomalies and CES data covering 2761 or 4813 known disease genes from 12 patients. WES revealed pathogenic mutations in known disease genes in a total of 23% of cases, which increased to almost Whole-exome sequencing has revolutionized rare disease research, with 70% in cases with a precise clinical syndrome suspicion. Diagnostic yield of over 100 disease-gene identifications since the first published success in CES was 50% in total. Comparison of the average yield of ~135 private non- 2010. However, many cases remain unsolved due to the fact that ~100-1000 synonymous variants per case targeting the whole exome versus the ~65 for loss of function, candidate variants remain after removing those deemed the 2761 and ~107 for the 4813 gene panel, indicates a more sensitive vari- as common, low quality or non-pathogenic. In some cases it may be pos- ant detection on the clinical disease panel. The increased sensitivity may be sible to use multiple affected individuals, linkage data, identity-by-descent explained by the high average coverage of over 200x and a 10x coverage in inference, trio analysis, or prior knowledge of affected pathways to narrow almost 98% of the targeted region. Of 29 diagnosed cases, 41% represented down to the causative variant. Where this is not possible or successful, one autosomal dominant mutations, 52% were inherited in an autosomal reces- approach is to use model organism phenotype data to evaluate whether a sive pattern and 7% had X-linked inheritance. In about 14% of WES cases variant is likely to result in the patient’s clinical manifestations. We have in total, and in 31% of affected sib pairs we detected new possible disease developed an algorithmic approach (PHenotypic Interpretation of Variants causing candidate genes. in Exomes; PHIVE) to semantically compare clinical and mouse phenotypes. We conclude that CES is highly sensitive especially in cases with a syndromic The output is combined with measures of variant candidacy such as patho- c Cl 0in 7i .c 3al diagnosis. genicity and allele frequency and synergistically improves performance: the One generic automated workflow for both Sanger and ion causative variant is identified as the top hit in up to 83% of exomes, with a semiconductor sequencing in routine DNA diagnostics 54-fold improvement over variant-based prioritization alone. A web imple- K. Neveling, A. Diekstra, E. Bosgoed, A. Rikken, B. van Lier, E. J. Kamsteeg, M. Tychon, R. mentation (Exomiser) is freely available. C. Derks, R. A. van Soest, A. R. Mensenkamp, H. Scheffer, M. R. Nelen; Another complementary approach we have developed ranks exome candi- Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. dates based on their proximity in protein-protein networks to genes shown, or are suspected, to be associated with the disease. Again, combining this with variant-based measures of candidacy leads to large improvements in Dideoxy-based chain termination sequencing developed by Frederick San- performance with up to 47% of exomes having the causative variant as the ger is the “gold standard” sequencing approach used by clinical genetic la- top candidate. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | b W oraW torW ies.E . RS eH ceG nt. lO y, R neG w NGS technologies found their way into diagno2s7ticABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index laboratories, enabling to sequence also large targeted gene panels or even the tests. This scoring system is new, as it does not feature in any other gui- complete exomes. These NGS approaches are normally used in parallel to deline. As far as ‘reportable range’ is concerned, we propose the use of 3 conventional Sanger sequencing. The development of benchtop NGS machi- specific percentages depending on the reference (technical target, coverage nes now allows to analyze single genes or small gene panels using the new of transcript in a gene panel, coverage with reference to the genome) which technologies, making these platforms increasingly competitive to Sanger will again allow to compare individual results within runs, between tests sequencing. and between laboratories. The guidelines propose a template for reporting Here we show that we have generated a generic automated ion semiconduc- NGS results as well. Finally, the guidelines also deal with informed consent, tor sequencing workflow which can be used in a clinical setting. Standard unclassified variants and unsolicited findings, again from the laboratory amplicon-based enrichment remains identical to the PCR for Sanger sequen- standpoint. Similarly, they define the difference between research and dia- cing. A novel post-enrichment pooling strategy was developed, allowing to gnostics, with a practical solution to the ‘duty to recontact’. 
C07 .6 limit the number of library preparations and thereby reducing sequencing Clinical exome sequence performance for reporting secondary costs up to 60-70% compared to Sanger sequencing. A total of 1224 known genetic findings pathogenic variants were used to perform a thorough validation, resulting E. Londin1, P. Clark2, M. Sponziello3, L. Kricka4, P. Fortina1,3, J. Y. Park5; in an analytical sensitivity of 99,92%,with a specificity of 99,99%. An addi- 1Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Children‘s Hospital of tional study using a total of 100 patient-derived DNA samples was perfor- Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Sapienza Universita’ di Roma, Rome, Italy, med blinded and resulted in an analytical sensitivity of 99.60% and a spe- 4University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5University cificity of 99.98%, comparable to Sanger sequencing. These data combined of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and Children’s Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. with the high scalability of our developed system makes it attractive to use ion semiconductor sequencing as our main mutation scanning technique, independent of the requested genes. We have therefore implemented this automated semiconductor sequencing workflow in our routine DNA diagno- The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) has re- stics, and ISO15189 accreditation is in process. commended the reporting of clinically actionable incidental genetic findings 
C07 .4 in the course of clinical exome testing. Specifically, the pathogenic findings Setting sequencing thresholds for the use of next generation of 56 specific genes with known clinical importance should be reported. Ho- sequencing as a diagnostic tool wever, this assumes that exome sequencing returns data of sufficient quality Y. Sun, M. J. V. Hoffer, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, J. T. den Dunnen, G. W. E. Santen; using methods that were not validated for clinical use. To address this issue, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. we surveyed the potential false negative rate of mutations in the 56 ACMG genes. We retrospectively, analyzed forty-four exome datasets from four dif- ferent exome capture kits and two-sequence platforms. The exome methods Before replacing gene-by-gene Sanger sequencing with genome-wide NGS, were examined for their ability to detect clinically relevant mutations in the it is essential that diagnostic laboratories investigate the relation between 56 ACMG genes. A total of 17,774 pathogenic nucleotide variants are an- sequencing depth and test characteristics such as false-positive/negative notated in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) for the 56 genes, rates, yield and coverage of relevant regions. In addition, capture bias needs and data was examined for depth of coverage in the exome datasets. Over- to be evaluated when choosing between whole exome (WES) and whole ge- all, the four-exome methods had inadequate depth of coverage for accurate nome sequencing (WGS). base calling ranging from 5.2% to 34.8% of the pathogenic variant positi- To determine these factors we investigated 9 samples sequenced in diagno- ons. At least one gene in each exome method was missing >40% of the pa- stic laboratories using both WES and WGS and 4 samples analysed by SNP- thogenic variant positions. The worst performing method was predicted to array and deep sequenced by WES. As intellectual disability (ID) is consi- miss >90% of clinically significant variant positions in the genes TMEM43, dered the primary indication for diagnostics using WES/WGS, we focused PCSK9, KCNQ1 and LMNA. The heterogeneous and occasional poor depth of on a panel of ~400 ID genes. We observed no false-negatives in WES versus coverage across this set of 56 genes illustrates the opportunity for further WGS for the ID gene panel region. In contrast, duplicated regions and regi- innovation in standardizing clinical NGS methods. Implementation of the ons with many variants in close proximity were problematic, suffering from ACMG incidental findings guideline requires recognition of the substantial increased false negative rates (> 1/100). possibility of reporting false negative results. Subsequently we determined minimal sequencing criteria by applying 
C08 .1 GATK’s experime6ntal reference confidence score model on subsets of WES Smc1a cohesin gene mutations in colorectal precancerous lesions data (20-140*10 mapped reads). This revealed that (1) false positive ra- F. Cucco1,2, A. Servadio3, V. Gatti4, P. Bianchi5, L. Mannini1, A. Prodosmo4, E. De Vitis1, G. Basso5, A. Friuli1, L. Laghi6, S. Soddu4, G. Fontanini3, A. Musio1,6; tes are negligible, (2) false negative rates a6re below 1/1000, (3) the yield 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pisa, Italy, of identified variants is >95% with >30*10 mapped reads (~35X average 2Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 3Dipartimento di depth), and (4) adequate d6epth can be reached for >95% of the bases of the Patologia Chirurgica, Medica, Molecolare e di Area Critica, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, ID gene panel w6ith >60*10 mapped reads (~70X average depth) and >99% 4Laboratorio di Oncologia Sperimentale, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Regina Elena, Roma, with > 140*10 mapped reads (~160X average depth). Italy, 5Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Milano, Italy, 6Istituto Toscano Tumori, Firenze, Italy. We conclude that the applied methodology allows diagnostic laboratories to make informed decisions on sequencing criteria using few deeply sequen- c Ce 0d 7 W .5ES datasets. Chromosome missegregation leading to chromosomal instability, is thought EuroGentest guidelines for diagnostic next generation sequencing to play a pivotal role in cancer development. As major cohesin function is G. Matthijs1, M. Alders2, P. Bauer3, A. Corveleyn1, S. Eck4, I. Feenstra5, V. Race1, H. to assure correct chromosome segregation, increasing data suggests its in- Scheffer5, E. Sistermans6, E. Souche1, M. Sturm3, M. Weiss6, H. Yntema5, and the volvement in tumorigenesis. Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a useful model for Participants to the EuroGentest workshop on Diagnostic NGS Guidelines; investigating the role of cohesin in carcinogenesis. CRC develops over the 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, course of many years as a consequence of the accumulation of specific muta- Academic Medical Centre (AMC), Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Institute of Medical tions in both oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. These mutations ari- Genetics and Applied Genomics, University Hospital, Tübingen, Germany, 4Center for se in a characteristic sequence leading to early adenoma/dysplastic crypt, Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics, Dr. Klein, Dr. Rost, Martinsried, Germany, 5Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, late adenoma and carcinoma. Two types of genomic instability have been Netherlands, 6VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. identified in CRC: chromosomal instability (CIN), is present in around 85% of colorectal cancers, while the remaining 15% shows microsatellite insta- bility (MSI). CIN was proposed as the major cause of cancer development Next generation sequencing (NGS) is quickly being optimized for use in dia- more than 100 years ago, but its molecular mechanisms have not yet been gnostics. The technologies bring challenges at the technical level, in terms of completely defined. In this regard, the identification of gene(s) that gives data management and in the interpretation of results. Over the past 2 years, rise to a CIN phenotype at an early stage of CRC development has been chal- guidelines have been issued by the American, Australian, Dutch and British lenging. To this aim, we analyzed colorectal early adenomas and identified genetic professional societies. At EuroGentest, an expert group has been eleven mutations in SM
C1 A core cohesin subunit. Transfection of the SM
C1 A working on compiling, integrating and completing these guidelines. For in- mutants identified in early adenomas and wild-type SM
C1 A gene silencing stance, we believe that defining the ‘diagnostic utility’ of the NGS test is the in normal human fibroblasts led to chromosomal instability. Since SM
C1 A is laboratory’s first duty when preparing to offer diagnostic NGS. Second, we an X-linked gene, our finding suggests that a single allele mutation is enough introduce a scoring system for the different NGS assays depending on their to trigger chromosomal instability and tumorigenesis. quality and comprehensiveness. This is important for patients and clinicians This work was supported by grants from Istituto Toscano Tumori and Asso- to allow comparison of the diagnostic offer from the different laboratories. ciazione Italiana Ricerca sul Cancro to A.M. It2 c8ould also be used by the health care system to E evS aH luG at e2 a0 n1 d 4 re | i mM buIL rsA e N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C08 .2 Comprehensive annotation of splice junctions supports pervasive CDH1 alternative splicing at the BRCA1 locus: a report from the ENIGMA tained directly from a tumor specimen of an affecMteAdP i3nKd6ividual. Screening consortium of 115 unrelated individuals with non- FGC identified the p.
P946 L va- M. Colombo (co-first author)1, M. J. Blok (co-first author)2, P. Whiley3,4, M. riant, as well as four additional coding variants in (p.F849Sfs*142, Santamariña5, S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez6, A. Romero7, P. Garre7, A. Becker8, L. D. Smith9, p.
P958 T, p.D200Y and p.V207G). These probands were negative for muta- G. De Vecchi1, R. D. Brandão2, D. Tserpelis2, M. Brown4, A. Blanco10, S. Bonache6,11, M. tions in another 50 genes withM lAinPk3sK t6o gastrointestinal cancers also being Menéndez12, C. Houdayer13, C. Foglia1, J. D. Fackenthal14, D. Baralle9, B. Wappenschmidt8, screened in this cohort. These findings, together with wMhAaPt 3isK 6known from K. ConFaB15, E. Díaz-Rubio7,16, T. Caldés7, L. Walker17, O. Díez6,11,18, A. Vega10, A. B. Spurdle3, mouse models about the role MpAlPay3sK 6in oncogenesis, and previous P. Radice1, M. de la Hoya7; studies showing the presence of somatic mutations in in non-he- 1Dept. of Preventive and Predictive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical reditary gastric cancers, indicate that variants are a predisposing Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Molecular Cancer Epidemiology Laboratory, f Ca 0c 8to .4r for FGC. Genetics and Computational Division,QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Germline mutations in SUFU cause Gorlin syndrome and redefine the Brisbane, Australia, 4School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences,The University of risk associated with childhood medulloblastoma. Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 5Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC,Universidad de Santiago de Compostela,CIBERER,IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 6Oncogenetics W. G. Newman1, M. J. Smith1, C. Beetz2, S. Williams1, Z. Bholah1, B. Anderson1, S. B. Daly1, J. Urquhart1, J. O‘Sullivan1, A. Kelsey1, S. Bhaskar1, D. G. Evans1; Group,Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Spain, 7Laboratorio de Oncologia Molecular. Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria San Carlos. 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2University of Jena, Jena, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 8Center of Familial Breast and Ovarian Germany. Cancer,University Hospital Cologne.Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Germany, 9Human Development and Health Academic Unit,Faculty of Medicine,University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, United Kingdom, Background Mutations in PTCH1 have been identified in approximately 70% 10Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica-SERGAS,Grupo de Medicina of individuals with Gorlin syndrome. Methods Gorlin families were screened Xenomica-USC,CIBERER,IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 11Oncogenetics Group,Vall for PTCH1 mutations by DNA and RNA sequencing and MLPA. Selected cases d’Hebron Research Institute and Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, without an identified mutation with more than one affected member under- 12Genetic Diagnosis Unit,Hereditary Cancer Program,Institut Catala d’Oncologia, Barcelona, Spain, 13Service de Genetique and INSERM U830,Institut Curie and Universite went exome sequencing. Results PTCH1 mutations were identified in 42/70 Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cite, France, 14Dept. of Medicine, The University of (60%) of families fulfilling Gorlin syndrome criteria. Exome sequencing of Chicago Medical Center, IL, United States, 15Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,St Andrews four PTCH1 negative patients revealed a heterozygous germline SUFU mu- Place,East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 16Servicio de Oncologia Medica.Hospital tation, c.550C>T (p.Gln184*), in one individual. Sanger sequencing of 23 Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 17Dept. of Pathology,University of Otago, Christchurch, further PTCH1 negative families identified a novel heterozygous SUFU mis- New Zealand, 18Oncogenetics Group,University Hospital of Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, sense mutation, c.544G>T (p.Asp182Tyr). MLPA screening of SUFU defined Spain. a deletion in one family, starting between exons 3 and 5 and removing the 3’ BRCA1 end of the gene. All affected SUFU positive families contained a single case of medulloblastoma. Of 171 individuals meeting Gorlin syndrome criteria 115 Loss-of-function germ-line mutations in (MIM #113705) confer (67%) have a PTCH1 mutation and 10 a SUFU mutation. Only two of 115 markedly increased rBisRkC Aof1 breast and ovarian cancer. The full-length tran- (1.8%) with a PTCH1 mutation have developed pathology proven medull- script codifies for a protein involved in DNA repair pathwBaRyCs Aa1n d cell-cycle oblastoma. Three of ten individuals from three families with SUFU-related checkpoints. Several splicing isoforms have been describneadtu irna plluyb olcic- Gorlin syndrome developed a medulloblastoma. Three cranial tumours oc- cduormrianign databases, but the physiological role (if any) of alternative curred in follow up of two SUFU mutation cases, two meningiomas and a splicing remains to be established. An accurate description of pilocytic astrocytoma. Conclusions The risk of medulloblastoma in Gorlin BRaCltAe1rn ative splicing at this locus is a prerequisite to understand its syndrome is reported as 5%. Our study redefines the risk of medulloblasto- biological significance. However, a systematic analysis of alternative splicing ma in PTCH1 related Gorlin syndrome as ~2%, with a risk around 15 times at the locus is yet to be conducted. higher in SUFU related Gorlin syndrome. We also show convincingly for the Here, the Evidence-based Network for the Interpretation of Germ-line first time that SUFU mutations cause classical Gorlin syndrome. Mutant AllBeRleCsA 1(E NIGMA) consortium combines RT-PCR, exon scanning, 
C08 .5 cloning, sequencing, and relative semi-quantification to describe naturally Evaluation of anti-cancer chemotherapy genotoxicity using a new p53 occurring alternative splicing with unprecedented resolution. The functional assay in human lymphocytes study has been conducted BinR CbAlo1o d related RNA sources,commonly used J. M. Flaman, E. Kasper, Y. Zerdoumi, F. Soubigou, G. Bougeard, T. Frebourg; Inserm U1079 and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. for clinical splicing assays, as well as in one healthy breast tissue. We have characterized a total of 63 alternative splicing events, including 35 novel findings. A minimum of 10 splicing events (∆1Aq, ∆5, ∆5q, ∆8p, ∆9, Most of the conventional anti-cancer chemotherapies inhibit proliferation ∆(9,10), ∆9_11, ∆11q, ∆1B3RpC,A a1n d ∆14p) represent a substantial fraction of and survival of cancer cells by inducing DNA damages, are potentially mu- the full-length expression level (ranging from 5% to 100%). Remarkably, tagenic and therefore might promote development of secondary tumours, our data indicates that alternative splicing is similar in blood and in particular in patients with inherited cancer risk. The p53 pathway is acti- breast, a finding supporting the clinical relevance of blood-based in vitro vated in response to anTyP g5e3notoxic stress. Our team has recently developed splicing assays. a new functional assay of p53 in human lymphocytes in order to classify Overall, our data suggests an alternative splicing model in whichB mRCoAst1 n on- the different germline mutations detected in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. mutually exclusive alternative splicing events are randomly combined into We adapted this assay to developT Pa5n3 universal genotoxicity test based on individual mRNA molecules to produce hundreds of different iso- specific detection of p53 pathway induction. This simple test is based on forms. 
C08 .3 the exposure of human wild-type lymphocytes to chemical or physical Germline mutations in MA
P3 K6 predispose to gastric cancer agents, then on the measurement by RT-QMPSF of p53 target gene expres- D. Gaston1, S. Hansford2, C. Oliveira3, M. Nightingale1, H. Pinheiro3, C. Macgillivray1, P. sTiPo5n3. The specificity of the p53 pathway induction is demonstrated by the Kaurah2, A. L. Rideout4, P. Steele4, G. Soares5, W. Huang1, S. Whitehouse1, S. Blowers6, M. A. same experiment carried out in lymphocytes harbouring a heterozygous LeBlanc1, H. Jiang7, W. Greer1, M. E. Samuels8,1, A. Orr1, C. V. Fernandez4, J. Majewski9, M. Ludman4,10, S. Dyack4, L. S. Penney4, C. R. McMaster1, D. Huntsman2, K. Bedard1; mutation, which compromises the response to genotoxic stress. Using 1Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, this test, we evaluated the genotoxicity of the conventional anti-cancer BC, Canada, 3University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, drugs commonly used. This analysis revealed that all classes of anti-cancer Canada, 5Porto Hospital Center, Porto, Portugal, 6Queen‘s Family Health Team, Kingston, drugs are genotoxic, with the exception of the mitotic spindle poisons, such ON, Canada, 7Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8University of as paclitaxel or derivatives of vinca alkaloids. These results suggest that the Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 9McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 10Meir remarkable high rate of multiple primary tumours observed in patients with Medical Center, Kfar Saba, Israel. Li-Fraumeni syndrome may be due in part to the mutagenic effect of che- CDH1, motherapies, and that the use of microtubules poisons may be of particular interest in these patients. This new functional assay should facilitate the Mutations in the E-cadherin gene, account for 40% of hereditary dif- identification of new non-genotoxic anti-cancer molecules. fuse gastric cancer (HDGC) cases. The genes responsible foCrD tHh1e remaining 
C08 .6 cases of HDGC, as well as other familial gastric cancers (FGC) are current- Functional analysis of mismatch repair gene variants of uncertain ly unknown. We examined a large family with FGC and no mutations significance and their possible contribution to Lynch syndrome using a combination of genetic mapping with high-density SNP arrays and M. Kasela1, R. Tricarico2, J. Kantelinen1, G. Gorelli2, M. Genuardi2, M. Nyström1; 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Florence, Florence, Italy. exome seqMuAePn3ciKn6g) and identified that the cancer is associated with a germ- line coding variant (p.
P946 L) in mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 29 kinase 6 ( . A somatic second-hit (p.H506Y) was present in DNA ob-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Objective: Germline pathogenic mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) ly inspected variant segregation with disease and extended these findings to genes and especially in MSH2 and MLH1 predispose to Lynch syndrome unrelated patients (n=1500) and control subjects (n=1500) of Scandinavi- (LS). However, many of the found variants are of uncertain significance an descent. In two families missense mutations in NOVA2 and RP
E65  were (VUS), wMheitchho cdosm:plicates their risk assessment and calls for functional ana- found to segregate with parkinsonism and were not observed in control lyses before predictive gene testing and genetic counseling are offered to a subjects of Scandinavian origin. Both variants were subsequently genotyped family. 5 MLH1 and 4 MSH2 variants were identified in a set of in a multi-ethnic case-control series submitted by the GEOPD Consortium Italian families with suspected LS. The probands from these families were (n=5000). Interestingly, two additional patients with familial parkinsonism investigated by sequencing of the coding regions of the genes and by mi- were identified as RP
E65  carriers and no controls. Moreover, sequencing of crosatellite instability (MSI) and immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of entire coding region of RP
E65  and NOVA2, in multi-ethnic probands with MMR proteins on tumor samples. Functional significance of the 9 putative familial parkinsonism (n=100), led us to identify more missense mutations. LRSe spureltdsi:sposing VUS was analyzed in an in vitro MMR assay and expression/ O 
C0 u 9r .d 3ata provides evidence for two novel genes in the etiology of PD. stability of the mutated variants evaluated by Western blot analysis (WB). Genome-wide analysis of microRNA coding genes in bipolar disorder As a result, 2 MLH1 and 3 MSH2 variants showed no repair in the A. J. Forstner1,2, A. Hofmann1,2, T. W. Mühleisen1,2,3, M. Leber4, T. G. Schulze5, J. assay and were assessed as pathogenic, whereas 3 MLH1 and 1 MSH2 vari- Strohmaier6, F. Degenhardt1,2, J. Treutlein6, M. Mattheisen7,8, R. Breuer6, S. Meier6,9, S. ant repaired as the wild type protein and were assessed as proCfiocinecnltu. sLioownes-: Herms1,2,10, P. Hoffmann1,2,10, A. Lacour11, S. H. Witt6, A. Reif12, B. Müller-Myhsok13, S. red protein expression patterns in WB as well as in silico analysis together Lucae13, W. Maier14, M. Schwarz15, A. Pfennig16, M. Bauer16, M. Hautzinger17, S. Moebus18, with MSI and IHC data further supported their pathogenicity. P. M. Czerski19, J. Hauser19, J. Lissowska20, N. Szeszenia-Dabrowska21, P. Brennan22, J. D. McKay23, A. Wright24,25, P. B. Mitchell24,25, J. M. Fullerton26,27, P. R. Schofield26,27, N. G. The functional analysis together with clinical, tumor pathological and in si- Martin28, G. Babadjanova29, M. Alda30, P. Grof31,32, G. A. Rouleau33, G. Turecki34, C. Laprise35, lico analysis helped to confirm pathogenicity in 5 out of 9 putative Lynch F. Rivas36, F. Mayoral36, M. Kogevinas37, M. Grigoroiu-Serbanescu38, G. Schratt39, T. s Cy 0n 9d .1rome variants. Becker4,11, M. Rietschel6, S. Cichon1,3,10, M. M. Nöthen1,2; Functional analysis of SHANK2 mutations identified in schizophrenia 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine patients INM-1, Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany, 4Institute for Medical Biometry S. Peykov1, S. Berkel1, T. Böckers2, K. Weiss3, G. Schratt3, S. Cichon4, M. Rietschel5, M. Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department Noethen6, G. Rappold1; of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 1Institute of human genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of Anatomy and Cell 6Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Biology, Ulm, Germany, 3Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Marburg, Germany, University Medical Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 4University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, 7Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 8Institute for Germany, 6Institute of human genetics, Bonn, Germany. Genomics Mathematics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 9National Centre Register- SHANK2 Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 10Division of Medical Genetics and Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 11German Center Genetic variants in the SHANK2 gene have been previously reported in pati- for Neurodegenerative Diseases DZNE, Bonn, Germany, 12Department of Psychiatry ents with intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder. Our study fo- Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, cused on thSeH aAnNalKy2sis of variants associated with schizophrenia. We 13Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 14Department of Psychiatry, analyzed all exons and exon-intron boundaries of the ProSA
P1 A_AB208026 University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 15Psychiatric Center Nordbaden, Wiesloch, Germany, 16Department of Ps isoform of by Sanger sequencing in a cohort of 481 schizophrenia patients (177 trios and 304 singleton patients) and 374 unaffected indivi- duals. We detected ten missense variants that affect protein structure which Bipolar disorder is a severe and highly heritable disorder of mood with a are only present in the patient group. lifetime prevalence of about 1%. Molecular genetic studies have identified a We used mutation pIrne dsiilcictioon tools that are based on evolutionary protein number of susceptibility genes, with the relevant pathways, however, being conservation and chemical properties of amino acids to select the four most still largely unknown. promising variants. investigation is helpful to estimate a functional microRNAs are a class of small non-coding RNAs. Accumulating evidence relevance of mutations, but cannot substitute the functional analysis itself. suggests that microRNAs contribute to basic mechanisms underlying brain To analyze the functional impact of the four selected mutations, we conduc- development and plasticity thus suggesting their possible involvement in ted overexpression and knockdown-rescue experiments in primary hippo- the pathogenesis of several psychiatric disorders, including bipolar disor- campal neurSoHnsA NfrKo2m rat with a major focus on morphological changes of der. the neurons. Another major point of our study was to investigate the effect The aim of the present study was to systematically investigate whether com- of different isoforms and schizophrenia mutations on the actin mon variants at all known microRNA loci (miRBase release 13.0) contribute structures. We used COS-7 cells as a model system and live cell TIRF (Total to the development of bipolar disorder. We performed gene-based analyses Intienr nvaivl oReflection Fluorescence) microscopy for imaging of actin structu- for all microRNAs and +/- 20kb flanking sequences using VEGAS on the lar- res. Additionally, we also performed actin polymerization assays to measu- gest existing GWAS dataset of bipolar disorder comprising of 9,747 patients re F-actin/G-actin ratio in our mutants compared to SHANK2 wild and 14,278 controls (Mühleisen et al., Nature Commun 2014). In this data- type. With these functional tests we were able to show for the first time a set we combined our data obtained from four European countries, Canada, functional effect of SHANK2 variants which were identified in schizophrenia and Australia with the GWAS results of the multinational Psychiatric Geno- patients. 
C09 .2 mics Consortium. Exome sequencing of familial parkinsonism in Scandinavia Our analysis revealed that 98 of the 609 microRNAs showed nominally si- E. K. Gustavsson1, I. Guella1, C. Szu-Tu1, D. M. Evans1, C. Thompson1, H. E. Sherman1, H. gnificant p values, indicating that bipolar disorder-associated microRNAs Han1, C. Vilarino-Guell1, M. K. Lin1, F. T. Pishotta1, M. Toft2, K. Wirdefeldt3, A. C. Belin4, M. S. are enriched within the known microRNA loci (p=0.006). After correction Petersen5, J. Aasly6, M. J. Farrer1, GEOPD Consortium; 1Djavad Mowafhagian Centre for Brain Heath, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, for multiple testing, nine microRNAs (let-7g, miR-135a, miR-499, miR-581, BC, Canada, 22Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, miR-611, miR-640, miR-644, miR-708, miR-1908) showed a significant as- 3Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Department of Clinical sociation with bipolar disorder. These included microRNAs known to be in- Neuroscience, Karolinska Instiutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Neuroscience, volved in neural development and synaptic plasticity. Karolinska Instiutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Department of Occupational Medicine and Results from the investigation of the affected target genes and underlying Public Health, The Faroese Hospital System, Torshavn, Faroe Islands, 6Department of regulatory networks supports these disease mechanisms and also suggests Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. new mechanisms. 
C09 .4 Imbalance between excitation and inhibition in Neurons derived from Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease, and MEC
P2 , CDK
L5  and FOXG1 iPSCs the second most prevalent neurologic disorder of the elderly. Although I. Meloni1, T. Patriarchi1,2, S. Amabile1, A. Bartolini3, D. Yasui4, E. Calcagno5, C. Lo Rizzo1, F. Ariani1, F. Mari1,3, M. Mencarelli3,1, J. W. Hell2, A. Renieri1,3; ~14% of patients have a family history of parkinsonism in only a small pro- 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacology, portion of such pedigrees have pathogenic mutations been identified to un- School of Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, United States, 3Genetica derlie disease susceptibility. The majority of causal and disease-modifying Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria senese, Siena, Italy, 4Department of Medical variants remain unknown. We report longitudinal clinical, genealogic and Microbiology and Immunology, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, United States, comparative sequence (exome) analyses of affected multi-generational fa- 5Department of Neuroscience University of Torino, Torino, Italy. milies. Genome alignment, variant annotation and comparative analyses MEC
P2  CDK
L5  FOXG1 were used to identify shared coding mutations. Initially we have examined CDK
L5  co 3n 0cordant/discordant variant sharing within mEuSltHi-iGnc i2d0en1t 4p |e dMigIrLeeAs N, RITeAtt LsyYn d| rWomWe iWs d.EueS tHo Gde. OnoRvGo mutations in , or ge- (n=10), using Mendelian models and maximum parsimony. We subsequent- nes. MeC
P2  and FoxG1 are transcriptional regulators; encodes for aABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index kinase protein involved in multiple cellular processes. In spite of their invol- their expression in Central Nervous System and/or neuronal function, pre- vement in the same disease, a functional interaction between the three ge- vious reported involvement in a known genetic disease and the interaction nes has not been proven and disease mechanism remain elusive. It has been to genes/protein responsible for a resembling phenotype. By this approach suggested that an excitation/inhibition imbalance might play an important we have validated by Sanger sequencing 57 variants corresponding to 38 role in Rett pathogenesis. We have used a mouse model and a human model genes. In 8 cases parents analysis has proved the de novo origin of the SNVs, based on patients-specific iPSCs-derived neurons to test the hypothesis that which occur in GABA receptors, Sodium and Potassium neuronal channels, in maturing neurons an initial excess of excitatory synapses might result in synaptic vesicular releasing factor and a transcriptional regulator. Our data excitotoxicity finally leadingV GtoL UloTs1s of excitatory synapses. GWAeD 1have esta- confirm exome targeted NGS as a promising tool to disclose novel pathoge- blished 3 iPSC lines for each gene. Quantitative RT-PCR on iPSCs-deVrGivAeTd n Ce 1t 0ic mechanisms leading to RTT. .1 neurons demonstrated that is over-expressed while is down- PL
S3  mutations in X-linked osteoporosis and fractures: unraveling a regulated. SimilarVlGy,L dUoTw1nG-rluegAu1laGtilounA 2ofN aRn1other inhibitory marker ( ) new bone regulatory pathway is observed in the mouse model. However, in this model a reduction of exci- D. Micha1, F. S. van Dijk1, M. C. Zillikens2, M. Riessland3, C. L. M. Marcelis4, C. E. de tatory synapses ( , , , ) is observed opposite tGoR iIPD
S1 Cs- Die-Smulders5, J. Milbradt3, A. A. Franken6, A. J. Harsevoort7, K. D. Lichtenbelt8, M. derived neurons. E. Rubio-Gozalbo9, H. E. Pruijs10, R. Zwertbroek11, Y. Moutaouakil1, J. Egthuijsen1, M. Moreover, RNA and protein analysis shows an over-expression of , a Hammerschmidt12, R. Bijman1, C. Semeins13, A. D. Bakker13, V. Everts13, J. Klein-Nulend13, member of the delta family of ionotropic glutamate receptors which indu- N. Campos-Obando2, A. Hofman14, G. J. te Meerman15, A. J. M. H. Verkerk2, A. J. M. H. Uitterlinden2, A. Maugeri1, E. A. Sistermans1, Q. Waisfisz1, H. Meijers-Heijboer1, B. Wirth3, ces preferentially inhibitory presynaptic difMferEeCnPt2iation of cortical neurons. M. E. H. Simon16, G. Pals1; Our data provide evidenCcDeK iLn5 favourF OofX Gex1citotoxicity as an important con- 1VU medical center, dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, tributing factor in Rett pathogenesis due to mutations and suggest a Dept. of Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3University of Colgne, Inst. of similar mechanism for - and -mutated patients. These results Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 4Radboud University, Dept. of Genetics, Nijmegen, confirm the presence of an imbalance between excitation and inhibition Netherlands, 5Maastricht University Medical Center, Dept. Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, thus providing novel insights into Rett pathophysiology. Netherlands, 6Isala Clinics, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Zwolle, Netherlands, 7Isala 
C09 .5 Clinics, Dept. of Orthopedics, Zwolle, Netherlands, 8UMC Utrecht, Dept. of Medical Left/right asymmetry genes are associated with handedness and Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Maastricht University Medical Center, Dept. appear relevant for neurodevelopmental disorders Pediatrics, Maastricht, Netherlands, 10UMC Utrecht, Dept. of Pediatric orthopedics, S. Paracchini1, W. Brandler2, A. Morris2, D. Evans3, S. Ring3, J. Stein2, A. Monaco2, J. Utrecht, Netherlands, 11Westfries Gasthuis, Hoorn, Netherlands, 12University of Colgne, Talcott4, S. Fisher5, C. Webber2; Dept. of Developmental Biology, Cologne, Germany, 13ACTA, Dept. of Oral Cell Biology, 1University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 2University of Oxford, Oxford, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 14Erasmus MC, Dept. of Epidemiology, Rotterdam, Netherlands, United Kingdom, 3University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Aston University, 15UMC Groningen, Dept. of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 16Erasmus MC, Dept. of Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Max Planck Institute, Nijmegen, United Kingdom. Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Humans display structural and functional asymmetries in brain organiza- Osteoporosis with its consequences, i.e., fractures, is major health problem tion, strikingly manifested through language and handedness. While we in ageing societies. As osteoporosis is a prevalent disorder, understanding understand the biology of body asymmetries, the molecular basis of brain its etiological factors is very important. We recently identified novel pa- laterality is still unknown. We report a genome-wide association study thogenic variants in PL
S3  (encoding Plastin 3 (PL
S3 ), a filamentous-actin (GWAS) for aP q uantitative measure of handPeCdSnKe6ss and dexterity (pegboard) bundling protein) as a cause of X-linked osteoporosis and osteoporotic frac- in individuals with dyslex-i9a (n = 728). The most strongly associated variant, tures in five Dutch families (van Dijk et al. NEJM 2013:369(16):1529-36). rs7182874 ( = 8.68×10 ), is located in , a gene known to activate These loss-of-function variants cause decreased bone mineral density and NODAL, which is required to regulate left/right body axis determination. A increased risk of fracture in hemizygous young men whereas the clinical novel approach for GWAS pathway analysis, based on gene-set enrichment picture in heterozygous women ranged from asymptomatic to early-onset strategies, showed that left/right asymmetry pathways are associated with osteoporosis. It was highly unexpected that mutations in this gene would handedness in both the dyslexia and a general population (n = 2666) co- cause osteoporosis and fractures as it had never been described as a candi- horts. In particular, genes involved in corpus callosum development were date gene for osteoporosis nor was it known to play a role in bone forma- enriched among the GWAS top hits. Furthermore, different markers at the tion. However, results of in vivo analyses in zebrafish strongly supported PCSK6 locus were found to be associated with a measure of handiness in a a role for PL
S3  as a bone regulatory protein. Furthermore, a rare variant completely independent study. The dyslexia-specific marker-trait associati- (rs140121121) in PL
S3  was found to be associated with a twofold increased on could be the result of an epistatic effect. Recent findings show that dysle- fracture risk in elderly female carriers in the normal population indicating xia candidate genes play a role in ciliogenesis, an important developmental genetic variation in PL
S3  as a novel etiological factor involved in common, process at the basis of left/right structural asymmetries determination. We multifactorial osteoporosis. However, the exact mechanism by which PL
S3  propose that handedness is a polygenic trait controlled in part by the mole- mutations cause osteoporosis and fractures is unknown and currently sub- cular mechanisms which establish left/right body asymmetry early in deve- ject of further investigations. Unravelling this new bone regulatory pathway lopment, which in turn influence brain midline development and might be is of great importance for understanding the aetiology of osteoporosis, in- implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders. We are now investigating the creasing also the possibilities for prevention, diagnosis and treatment ai- molecular mechanisms underlying this association using neuronal stem cell med at bone formation. 
C10 .2 and zebrafish models. 
C09 .6 Mutations in plastin 3 cause osteoporosis with fractures. Exome sequencing to disclose potential new pathogenetic variants in Overexpression of PL
S3  and other F-actin bundling proteins influence Rett patients without mutations in the known Rett genes skeletal development in zebrafish and mice M. Marchi1, F. Cogliati1, D. Gentilini1, I. Cracco1, D. Cittaro2, M. Pintaudi3, A. Vignoli4, L. J. Milbradt1, M. Dimitra2, M. Riessland1, N. Hamann3, F. van Dijk2, M. Peters1, N. Mendoza Giordano5, E. Veneselli3, B. Ben Zeev6, L. Larizza1,7, S. Russo1; Ferreira1, M. S. Hosseini Barkooie1, E. Janzen1, M. C. Zillikens4, M. Hammerschmidt5, A. 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2San Raffaele Hospital-DIBIT, Milano, Italy, Niehoff3,6, G. Pals2, B. Wirth1; 3Gaslini Hospital- NPI, Genova, Italy, 4San Paolo Hospital- Epilepsia Center, Milano, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular Medicine Italy, 5Spedali Civili Hospital NPI, Milano, Italy, 6Sheba Medical Center- x, Tel Aviv, Israel, Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Connective Tissue Disorders; Department of 7Health Sciences Department, University of Milan, Milano, Italy. Clinical Genetics; VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Institute of Biomechanics and Orthopaedics; German Sport University Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Internal Medicine; Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Mutations in the X-linked gene MEC
P2  are the main cause of classical Rett 5Institute for Developmental Biology and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Cologne Center for Musculoskeletal Biomechanics, Medical Faculty, syndrome (RTT), while 28% of patients with early onset seizures and a University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. small percentage of those with congenital variant forms carry mutations in CDK
L5  and FoxG1 genes, respectively. About 5% of classical and 40-50% of atypical RTT patient remain without a molecular diagnosis. Aiming at dis- Osteoporosis affects a large proportion of the human population, particu- closing novel candidate genes , a cohort of 31 Rett patients with both classic larly women after menopause. Recently we reported that pathogenic loss- and atypical phenotype and unascertained genetic defect was processed .on of-function variants in the plastin 3 (PL
S3 ) gene, localized on Xq23 are cau- a HiScan Illumina platform by True Seq Exome Enrichment. As most mu- sative of familial osteoporosis with fractures. Furthermore, a rare variant in tations in the known RTT causative genes discovered up to day have a de PL
S3  (rs140121121) associated with a 2-fold increased risk for fractures novo origin, we adopted this model and filtered heterozygous variants, prio- among elderly heterozygous women in two large cohorts from Rotterdam ritizing those predicted to introduce a frameshift or stop codon or splice or intE erS eH stiG 2 g0 en1 e4 t| M I iL nA toN ac, I oT uA ntL Y |( VWanW DWijk. eEtS aHl, GNE.OJMR, OGct 2013). PL
S3  is an ubiquitously expressed a3ct1in- missense changes. Prioritization of the ng s o ok cABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index bundling protein that largely influences the dynamics of the actin cytoske- ted to interfere with enzymatic cleavage of the EDN1 pro-protein. The other leton. We demonstrated that PL
S3  mRNA co-injection dose dependently two cases involved patients with dominantly-inherited isolated QME; they rescued malformations of the craniofacial muscular-skeletal system, body harboured heterozygous EDN1 mutations - a premature stop in one case axis and tail phenotype induced upon pls3 morpholino injection in 3 and 5 and a missense mutation affecting a highly conserved residue of the mature dpf col1a1::eGFP transgenic zebrafish. Remarkably, affected patients with EDN1 peptide in the other. The nature of the mutations and the different PL
S3  loss of function mutations only presented a bone phenotype. The ab- modes of inheritance suggest that heterozygous loss of function mutations sence of systemic manifestations has led us to hypothesise that other F-ac- in EDN1 cause isolated QME and that homozygous hypomorphic mutations tin bundling proteins may compensate for the loss of PL
S3  in other tissues. cause ACS. These are the first reported mutations of EDN1 in humans and Interestingly, α-Actinin (ACTN) was found to be overexpressed in patients’ suggest that ACS and QME are a phenotypic continuum resulting from im- fibroblasts, possibly preventing more severe disease manifestations. Indeed paired EDN1-EDNRA signaling. 
C10 .5 co-injection of ACTN1 or ACTN4 mRNA, rescued the muscular-skeletal phe- Defects in TAPT1, involved in Axial Skeletal Patterning, Cause a notype induced by pls3 knock-down in fish. Moreover, analysis of femora by Complex Lethal Recessive Disorder of Skeletal Development micro computed tomography in 3-month-old transgenic mice overexpres- S. Symoens1, A. Barnes2, F. Malfait1, K. Vleminckx1, W. Steyaert1, D. Syx1, E. Parthoens3, M. sing human PL
S3  showed significant differences in cortical and trabecular Biervliet4, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach5, J. De Backer1, H. Bächinger6,7, A. De Paepe1, J. C. Marini2, bone structures when compared to control mice. These results strongly in- P. J. Coucke1; dicate that PL
S3  is a novel etiologic factor for monogenic and mutifactorial 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Bone osteoporosis and PL
S3  and other F-actin bundling proteins are important and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4Center for Medical regulators of bone development and maintenance. 
C10 .3 Genetics, Brussels University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium, 5Institut für Humangenetik XYLT1 mutations in Desbuquois dysplasia type 2 Lübeck, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany, 6Research C. Huber1, C. Bui2, Y. Alanay3, B. Tuysuz4, C. Bole-Feysot5, J. Leroy6, G. Mortier7, P. Department, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Portland, OR, United States, 7Department of Nitschke8, V. Cormier-Daire2; Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 1INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes – Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, United States. PARIS, France, 2INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes – Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 3Acibadem University, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetics Unit, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa TAPT1 encodes Transmembrane Anterior Posterior Transformation-1 pro- Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Plateforme de Génomique, Fondation IMAGINE, Paris, France, 6Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood tein. TAPT1 is evolutionarily conserved, with similar orthologs from yeast Cité University, Imagine Institute, Greenwood, SC, United States, 7Department of Medical to vertebrae. ENU mutagenesis of TAPT1 resulted in embryonic lethality of Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, murine homozygotes, with posterior to anterior transformations of thoracic 8Plateforme de Bioinformatique, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. and lumbar vertebrae. The mechanism by which this ubiquitously expressed protein causes a specific patterning defect is unknown. We combined homo- zygosity mapping with exome sequencing for a Moroccan family with three Desbuquois dysplasia (DBQD) is a severe condition characterized by short lethal fetuses affected with fractures of ribs and long bones, underminera- stature, joint laxity and advanced carpal ossification. Based on the presence lized skull and axial skeleton, hydramnios with ascites and dilated ventri- of additional hand anomalies, we have previously distinguished DBQD type cles. We identified a homozygous c.1108-1G>C mutation in TAPT1, causing 1 and identified CANT1 (calcium activated nucleotidase 1) mutations as re- in-frame skipping of exon 10. A second TAPT1 mutation was identified by sponsible for DBQD type 1. We report here the identification of 5 distinct direct sequencing in a Syrian pedigree with three lethal fetuses with fractu- homozygous xylosyltransferase 1 (XYLT1) mutations in 7 DBQD type 2 cases res and multiple congenital anomalies of brain, face, heart and lungs. The- from 6 consanguineous families. Among the 5 mutations, 4 were expected se probands were homozygous for a missense mutation in TAPT1 exon 9 to result in loss of function and a drastic reduction of XYLT1 cDNA level was (c.1058A>T, p.Asp353Val). In both families, a diagnosis of recessive osteoge- demonstrated in 2 cultured individual fibroblasts. No significant clinical or nesis imperfecta (OI) was initially proposed. Both variants affect the second radiological differences could be found with the remaining 14 DBQD type luminal loop of TAPT1. Proband fibroblast type I collagen has broadened 2 cases with unknown molecular bases. However, long term follow up of electrophoretic mobility of alpha-chains in the cell layer, suggesting abnor- XYLT1 mutated individuals emphasizes the severity of the short stature (< mal post-translational modification of collagen and a relationship with OI -6 SD) contrasting with obesity, lower limb and foot deformities requiring forms. Immunocytochemical staining of dermal fibroblasts revealed co- often repeated surgeries and intellectual disability (5/7). Interestingly, re- localization of TAPT1 with the centrosomal protein gamma-tubulin at the spiratory distress was present at birth in 4/7 cases and spontaneously re- basal body of the cilium, suggesting TAPT1 might have a ciliary function. The solved in the first years of life but thorax narrowness persisted in the eldest novel autosomal recessive skeletal defects reported here underscore the im- children. Since xylosyltransferase 1 (XT-I) catalyzes the very first step in portance of the cilium in embryonic bone formation. Functional studies with proteoglycan (PG) biosynthesis, we further demonstrated in the two indivi- siRNA, zebrafish and expression studies are ongoing. 
C10 .6 dual fibroblasts a significant reduction of cellular PG content. Our findings ZI
C1  mutations cause coronal craniosynostosis and learning disability of XYLT1 mutations in DBQD type 2 further support a common physiological S. R. F. Twigg1, J. A. C. Goos2, I. Westbury1, S. J. McGowan1, M. van Dooren2, A. M. W. basis involving PG synthesis in the multiple dislocation group of disorders. van den Ouweland3, P. J. van der Spek4, .. 500 Whole-Genome Sequences (WG
S500 ) This observation sheds light on the key role of the XT-I during the ossifica- Consortium5, S. A. Wall6, I. M. J. Mathijssen2, E. Pauws7, A. O. M. Wilkie1,6; tion process. 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department 
C10 .4 of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Mutations in endothelin 1 cause auriculocondylar syndrome and 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department isolated question mark ears of Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Wellcome Trust Centre for C. T. Gordon1, F. Petit2, P. Kroisel3, L. Jakobsen4, R. Zechi-Ceide5, M. Oufadem1, C. Bole- Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Craniofacial Unit, Oxford Feysot1, P. Nitschke1, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1, M. Holder-Espinasse1, J. Amiel1; University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7UCL Institute of Child Health, 1Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U-1163, Paris, France, 2Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, London, United Kingdom. Centre Hospitalier Regional Universitaire de Lille, Lille, France, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 5Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of the cranial sutures, is a serious Sao Paulo, Bauru, Brazil. disorder affecting approximately 1 in 2,500 children. Presentation and un- derlying cause is very heterogeneous and approximately 25% of cases have a single genetic basis. Using trio-based whole genome sequencing we identi- Auriculocondylar syndrome (ACS) is a rare craniofacial disorder involving fied a de novo nonsense mutation (p.
S388 *) of ZI
C1  in a patient with bicoro- micrognathia, condyle hypoplasia and question mark ear (QME). QME, which nal synostosis and severe learning disability. Two further de novo nonsense involves a defect in the fusion of the lobe and helix, can occur as an isolated mutations were identified by resequencing in our craniosynostosis panel; anomaly. Recently, mutations in PLCB4 and GNAI3 were identified in ACS. both cases had similar phenotypes to the original patient. A fourth ZI
C1  Both genes are predicted to function in the endothelin 1 (EDN1)-endothelin mutation encoding a missense substitution, was identified in a 3-generation receptor type A (EDNRA) signalling pathway during the development of the family with bicoronal synostosis and normal to mildly impaired intellectual pharyngeal arches. Following exclusion of PLCB4 and GNAI3 in a series of function. ACS and QME patients, we performed exome sequencing in three unsolved ZI
C1  encodes a transcription factor which, when heterozygously deleted families, and identified a mutation in EDN1 in each case. A fourth EDN1 mu- with its contiguous neighbour ZI
C4 , is associated with Dandy-Walker mal- tation was identified by direct sequencing. Two of the four cases involved formation rather than craniosynostosis. This suggests that the ZI
C1  mutati- patients affected with ACS, born to consanguineous, healthy parents; these 32 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, oITnAs iLdYen |t iWfiedW inW ou.Er SstHudGy .mOigRhGt act through a gain-of-function mechanism patients harboured homozygous missense mutations in EDN1, each predic-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index to cause suture fusion. Interestingly, the 4 identified ZI
C1  variants all cluster <0.001) for AN vs AUT (p=0.0009), MDD (p=0.009), and SCZ (0.0008), and within 42 nucleotides of the terminal exon; analysis of fibroblast RNA from at Pt <0.01 for BPD (p=0.0004). We demonstrated for the first time a shared the first case showed that the mutant transcript escapes nonsense-medi- genetic aetiology between AN and other PsyD using genome-wide data. 
C11 .3 ated decay. To gain further insight into the molecular mechanism we are Efficient estimation of pairwise genetic correlations between characterising the in vitro activity of the mutant proteins. Furthermore we hundreds of quantitative traits from population samples of thousands show that in mouse embryos Zic1 is expressed in the supraorbital region at of individuals 
E11 .5-
E12 .5, consistent with a role for ZI
C1  at a very early stage of cranial M. Pirinen1, C. Benner1, T. Lehtimäki2, J. G. Eriksson3,4,5, O. T. Raitakari6,7, M. Järvelin8,9,10, suture biogenesis. Overall these findings confirm ZI
C1  as a new disease gene V. Salomaa3, S. Ripatti1,11,12; in coronal craniosynostosis, particularly when accompanied by unexplained 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Clinical learning disability. Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, University of Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere, 
C11 .1 Finland, 3Department of Chronic Disease Prevention, National Institute for Health and Polygenic risk for ADHD is associated with impaired educational Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care, achievement and lower IQ in the general population University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Unit of General Practice, Helsinki University E. Stergiakouli1, J. Martin2, M. L. Hamshere2, A. Thapar2, D. M. Evans1, N. J. Timpson1, G. Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Davey Smith1; Medicine, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 7Research 1MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit at the University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Turku and 2MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University School of Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Turku, Finland, 8Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, MRC Health Protection Introduction Agency (HPA) Centre for Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 9Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 10Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 11Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 12Hjelt Institute, University of High levels of ADHD symptoms during childhood carry risk of worse aca- Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. demic performance and can impact on employment and earnings in adult- hood. Polygenic score analysis was uinse pdr etsos show that common risk alleles for clinical ADHD contribute to the risk of having higher ADHD symptoms in Several modern technologies, such as nuclear magnetic resonance and mass the general population (Martin et al. ). We have used polygenic score spectrometry platforms in metabolomics, produce high-dimensional phe- aMneatlhysoids sto investigate the contribution of common risk variants for clinical notype data on individuals. A first step towards utilising high-dimensional ADHD on educational performance and IQ in the general population. phenotypes in genetic studies is to understand how their genetic compon- ents are related. Academic performance was assessed using results from Key Stage 3 natio- Recent algorithmic advances in multivariate linear mixed models have nal tests and externally marked GCSE examinations in 6,385 children from enabled variance component estimation for pairs of traits using population the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). Polygenic samples of individuals and genome-wide panels of SNPs. However, current rRiesksu slctosres were calculated for ALSPAC children and their mothers based on methods have not been tailored for situations where hundreds of traits are the results of an ADHD GWAS (Stergiakouli et al. 2012). available on the same set of individuals. For such settings, we introduce an algorithm that efficiently decomposes pairwise phenotypic correlations into ADHD polygenic scores on the children were associated with worst educa- genetic and environmental components. tional outcomes as represented by both time points and also with lower IQ We illustrate our approach with an application to 105 pairs of metabolic scores at age 15.5 (see Table). Moreover, ADHD polygenic scores on the mo- and anthropometric traits measured on up to 14,000 Finnish individuals. tDhiesrcsu wsseiroen associated with lower IQ in the mothers and worst educational For example, we estimate that the observed phenotypic correlation (-0.41) outcomes in the children (see Table). between triglyserides (TG) and HDL cholesterol decomposes into an addi- tive genetic correlation (-0.59, s.e. 0.06) and an environmental correlation Our results suggest that the same genetic variants that are relevant for an (-0.36 s.e. 0.02). ADHD diagnosis are also implicated in impaired academic performance in We discuss the interpretation of genetic correlations as correlations bet- the general population and lower IQ score in both children and adults. ween locus-wise genetic effects and characterise settings where prior in- Outcome N Beta coefficient (95% CIs) p value-6 Score achieved at key stage 3 6385 -1.41(-2-(-0.81)) 4.2x10-4 formation about genetic correlation increases statistical power to identify Capped GCSE points 6298 -3.84(-5.96-(-1.72)) 4x10-4 pleiotropic loci, i.e. loci that contribute to multiple traits. IQ at age 15.5 3858 -0.77(-1.19-(-0.36)) 2.4x10 
C11 .4 Mothers IQ 2313 -0.64(-1.2-(-0.08) 0.025 The influence of genotype and phenotype data quality control on SNP 
C11 .2 based heritability estimates within and across studies. Polygenic risk score analysis shows shared genetic aetiology between J. Hottenga1, I. Fedko1, G. Willemsen1, E. J. C. N. de Geus1, B. Penninx2, D. I. Boomsma1; AN and five other psychiatric disorders 1VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2EMGO Institute for Health and L. M. Huckins1, K. S. Mitchell2, L. Thornton3, WTCC
C3  Consortium, GCAN Consortium, D. Care Research, VU University Medical Center/GGZ inGeest, Amsterdam, Netherlands. A. Collier4, P. F. Sullivan5, C. M. Bulik5, E. Zeggini1; 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Department of Psychiatry, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States, 3Dept. of Psychiatry, University of North Currently, many GWA studies are accompanied by additional analyses to Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 4Institute of Psychiatry, King‘s get an estimate of the amount of heritability explained by the GWAS SNPs. College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States. Such analyses in unrelated individuals critically depend on the construction of a Genetic Relatedness Matrix (GRM) as implemented for example in the software package GCTA [1]. What sometimes seems a bit surprising is the Anorexia nervosa (AN) is marked by extremely low body weight and in- large variation in the obtained point estimates between studies. Although tense fear of gaining weight. We evaluated shared genetic determinants of heritability is a population specific characteristic, these GRM-based herita- AN and commonly comorbid psychiatric disorders (PsyD) by testing whe- bilities seem more variable than e.g. heritabilities based on twin data. Using ther polygenic risk scores derived from genome-wide data of other PsyD genotype data and a wide range of phenotypes from two large population can predict AN status. We obtained allele risk scores for major depressive based studies in the Netherlands (NESDA: Netherlands Study of Depression disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BPD), autism (AUT), attention deficit hy- and Anxiety and NTR: Netherlands Twin Register), in addition to a set of si- peractivity disorder (ADHD) and schizophrenia (SCZ) from the Psychiatric mulated phenotypes, we examined the effects SNP selection based on GWAS Genomics Consortium (PGC). We divided each of these sets into 10 Pt signi- QC, relational filters and phenotype transformations. For continuous traits, ficance level thresholds. The test set comprised AN cases and controls from the results show that the GRM method is sensitive to SNP selection criteria, a published Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 3 AN GWAS study. For with - or without imputations, as well as deviation of phenotypes from the every test set sample, we produced a polygenic risk score as a weighted sum assumed normal distribution. For dichotomous traits, additional issues in- of risk allele scores. Logistic regression was used to assess whether each cluding non-random missingness of genotypes, play a role. Thus, a substan- PsyD polygenic score predicted AN case-control status. We computed pseu- tial part of the variation in GCTA heritability estimates may depend on data do R^2 values, and compared these to the values obtained when randomly quality control and the selection of study individuals prior to the analysis. permuting case-control status to measure the proportion of variance in AN 1. GCTA: a tool for genome-wide complex trait analysis. Yang J, Lee SH, God- explained by each PsyD risk score. Our pseudo R^2 values were ~0.5-1%, dard ME, Visscher PM. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):76-82. PMID: comparable to pseudo R^2 values in a recent PGC polygenic score analysis 21167468. of five PsyD. We computed an empirical p-value for every significance thres- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 33 hold and found significant pseudo R^2 values at the lowest Pt threshold (PtABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C11 .5 Co-regulated transcripts associated to cooperating eSNPs define bi- fan motifs in human gene networks We developed a diagnostic NGS pipeline to identify mutations in 170 ge- A. Kreimer1, I. Pe‘er2; netically and clinically unselected RD patients. Underrepresented regions 1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY, United were examined by Sanger sequencing. We found mutations in 50 to 60% States, 2Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, United of retinitis pigmentosa and approximately 80% of syndromic (Bardet-Biedl States. or Usher syndrome) cases. Seventy-one novel mutations in 40 genes were identified, among which the genes USH2A, EYS, ABCA4, and RHO were more frequently affected by pathogenic sequence alterations. Occasionally, cases Associations between the level of single transcripts and single corresponding carried mutations in more than one RD-associated gene suggesting modifier genetic variants, eSNPs, have been extensively studied and reported. Howe- effects of the additional variants. We further found possible dominant de- ver, most expression traits are complex, involving the cooperative action of novo mutations in sporadic RD cases imposing difficulties for counseling of multiple SNPs at different loci affecting multiple genes. Finding these coope- patients and families. Exome sequencing showed similar detection rates in rating eSNPs by exhaustive search has proven to be statistically challenging. 11 additional research-based RD cases confirming that both approaches are In this paper we utilized availability of sequencing data with transcriptional efficient to identify mutations in known disease genes. In contrast to panel profiles in the same cohort to identify two kinds of usual suspects: eSNPs sequencing, exome analysis provided the bases to search for gene candida- that alter coding sequence or eSNPs within the span of transcription factors tes for RD. (TFs). We devised a computational framework for examining pairs of such In conclusion, NGS-based mutation analyses provide reliable and cost-effici- cooperating source eSNPs that are both associated with the same pair of ent approaches to investigate genetically heterogeneous diseases like RD. 
C12 .2 target transcripts. We characterize such quartets through their genomic, to- New Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) genes/mutations identified by pological and functional properties. We establish that this regulatory struc- High throughput sequencing and genotyping in the Italian and Qatari ture of cooperating quartets is frequent in real data, but is rarely observed in populations. permutations. eSNP sources are mostly located on different chromosomes G. Girotto1, D. Vozzi2, E. Rubinato2, A. Morgan1, K. Abdulhadi3, D. Vuckovic1, M. Di stazio1, and away from their targets. In the majority of quartets, SNPs affect the ex- A. d’Eustacchio2, M. La Bianca1, R. Badii4, P. Gasparini5; pression of the two gene targets independently of one another, suggesting a 1Dep. Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Inst. Maternal and Child mutually independent rather than a directionally dependent effect. Further- Health-IRCCS ‘‘Burlo Garofolo’’, Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Audiology and Balance Unit, HMC, more, the directions in which the minor allele count of the SNP affects gene Doha, Qatar, Doha, Qatar, 4Molecular Genetics Laboratory, HMC, Doha, Qatar, Doha, expression within quartets are consistent. Same-effect eSNPs are observed Qatar, 5Dep. Medical Sciences, University of Trieste,Inst. Maternal and Child Health- more often than expected by chance. Cooperating quartets reported here in IRCCS ‘‘Burlo Garofolo’’, Trieste, Trieste, Italy. a human system might correspond to bi-fans, a known four nodes network motif previously described in model organisms. Overall, our analysis offers insights concerning the fine motif structure of human regulatory networks. To overcome the remarkable genetic heterogeneity of HHL an extremely po- 
C11 .6 werful 3 steps “gene-identification strategy” was designed. STE
P1  consists Inferring the human embryonic selection via genomic data in a screening of 96 HHL genes by targeted re-sequencing (TS) on Ion Tor- K. Popadin, P. Makrythanasis, S. E. Antonarakis; rent PGM™ (3487 amplicons). Positive cases contribute to define an accurate Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva, Switzerland. molecular epidemiology picture while negative ones undergo a combination of STE
P2  (linkage studies) and STE
P3  (whole exome sequencing) or directly STE
P3  (depending on pedigree size). Selection constantly filters out genomes with an excess of slightly dele- Illumina protocols were used for STE
P2  and STE
P3 . Sequencing variants terious variants (SDVs) maintaining the fitness of human population. In were annotated/filtered according to standard pipelines. This strategy was case of consanguineous marriages high level of homozygosity, observed in applied to a first series of 28 Italian and Qatari families. STE
P1  characte- offspring, uncovers the damaging effect of many SDVs variants making the rized 43% of all families and led to the identification of several novel al- purifying selection more effective. We hypothesize that healthy offspring leles in known HHL genes (Table1a). STE
P2  identified four new HHL loci of consanguineous marriages carry a deficit of these variants as a result of (Table1b), while STE
P3  had already led to the discovery of 2 new genes the embryonic selection acting against the high genetic load. Using 50 geno- (BD
P1  and TBLY1) and it is in progress in the remaining 14 families. Briefly, typed pedigrees with consanguineous marriages we revealed a signature of p*2625Gluext*11 mutation resulting in an elongation of 11 residues of the purifying selection. First, by means of modified transmission disequilibrium BD
P1  protein was identified in a recessive family. Bdp1 inner ear expreTsBsLioYn1 test we observed a genome-wide deficit of rare derived alleles, transmitted was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. In a pedigree showing a Y-linked from consanguineous parents to their healthy offspring. Because rare deri- pattern, the predicted pathogenic D69V mutation was identified in ved alleles are enriched in deleterious variants we assume, that the deficit gene. Functional studies are in progress to confirm its pathogenicity. This of rare derived alleles could be a signature of embryonic purifying selection, sTtarbatleeg 1y proved to be very successful by explaining several unsolved cases. which filters out low-fitted genomes with high load of mutations. Second, Updated data will be presented and discussed we expect that haplotypes, which are rarely seen in long Runs Of Homozy- Amino acid a Origin inheritance cDNA change Gene gosity (ROH) harbor loci with high load of recessive mutations. Comparing change the density of slightly deleterious variants inside and outside ROH we pre- 
P2 RX2 sent an approach and the first results describing transmission of haplotypes 2nd (Faletra et identical by descent in consanguineous marriages. Further investigation of mutation al. 2013) Italy dominant c.1057G>C pG353R the genetic load of long ROH and the pattern of their inheritance can help to described TECTA allocate mutations causing recessive autosomal diseases. worldwide 
C12 .1 Novel Italy dominant c.775G>C p.G259R TMPRS
S3  Next generation sequencing as a reliable and efficient technique to mutation Novel p.T340R/p. identify mutations in patients with retinal dystrophies Italy recessive c.1019C>G/c.1291C>T LOXHD1 mutation 
P431 S J. Neidhardt1, N. Glöckle2, A. Tiwari1, T. Besnard1, J. Lemke3, S. Kohl4, S. Biskup2, W. Novel Berger1,5,6, B. Wissinger4; Qatar recessive c.1588G>T p.
E530 X mutation MYO15A 1University of Zürich, Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, Schlieren, Switzerland, c.453_455delCGAinsT 2CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 3University Childrens Hospital, Bern, Switzerland, Novel Qatar recessive GGACGCCTGGTCGGG p.
E152 GfsX81 4University of Tübingen, Centre for Ophthalmology, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, mutation CAGTGG POU3F4 Tübingen, Germany, 5University of Zurich, Zurich Center for Integrative Human Novel Italy recessive c.G989A p.R330K TM
C1  Physiology (ZIHP), Zurich, Switzerland, 6University and ETH Zurich, Neuroscience Center mutation Zurich (ZNZ), Zurich, Switzerland. Novel Qatar recessive c.G1334A p.R445H TM
C1  mutation Novel Qatar recessive c.T1808A p.
L603 H TRIOBP mutation Retinal dystrophies (RD) constitute a group of blinding diseases that show Novel Qatar recessive c.G634A p.G212S OTOF clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity. More than 20 different clinical mutation Novel diagnoses with over 200 genes have been associated with RD. This enor- Qatar recessive c.
C2170 T p.R724C LOXHD1 mutation mous heterogeneity is an obstacle to identify disease-associated mutations Novel p.M613V/p. Qatar recessive c.A1837G/c.T2A WF
S1  for any diagnostic- and research-based approach. mutation M1K Next generation sequencing represents the most efficient technology to bNovel M Qar ak tae rrs Ch rr eo cm eso ss ivo eme LO c.CD 1 S 2C 9O 4R GE p.
L432 V mutation identify mutations in RD patients and families. In this study, we performed both, panel-based sequencing of 105 RD-associated genes for diagnostic R
S7388463  to p3ur4poses and exome sequencing for research casesE . SHG 2014 | MILAN, INTewA lLocYus | W R
S1 W 267W 81. 5E 4SHGc.hOr8RG 3.327ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C12 .5 Mutations in the tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme, Aconitase 2,cause R
S3128516  to New locus chr9 4.1413 either isolated or syndromic optic neuropathy with encephalopathy R
S893918  R
S17093352  and cerebellar atrophy New locus to chr14 4.2 M. D. Metodiev1, S. Gerber1, L. Hubert1, D. Chretien1, X. Gérard1, P. Amati2, N. Boddaert3, R
S10137845  A. Kaminska3, I. Desguerre3, J. Kaplan1, A. Munnich1,3, A. Rötig1, J. Rozet1, C. Besmond1; R
S6583338  to 1Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 2CHU d‘Angers, Angers, France, 3Hôpital Necker-Enfants New locus chr7 2.1 R
S2191041  Malades, Paris, France. 
C12 .3 Disclosure of false disease genes - an underestimated potential of targeted and genomewide NGS: The example of MYO1A and deafness Inherited optic neuropathy has been ascribed to mutations in mitochondri- type DFNA48 al fusion/fission dynamic genes, nuclear and mitochondrial DNA-encoded T. Eisenberger1, N. Di Donato2, S. M. Baig3, C. Neuhaus1, A. Beyer2, E. Decker1, C. respiratory enzyme genes or nuclear genes of poorly known mitochondrial Bergmann1,4, H. J. Bolz1,5; function. On the other hand, enzymopathies of the tricarboxylic acid cycle 1Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Institute for Clinical (TCA) have been reported to cause severe encephalopathies or isolated re- Genetics, Carl Gustav Carus TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, tinitis pigmentosa, but no TCA-cycle enzyme deficiency has been hitherto Pakistan, 4Department of Medicine, University of Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, reported in isolated optic neuropathy. Studying a series of five patients with Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, optic atrophy, we found homozygous or compound heterozygous missen- Germany. se and frameshift mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial aconitase MYO1A (ACO2), a TCA-cycle enzyme, catalyzing interconversion of citrate into isoci- DFNA48 trate. Retrospective studies using patient-derived cultured skin fibroblasts in-fram eis considered the gene underlying autosomal dominant non-syndro- revealed various degrees of deficiency in ACO2 activity but also in ACO1 cy- mic hearing loss type , based on six missense variants, one small tosolic activity. Our study shows that autosomal recessive ACO2 mutations insertion and one nonsense alteration. By next-generation sequen- can cause either isolated or syndromic optic neuropathy. This observation cing (NGS) targeting 66 deafness genes in 1M09Y Oh1eAaring-impaired patients, supports the view that optic atrophy is a hallmark of defective mitochondri- we identified three families (including a consanguineous one) that provide al energy supply and that extra-ocular involvement is not related to severity strong evidence against a causative role of in inherited deafness: of the enzyme deficiency. 
C12 .6 Two novel nonsense mutations (p.Tyr740* and p.Arg262*) and a previously Isolated foveal hypoplasia with secondary nystagmus and low vision described missense mutation were identified not only in the index pMaYtiOen7Ats is associated with a homozygous SL
C38 A8 mutation EinY Ahe1terozyCgIBou2s state, but also in unaffected relatives. The heariMngY Ode1fAicit in Y. Perez1, L. Gradstein2, H. Flusser3, B. Markus1, I. Cohen1, Y. Langer1,4, M. Marcus2, T. these families was clearly due to mutations in other deafness genes, , Lifshitz2, R. Kadir1, O. S. Birk1,4; and , respectively. All but two of the altogether ten mu- 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute of tations have been annotated in dbSNP, and population frequencies (dbSNP, Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Department of 1000 Genomes, Exome Sequencing Project) above 0,1% contradict patho- Ophthalmology, Soroka Medical Center and Clalit Health Services, Faculty of Health genicity assuming a dominant model. Moreover, one healthy indiMviydou1aal Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Zussman Child Development Center, Soroka Medical Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, from the consanguineous family was homozygous for the noMnsYeOn1sAe muta- Israel, 4Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion tion p.Arg262*, compatible with a previously reported homozygous University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. knockout mice lacking any overt pathology. We conclude that is dis- pensable for normal hearing and may even represent a non-essential gene, adding to the list of „erroneous disease genes“ that is growing rapidly with Foveal hypoplasia, always accompanied by nystagmus, is found as part of increasing availability of data from large-scale sequencing projects. Data the clinical spectrum of various eye disorders such as aniridia, albinism and from individuals born to consanguineous parents are particularly valuable achromatopsia. However, the molecular basis of isolated autosomal recessi- because they are enriched for homozygous loss-of-function variants, with ve foveal hypoplasia is yet unknown. Individuals of apparently unrelated non the potential to unmask „false disease genes“. Their identification is urgently consanguineous Israeli families of Jewish Indian (Mumbai) ancestry presen- needed to improve mutation databases and avoid pitfalls in diagnostics and ted with isolated foveal hypoplasia associated with congenital nystagmus genetic counseling. 
C12 .4 and reduced visual acuity. Genome-wide homozygosity mapping followed AON intravitreal injections to manipulate splicing in retinal cells by fine mapping defined a 830 Kb disease-associated locus (LOD score 3.5). X. Gerard1, I. Perrault1, A. Munnich2, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1; Whole-exome sequencing identified a single missense mutation in the ho- 1Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Ophthalmic Genetics, Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute, mozygosity region: c.95T>G, p.(Ile32Ser), in a conserved amino acid within Translational Genetics, Paris, France. the first predicted transmembrane domain of SL
C38 A8. The mutation fully Purpose: segregated with the disease-associated phenotype, demonstrating an ~10% CE
P290  carrier rate in Mumbai Jews. SL
C38 A8 encodes a putative sodium-depen- Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the leading causeC EoPf 2h9e0redi- dent amino-acid/proton antiporter, which we showed to be expressed solely tary blindness in children. encodes a ciliary protein important to in the eye. Thus, a homozygous SL
C38 A8 mutation likely underlies isolated photoreceptor connecting cilium assembly and function. The in- foveal hypoplasia. Intracellular localization of SL
C38 A8 using confocal mi- tronic c.2991+1655A>G change is the most common LCA-causing mutation croscopy indicated that SL
C38 A8 resides within the nuclear envelope and (10%). It introduces a cryptic exon in the mRNA encoding a premature ter- in the Golgi apparatus as well. The sub-localization of SL
C38 A8 is different mination codon. Recently, we made the proof-of-concept of antisense oligo- than that of other SL
C38  proteins, as all other members of this family are nucleotides (AON)-mediated exon skipping to coinrr veicvto the splicing in patient cytoplasmic transmembrane proteins. This may suggest that SL
C38 A8 has fibroblasts whichM reectohvoedrse:d ability to ciliate. The purpose of thCise pst2u9d0y was a different function altogether, and may not be an amino acid transporter as to make the proof-of-concept of exon-skipping using intravitreal in- previously predicted. The precise role of SL
C38 A8 in normal eye develop- jections of AONs. AONs were designed to skip mouse exon ment and function, and the molecular mechanisms through which its muta- 36. Variable concentrations of i6)-FAM-AONs were injected into the vitreous tion causes foveal hypoplasia are yet to be elucidated. of 
C57 BL/6J mice. Riei)tinal sections and mRNA weRrees purletps:ared during 30 days 
C13 .1 post-injections (dpii)n tvoit froollow the distribution of oligonucleotides across Stratified cancer screening in Europe using genomic information: cellular layers and exon skipping efficiency. The most efficient conclusions and recommendations from the COGS project T. H. S. Dent1, S. Chowdhury1, A. Hall1, N. Pashayan2, P. D. P. Pharoah3, H. Burton1; AONs identified by analyses were injected in the vitreous of animals. 1PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Centre of Applied Health Research, Excellent correlation between the efficiency of exon skipping and AON in- University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Public Health and jected dose has been demonstrated. Histological analyses revealed a wide Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. distribution Coof nAcOluNs iionn a:ll retinal cell layers at least until 30 dpi. A linear amount decrease of mRNA lacking exon 36 was measured but still detectab- le at 30 dpi. Here we report that single intravitreal injection of As part of the Collaborative Oncological Gene-environment Study (COGS), AON allows efficient and persistent exon skipping in retinal cells. Hence, this we investigated using genomic and other information to estimate indivi- strategy may be regarded as an attractive alternative to gene replacement duals’ risk of developing cancer and offering different screening and other therapy for 10 % of patients affected with LCA. preventive interventions according to the results. We concluded that genetic testing may soon be used in risk-stratified screening for breast and prostate cancer and that policy-makers should prepare for this. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |S WtraWtifiWed .sEcSreHenGin.gO cRoGuld produce high rates of diagnosis and early tr3e5at-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index ment, while sparing lower risk, disease-free people the risks and inconveni- tools are being used by HCPs to overcome poor literacy in some families. ence of screening, and reducing costs. Achieving this with genomic informa- We liaised with HCPs to develop a guidelines handbook to help with the tion is attractive and increasingly feasible. management of common genetic disorders at a local level. We produced a We will describe how this approach can be implemented, including how series of common clinical scenarios that HCPs might encounter to help with the screening offer would be made, how risk would be estimated, the age at advising on relative risk and genetic testing procedures. The two-day Cli- which this could occur and the potential use of genetic data for other pur- nical Bioinformatics course aimed to update our laboratory staff to enable poses. We will describe how management might differ depending on indivi- translation of our research findings into our local diagnostic laboratory. duals’ risk, communication of results and follow-up arrangements, and the Our educational seminars covered topics such as carrier testing, intellec- different issues raised by modification of an existing screening programme tual disability, consanguinity, rare disease research and the role of advoca- (breast cancer) and the establishment of a new one (prostate cancer). cy. Discussions with seminar attendees suggest that there is a significant These issues will need careful handling to ensure outcomes are optimal and knowledge deficit when it comes to genetics in healthcare. However, encou- harms minimised. ragingly, HCPs voiced an overwhelming interest in gaining more knowledge Although we do not think the evidence is yet adequate to support risk-stra- about genetics and its application to their practice. We plan to continue our tified screening for breast and prostate cancer, we believe that point will efforts and develop eLearning tools to support the integration of genetics soon be reached. Further research is needed into impact, utility, cost-effec- into mainstream medicine. 
C13 .4 tiveness, acceptability and ethical, legal and social implications. A critical Unanticipated results in whole exome study: we‘ve still a lot to learn factor may be whether targeting resources according to risk is seen as ac- C. Skrzynia, J. M. O‘Daniel, D. Marchuk, K. Lee, J. S. Berg, J. P. Evans; c Ce 1p 3t .a 2ble by the entire screening population. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States. Expanding access to genetic counseling for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer with telephone delivery: A cluster randomized noninferiority trial Mutations in SCN5A are associated with Brugada syndrome, LQTS, atrial fi- A. Y. Kinney1,2,3, K. M. Butler2, M. D. Schwartz4,5, J. S. Mandelblatt4,5, K. M. Boucher3,6, L. M. brillation and other conditions with risk of sudden cardiac death. Evidence- Pappas3, A. Gammon3, W. Kohlmann3, S. L. Edwards3,6, A. M. Stroup3,6,7, K. G. Flores2, R. A. based guidelines exist to significantly improve or avert the mortality and Campo3; morbidity associated with these conditions. As such the ACMG included SC- 1University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States, 2University of New Mexico N5A on its list of incidental findings which it recommends should be retur- Cancer Center, Albuquerque, NM, United States, 3Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake ned as part of all whole-exome/genome sequencing tests. We outline three City, UT, United States, 4Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States, 5Georgetown-Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Washington, DC, United challenges faced in the return of unanticipated SCN5A variants: (1) Defining States, 6University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 7Rutgers Cancer Institute of pathogenicity in the presence of reduced penetrance and a highly heteroge- New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, United States. neous grouping of conditions; (2) Balancing potential psychosocial harm to patient/family with result disclosure vs. possible medicolegal ramifications of not reporting this type of results; and (3) Psychosocial impact of a risk for Geographic barriers limit access tBoR iCnA-p1e/2rs on cancer genetic services. We sudden cardiac death in the absence of a personal or family history context. conducted a cluster randomized trial with high-risk women to test the Through the NCGENES whole exome sequencing study, these challenges are equivalency and noninferiority of telephone counseling to remote being explored in a cohort of ~500 patients. Incidental, medically actionable in-person counseling. 988 women, 25-74 years of age, with a personal or findings are reported and this is emphasized during the pre-test counseling. family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer enrolled. Participants were We present here our experience with incidental finding of SCN5A mutations randomized by family unit to either telephone or in-person counseling. As- detected in 8 of 145 (5.5%) participants. Each variant, previously reported sessments were done 1 week following pre-test and post-test counseling, as pathogenic, was independently reviewed and discussed with members and at 6 months. Cluster bootstrap methods were used to estimate the 95% of the molecular analysis team to reach consensus regarding interpretation confidence interval (CI) for the difference between test uptake proportions. of its pathogenicity. Upon review we determined there was convincing evi- BBRetCwAe1e/n2-group intervention differences in psychosocial outcomes were dence for only one to be considered pathogenic and reported. The remaining estimated using linear models together with one-sided 97.5% CIs. Telephone were not reported, though future information may change the assessment of genetic counseling fulfilled the criteria for noninferiority to in-per- t Ch 1e 3s .e 5 interpretations. son remote counseling with regard to anxiety, cancer-specific psychological The stepping stone approach towards the Genetics Clinic of the Future distress, and quality of life measures, as wBeRllC aAs1 a/s2sessments of the informa- D. Schuurbiers1, G. Bertier2, M. Radstake3, P. Bauer4, C. Bock5, P. Borry6, A. Bredenoord7, A. tiveness, interpersonal sensitivity and partnership building of genetic coun- Brookes8, X. Estivill2, R. Hennekam9, L. Johnston10, H. Kääriäinen11, N. Knoers12, F. Lescai13, selors for both urban and rural dwellers. testing uptake was lower R. Maalman14, F. Nielsen15, G. van Ommen16, C. Oosterwijk17, J. Paschall18, B. Prainsack19, J. following telephone (21.8%) than in-person pre-test counseling (31.8%) Saarela20, R. Sudbrak21, M. Swertz22, H. Teare23, T. Vrijenhoek12,24; 1Responsible Innovation Collective, Delft, Netherlands, 2Centre for Genomic Regulation, (CI=3.9%-16.3%). However, in-person counseling had higher average cost Barcelona, Spain, 3Centre for Society and the Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, Radboud per participant counseled than telephone counseling ($654 vs. $278). The University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, higher uptake of testing in the rural (35.1%) compared toB RthCeA u1r/b2an (25.2%) Rare Disease Center Tuebingen, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 5CeMM subgroups suggests that the genetic screening interests of rural populations Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, may be underserved by existing health care systems. telephone Austria, 6Department of Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, counseling appears to be safe and as effective as in-person counseling with 7Julius Center, Department of Medical Humanities, University Medical Centre Utrecht, regard to minimizing adverse psychological reactions and delivering pati- Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 9Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of ent-centered communication for both rural and urban dwellers. 
C13 .3 Amsterdamt, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Institute of Genetic Medicine, International New approaches to bridge the gap between genetics research and Centre for Life, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 11National primary health care in Ireland Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 12Department of Medical Genetics, S. Lynch1,2,3, R. O‘ Shea4, R. O‘ Shea4, J. Turner1, A. Ward1, M. Byrne5, J. Casey6,2; University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 13Department of Biomedicine, 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin 12, Ireland, 2Academic Centre on Rare Human Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 14Ruben Maalman Illustrations, Diseases, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 3Temple Street Children‘s Rotterdam, Netherlands, 15DNA Digest, London, United Kingdom, 16Department of University Hospital, Dublin 1, Ireland, 4National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 17European Disorders, Dublin 1, Ireland, 5University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 6Temple Street Genetic Alliances Network, Soest, Netherlands, 18European Bioinformatics Institute, Children‘s University Hospital, Dublin 12, Ireland. Hinxton, United Kingdom, 19Department of Social Science, Health and Medicine, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 20University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 21Dahlem Centre for Genome Research and Medical Systems Biology, Berlin, Germany, 22Genomics Coordination Center, University of Groningen, University Medical Center The translation of research findings on rare disorders from the laboratory Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 23HeLEX – Centre for Health, Law and Emerging into hospital practice can be challenging. Translation into primary health- Technologies, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, care is even more problematic due to lack of funding, infrastructure and United Kingdom, 24Center for Genome Diagnostics, Utrecht, Netherlands. communication with primary care staff. Through funding specific for disse- mination, we have been able to engage with healthcare professionals (HCPs) using a multi-faceted approach. We developed a microsite (http://www.ucd. Routine application of genomics in the clinic faces many cross-cutting, con- ie/medicine/rarediseases/), animation videos, guidelines handbook, Bioin- troversial challenges. To map them, we have introduced the concept of the formatics course and four nation-wide educational seminars. Genetics Clinic Of the Future (GCOF). Moreover we have developed a step- The animation videos were designed for HCPs to help explain inheritance ping stone approach to meet these challenges, comprising of field labora- p3at6terns and to educate about consanguinity. ThesEeS gHraGph 2ic0al1 e4du |c MatiIoLnAal N, tIoTrAieLs Y(t h| eW ‘stWepWpin.Eg SstHonGes.O’) tRhGat address controversial, multi-dimensionalABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index and interdependent challenges. Here we present three field laboratories, the improvement in genome-wide signal captured relative to those present each of which are rooted in one of the main areas of the GCOF. Initially, we in HapMap 2, HapMap 3 or 1KGP. We find no appreciable increase in variance considered the effect of new phenomena like genome-first approaches and explained as density increases, suggesting that the contribution of variants health data management on the organisation of the ‘doctor’s office’. In the with MAF>0.01 are likely to be well-captured by existing GWAS implementa- second, we developed a broadly supported map of conditions and views on tion. Larger sample sizes will be required to refine these estimates. 
C14 .2 knowledge and data exchange, which is rooted in the ‘server room’. Finally, Genome of the Netherlands imputation identifies seven new loci for we explored the possibilities for involvement of patients and non-patients in quantitative ECG traits in meta-analysis of 30,000 samples the ‘living room’ of the GCOF. Each field laboratory establishes focused, con- J. van Setten1, N. Verweij2, M. N. Niemeijer3, S. Trompet4,5, H. Mbarek6,7, M. Eijgelsheim3, structive interdisciplinary collaborations around ‘radically interdisciplina- J. J. Hottenga6,7, J. A. Kors3, E. M. van Leeuwen3, P. W. Macfarlane8, A. Hofman3, B. H. ry’ topics. Based on the ‘stepping stones’ initiatives we set the route towards Stricker3,9, J. W. Jukema4,5, C. M. van Duijn3, D. I. Boomsma6,7, E. J. C. de Geus6,7, P. van der the GCOF: researchers from the natural and social sciences, medical profes- Harst2, P. I. W. de Bakker1, A. Isaacs3; sionals, healthcare managers, industry representatives, policy makers, pa- 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Erasmus MC – University tients and citizens collaboratively identify the design principles of genome Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Center, data infrastructures as genomic technologies mature and become embed- Leiden, Netherlands, 5ICIN - Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6VU d Ce 1d 3 .i 6n routine diagnostic procedures and health management systems. University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7NCA and EMGO+ research institutes, VU medical Teaching Genomic Medicine to Physicians - this is our responsibility center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 9Inspectorate of Health Care, The Hague, Netherlands. as medical geneticists I. Maya1, L. Basel-Vanagaite2,3,4, E. Taub1, A. Koifman5,6, D. M. Behar7, R. Tomashov- Matar1, R. Sukenik-Halevi8, D. Marom3,9, A. Reches10, M. Shaohat1,3; 1Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of quantitative electrocardiogra- Tikva, Israel, 2The Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute and Felsenstein Medical Research phic (ECG) traits in large consortia identified over 50 loci associated with Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 3The Sackler Faculty of Medicine, QRS, RR, QT and PR intervals, with even more loci discovered in ongoing Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Pediatric Genetics, Schneider Children s Medical HapMap-based meta-analyses in larger sample sizes. We hypothesized that Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Soroka University Medical Center, Beersheba, Israel, 6Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, imputation from sequencing-based reference panels may help in identifying Israel, 7Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 8Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba, Israel, new loci as the contribution of lower-frequency variation has not yet been 9Pediatrics A, Schneider Children s Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, extensively characterized. In the current study, we meta-analyzed GWAS re- 10Souraski Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. sults from 30,000 samples on the QRS, RR, QT and PR intervals after impu- Background ting 19 million SNPs from the Genome of the Netherlands (GoNL) reference panel (998 unique haplotypes). This approach proved successful; in additi- : Due to new discoveries in genomic medicine, and the transi- on to many known loci, we identified seven novel locus-trait associations. Of tion of genetic knowledge from research laboratories into clinical practice, the seven novel loci, three were for PR, three were for QT and one was for an increasing number of medical societies incorporate recommendations QRS. Two were novel trait/locus combinations for loci previously observed regarding genomic tests and therapeutics into routine clinical guidelines. for other ECG traits. Several others are involved in ion handling crucial to Primary care practitioners have inadequMatee tkhnoodwsledge and skills in medi- cardiac electrophysiology. The dense coverage of the genome (~seven times cal genetics and many are unaware of the technical, ethical, legal and psy- more SNPs than HapMap-based studies) also enabled us to study known loci chosocial implications of genetic testing. : We initiated a „genomic in much finer detail. In conclusion, we show that larger reference panels education“ program for the purpose of providing physicians from different with more accurate haplotype estimates and denser SNP data enable us to medical fields advanced knowledge in genomic medicine . We emphasized find new loci and fine-map previously known ones. 
C14 .3 the main take-home messages for physicians, defined as: risk calculation Genome-wide association analysis identifies a new gene involved in for various genetic diseases, recognition of the mode of inheritanRcees furlotms: salt perception and liking the pedigree, guidelines for decision-making on which molecular tests to A. Robino1,2, N. Pirastu1,2, C. Mansfield3, D. Hwang3, D. R. Reed3, P. Gasparini1,2; use, interpretation of test results and their clinical implications. 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy, To date, 82 physicians have participated in 6 courses of our „genomic edu- 2University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia, PA, cation“ program, which included lectures, workshops and guided tours in United States. genetic laboratories. In the „pre-course“ examination the average score was 56% (range 20%-80%), whereas in the „post-course“ examination it was 79% (range 40%-100%). The average improvement in score as a result of Salt perception and genetic variation in taste receptors may be important the course was 21% (range 0%-80%). The physicians who participated in determinants of individual differences in salt intake, which in turn repre- our program repCoorntceldu sai ovenr:y high level of satisfaction from the theoretical sents a risk factor for the development of hypertension and cardiovascular and practical knowledge they aqired as well as the concept of a „one-week diseases. Genetic variations in taste perception are well known for bitter, update course“. A one-week „genomic education“ program is an sweet and umami taste, while little is known on the genetic bases of human effective strategy to update primary care physicians regarding the advances salt perception. To investigate this area, salt taste responses were collected in Genomic Medicine in order to improve their care of patients. on ~ 900 healthy adults coming from 6 different small villages from North- 
C14 .1 Eastern Italy. NaCl taste intensity was assessed with the labelled magnitu- Insights into the genetic architecture of anthropometric traits using de scale (LMS) using a concentration of 1M and the log10 of the intensity whole genome sequence data ratings were used for the analysis. Genotyping data were imputed to the E. Zeggini, UK10K consortium; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. 1000G SNP set and used to perform a GWAS of salt perception including sex and age as covariates. A significant association with rs547916 SNP (p- value=5.6x10-08), closely located to the KCNA5 gene, was detected. A re- Body weight and fat distribution measures are associated with increased risk plication analysis was carried out on an American cohort confirming the of cardiometabolic disease. As part of the UK10K study, we have investigated association with salt liking phenotype (p-value=0.002). KCNA5 encodes a the genetic architecture of anthropometric traits in 3,538 individuals with member of potassium channel voltage-gated, shaker-related subfamily and 6.5x whole genome sequence (WGS) data from the ALSPAC and TwinsUK belongs to the delayed rectifier K+ (DRK) channels that in the mammalian cohorts. Variants discovered through WGS, along with those from the 1000 taste system play a central role in specific taste transduction pathways. A Genomes Project (1KGP), were imputed into additional individuals from the study has also shown that KCNA5 is the major functional DRK channel ex- ALSPAC and TwinsUK cohorts with GWAS data (total sample size 9,979). We pressed in the in rat taste buds. Further experiments are needed to better invesitnig sailtiecdo association between anthropometric traits and 8.6 million low clarify KCNA5 role in salt perception and liking and possible implications for frequency and common variants (MAF>0.01). We are in the process of obtai- c Ca 1r 4d .i 4ovascular diseases. ning replication of prioritised signals. In interim replication analysis ImmunoSeq: Discovery of novel rare variants implicated in across ~15,000 samples, 43 out of 66 novel signals for BMI have the same autoimmune and inflammatory diseases by targeting regulatory direction of effect in the replication cohorts (p-value=0.0093). We examined regions in immune cells the concordance of the direction of effect at established loci for each trait. A. Morin1,2, T. Kwan1,2, L. Letourneau2, K. Tandre3, M. Eloranta3, V. Arseneault2, M. Out of the 31 established independent loci for BMI that were present in our Caron1,2, A. Madore4, G. Bourque1,2, A. Montpetit2, A. Syvanen5, L. Ronnblom3, M. G. data, 28 have the same direction of effect (p-value=2.3e-06). For weight, 10 Lathrop1,2, C. Laprise4, T. Pastinen1,2; 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2McGill out of 11 known loci (p-value=0.006), and for height 151 out of 172 loci (p- value<2.2e-16) have the same direction of EefSfeHctG, r e2sp0e1ct4iv e| lMy. WILeA esNti,m IaTtAedL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 37ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index University and Genome Quebec Innovation centre, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Département des sciences fondamentales, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Saguenay, There are now over 163 loci associated with inflammatory bowel disease QC, Canada, 5Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life (IBD) susceptibility in European populations, though little is known about Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. their contribution to disease risk in non-European populations. Using the custom Immunochip array, we genotyped 9,846 individuals of East Asian (Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, China and UK individuals of East Asian Comprehensive DNase I hypersensitive site (DHS) mapping by the ENCO- descent), Indian and Indo-European (Iranian) descent. Combining these DE project identified all classes of cis-regulatory elements. Recent studies with the existing cohort of 81,248 individuals of European descent (Jostins showed enrichment of complex trait GWAS noncoding hits in DHS. However, et al. Nature 2012), we identified 14 novel IBD susceptibility loci at genome- GWAS hits only partially explain complex trait heritability. The discovery of wide significance (P<5×10-8). The majority of IBD risk loci were shared bet- rare variants located in regulatory regions specific to immune cells should ween both Europeans and non-Europeans, and differences in the amount of explain part of this heritability. Our approach combines selective DNA cap- variance explained in disease liability at each locus were driven by a combi- ture of relevant regulatory regions coupled to next-generation sequencing. nation of differences in allele frequencies and effect sizes. For instance, the Genome-wide DHS mapping data from the ENCODE and NIH Roadmap Epi- variance in Crohn’s disease (CD) liability explained by four independent risk genomics Projects were used to select regulatory regions of immune cells. variants at TNFSF15 was 19 times greater in East Asians than Europeans, a We designed a custom DNA capture panel (Roche SeqCap EZ developer) reflection of the risk-increasing alleles being more common and having lar- to target these selected regions, as well as exonic and HLA regions. Captu- ger odds ratios in East Asians. Aggregation of all SNPs assayed on the Immu- red DNA (163Mb) is indexed (5-fold per lane) for sequencing on Illumina nochip revealed significant genetic correlation (0.4-0.85) for IBD between HiSeq2000 system, yielding average coverage of ~28x. We first applied the European and non-European populations. Together, this study increases the “Immunoseq.” assay to 30 healthy individuals from Sweden (Uppsala BioRe- total number of IBD susceptibility loci to 177 and demonstrates the perva- source), where we have existing transcriptome, methylome and ChIP-seq sive sharing of genetic risk factors across populations, though there exists data from three primary immune cells (monocytes, B-cells and T-cells). The heterogeneity in the variance explained per locus. 
C15 .1 capture panel was also applied to 150 trios from the Saguenay‒Lac-Saint- BCA
P31  mutations cause a new X-linked syndrome with deafness, Jean asthma familial collection (complex trait with immune and inflamm- dystonia, central hypomyelination and disorganization of the Golgi atory components). We observe an enrichment of variants in the vicinity apparatus of allelicly differentially expressed genes (p<1e-10) as well as potential P. Cacciagli1,2,3, J. Sutera-Sardo1,2, A. Borges-Correia1,2, J. Roux1,2, I. Dorboz4, J. Desvignes1,2, impact of rare conserved variants on allelic differential expression of ge- C. Badens1,2,3, M. Delepine5, M. Lathrop5,6, P. Cau1,2,7, N. Lévy1,2,3, N. Girard2,8, P. Sarda9, O. nes (p<0.05). This highlights the 1) potential impact of rare variations on Boespflug-Tanguy4,10, L. Villard1,2; functional mechanism in immune cells and 2) power of our targeted capture 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 3Dpt a Cp 1p 4r .5oach to identify novel rare variants in regulatory regions. de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants Timone, Marseille, France, 4Inserm U676, Paris, France, 5Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 6Fondation Jean Dausset, CEPH, Exome array analysis in >30,000 Europeans establishes a functional Paris, France, 7Lab de Biologie Cellulaire, Hôpital d’Enfants Timone, Marseille, France, role for G6P
C2  and identifies novel coding variants influencing 8Sce de Neuroradiologie, Hôpital de La Timone, Marseille, France, 9Dpt de Génétique glycaemic traits Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 10Sce de Neuropédiatrie, A. Mahajan1, X. Sim2, H. J. Ng3, A. K. Manning4, M. A. Rivas1, H. M. Highland5, A. E. Locke2, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France. N. Grarup6, H. K. Im7, A. P. Morris1, J. B. Meigs8, C. M. Lindgren1, A. L. Gloyn3, on behalf of T2D-GENES and GoT2D consortia; 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Center for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United BA
P31  is one of the most abundant proteins of the membrane of the en- States, 3Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, doplasmic reticulum (ER). It is a chaperone protein involved in several Oxford, United Kingdom, 4The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Human pathways, including ER-associated protein degradation, export of proteins Genetics Center, Univ of TX Health Sci Cent at Houston, Houston, TX, United States, from the ER to the Golgi, and programmed cell death. BA
P31  is encoded by 6Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and the BCA
P31  gene located in Xq28. It is highly expressed in neurons. We iden- Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 7Department of tified loss of function mutations in BCA
P31  in seven individuals from three Health Studies, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 8Massachusetts General different families and one missense mutation in another fourth family. The- Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. se people suffer from intellectual and motor disability, dystonia and senso- rineural hearing loss with abnormal white matter. The association of these clinical signs define a new X-linked syndrome. In primary fibroblasts from To identify coding variants associated with fasting glucose (FG) and fasting patients, we found that the absence of BCA
P31  changed the morphology of insulin (FI) levels, we anGa6lyPsCe2d exome array data in up to 33,407 non-diabe- the ER and disorganized the Golgi apparatus in a significant proportion of tic individuals of European ancestry. We identified multiple glucose-lowe- cells. We demonstrated that the constitutive deficiency of BCA
P31  did not ring coding variants in , which resides in an established FG genome- activate the response to unfolded proteins (UPR) nor triggered cell death. wide associatiPon study (GWAS) locus. Conditional singPle-variant association Ma sin Aa Fl iy s pcis ne 2cs 1et a Lb )l <i s a5h nxe d1d o-t7 nh ee Prp ar rhe es se nP gc eCe eDo f ot 3w xo 0oc -o m11d in 0og v (a r MCiOaN AnD Ft =s p.a .t 1e 1x 7o- 71m0 )e ,- 8Pw oid he R chaa arth nte gur e, so u Ter td eaa et oa is esu ug g te sns pt rt oh va it t eh e a m3b os le en cac uye ao raf bB aiA sP s3 f1 ta f af ne nc et os lE MR ea nEn dRd -G io aol nlg i ya np -- g n ,f i .a ( 0 ) i n t i OnN =, .n e 1c ,m .8n ,7 1 Hx 0 Y, 4 b.1 t% p a s .m sb l sm la d t h a t B A aP 1 p l ls n m ip o or ra t r e in lG g si e x - h r d w e V 9 ( 1 % wCO PNe SD Kr Aeo Tn i Hn 1d 77e Yp =e -41n 0.0d xe 1n 0t- 7o af nth de G HW 177A SC OSNND Pon a V2t n9t Lh v=i i3s r.l 7oo xc 1u 0s- 1a0 )n d o ef e ea -c bh so Get d6h Pe aCr 2( alyV2 s1 i9 sL d Cr 1o 5m .2oe a gn id c lo dn in soe rc dt ein r.tracellular protein trafficking with a severe congenital Y I1 t . G n a n n e u r lo ca ( =8x10 ) highlighted another coding variant p.Y207S (MAF=0.5%) Mutations in KPTN Cause Macrocephaly, Neurodevelopmental Delay, with evidence of association with FG. studies of these vari- and Seizures ants showed a reduction in protein expression by 98% (p.H177Y, p<0.001), E. L. Baple1, R. Maroofian1, B. Chioza1, M. Izadi2, H. E. Cross3, S. Al-Turki4, K. Barwick1, A. 100% (p.Y207S, p<0.001) and 43% (p.V219L, p<0.01) compared to wild- Skrzypiec1, R. Pawlak1, K. Wagner5, R. Coblentz5, T. Zainy1, M. A. Patton1, S. Mansour6, P. Rich6, B. Qualmann2, M. E. Hurles4, M. M. Kessels2, A. H. Crosby1; type in HEK293 cells, with similar results in IN
S1 E cells. Protein expression 1University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Jena University Hospital was rescued with a proteasome inhibitor implying degradation of unstable and Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany, 3University of Arizona School of G6P
C2  proteins via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Expressed variant Medicine, Tucson, AZ, United States, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, proteins localized as expected to the endoplGasLm
P1 icR r ePticulum. We also iden- United Kingdom, 5Windows of Hope Genetic Study, Holmes County, OH, United States, 6St. tified two genesU RnoBt2 mPapping to previously reported GWAS -l7oci in which George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, Tooting, United Kingdom. coding variants werGe 6aPsCs2ociate-d7 with FG ( : =4.4x10 , 1.6% MAF, p.A316T) or FI ( : =3.8x10 , 0.1% MAF, p.
E594 V). These data establish a functional role for in FG homeostasis and identify novel glycaemic The proper development of neuronal circuits during neuromorphogenesis trait loci. They do not support a role for low-frequency or rare coding vari- and neuronal-network formation is critically dependent on a coordinated ants in explaining previously reported association signals at GWAS loci. and intricate series of molecular and cellular cues and responses. Although 
C14 .6 the cortical actin cytoskeleton is known to play a key role in neuromorpho- Transethnic association study of IBD identifies novel risk loci and genesis, relatively little is known about the specific molecules important for shows pervasive sharing of genetic risk factors across populations J. Z. Liu1, S. van Sommeren2, R. K. Weersma2, C. A. Anderson1, The International IBD this process. We identified nine affected individuals from four Ohio Amish Genetics Consortium; families affected by an autosomal recessive, variable form of neurodeve- 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2University of Groningen, lopmental delay. The most consistent features were global developmental Groningen, Netherlands. delay, macrocephaly, anxiety, and some features suggestive of a pervasive developmental disorder. In addition, a primary seizure disorder was descri- 38 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG bed in three cases. Using a combination of autozygosity mapping, linkageABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index analysis and whole-exome sequencing, we demonstrated that two founder autoimmune response. Usp18 knockout mice have cerebral hemorrhage mutations in KPTN, encoding kaptin, can result in this phenotype. Our im- and hydrocephalus with ependymal necrosis. Microscopy of patient brain munofluorescence analyses in primary neuronal cell cultures showed that tissues shows severe ependymal abnormalities, similar to the mouse. endogenous and GFP-tagged kaptin associates with dynamic actin cyto- In conclusion, US
P18  mutations are a novel genetic cause of pseudo-TORCH skeletal structures and that this association is lost upon introduction of the syndrome and severe cerebral hemorrhage which provide for the first time identified mutations. Taken together, our studies have identified kaptin alte- a direct link between the IFN type I signalling pathway and the disease phe- rations responsible for this disorder and have defined kaptin as a molecule notype. 
C15 .5 crucial for normal human neuromorphogenesis. Finally, our identification Loss of CTNND2 is associated with borderline intellectual dysfunction of two KPTN mutations within this Anabaptist population parallels the si- in humans and neuronal migration defects in zebrafish tuation seen for a number of other genes with multiple mutations that also W. Hofmeister1, D. Nilsson1,2, A. Topa3, B. Anderlid1, F. Vezzi2, V. Wirta2, M. Nordenskjöld1, commonly cause inherited diseases globally (e.g., GJB2 mutations in inheri- E. Syk Lundberg1, A. Lindstrand1; ted hearing loss, and ATM mutations in ataxia telangiectasia), indicating that 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, kaptin neurodevelopmental delay might be similarly widespread. Sweden, 3Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. 
C15 .3 REP
S1  is a novel gene of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation A. B. Drecourt1, N. Boddaert2, I. Desguerre3, D. Chretien1, A. Munnich3, A. Rötig1; Cytogenetically visible chromosomal translocations are a unique resour- 1INSERM U1163 Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2Department of Radiology, Hôpital ce as they can pinpoint strong effect genes. Here we report a mother and Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Necker- daughter with borderline intelligence and learning problems within the Enfants Malades, Paris, France. dyslexia spectrum and two apparently balanced reciprocal translocations; t(1;8)(p22;q24),t(5;18)(p15;q11). By low coverage mate-pair whole geno- me sequencing we were able to pinpoint the genomic breaks to within a 2kb Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) encompasses a window and the DNA breakpoints were then verified by PCR and Sanger se- group of rare neurogenerative disorders with different clinical, brain MRI quencing. The 5p breakpoint was located between exon 7 and 8 of CTNND2. and molecular features, underlined by progressive extrapyramidal dys- By genome wide array comparative genomic hybridization we identified an function and iron accumulation in the brain. To date, mutations in PANK2, additional individual with similar phenotypic presentation and a maternally PLA2G6, FA2H, AT
P13 A2, 
C2 orf37, CP, FTL and WDR45 have been associated inherited 163kb microdeletion exclusively involving CTNND2. The micro- with NBIA. Nevertheless a large number of individuals have “idiopathic deletion at 5p11.2 is present as mosaicism in the mother and absent in the NBIA”, with unknown etiology. Exome sequencing of two sisters with NBIA patient’s healthy siblings. identified two heterozygous mutations in the REP
S1  gene. REP
S1  is involved Inappropriate migration of cortical neurons has been postulated as a poten- in endocytosis and the two mutations (p.Ala113Glu and p.Val78Leu) affect tial mechanism for various neurological disorders including dyslexia, given its EH1 domain that interacts with RAB11FI
P2 . Western Blot analysis detec- the potential role of CTNND2 in neuron motility, we were particularly in- ted a low level of REP
S1  in patient’s fibroblasts. The function of REP
S1  in terested in assessing defects in neuronal migration in vivo. Knockdown of iron metabolism is unknown, but it was shown that RABB11-FI
P2  functions one of two zebrafish CTNND2 orthologues using antisense morpholino oli- in transferrin recycling. We investigated the iron metabolism and oxidative gonucleotides showed mostly normal development of the neuronal clusters. stress in patient’s fibroblasts. Patient fibroblasts exhibited a dramatic iron However, analysis of a subpopulation of forebrain neurons expressing GFP overload, measured by a colorimetric ferrozine-based assay. Consistently under the islet promoter (isl:GFP) in knockdown embryos showed the pres- steady-state levels of ferritin, iron responsive protein (IR
P1 ) and SOD2 were ence of misplaced isl:GFP cells between the telencephalon and diencephalon increased whereas aconitase activity was decreased. This indicates that indicative of a defects in migration. This suggests that defective migration of REP
S1  mutations induce deregulation of iron metabolism. Over-expression subpopulations of neuronal cells due to loss of CTNND2 could be part of the of the wild-type REP
S1  cDNA in patient’s cells reduces the iron overload of underlying mechanism behind the cognitive dysfunction in the patients. 
C15 .6 these cells that display almost normal iron content. Our experiments de- Novel (ovario)leukodystrophy related to AAR
S2  mutations monstrate that REP
S1  is a new gene of NBIA. Improvement in our under- S. H. Kevelam1, C. Dallabona2, D. Diodato3, T. B. Haack4,5, L. Wong6, G. S. Salomons7, standing of the biochemistry and pathophysiology of this form of NBIA will E. Baruffini2, L. Melchionda3, C. Mariotti8, T. M. Strom4,5, T. Meitinger4,5, H. Prokisch4,5, help develop novel therapeutics for this neurological condition. K. Chapman9, A. Colley10, H. Rocha11, K. Őunap12, R. Schiffmann13, E. Salsano14, M. 
C15 .4 Savoiardo15, E. Hamilton1, T. E. M. Abbink1, N. I. Wolf1, I. Ferrero2, C. Lamperti3, M. Interferon type 1 response regulator US
P18  is mutated in severe Zeviani16, A. Vanderver17, D. Ghezzi3, M. S. van der Knaap1,18; pseudo-TORCH syndrome 1Department of Child Neurology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University, M. Meuwissen1,2, R. Schot1, G. Oudesluijs1, S. Tinchert3, L. van Unen1, D. Heijsman4, M. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Life Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Lequin5, M. Kros6, R. Willemsen1, R. Brouwer7, W. van IJcken7, R. de Coo8, J. Dudink9, A. Italy, 3Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Fondazione Istituto Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Bertoli Avella1, F. Verheijen1, G. Mancini1; IRCCS, Milan, Italy, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University, Munich, Germany, 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Department of Molecular and Human 2Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium, 3Dept. Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 7Department of Clinical of Clinical Genetics, Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Dept. of Chemistry, Metabolic Unit, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Bioinformatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Dept. 8SOSD Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione Istituto, of Radiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Dept. of Milan, Italy, 9Department of Genetics, Childrens National Medical Center, Washington, Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Center for DC, United States, 10Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Biomics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Dept. of Child Australia, 11Neurology Department, Centro Hospitalar São João, and Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Dept. of Clinical Neuroscience and Mental Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Neonatology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Porto, Portugal, 12Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 13Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, TX, United States, 14Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Fondazione Istituto Neurologico Pseudo-TORCH syndrome indicates a group of disorders putatively linked “Carlo Besta”, IRCCS, Milan, Italy, 15Department of Neuroradiology, Fondazione Istituto to autoimmunity and is characterized at birth by cerebral calcification, mi- Neurologico ‘Carlo Besta’, IRCCS, Milan, Italy, 16Mitochondrial Biology Unit - MRC, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 17Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Department crocephaly, enlarged ventricles, cerebellar atrophy and the development of of Neurology, Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States, hyperbilirubinemia, thrombocytopenia and hepatomegaly resembling con- 18Department of Functional Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive genital infections. There is overlap with Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS), Research, VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands. caused by mutations in genes involved in RNA catabolism, indirectly leading Purpose: to increased Interferon type I signalling. We report on patients from two families with pseudo-TORCH, cerebral haemorrhage and early demise. This study was focused on patients with a leukoencephalopathy The first consanguineous family included 3 affected sibs. Using linkage ana- of unknown cause with the aim to define a novel, homogeneous phenotype lysis, whole exome sequencing and sanger sequencing of the non-covered suggestive of a common genetic defect, based on clinical and MRI findings, exons in the linkage area, we identified a homozygous truncating mutation aMnedt htoo didse: ntify the causal genetic defect, shared by patients with this phe- in US
P18 , causing total absence of US
P18  transcript in cultured fibroblasts, notype. compared to normal expression in controls. In the second family, including Independent exome sequencing studies were performed in two two sibs, the same truncating mutation in heterozygous form was found. unrelated patients with a novel leukoencephalopathy. MRI findings in these No transcript was amplified from cells of the two patients, suggesting that a patients were compared to MRIs in a database of unclassified leukoencepha- second mutation is present in areas not covered by Sanger sequencing. lopathies. Eleven additional patients with similar MRI abnormalities were US
P18  is an interferon-stimulated gene anEdS iHtsGelf 2a 0k1ey4 r e| gMulaILtoAr Nof, i nITteAr-LY |s eWlecWteWd. C.ElinSiHcaGl a.nOd RMGRI findings were investigated. 39 feron response both in native antibacterial and antiviral immunity and inABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Results: Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 3Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL Institute of Child AAR
S2  Health, London, United Kingdom, 4GOSgene, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, Exome sequencing revealed compound heterozygous mutations in United Kingdom, 5Group on the Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids, Department of encoding mitochondrial alanine-tRNA synthetase in both patients. Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 6University Clinic of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Clinical Genetics Functional studiesA iAnR ySe2a st confirmed the pathogenicity of the mutations in Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8Radiology one pAatAiRenSt2. Sanger sequencing was performed in the eleven additional pati- Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 9Department of ents and revealed mutations in four patients. The in total six patients Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, with mutations had childhood to adulthood onset signs of neurolo- Thailand, 10Department of Medical Genetics, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, gical deterioration consisting of ataxia, spasticity and cognitive decline with Warsaw, Poland, 11Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital features of frontal lobe dysfunction. MRIs showed a leukoencephalopathy Motol and 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 12Centre de Génétique with involvement of left-right connections and ascending and descending Humaine, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 13Cutis Laxa Study Group, University of Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 14Department of Pediatrics, University tCroanctcsl,u asniodn cse:r ebellar atrophAyA. ARlSl2 f emale patients had ovarian failure. Signs of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 15Seattle Children‘s Craniofacial Center, of cardiomyopathy were not observed. Seattle, WA, United States, 16Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Mutations inA AR
S2  have been found in a severe form of in- Italy, 17Histopathology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, fantile cardiomyopathy in two families. We present six patients with a no- London, United Kingdom, 18Neural Development Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, vel phenotype caused by mutationAsA, RcSh2a racterized by a distinctive London, United Kingdom, 19Reta Lila Weston Institute, UCL Institute of Neurology, leukoencephalopathy and, in female patients, ovarian failure, indicating that Queen Square, London, United Kingdom, 20Department of Molecular Neuroscience, the phenotypic spectrum associated with variants is wider than pre- UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom, 21Laboratório de Anemias Congénitas e Hematologia Molecular, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e viously reported. 
C16 .1 Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. A congenital disorder of glycosylation, with lymphopenia, neutropenia, and skeletal dysplasia, caused by mutations in the gene encoding phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3). Lenz-Majewski syndrome (LMS) constitutes a unique rare disease charac- A. Stray-Pedersen1,2,3, P. H. Backe4,5, H. S. Sorte3, L. Mørkrid5, N. Y. Chokshi6, H. Erichsen7, terised by the association of generalised sclerosing bone dysplasia, intel- T. Gambin1, K. B. P. Elgstøen5, M. Bjørås4, M. Wlodarski8, M. Krüger8, S. Jhangiani1,9, D. lectual disability, cutis laxa and distinct craniofacial, dental, and distal limb M. Muzny1,9, A. Patel10, K. Raymond11, G. S. Sasa12, R. A. Krance12, C. A. Martinez12, S. M. Abraham13, C. Speckmann8, S. Ehl8, P. Hall14, L. Forbes2,6, E. Merckoll15, J. Westvik15, G. anomalies. By using whole-exome sequencing in four patients and selecting Nishimura16, C. F. Rustad3, T. G. Abrahamsen7,17, A. Rønnestad7, L. T. Osnes18, T. Egeland18, variants according to the predicted dominant de novo etiology model, we O. K. Rødningen3, C. R. Beck1, E. Boerwinkle1,9,19, R. A. Gibbs1,9, J. R. Lupski1,9,20, J. S. identified causative heterozygous missense mutations in PTDS
S1  gene, Orange2,6, E. Lausch8, I. Hanson6; which encodes phosphatidylserine synthase 1 (PS
S1 ). Subsequently, three 1Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics of the Department of Molecular and additional patients were screened by Sanger sequencing and similar muta- Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine (BCM), Houston, TX, United States, 2Center tions were found. In total, five different missense mutations affecting four for Human Immunobiology of Texas Children’s Hospital (TCH), BCM, Houston, TX, United specific PS
S1  amino acids were identified in the seven patients studied to States, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital (OUS), Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Microbiology, OUS, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of Medical Biochemistry, date. PS
S1  is one of two enzymes involved in production of phosphatidyl- OUS, Oslo, Norway, 6Section of Immunology, Allergy, and Rheumatology, TCH, Houston, serine. Phosphatidylserine synthesis was increased in patients’ intact fibro- TX, United States, 7Department of Pediatrics, OUS, Oslo, Norway, 8Department blasts and end-product inhibition of PS
S1  by phosphatidylserine was signi- of Pediatrics, Freiburg University Hospital, Freiburg, Germany, 9Human Genome ficantly reduced. Therefore, these mutations cause a gain-of-function effect Sequencing Center of Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 10Medical associated with regulatory dysfunction of PS
S1 . In support of this model, Genetics Laboratories, Molecular and Human Genetics, BCM, Houston, TX, United States, craniofacial defects similar to those found in LMS, were observed following 11Dept of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo College of Medicine, Rochester, expression of mutant but not wild-type PTDS
S1  in zebrafish. Interestingly, MN, United States, 12Texas Children’s Cancer and Hematology Center, Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, BCM, Houston, TX, United States, 13Pediatric Hematology Oncology, total phospholipid cellular content was similar between patient and control University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, United States, 14Emory Genetics Laboratory, fibroblasts. Ongoing lipidomic studies suggest that the identified mutations Dept of Human Genetics, Emory University, Decatur, GA, United States, 15Department of cause abnormal fatty acid composition of individual subclasses of membra- Radiology, OUS, Oslo, Norway, 16Department of Radiology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, ne phospholipids. In conclusion, we have identified LMS as the first human Japan, 17University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 18Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, disease caused by disrupted phosphatidylserine metabolism and one of OUS, Oslo, Norway, 19Human Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Center, the few examples of gain-of-function mutations affecting an enzyme. Our Houston, TX, United States, 20Department of Pediatrics, BCM, Houston, TX, United States results bring important insight to the understanding of phosphatidylserine metabolism and point to an unexplored link with bone development and homeostasis. Human phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3) catalyzes the conversion of GlNAc- 
C16 .3 6-P into GlcNAc-1-P, during the synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc, a sugar nucleotide Homozygous FIBP truncating mutation in a new multiple congenital critical to multiple glycosylation pathways. PGM3-defects have earlier been anomalies syndrome with overgrowth, macrocephaly, Iris coloboma, associated with hematopoietic deficiency in a mouse model. We identified and learning disabilities three unrelated patients with recurrent infections, congenital leukopenia C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, D. Picot2, L. Duplomb-Jego2, J. Thevenon1,2, B. Terriat3, D. Minot1, J. St-Onge2,4, Y. Duffourd2,4, P. Vabres2,5, J. Rivière2,4, L. Faivre1,2; including neutropenia, B and T cell lymphopenia, and progression to bone 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2EA 4271 GAD, FHU-TRANSLAD, Université de marrow failure. Whole exome sequencing revealed novel, deleterious mu- Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Service d’Angiologie, CHU Bocage, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire tations in the PGM3 gene in all three subjects, delineating a new type of de Génétique Moléculaire, FHU-TRANSLAD, PTB, CHU, Dijon, France, 5Service de congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG). Functional studies of the human Dermatologie, CHU Bocage, Dijon, France. immunodeficiency-associated PGM3 gene variants in E.coli cells demonstra- ted reduced PGM3 enzyme activity with decreased phosphate group trans- fer from position GlcNAc-6-P to GlcNAc-1-P. Two of the 3 patients had skel- Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) pathways determine crucial cellular roles etal anomalies with short stature, brachydactyly, and intellectual disability, for proliferation, migration, fate and survival, by various extracellular and however these additional features were absent in the third patient, showing intracellular modes of action. Acidic FGF extracellular action usually consists the clinical variability of the disease. Two patients were transplanted using a of binding multiple forms of cell surface receptors, leading to the activation cord blood hematopoietic stem cell and a matched-related donor bone mar- of cytoplasmic tyrosine-kinase pathways but it also enters into the nucleus row; both had successful engraftment and correction of neutropenia and to stimulate DNA synthesis. The acidic fibroblast growth factor intracellu- lymphopenia. We define PGM3-CDG as a novel cause of treatable genetic im- lar binding protein (FIBP) is a FGF1 binding protein widely expressed in munodeficiency, document the power of whole exome sequencing in gene human tissues, but its function remains unknown in FGF signaling. We per- discoveries for rare disorders, and illustrate the utility of genomic analyses formed exome sequencing in a 22-year-old man, born from healthy consan- i Cn 1 s 6t .u 2dying combined and variable phenotypes. guineous parents, and presenting with an undefined phenotype associating Lenz-Majewski syndrome: disturbed phosphatidylserine metabolism overgrowth, marfanoid habitus, macrocephaly, facial dysmorphism, large causes intellectual disability and a sclerosing bone dysplasia thumbs, bilateral iris coloboma, ventricular septal defect, mitral valve pro- S. B. Sousa1,2, D. Jenkins3, E. Chanudet4, G. Tasseva5, E. Bliss2, M. Ishida2, J. Sá1, J. M. lapse, venous insufficiency, moderate scoliosis, and learning disabilities. A Saraiva1,6, A. Barnicoat7, R. Scott7, A. Calder8, D. Wattanasirichaigoon9, K. Chrzanowska10, homozygous nonsense mutation (p.Gln218*) was identified and was absent M. Simandlová11, L. Van Maldergem12,13, A. Hing14,15, M. Silengo16, G. Glenn Anderson17, in unaffected siblings. FIBP is known to be expressed in brain, eye, heart and J. Docker18, M. Ryten19,20, J. Pereira21, K. Mills2, P. Clayton2, P. Stanier18, P. Beales3,4, J. E. kidneys, consistent with the patient’s clinical features. Additional functio- Vance5, G. E. Moore2; nal results argue for the pathogenicity of the mutation in the phenotype: 1) 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de FIBP cDNA was undetectable in patient’s fibroblasts; 2) the intracellular FGF Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, UCL Institute of pathway was deregulated with increased FGF-1 protein level; 3) The XTT 40 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, tIeTsAt aLnYd |K Wi67W laWbe.llEinSgH exGh.iObitRedG a higher proliferation capacity in patient’sABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index Sciences and Technologies, University of Salento, Lecce, Italy, 4PhD Program, Scienze FIBP della Riproduzione e dello Sviluppo, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. fibroblasts than controls. In conclusion, we present the first implication of the gene in a novel auto- somal recessive multiple congenital abnormalities syndrome and the results Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a multiple congenital malformation syndrome cha- o Cf 1 p 6a .4thophysiological studies. racterized by facial features, skeletal anomalies, dermatoglyphic abnormali- Hidden mutations in Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) - Limitations ties, mental retardation, and postnatal growth deficiency. Heterozygous mu- of Sanger sequencing in molecular diagnostics tations in the KMT2D gene are detected in 60% of Kabuki patients. KMT2D F. J. Kaiser1, D. Braunholz1, J. Eckhold1, J. Pozojevic1, K. Wendt2, E. Watrin3, H. Rieder4, G. gene encodes a H3K4 histone methyltransferase that plays important role in Gillessen-Kaesbach5; the epigenetic control of active chromatin states modulating the expression 1Sektion für Funktionelle Genetik am Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, of genes essential for embryogenesis and development. A subset of KS in- 2Department of Cell biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Institut dividuals was recently identified with mutations in the chromatin modifier de Génétique et Développement, UMR6290-CNRSfaculté de Médecine Rennes, Rennes, KDM6A. We performed a mutational screening on 303 Kabuki patients by France, 4Institut für Humangenetik Düsseldorf, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, direct sequencing, MLPA, and qPCR, detecting 133 patients with KMT2D and Düsseldorf, Germany, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany. four with KDM6A mutations. Among the KMT2D mutations we identified 46 missense variants across the entire length of the KMT2D gene, 16 were inherited from an apparently asymptomatic parent. CdLS is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous developmental disNoIrPdBeLr. Aim of this study is to ascertain the pathogenicity of KMT2D missense muta- Patients are characteSrMizCe1dA b, yS MdiCs3ti,n RctA fDa2ci1al feaHtDurAeCs8, growth retardation and tions through an integrative analysis of bioinformatics tools and biochemical cognitive delay. Whereas half of the patients show mutations in the and cellular assays. We used an innovative in silico approach that combines gene, mutations in or accoNuInPtB fLo r additional comparative analysis and motif/domain search tools with threading/homo- 10%. Interestingly, recent data using DNA from buccal mucosa (BM) tissue logy modeling protocols to predict functional/structural effect of KMT2D could identify a high proportion of mosaic mutations in which were missense variants and identify and confirm potential pathogenic mutations. not detected in DNA from blood samples. Here we report on two unrelated Due to the huge size of KMT2D gene, we devised a strategy where minige- patients with characteristic CdLS phenotype, who were mutation negative nes carrying KMT2D missense variants were generated. We evaluated their by Sanger sequencing analyzing DNA from blood and BM samples. potential pathogenicity effects by measuring KMT2D enzymatic activity and Subsequent Ion Torrent panel sequencing on DNA of BM using a custom expression level of KMT2D known target genes. Our strategy should offer a made Ion AmpliSeq enrichment that includes the five known CNdILPSB gLenes be- valuable support to estimate the real deleterious effect of KMT2D missense side eleven functionally-associated candidate genes, could detect a mosaic variants, an issue in diagnostic counseling. nonsense (17%) and a mosaic missense mutation (13%) in . Intere- 
C17 .1 stingly SNaPshot fragment analyses were able to confirm both mutations in A dominant mutation in CHCHD10 causes neurodegenerative disorder DNA from BM, fibroblasts and urine samples but did not detect these muta- with mitochondrial DNA instability tions in DNA from blood. Additional Sanger sequencing approaches using V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2, S. Bannwarth1, S. Saadi1, A. Chaussenot2, E. Genin1, K. Fragaki1, L. Berg-Alonso1, S. Lacas-Gervais3, V. Serre4, A. Verschueren5, C. Rouzier1, G. Augé1, C. DNA from all four tissues could only detect both mutations in fibrNobIPlaBsLt Cochaud2, F. Lespinasse1, J. Pouget5; DNA. 1IRCAN, UMR CNRS 7284/INSERM U1081/UNS, Nice, France, 2Department of Medical In summary, our data strongly support a high frequency of mosaic Genetics, CHU Nice, Nice, France, 3Joint Center for Applied Electron Microscopy, Nice, mutations in CdLS-patients. More importantly, it also shows the limitations France, 4UMR7592 CNRS, Paris, France, 5Department of Neurology, Timone hospital, of current sequencing approaches in diagnostics, even when using DNA of Marseille, France. BM as recently suggested. Thus we recommend the use of high coverage se- quencing techniques on DNA of BM, especially when analyzing patients with c Ch 1a 6r .a 5cteristic CdLS-phenotypes and negative Sanger sequencing results. Mutations in OPA1 and MFN2, two genes encoding membrane proteins in- RNA Polymerase II activity is affected at the promoter regions in volved in mitochondrial dynamics, are responsible for mitochondrial DNA SM
C1 A-mutated Cornelia de Lange Syndrome cells (mtDNA) instability disorder with “Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy L. Mannini1, S. Bilodeau2, C. Amato1, V. Quarantotti1, F. Cucco1,3, I. D. Krantz4, A. Musio1; (ADOA) plus” phenotype. We report a large family with a late-onset com- 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Pisa, Italy, plex phenotype including motor neuron disease, cerebellar ataxia, cognitive 2Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l’Université Laval and Centre de recherche du decline and myopathy. Muscle biopsy showed ragged-red and COX negative CHU de Québec (Hôtel-Dieu de Québec), Département de biologie moléculaire, biochimie fibres with combined respiratory chain deficiency and abnormal assembly médicale et pathologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada, of complex V. The multiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions found in 3Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4Division of Human Genetics, skeletal muscle revealed a mtDNA instability disorder. By whole-exome se- The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and the Perelman School of Medicine at the quencing (WES), we identified a missense mutation (c.176C>T; p.Ser59Leu) University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. in the CHCHD10 gene that encodes a coiled-coil helix coiled-coil helix pro- tein, whose function was unknown. We show that CHCHD10 is a mitochon- drial protein located in the intermembrane space and enriched at cristae Mutations in genes encoding cohesin subunits or regulators, namely NIPBL, junctions. Patient fibroblasts carrying the CHCHD10 mutation present with SM
C1 A, SM
C3 , HDA
C8  and RAD21, have been linked to Cornelia de Lange a respiratory chain deficiency and a fragmentation of the mitochondrial net- syndrome (CdLS). It has been hypothesized that the dysregulation of gene work. Furthermore, we show that overexpression of CHCHD10
S59 L triggers expression by chromatin remodeling likely represents the underlying pa- mitochondrial fragmentation in HeLa cells, thus confirming the deleterious thogenesis of CdLS, however the exact mechanism by which this is effected effect of this mutant on mitochondrial morphology and network. DR
P1 - is unknown. To gain a better understanding of this process we investiga- K38A, which is resistant to fission, did not modify the mitochondrial frag- ted whether the gene transcription machinery was somehow affected by mentation observed in cells expressing CHCHD10
S59 L, suggesting that the SM
C1 A mutations. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with CHCHD10 mutant leads to impaired fusion activity. This work, suggesting massively parallel DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) to identify genomic regions that CHCHD10 plays a role in mitochondrial fusion and/or in maintenance co-occupied by cohesin, NIPBL and RNA pol II in normal human lympho- of cristae morphology, highlights the critical role of mitochondrial dynamics blastoid cells. Genes co-localizing cohesin, NIPBL and RNA pol II have been in terms of human disease and mitochondrial genome stability. compared to gene expression data from CdLS cell lines. Finally, we investi- 
C17 .2 gated the recruitment of RNA pol II onto genes differentially expressed in Decoding Mitochondrial Disorders using Exome Sequencing CdLS mutated cells. Our results indicate that SM
C1 A mutations reduce the L. Kremer1, T. Haack1, R. Kopajtich1, B. Haberberger1, C. Biagosch1, T. Wieland1, E. Graf1, recruitment of Pol II at promoter regions and also affect the activity of the T. Schwarzmayr1, T. Strom1, P. Freisinger2, T. Klopstock3, T. Meitinger1, W. Sperl4, J. Mayr4, H. Prokisch1; Pol II elongating form. These findings highlight the pivotal role of cohesin in 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, transcriptional regulation and the effect on Pol II occupancy may explain the Germany, 3Friedrich-Baur-Institut, LMU München, München, Germany, 4Paracelsus t Cy 1p 6ic .6al gene dysregulation observed in CdLS cell lines. Medical University, Salzburg, Austria. In silico and functional characterization of KMT2D/ML
L2  missense mutations as causative in Kabuki syndrome P. De Nittis1, L. Micale1, B. Augello1, C. Fusco1, A. Romano2, B. Piccinni3, M. Pellico1, B. Mitochondrial disorders are a heterogeneous group of diseases characteri- Mandriani1, C. Rinaldi1, A. Di Lauro1, T. Verri3, L. Zelante1, G. Merla1,4; zed by faulty oxidative phosphorylation. Despite good progress in the field, 1Medical Genetics Unit, IRCSS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni most disease causing mutations still have to be identified. We applied whole Rotondo, Italy, 2Institute of Experimental Neurology, Division of Neuroscience, San exome sequencing in 300 unrelated individuals with juvenile-onset mito- Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Biological and Environmental chondrial disorder. In a quarter of patients, we detected mutations in known ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |d WiseWaseW ge.EneSsH. InG a.nOoRthGer quarter of patients, we identified mutations in4 g1e-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index nes previously not associated with mitochondrial disorders. Mutations in to heterozygotes, significantly modified intestinal content reminiscent of the majority of genes are rare and could be identified due to loss-of-function diarrhea with a continued lethality of knockout from days 3 to 21 post-par- alleles in evolutionary conserved genes such as MGM
E1 , the first exonuclea- tum. RNA sequencing of gut and stomach biopsy in an adult patient showed se involved in mitochondrial replication (Kornblum et al., Nat. Genet. 2013). major downregulation (X10 to X200) of several gastrointestinal peptide Mutations in other genes are more frequent, with ACAD9 being the most hormones transcripts compared to controls, suggesting enteroendocrine common finding with more than 15 cases, providing statistical evidence for cell dysfunction. No gene in a ±1Mb interval around the enhanAcRerX showed the association with isolated respiratory chain complex deficiency. More mRNA disregulation, to be expected if enhancer action extends to adults. difficult to identify are missense mutation in genes coding orphan proteins Intriguingly, we observed a 30 fold mRNA downregulation of , a tran- such as FBX
L4 , a protein with unknown function associated with reduced scription factor previously implicated in syndromic diarrhea. Circularized mitochondrial protein content. Additional diagnostic challenges are pati- chromosome conformation capture (4C) is currently employed at different ents with recessive mutations in more than one gene resulting in a com- mouse developmental stages, seeking further information on potential en- pound clinical phenotype. hancer targets. Our results suggest that congenital diarrhea in our patients Evolving topics are tRNA modifying enzymes (ELA
C2 , MTO1 and GTPB
P3 ) involves a rare case of enhancer-mediated phenotype, perhaps involving fai- and tRNA synthetases, both involved in the translation of mitochondrial pro- lure of enteroendocrine development or function. teins as well as cofactor metabolism defects. The later offers rational the- 
C17 .5 rapeutic options as for example riboflavin supplementation in the case of Genetic testing leads clinical care in neonatal diabetes: a new mutations in the riboflavin transporter SL
C52 A2. paradigm In summary, the genetically heterogeneous group of mitochondrial disor- E. De Franco1, S. E. Flanagan1, J. A. L. Houghton1, H. Lango Allen1, R. Caswell1, D. J. G. Mackay2,3, K. I. Temple3, S. Ellard1, A. T. Hattersley1; ders is an example par excellence for the application of genome wide se- 1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, q Cu 1e 7n .3cing. Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury Health Care Lentivial vector based hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy mediates Trust,, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. sustained expression of functional thymidine phosphorylase in mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy mouse model R. Yadak1, J. Torres-Torronteras2, Y. Cámara2, E. Bogaerts1, G. de Ruijter1, R. Martı2, N. van Til1, G. Wagemaker1, I. de Coo1; Before next-generation sequencing, genetic testing was based on selection 1Eramus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Laboratory of Neuromuscular and of a gene (or small number of genes) in which mutations had been identified Mitochondrial Disorders, Barcelona, Spain. in patients with recognisable, discrete phenotypes. For neonatal diabetes this included a transient subtype and syndromes such as Wolcott-Rallison. In this study we investigated the impact of testing all known genetic causes MNGIE is an autosomal recessive disease caused by deficiency of the en- of neonatal diabetes. zyme thymidine phosphorylase (TP), resulting ienx s vyisvtoemic accumulation of We studied 1020 patients from 79 countries with diabetes diagnosed <6 nucleosides thymidine (Thd) and deoxyuridine (dUrd), and mtD NA deleti- months of age. Mutations were identified by targeted next-generation se- Tonp-s/,-U dpepp-l/e-tion and dysfunction. We aimed to use lentiviral vector (LV) quencing of 21 genes, Sanger sequencing or 6q24 methylation analysis. hematopoieTtipc -s/t-eUmpp c-e/l-l (HSC) gene therapy to deliver human TPenzyme in A pathogenic mutation was identified in 840 patients (82%). The most com- double knockout mice, a model for MNGIE disease. To that end, LV mon cause was a potassium channel mutation (n=390); most of these pati- transduced HSCs containing the native cDNA sequ ence (TP) or ents achieve improved glycaemic control after transfer from insulin to sul- codon optimiTzepd-/ (-TUPpcpo-/) -driven by the phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) or the fonylureas. The median age at referral decreased from 271 weeks in 2004 spleen focus forming virus (SFFV) promoter were transplantedin sublethal- to 18 weeks in 2013. Patients with a genetic diagnosis of Wolcott-Rallison ly irradiated mice. Wild type mice had detectable but very low syndrome referred <12 months of age were therefore more likely to have levels of enzyme activity in blood cell fractions (0.07 ± 0.03nmoles/h/mg, isolated diabetes at referral (85% vs 33% >12 months) and develop additio- N=4), 1 month post transplantation, enzyme activities increased at least 90- nal features (e.g. liver failure) after testing. A genetic diagnosis also predicts fold in LV recipient mice (LV-TP and LV-TPco = 150±4 and 96±4 nmoles/h/ diabetes remission: 88/94 patients (94%) referred <3 months received a mg respectively, N=4), with a 400-fold increase observed in recipients of LV- genetic diagnosis of transient neonatal diabetes before remission. SFFV-TPco (450±5, N=4), resulting in reduction of Thd and dUrd in plasma Comprehensive genetic analysis identified causal mutations in >80% of ca- and urine. TP activity was detectable in brain of gene therapy-treated mice ses. More patients are now referred at presentation with isolated diabetes 14 months after treatment (average of 1.2-fold in LV-TP and LV-TPco compa- and the genetic result predicts clinical course and development of related red to wild type and 36-fold for LV-SFFV-TPco), which significantly reduced features. This represents a new paradigm for clinical care with genetic dia- the nucleoside levels.High molecular chimerism (76.5±8.2 % donor chime- gnosis preceding the development of clinical features and guiding clinical rism, N=12) with low LV vector copy numbers (1.01±1.1VCN/donor derived management. 
C17 .6 cell, N=12)were achieved.Overall, HSC gene therapy resulted in stable TP ex- Safety and efficacy of pravastatin and zoledronate association pression and long-term biochemical correction without geno-phenotoxicity in Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria: two-years treatment results of in MNGIE mice to be further optimized to develop a clinical protocol to treat a phase II, open label, single arm clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov MNGIE patients. 
C17 .4 #NCT00731016) Deletion of a distant-acting enhancer near 
C16 ORF91 underlies A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1,2,3, S. Sigaudy1,2,3, P. Bourgeois1,2,3, S. Miloudi4, P. Roll1,2,3, G. recessive congenital diarrhea Gorincour5, J. Gentet6, F. Sabatier7,8, L. Arnaud8, N. André6, P. Cau1,2,3, R. Truillet4, E. Jouve4, D. Oz-Levi1, I. bar Joseph2, T. Olender1, D. Marek-Yagel3, A. Alkelai1, E. K. Ruzzo4, P. J. Micallef4, N. Lévy1,2,3; Tatarsky1, H. Reznik-Wolf5, C. Hartman6, R. Shamir6, R. Kleta7, D. B. Goldstein4, E. Pras5, L. 1Département de Génétique Médicale et Biologie Cellulaire, AP-HM, Hôpital d’Enfants de A. Pennacchio8, D. Lancet1, Y. Anikster5; la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, GMGF, Marseille, France, 3Inserm, 1The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2Sheba medical center, Ramat Gan, UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 4Centre d’investigation clinique - Unité de pharmacologie Israel, 3Sheba Medical center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 4Center for Human Genome Variation, clinique et d’évaluations thérapeutiques (CIC-UPCET), AP-HM, Hôpital La Timone, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, United States, 5Sheba Medical Marseille, France, 5Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, AP-HM, Hôpital d’Enfants Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 6Schneider Medical Center, Petach-Tikva, Israel, 7Centre for La Timone,, Marseille, France, 6Service d’Hématologie et Oncologie Pédiatrique, Nephrology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 8Lawrence Berkeley AP-HM, Hôpital d’Enfants La Timone, Marseille, France, 7Laboratoire de Culture et National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States. Thérapie cellulaire, AP-HM, Hôpital de la Conception, Marseille, France, 8Laboratoire d’hématologie, AP-HM, Hôpital de la Conception, Marseille, France. We studied eight patients from seven families of Jewish Iraqi origin, suffe- ring from congenital diarrhea, historically defined as inCt1ra6cOtRabFl9e1 diarrhea Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is an extremely rare deve- of infancy syndrome (IDIS). Next-generation sequencing and SNP arrays lopmental disorder affecting children with segmental features of aging, in- identified two structural genomic deletion alleles near , leading cluding thin skin, loss of subcutaneous fat, alopecia, osteopenia and accele- to a homozygous deletion of a 1500bp intergenic critical region (ΔV) shared rated cardiovascular arteriosclerotic disease, leading to death at the mean by all patients. The ΔV region contained a segment with vertebrate evolu- age of 13 years. The syndrome is due to a mutation in the gene encoding tionary conservation and transcription factor binding clustering. ΔV was lamins A/C, leading to the production of an aberrant lamin A precursor shown by mouse embryo transgenic assay to harbor a robust enhancer, called progerin. Intranuclear progerin accumulation exerts multiple toxic active in specific sub-regions of stomach, duodenum and pancreas at early effects which ultimately lead to organismal premature aging. Preclinical developmental stages (
E11 .5-14.5). In a mouse ΔV deletion strain, homozy- data provided proof-of-principle that the combined use of zoledronate and g4ou2s offspring had on average 36% smaller post-naEtSalH wGei g2h0t a1s4 c o|m MpaILreAd N, pITraAvaLsYta |t iWn (WZoPWra.)E cSoHulGd a.OmeRliGorate several disease parameters, includingABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index growth, bone density and survival. On these bases, we conducted in Mar- analyzed 106 patients (mostly males and sporadic cases) with molecularly seille La Timone Hospital a phase II, open label, single arm trial including undiaAgTnRoXsedC UID
L4 . OBn, eD MthDirdF oMf Rth1emH ChFaCr1b,oIrLe1dR aAuPtiLs1ticI QfeSaEtCu2resK.DM5C MAOA 12 European HGPS patients, aiming to test the safety and efficacy of two WMEe CiPd2enStLifCie9dA 6caSuLsCat1i6vAe 2m, PuHtaFt8io)n,s ind e2 6no pvoat ients: sixteen in X-linDkYeRdK 1geA- years of ZoPra treatment (10 to 20 mg/day oral pravastatin and 0.05 mg/kg nGeRsI N(1ME,D 13LTCF4RA, I1SHA, NK3, SLC 2A1, SYNG,A 
P1  , , , intravenous zoledronate every 12 weeks). The adverse events observed in , , 10 in autosomal genes ( NLGN3, this study were consistent with those expected in the HGPS population and , , , , ). We detected likely- none warranted treatment discontinuation. ZoPra induced clinical benefi- cauSsHatRivOeO mMu4t atioSRnPs Xre2quiring additional validation in 5 patients (in cial effects, including an amelioration of rates of weight gain and lipid pro- for instance). Our findings confirm MED13L as an ID gene, but raise doubts files, bone mass increases, reduced mesenteric fat together with increased on or . We identified causative mutations in syndromic ge- leptin levels, reduced thrombocytosis and concurrent reductions of circula- nes in patients deviating from the classic phenotype. Some genes were hit ting endothelial microparticles and endothelial progenitor cells, suggesting more than once suggesting they correspond to more frequent conditions. reduced vascular injury. Our results are discussed in light of previous results The identification of mutations in 25-29% of patients proves the diagnostic of a phase II lonafarnib trial in HGPS. efficiency of this strategy, higher than CGH and comparable to trio-exome 
C18 .1 sequencing at lesser cost. We have now updated our captured gene list to Molecular Inversion Probe based Resequencing Identifies Recurrently 270 genes, and will report on its use. Mutated Genes in Intellectual Disability 
C18 .3 A. Hoischen1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, B. P. Coe2, C. Gilissen1, A. Vulto-Silfhout1, J. Schuurs- Comprehensive NGS based diagnostics in over 1000 patients with Hoeijmakers1, M. van de Vorst1, M. Steehouwer1, P. de Vries1, C. Baker2, K. Witherspoon2, epileptic disorders B. J. O’Roak2, J. Shendure2, H. G. Brunner1, C. Romano3, B. B. A. de Vries1, J. A. Veltman1, E. I. Steiner1, M. Doecker1, A. C. Russ1, J. Juengling1, K. Reicherter1, J. Hoffmann1, S. Fehr1, F. E. Eichler4; Battke1, J. Lemke2, H. Lerche3, S. Biskup1, K. Hoertnagel1; 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 1CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 2Division of Human Genetics, University Children’s Netherlands, 2Department of Genome Sciences; University of Washington, Seattle, WA, Hospital, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland, 3Department of Neurology and Epileptology, United States, 3Unit of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, IRCCS Associazione Oasi Maria University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Santissima, Troina, Italy, 4Department of Genome Sciences & Howard Hughes Medical Institute; University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. Purpose: Epileptic disorders have a highly heterogeneous background and a strong genetic contribution. Knowing the underlying molecular defect can Exome sequencing studies of individuals with intellectual disability (ID) and be veryM veatluhaobdl:e for diagnosis, guiding treatment and estimating recurrence related neurodevelopmental disorders have identified many de novo muta- risks. For this purpose we have developed a comprehensive diagnostic tions but few recurrently mutated genes1,2. We therefore applied a molecu- panel. 461 relevant genes were selected from the literature, and lar inversion probe (MIP) based resequencing method to screen 42 ID can- subdivided into subpanels according to their phenotypes. Following custo- didate genes - mainly from a previous study2 - in ~2,500 patients with the mized target enrichment, NGS was performed, followed by bioinformatic clinical diagnosis of ID and 1,000 healthy controls. This approach allowed analysis. VRareisaunlttss :w ith a global minor allele frequency <5% were selected targeted multiplex enrichment of 768 DNAs per week per fte, and barcoding for evaluation and identified mutations were validated using Sanger se- allowed simultaneous sequencing of up to 3,072 samples for the 42 gene quencing. In our study, over 1000 patients with epileptic disorders panel per HiSeq2000 sequencing run. This resulted in an average coverage were analyzed. 20% of patients had pathogenic mutation(s) and 29% were of >300x coverage per sample, allowing highly accurate variants calling. inconclusive, partly being predicted pathogenic but unknown variSaCnNts1,A paSrCt-- We discovered predicted loss-of-function (LoF) events for more than half lNy2 dAu, eC tAoC nNoAn1-AsegMrEeCgaPt2io n of KidCeNnTt1ified variants. 51% of the cases remained of the candidate genes, including multiple recurrent de novo nonsense and unsolved. We observed rare variants in 203 different genes, with , frameshift mutations in several genes including CHD2, GATD2B and MYT1L. , and being mutated most frequently. Across This together with ongoing ‘reverse-phenotyping’ of the affected individuals tChoen ccoluhosirot,n 7:8 genes were identified as causative only once, emphasizing the further supports the pathophysiological role of these genes in intellectual advantage of diagnostic panels for very rare conditions. disability. We were also able to analyze copy number status for these can- We have developed a highly reliable and cost-efficient diagno- didate genes, and discovered de novo CNVs, deletions and duplications, that stic NGS panel to analyze the genetic basis of epilepsies. We detected muta- implicate new dosage sensitive genes. Despite the challenging task to prove tions in patients with clear and unspecific epilepsies, as well as in patients causality, latest technological improvements allowed entering a golden age suffering from very rare conditions.This enables better understanding of of ‘neurodevelopmental-gene’ discovery which promises to improve not genotype-phenotype correlations, and gives new insights into complex mo- only our understanding of disease but provide fundamental insight into the des of inheritance such as combinatorial effects of variants. biology of human brain development. 
C18 .4 1. Rauch, A. et al. Lancet 380, 1674-82 (2012). Planar cell polarity gene mutations contribute to the etiology of 2. De Ligt, J. et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1921-9 (2012). human Neural Tube Defects 
C18 .2 P. De Marco1, E. Merello1, G. Piatelli1, A. Cama1, Z. Kibar2, V. Capra1; Efficient molecular diagnosis of Intellectual Disability: targeted 1Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2CHU Sainte Justine Research Center, Montreal, High throughput exon sequencing of 217 ID genes detects causative QC, Canada. mutations in at least 26 of 106 tested patients J. Mandel1,2,3, C. Redin1,3, J. Muller1,2, B. Gérard2, B. Jost1, M. Dumas1, S. Le Gras1, the French clinical genetics of ID consortium, D. Bonneau4, H. Dollfus5, Y. Alembik5, E. Flori6, Neural tube defects (NTDs) are congenital malformations affecting 1 infants V. Drouin Garraud7, D. Lacombe8, M. Doco Fenzy9, P. Sarda10, D. Geneviève10, P. Edery11, B. Isidor12, L. Olivier Faivre13, A. Piton1,3; per 1000 births. The most common forms of NTDs are anencephaly and 1IGBMC, Illkirch, CU Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire diagnostic genetique CHU myelomeningocele, which result from the failure of fusion in the cranial and Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Collège de France, Paris, France, 4Department of spinal regions of the neural tube, respectively. Population and family studies Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 5Service de indicate a complex etiology to NTDs involving environmental and genetic Génétique médicale, CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Service de cytogénétique, factors that remain undetermined. Animal models have strongly implicated CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 7Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Rouen, the Wnt non canonical planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway in the pathoge- Rouen, France, 8Service de génétique médicale,CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, Bordeaux, nesis of NTDs. PCP is the process of by which cells become polarized in the France, 9Service de cytogénétique, CHU Reims, Reims, France, 10Département de génétique médicale, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 11Département de génétique plane of an epithelium. PCP core members include the transmembrane pro- médicale, CHU Lyon Bron, Lyon, France, 12Service de génétique médicale, CHU Nantes, tein Frizzled (Fz), the intracellular proteins Dishevelled (Dsh), Strabismus Nantes, France, 13Département de génétique médicale, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France. (Stbm), Flamingo (Fmn), Prickle (Pk) and Diego. Downstream effectors in- clude the small GTPases of the RhoA family and JNK that upon activation lead to a variety of cellular responses including cytoskeletal rearrangements. Our Intellectual disability is a major public health problem, characterized by research group has demonVsAtNraGteLd1 ,a V lAinNkG bLe2twPeReICnK sLoEm1e CoEf tLhSeR 
P1 CFPZ gDe6neDsV aLn2d, an extreme genetic heterogeneity, with several hundred genes implicated hFUumZa n NTDs. We identified 52 rare mutations in a cohort of 629 NTDs pati- in monogenic forms with or without autism, complicating molecular dia- ents in seven PCP genes ( , , , , gnosis. In patients without evocative syndromic forms the offer is limited )that were absent in ethnically-matched controls.i nT hveiv 9o4 % of th ein m vuittrao- to Fragile-X testing and array-CGH, leaving most cases undiagnosed. Trio- tions were missense changes and a pathologic role was demonstrated for 46 Exome sequencing was recently proposed as a diagnostic approach, but re- of them by using bioinformatic prediction tools and and/or mains costly for general implementation. We thus tested targeted exon se- bioassays. Overall, the identified mutations realize of about 10% of NTD ca- quencing of 217 genes previously implicated in X-linked ID, or in autosomal ses. We hypothesize that rare variants of PCP pathway must interact with dominant or recessive forms in which ID EisS thHeG m a2j0or1 c4li n|i cMal IcLoAncNer,n I.T WAeL Y |o WtheWr gWen.eEs StoH mGo.dOulRatGe the incidence and severity of the disease. 43ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C18 .5 
C19 .1 Clinical exome sequencing for cerebellar ataxia and spastic Constitutive Activation of PRKACA in Adrenal Cushing‘s Syndrome paraplegia reveals novel gene-disease associations and uncovers T. Schwarzmayr1, F. Beuschlein2, M. Fassnacht2,3,4, G. Assié5,6, D. Calebiro7,8, C. A. unanticipated rare disorders Stratakis9, A. Osswald2, C. L. Ronchi10, T. Wieland1, S. Sbiera2,3, F. R. Faucz9, K. Schaak2, A. E. Kamsteeg, B. P. van de Warrenburg, S. T. de Bot, M. A. A. P. Willemsen, S. Vermeer, M. I. Schmittfull1, O. Barreau5,6, D. Vezzosi5, M. Rizk-Rabbin5, U. Zabel7, E. Szarek9, P. Salpea9, A. Schouten, R. Meijer, M. Pennings, C. Gilissen, H. Scheffer; Forlino11, A. Vetro12, O. Zuffardi11, C. Kisker8, S. Diener1, T. Meitinger1,13,14, M. J. Lohse4,7,8, M. Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Reincke2, J. Bertherat5,6, T. M. Strom1,13,14, B. Allolio3,4; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, University Clinical exome sequencing is an unbiased test that is used for straight-for- Hospital, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 4Comprehensive Heart Failure ward causative mutation detection, or for the discovery of novel (allelic) Center, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 5INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR gene - disease associations. Often, it leads to broader disease spectra, or re- 8104, Institut Cochin, Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Université Paris Descartes, verse phenotyping. Here, we describe the use of clinical exome sequencing Sarbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 6Department of Endocrinology, Referral Center for for a group of 76 probands with ataxia or spastic paraplegia. Since these Rare Adrenal Diseases, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 7Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, patients have had extensive testing (4.5 genes on average) before inclusion, Germany, 8Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Würzburg, mutations were not anticipated in the ‘common’ genes. In a two-tier analy- Würzburg, Germany, 9Section on Endocrinology & Genetics (SEGEN), Program on sis, variants in known disease genes were analysed first, followed by ana- Developmental Endocrinology & Genetics (PDEGEN), NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United lysis of the ‘full’ exome data set if no causative mutations were identified. States, 10Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Subsequently, segregation analyses, enzyme tests or reverse phenotyping Germany, 11Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare, Genetica Medica, University of Pavia, tests have confirmed or excluded the pathogenicity of most variants. In tho- Pavia, Italy, 12Biotechnology Research Laboratory, Foundation IRCCS, Policlinico San se 76 patients, we have thus detected causative mutations in 16, and likely- Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 13Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 14DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research) partner site, causative in another 9, all in the known disease genes. Some of the identi- Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany. fied diseases are very rare or even the second case described. Furthermore, another 8 putatively-causative mutations were detected in genes outside the known disease genesl, and await confirmation (functional tests or other Endogenous hypercortisolism, referred to as Cushing’s syndrome, is as- families with mutations in those gene). Some of the latter diseases may be sociated with excess morbidity and mortality. Corticotropin-independent allelic disorders, while others may be novel. In conclusion, exome sequen- Cushing’s syndrome is caused by tumors or hyperplasia of the adrenal cor- cing for these neurological disorders has resulted in a molecular diagnosis tex. in one-third of the patients, and has provided a candidate gene identification We performed exome sequencing of ten cortisol-producing adenomas and in approximately 1/10. More importantly, it has also provided some patients matched control tissue to identify somatic mutations and evaluated recur- with a molecular diagnosis that was both unanticipated and otherwise not rent mutations in candidate genes in adenomas of additional 171 patients. revealed. 
C18 .6 We further performed genome-wide copy number analysis in 35 patients WES detects disease causing SNVs and CNVs in Primary immunodeficiencies with cortisol-secreting bilateral hyperplasias. We studied the effects of the- H. S. Sorte1, A. Stray-Pedersen1,2,3, P. S. Samarakoon1, L. Forbes4,3, T. Gambin2, O. K. se genetic defects both clinically and in vitro. Rødningen1, I. C. Hanson4, L. M. Noroski3, C. Davis4, F. Seeborg4, S. K. Nicholas4, J. W. Exome sequencing revealed somatic mutations in the PRKACA gene, which Caldwell5, N. Y. Chokshi4, D. Bayer4, C. R. Beck2, T. J. Vece6, W. Wiszniewski2, S. J. Penney2, S. encodes the catalytic subunit of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), N. Jhangiani2, D. Muzny2,7, L. O. Mæhle1, A. Patel8, H. C. Erichsen9, T. G. Abrahamsen9,10, J. Buchner9, G. E. Tjonnfjord11,10, P. Aukrust10,12, L. T. Osnes13, M. A. Kulseth1, D. E. Undlien1,10, in 8 of 10 adenomas. Overall, PRKACA somatic mutations were identified W. T. Shearer4, B. Fevang10,12, R. A. Gibbs2,7, R. Lyle1, J. S. Orange4,3, J. R. Lupski2,7,8; in a total of 22 of 59 adenomas (37%) from patients with overt Cushing’s 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Baylor- syndrome; these mutations were not detectable in patients with subclini- Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics (BHCMG) of the Department of Molecular cal hypercortisolism (n=40) or in other adrenal tumors (n=82). Among 35 and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Center patients with bilateral cortisol-producing hyperplasias, 5 carried a germli- for Human Immunobiology of Texas Children’s Hospital/Department of Pediatrics, ne copy number gain of the chromosome 19 region, including the PRKACA Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Department of Pediatrics, gene. In vitro studies demonstrated impaired inhibition of both PKA cataly- Section of Immunology, Allergy, and Rheumatology, Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children‘s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 5Section Pulmonary, Critical tic subunit mutants by the PKA regulatory subunit, while cells from patients Care, Allergy and Immunologic Diseases, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, Winston- with germline chromosomal gains showed increased protein levels of the Salem, NC, United States, 6Department of Pulmonology, Texas Children’s Hospital, PKA catalytic subunit; in both instances, basal PKA activity was increased. Houston, TX, United States, 7Human Genome Sequencing Center of Baylor College of This study links genetic alterations of the catalytic subunit of PKA to hu- Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, man disease. Germline duplications of this gene result in bilateral adrenal Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 9Department of Pediatrics, Oslo hyperplasias, whereas somatic PRKACA gain-of-function mutations lead to University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 10Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, unilateral cortisol-producing adrenal adenomas. Oslo, Norway, 11Department of Hematology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 
C19 .2 12Section of Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, A mutation in SE
C61 A1 causes autosomal dominant interstitial Norway, 13Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. kidney disorder associated with anemia and growth retardation B. Loeys1,2, N. Bolar1, C. Golzio3, C. Van Hemelrijk4, A. Hoischen2, J. Huyghe1, A. Raes4, E. Matthys5, E. Sys6, M. Gubler7, C. Antignac7, M. Azou8, G. Van Camp1, S. Kmoch9, A. Bleyer10, Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDDs) constitute a heterogeneous group of J. Vande Walle4, G. Mortier1, H. Brunner2, L. Van Laer1, N. Katsanis3; genetic diseases affecting the immune system. Depending on the genetic 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 4University of etiology, symptoms range from mild to severe and life threatening. Know- Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 5Sint-Jan Hospital, Brugge, Belgium, 6Sint-Lucas Hospital, Brugge, ledge of the molecular genetic cause and disease mechanism is important Belgium, 7Inserm U983, Paris, France, 8Damian Hospital, Ostend, Belgium, 9Charles and can direct targeted and curative therapy. However, subtype classification University, Prague, Czech Republic, 10Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, is difficult as patients often have overlapping phenotypes. In addition, >250 NC, United States. PIDD genes have been reported, and few are offered for diagnostic genetic testing. We examined the utility of whole-exome sequencing (WES) to detect single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy number variations (CNVs) in the Autosomal dominant tubulo-interstitial kidney disease refers to a group diagnosis of PIDDs. As of Feb 2014, 225 patients with extensive immunolo- of disorders characterized by progressive loss of kidney function and the gical and genetic testing from 200 families have been recruited from Texas eventual need for dialysis and kidney transplantation. While mutations in Children Hospital (Houston, USA) and Oslo University Hospital (Norway). the UMOD, MU
C1 , and REN genes have been identified as the primary cau- Strategies for genetic analysis were tailored based on clinical data, immu- ses of this disorder, there remain a number of families in whom the gene- nophenotyping and family history, but for most families only the proband tic cause has not been identified. Here we report a three-generation family was subjected to WES. Initially, WES data were systematically screened for with autosomal dominant progressive chronic kidney disease associated variants in reported and potential PIDD genes. In addition, a computational with congenital anemia and intrauterine growth retardation. Ultrasound CNV prediction pipeline was applied to enable identification of potential examinations revealed small dysplastic kidneys without cysts, and a kidney disease-causing CNVs from the WES data. Analysis of the first 110 families biopsy revealed tubular atrophy with secondary glomerular sclerosis. We identified PIDD relevant variants in 60% of cases; half of these attaining a performed genome-wide linkage analysis and identified a candidate region definitive molecular PIDD diagnosis. The other half had previously reported with a maximum LOD-score of 2.7 on chromosome 3q. Combining whole PIDD-causing variants, but with an unexpected or extended clinical pheno- exome sequencing data with our critical interval, we identified a c.553A>G type, or heterozygote, potential deleterious variants in recessively inherited variant causing a p.Thr185Ala change in SE
C61 A1. SE
C61 A1 encodes the PIDD genes. Other interesting findings include PIDD-causing CNVs, somatic alpha-subunit of the SE
C61  complex, responsible for the translocation of re4v4ersion causing mosaicism, and 13 potential noveE l S diH seG as e2 g0 e1 n4 es .| MILAN, pIT roA teL iY ns | a W croW ssW th. eE eS nH doG p. laO smR iG c reticulum membrane. Suppression of se-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index ESR2 c61a1 in zebrafish embryos led to an absence of convolution of the prone- frame deletion in in this patient, c.541_543del (p.Asn181del). The de- phric tubules, whereas the pronephric ducts were unaffected, a phenotype lEeStRed2 amino acid is located in the DNA-binding domain and is highly conser- similar to the tubular atrophy seen in our patients. This phenotype could be ved. This deletion was absent in an ethnically matched control population. rescued by wild type SE
C61 A1 mRNA, but not with mRNA encoded from the mutation screening in a 46,XY DSD cohort revealed an additional hete- p.Thr185Ala allele, suggesting that the variant is a loss of function. Taken to- rozygous mutation c.251G>T (p.Gly84Val). Prediction programs suggest an gether, our genetic findings and the functional studies support SE
C61 A1 as effect on protein function (SIFT, Polyhen, Mutation Taster). In addition the a causal gene for a novel, dominant syndromic form of progressive chronic affected amino acid is conserved until fruitfly. kidney disease with tubular atrophy. Immunohistochemistry in an 8-weeks old human male embryo showed ER- 
C19 .3 beta expression in the hindgut and the eyes, which might recapitulate the TJ
P2  deficiency: a new cholestatic liver disease M. Sambrotta1, S. Strautnieks2, E. Papouli3, P. Rushton4, B. E. Clark4, D. A. Parry5, L. systemic manifestations of the index case. Brett2, C. V. Logan5, L. J. Newbury6, B. M. Kamath7, S. Ling7, T. Grammatikopoulos1,8, B. E. Dose-response assays with DPN, ERE-luc and TK-3xEREluc constructs, and Wagner9, J. C. Magee10, R. J. Sokol11, G. Mieli-Vergani1,8, University of Washington Center ER-beta wild type and mutant constructs inE HSERK2293T cells showed a diffe- for Mendelian Genomics, J. D. Smith12, C. A. Johnson5, S. Davison13, P. McClean13, M. A. rential transcriptional activation of the ER-beta mutants. Simpson14, A. S. Knisely2, L. N. Bull15, R. J. Thompson1,8; In conclusion, our study sustains a role of as novel disease gene for 1Institute of Liver Studies, Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal syndromic 46,XY DSEDS.R I2t is expected that further functional studies of these Biology, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2King‘s College Hospital, ER-beta mutants will provide insights into their molecular consequences London, United Kingdom, 3BRC Genomics Core Facility,at Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Department a Cn 1d 9 .i 5nto the role of in the pathogenesis of 46,XY DSD. of Haematological Medicine, King‘s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, LR
P5  variants associated with development of polycystic kidney and United Kingdom, 5Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St James‘s University Hospital, liver disease University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 6Renal Sciences, Division of Transplantation W. R. Cnossen1, R. H. M. te Morsche1, A. Hoischen2, C. Gilissen2, H. Venselaar3, S. Mehdi4, Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, C. Bergmann5,6, M. Losekoot7, M. H. Breuning7, D. J. M. Peters7, J. A. Veltman2, J. P. H. 7Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Hospital for Sick Children, Drenth1; Toronto, ON, Canada, 8Paediatric Liver, GI and Nutrition Centre, King‘s College Hospital, 1Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, London, United Kingdom, 9Histopathology Department, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Center for Sheffield, United Kingdom, 10University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, United States, 11Children‘s Hospital Colorado and University of Colorado School of 4Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University Mohammed First, d‘Oujda, Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States, 12Department of Genome Sciences, University of Morocco, 5Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 6Center for Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 13Children’s Liver and Gastroenterology Unit, Clinical Research, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 7LDGA-Department Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, United Kingdom, 14Division of Genetics and Molecular of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. Medicine, King‘s College London School of Medicine, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 15Liver Center Laboratory and Institute for Human Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a Mendelian disorder characterized by multiple renal cysts thaPt KpDro1g rePssKivDe2l y leads to Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) is an autosomal reces- renal disease. Polycystic livers are the most common extra-renal manifesta- sive disorder manifesting as early-onset cholestatic liver disease. In 1998 tion (83%). About 90% of ADPKD families harbor a or LRm
P5 utation, mutations in three genes encoding membrane transporters were identified. but others remain indistinct. Previous studies hypothesized involvement of However, 30% of patients remain without genetic diagnosis. Combined a third locus. Recently, wLeR idPe5n ti fied mutations in a novel gene ( ) asso- targeted resequencing (TRS) and whole-exome sequencing were used to ciated with isolated polycPysKtDic1 l/iv2er disPeaKsHeD (1PCLD). analyse a cohort of 33 children, from 29 families, wTJiPth2 chronic cholestatic We analyzed all exons of ina cohort of 29 patients with and 50 patients liver disease and no mutations in known PFIC genes. Most were from TcoJPn2- without prescreening of LRP a5n d . We identified 2 novel and 2 sanguineous families. Homozygous mutations in were identified in rIna rseil ivcaoriants in 4 unlinked ADPKD patients. One LfRam
P5 il y demonstrated ob- 12 individuals of 8 families; all were predicted to abolish translation. vious segregation of the novel variant with the disease. encodes a cytosolic component of cell-cell junctional structures, linking analyses predicted both novel and 1 rare variant to be patho- integral membrane proteins such as claudins with actin filaments. Immu- genic, and the remaining variant as possibLlyR Pd5am aging. All 4 variants were nohistochemistry and western blotting of liver tissue from these patients not found in exome data from 1,300 individuals of predominantly European showed a complete absence of TJ
P2  protein. Claudin-1 was not localised, ancestry sequenced in-house. The 2 novel variants were absent in se- but showed no alteration in protein TleJvPe2l. Tight junctions were abnormal veral (inter)national databases and also excluded in a control set of 1,000 on transmission electron microscopy. A further 53 cholestatic patients were Dutch and 525 Moroccan DNAs of healthy, unrelated individuals. then examined by TRS. Mutations in were identified in 8 families. All For 3 mutations homology modeling predicted that ionic interactions dis- mutations were protein-truncating mutations, except for three families with appear LwRhPic5h diminishes the protein domain function. Luciferase activity missense mutations. One missense mutation, p.His788Leu, was found in 2 assays LwRePr5e performed in eukaryotic cells transfected with wild-type and unrelated familieTs Jw
P2 ith severe early-onset cholestasis, which subsequently mutant . Wnt signal activation was significantly reduced in 2 novel and remitted. Previously a single, incompletely penetrant, missense mutation 1 rare variant. was identified in in Amish patients with isolated hypercholanaemia. In In conclusion, these findings contribute to the pathofysiology of renal and conclusTiJoPn2, a complete absence of TJ
P2  causes severe cholestatic liver disea- hepatic cystogenesis with involvement of the canonical Wnt signaling pa- se, with destabilization of tight junction structures, whilst missense mutati- t Ch 1w 9a .6y. ons in can lead to less severe phenotypes. These findings highlight the Digenic model in Alport syndrome i Cm 1p 9o .4rtance of TJ
P2  in the maintenance of liver integrity. M. Mencarelli1,2, M. van Geel3, H. Storey4, C. Fallerini1, L. Dosa1,2, M. Antonucci1,2, F. Cetta5, A. van den Wijngaard3, S. Yau4, F. Mari1,2, M. Bruttini1,2, F. Ariani1, K. Dahan6, B. Smeets3, F. Identification and functional characterization of ESR2, a new disease Flinter7, A. Renieri1,2; gene for 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda D. Baetens1, T. Guran2, L. De Cauwer3, L. Looijenga4, K. De Bosscher3, M. Cools5, E. De Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Baere1; Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4DNA Laboratory, GSTS Pathology, Guy’s 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital and Ghent University, Ghent, Hospital, London S
E1  9RT, London, United Kingdom, 5IRCCS MultiMedica, Milan, Italy, Belgium, 2Zeynep Kamil Maternity and Childrens’ Diseases Training and Research 6Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium, 7Department of Clinical Hospital, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Cytokine Genetics, Guy‘s & St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, Guy’s Hospital, London S
E1  9RT, Receptor Lab, Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium, London, United Kingdom. 44Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital and Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Alport syndrome (ATS) is a clinically and genetically hereditary nephropa- thy, that iCs OoLft4eAn5 associated with deafness and ocular lesions. Monogenic in- heritanCcOeL m4Ao3delsC aOrLe 4wAe4ll known, with semidominant X-linked inheritance, Disorders of sex development (DSDs) are congenital conditions with atypical linked to gene, or autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance, lin- development of chromosomal, gonadal or anatomical sex. The prevalence of ked to or gene. The increased availability of high throughput these conditions is 1 in 4500, milder genital abnormalities are seen in 1 in sequencing permits identification of kindreds with pathogenic mutations in 300 births. Today, the molecular cause is known in only 50%E oSfR c2ases. more than one disease-gene, also exploring digenic inheritance models. We Here, homozygosity mapping in a patient with syndromic 46,XY DSD re- have found 6 kindreds, in which the proband had 2 pathogenic mutations in vealed a potential functional candidate gene for DSD, namely , encoding ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |d WiffeWrenWt A.ElpSoHrt Gas.sOocRiaGted genes. In 4 out of 6 cases it was shown that 4ea5ch the Estrogen Receptor beta. Sanger sequencing revealed a homozygous in-ABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C20 .3 Study of the regulatory landscape of SHOX in 503 LWD and ISS cases mutation was inheriCteOdL 4frAo5m oneC OofL t4hAe4 parents. In most cases heterozygo- uncover a key role of the upstream cis-regulatory element CNE-3 tes had less severe diseaCsOeL t4hAan3 the dCoOuLb4leA 4h eterozygotes. In two cases mu- H. Verdin1, A. Fernández Miñán2, K. De Leeneer1, L. Borms1, S. Janssens1, B. Callewaert1, tations involved the and genes, whereas in the remaining 4, F. Malfait1, A. Kariminejad3, K. De Waele4, J. De Schepper4, I. François5, A. Dheedene1, B. mutations involved the and genes. Mutation pathogenicity Menten1, J. L. Gómez-Skarmeta2, E. De Baere1; was ascertained on the basis of the following criteria: non polymorphic mis- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad sense mutations in key aminoacids, as Glycine in the collagen Gly-X-Y triple Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain, 3Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics helical domain, or truncating mutations. In conclusion, results from new Center, Shahrak Gharb, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Pediatric technologies showed that some cases of ATS may segregate according to a Endocrinology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of Pediatrics digenic inheritance model. This model has previously been shown in other Endocrinology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. diseases, such as retinopathies, cardiomyopathies or intellectual disability. Our results are of interest both from a scientific point of view and for genetic SHOX counselling. Clinical geneticists should be familiar with more complex mo- Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and idiopathic short stature (ISS) are d Ce 2l 0s .o 1f inheritance, which could alter the recurrence risk. caused by a variety of molecular defects of and the downstream PAR1 Single cell allele-specific expression (ASE) in Down syndrome and region. Interestingly, the first deletion and duplication of the upstream re- common aneuploidies gulatory PAR1 region have recently been described in ISS, suggesting a new G. Stamoulis1, P. G. Ferreira1, P. Makrythanasis1, F. Santoni1, M. Guipponi2, M. Garieri1, E. pathogenic mechanism for ISS. Here, we aimed to evaluate the contribution Falconnet1, P. Ribaux1, E. T. Dermitzakis1,3, C. Borel1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,3; of copy number variations (CNVs) of uSpHsOtrXeam enhancers to the molecular 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, pathogenesis of LWD and ISS, and to characterize the chromosomal archi- Switzerland, 3iG
E3  Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. tecture of the regulatory landscape of . We performed CNV analysis of three previously characterized upstream enhancers (CNE-5, CNE-3 and CNE-2) using quantitative polymerase chain Trisomy 21 is a model disorder of altered gene expression. Several studies reaction (qPCR) analysis in 503 prescreened LWD and ISS patients with have addressed the transcriptome differences between normal and affected unknown molecular diagnosis. Three deletions and three enhancer dupli- individuals; however all of these studies suffer from the presence of ‘noise’ cations were found in five unrelated ISS patients respectively. Interestingly, due to gene expression variation among different indNivaidtuuraels. We have pre- their shortest region of overlap only contains CNE-3, pointing to a crucial viously used a pair of monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21 in order role for this upsStHreOaXm enhancer. Using chromosome conformation captu- to study the global dysregulation of gene expression ( in press 2014). re assays (3C and 4C-seq), we demonSHstOraXted reproducible interactions of The majority of previous studies focused on aneuploidies were conducted CNE-3 with the promoter. FiSnHalOlyX, the 4C-seq study allowed us to map οn cultured cell populations or tissues, but studies focusing on gene and al- the complete regulatory landscape of , extending more than 1 Mb both lelic expression behavior at the single cell level are lacking. In this study upstream and downstream of the promoter. we explore the allele specific expression in Trisomy 21 using transcriptome In conclusion, our study substantiates a role of upstream CNVs in ISS pati- studies in single cells. We have used 40 normal cells and 48 trisomic cells ents. In addition, we SpHroOvXided evidence for a key role of CNE-3 as upsStrHeOaXm from the fibroblasts of the monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21 and enhancer. Finally, our study indicates an important role for the extended compared the ASE (allele specific expression), and their transcriptional me- regulatory region of to be included in molecular diagnostics of - trics in these two cell groups. We observed a pattern of biased or monoalle- associated phenotypes. 
C20 .4 lic expression for the majority of the genes across single cells. These results Pseudoautosomal region 1 length polymorphism in the human will be presented and discussed. In addition a series of samples from mosaic population trisomy 21, trisomy 13 and trisomy 18 are in different stages of investigati- M. A. Mensah1,2, M. S. Hestand1, M. H. D. Larmuseau3,4,5, M. Isrie1, N. Vanderheyden3, M. on. These studies in single cells will provide a fundamental understanding Declercq1, E. L. Souche1, J. Van Houdt1, R. Stoeva1, H. Van Esch1, K. Devriendt1, T. Voet1, R. of the gene expression dysregulation and allele specific expression in aneu- Decorte3,4, P. N. Robinson2, J. R. Vermeesch1; p Cl 2o 0id .2ies. 1KU Leuven, Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Charité - Universitätsmedizin - Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3UZ Distinct properties of de novo mutations from whole genome Leuven, Laboratory of Forensic Genetics and Molecular Archaeology, Leuven, Belgium, sequencing of 50 patient-parent trios 4KU Leuven, Department of Imaging & Pathology, Biomedical Forensic Sciences, M. Pinelli1,2, B. Tan1,3, J. M. van de Vorst1, R. Leach4, R. Klein4, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, H. G. Leuven, Belgium, 5KU Leuven, Department of Biology, Laboratory of Biodiversity and Brunner1,5, J. A. Veltman1,5, A. Hoischen1, C. Gilissen1; Evolutionary Genomics, Leuven, Belgium. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, China, 4Complete Genomics Inc., Mountain View, CA, The human sex chromosomes differ in sequence, except for the pseudoau- United States, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, tosomal regions (PAR) at both the short and the long arm, denoted as PAR1 Maastricht, Netherlands. and PAR2. The boundary between PAR1 and the unique X and Y sequences was established during the divergence of the great apes. During a copy num- ber variation screen, we noted a paternally inherited chromosome X dupli- De novo germline mutations create the genetic variability that is the driving cation in 15 independent families. Subsequent genomic analysis demon- force of species evolution. However, they also can cause sporadic genetic strated that an insertional translocation of X chromosomal sequence into diseases if they affect critical genomic regions. Whole Genome Sequencing the Y chromosome generates an extended PAR. The insertion is generated (WGS) of parent-offspring trios allows us for the first time to study the re- by non-allelic homologous recombination between a 548 bp LTR6B repeat sult of mutational processes in a single generation in full detail. Here we with two paralogues located within PAR1 as well as at a distance of 105 report on the rate and pattern of de novo mutations based on WGS of 50 kb from the PAR boundary on the X chromosome. The identification of the trios at high (80x median) coverage. reciprocal deletion on the X chromosome in one family and the occurrence We identified an average of 58 de novo mutations (DNM) per trio (range of the variant in different chromosome Y haplogroups, demonstrate this is 32-84), 2,883 DNMs in total. By using the segregation of informative SNPs a recurrent genomic rearrangement. In contrast to its perceived evolutiona- we determined the parental origin for 678 DNMs, and found a paternal/ma- ry stability, we demonstrate that a PAR1 length polymorphism exists in the ternal ratio of 4 to 1 (79%/21%), consistent with previous data. Using the human population. This finding represents a novel mechanism shaping sex parental origin of these DNMs we found a significant correlation between chromosomal evolution. 
C20 .5 the paternal age and the number of paternal DNMs (Spearman’s p=0.006) Comparative proteomic analysis of different fragile X syndrome cell as well as a suggestive results for the correlation between maternal age and lines the number of maternal DNMs (p=0.08). S. Lanni1, F. Palumbo1, M. Goracci1, G. Mancano1, A. Vitali2, V. Marzano3, F. Iavarone3, F. We find that DNMs do not occur completely random in the genome, but are Vincenzoni3, M. Castagnola3, P. Chiurazzi1, E. Tabolacci1, G. Neri1; spatially clustered within individuals (observed=28 (0.9%), expected=1.3 1Institute of Medical Genetics-Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Institute ofChemistry of (0.004%), p-value<10-16) and have a sequence context that is enriched for Molecular Recognition-CNR--Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 3Institute of Biochemistry CpGs (observed=482 (20.6%), expected=58 (2.6%), p-value<10-16). In con- and Clinical Biochemmistry-Catholic University, Rome, Italy. clusion, our study provides insight into the parental origin and distribution of de novo mutations throughout the human genome. Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited intellectual disa- bility, is caused by absence of the FMRP protein due to expansion over 200 46 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, rIeTpAeaLtYs o| fW thWe CWGG.E tSraHctG a.tO thReG 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene and subsequentABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index DNA methylation. We have already characterized rare individuals of normal (c.11G>A (p.Trp4*), c.652C>T (p.Arg218*), c.798-2A>C) in these five indivi- intelligence with CGG expansion over 200 repeats without DNA methylation duals, all of which are in POGLUT1, encoding protein O-glucosyltransferase (unmethylated full mutation, UFM), which have relatively normal transcrip- 1. By further screening of POGLUT1 in our unexplained cases of DDD, we tion and translation, and represent the status of FXS cell lines prior to gene identified six additional mutations. Immunohistochemistry of skin biop- silencing. We have compared the three types of cell lines (normal control sies of affected individuals with POGLUT1 mutations showed significantly WT, FXS and UFM fibroblasts) with a proteomic approach in order to de- weaker POGLUT1 staining in the upper parts of the epidermis compared to monstrate possible differences that might clarify the mechanisms through healthy controls. Immunoblot analysis revealed that translation of the wild which the rare UFM cells remain unmethylated and transcriptionally active. type POGLUT1 and a mutated form with an amino acid substitution led to Protein extracts were compared by LC-ESI LTQ Orbitrap MS/MS analysis the expected size of about 50 kDa, while a nonsense mutation led to a trun- after mono-dimensional SDS-PAGE and trypsin digestion. Interrogation of cated protein of about 30 kDa. Immunofluorescence analysis identified a co- the dataset for differential protein expression shows that some metabolic localization of the wild type protein with the endoplasmic reticulum and a pathways are deregulated in UFM cells when compared to FXS cells. Among notable aggregating pattern for the truncated protein. Protein modeling and these pathways, mitochondrial metabolism (oxidative stress) is of particular transcript analysis supported the pathogenicity of the identified mutations. interest considering its role in neurodegenerative diseases (like FXTAS) and Recently, mutations in POFUT1, encoding protein O-fucosyltransferase 1, particularly in epigenetic regulation. The deregulated proteins, specifically were also reported to be responsible for DDD. Both POGLUT1 and POFUT1 mitochondrial SOD (SOD2), were validated by Western blot. The interaction are essential regulators of Notch activity. Our results emphasize the impor- of target mRNAs with FMRP was assessed by RNA immunoprecipitation. tant role of the Notch pathway in pigmentation and keratinocyte morpho- Preliminary data suggest that mitochondrial metabolism is likely to have a logy. 
C21 .2 role in DNA hypomethylation of UFM cell lines. The phenotypic spectrum of SHO
C2  c.4A>G (p.Ser2Gly) Supported by Telethon Onlus, FRAXA Foundation and Italian Association for C. Lissewski1, L. Mazzanti2, G. Zampino3, V. Cordeddu4, E. Burkitt-Wright5, A. De Luca6, C. f Cr 2a 0gi .l 6e X syndrome. Rossi2, I. van der Burgt7, A. Verloes8, B. Dallapiccola9, B. D. Gelb10, B. Kerr5, K. Kutsche11, H. Cavé8, M. Tartaglia2, M. Zenker1; RNA-DNA Differences in Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response 1Institute of Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, A. L. Richards1, S. Liu2, Z. Zhu3, V. G. Cheung2,1; Bologna, Italy, 3Istituto di Clinica Peditrica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 1University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Italy, 4Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore Chevy Chase, MD, United States, 3Life Sciences Institute, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5Genetic Medicine, St. Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, School of Biomedicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Istituto Mendel, Rome, Italy, 7Department of Human Genetics, The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle where proteins are synthe- Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Department of sized and modified. ER stress occurs when there is an excess of misfolded Genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré AP-HP, Paris, France, 9Ospedale “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, proteins, and if the stress persists, then apoptosis is induced. Here we stu- Italy, 10Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at dy RNA editing as a part of the ER stress response and how RNA editing Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. modulates the cellular response to promote cell survival. We sequenced the RNA and DNA of B-cells from 10 individuals before and following 2 and 8 hours of tunicamycin treatment to induce ER stress. By comparing the RNA SHO
C2  Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair (Mazzanti syndrome) (MIM and DNA sequences, we identified 15,823 A-to-G editing sites in 1,523 genes 607721) is caused by an invariant mutation in the gene (c.4A>G, as targets of RNA editing by ADAR (Adenosine Deaminase Acting on RNA). p.
S2 G). The disorder is characterized by facial features resembling Noonan Among these sites, 314 showed significant changes in editing level following syndrome, short stature, GH deficit, developmental delay, congenital cardiac ER stress (p-value<0.01; ANOVA). ThesXeIA sPit eXs -alirnek feodu Inndh iibni tgoern oefs A kpnoopwtons itso defects, and a distinctive hair phenotype characterized by easily pluckable, be involved in ER stress response: RNA processing, protein transport and slow growing hair in anagen phase. apoptosis. For example, sites found in ( ) We report on a large cohort of patients with molecularly confirmed diagno- show a 3-fold increase in editing level. Furthermore, ADAR knock-down in- sis from an international research collaboration. In all patients, the c.4A>G creases apoptosis following ER stress, suggesting that RNA editing is indu- change was invariably identified. Clinical data from a total of 89 patients ced to promote cell survival. The effect of ER stress on editing level is not (25 previously published) was available. The ages ranged from 0.08 - 39 limited to canonical ADAR editing, as we also detected other types of diffe- yearsP (TmPeNd1ia1nS aOt 
S91 .0 yeRaArsF)1. Short stature and an intellectual disability were rences between the RNA and DNA sequences whose levels change following present in most of the patients, and were more common thaSnH iOnC p2atients tunicamycin treatment. In this presentation, we will describe RNA sequence with , or mutations. Proven growth hormone deficiency modification as a critical step in ER stress response and cell survival. 
C21 .1 was diagnosed in 42% of patients with known test results. muta- Mutations in POGLUT1, encoding protein O-glucosyltransferase 1, tion-positive individuals also have a recognizable facial phenotype. Heart cause autosomal dominant Dowling-Degos disease defects were common, but differently distributed compared to patients with F. B. Basmanav1, A. Oprisoreanu2, S. M. Pasternack1, H. Thiele3, G. Fritz4, J. Wenzel5, mutations in other RASopathy genes. Multiple defects were documented in L. Größer6, M. Wehner1, S. Wolf1, C. Fagerberg7, A. Bygum8, J. Altmüller3, A. Rütten9, L. 51% of cases. Overall, Mazzanti syndrome represents a recognizable condi- Parmentier10, L. El Shabrawi-Caelen11, C. Hafner6, P. Nürnberg3,12,13, R. Kruse14, S. Schoch2, S. Hanneken15, R. C. Betz1; tion within the spectrum of RASopathies, with a single recurrent mutation, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department p C. 2S 12 .G 3, accounting for the vast majority of cases. of Neuropathology and Department of Epileptology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Heterozygous germline mutations in A2M
L1  are associated with a Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, disorder clinically related to Noonan syndrome Germany, 4Department of Neuropathology, Neurozentrum, University of Freiburg, H. G. Yntema1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, M. Bonetti2, J. Paardekooper Overman2, W. M. Freiburg, Germany, 5Department of Dermatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Nillesen1, S. G. M. Frints3, J. de Ligt1, G. Zampino4, A. Justino5, J. C. Machado5, M. Schepens1, 6Department of Dermatology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, H. G. Brunner1, J. A. Veltman1, P. Gros6, J. L. Costa5, M. Tartaglia7, J. den Hertog2, I. van der 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, Burgt1; 8Department of Dermatology and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, 1Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Odense, Denmark, 9Laboratory of Dermatohistopathology, Friedrichshafen, Germany, 2Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 10Department of Dermatology, Berne University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 11Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 12Cluster Netherlands, 4Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases, University Italy, 5IPATIMUP - Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 13Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 6Crystal and Structural Chemistry, Bijvoet Center for of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 14Dermatological Practice, Paderborn, Germany, Biomolecular Research, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, 15Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. Dowling-Degos disease (DDD) is an autosomal dominant genodermatosis which is characterized by progressive reticulate hyperpigmentation affec- Noonan syndrome (NS) is a developmental disorder characterized by short ting the flexures, large skin folds, trunk, face and extremities. We previously stature, facial dysmorphisms and congenital heart defects. To date, all muta- identified loss-of-function mutations in KRT5 in fewer than half of the indi- tions known to cause NS are dominant, activating mutations in signal trans- viduals of our DDD cohort. ducers of the RAS/MAPK pathway. In 25% of cases, however, the genetic We undertook an exome sequencing approach to identify additional gene- cause of NS remains elusive, suggesting that factors other than those invol- tic causes of DDD by focusing on five unrelated affected individuals without ved in the canonical RAS/MAPK pathway may also play a role. Here, we used KRT5 mutations. Data analysis revealedE SthHreGe h2e0te1r4oz y| gMouIsL AmNut,a tIiToAnsL Y | f aW miW ly-W bas.E edS H whG o. leO eR xoG me sequencing of a case-parent trio and ident4ifi7edABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index de novo , A2M
L1  Clinica Pediatrica, Clinica Pediatrica Università Milano Bicocca, Fondazione MBBM, A.O. S. Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 11Istituto di Genetica e Biofisica “A. Buzzati Traverso”, a A2M
L1  mutation p.(Arg802His), in whichencodes the secreted Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Napoli, Italy, 12Leibniz Institute for Age Research, protease inhibitor Alpha-2-Macroglobulin-Like-1. Subsequent resequencing Jena, Germany, 13Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Magdeburg, Otto- von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany, 14Mindich Child Health and Development of in 155 cases with a clinical diagnosiAs 2oMf NL
S1  led to the identification Institute and Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn of additional mutations in two families, p.(Arg802Leu) and p.(Arg592Leu). School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States. Functional characterization of these human mutations in zebrafish showed NS-like developmental defects, including a broad head, blunted face and cardiac malformations. Using the crystal structure of A2M, which is RASopathies, a family of disorders characterised by cardiac defects, defec- highly homologous to A2M
L1 , we identified the intramolecular interaction tive growth, facial dysmorphism, variable cognitive deficits and predispo- parAt2nMerL 1of Arg802. Mutation of this residue, Glu906, induced similar deve- sition to certain malignancies, are causRedR AbSy constitutional dysregulation lopmental defects in zebrafish, strengthening our conclusion that mutations of RAS signalling predominantly through the RAF-MEK-ERK cascade. We in cause a disorder clinically related to NS. This is the first report of report on two germline mutations in , a small monomeric GTPase the involvement of an extracellular factor in NS, and RASopathies in general, controlling cell adhesion, spreading and migration, RuRnAdSe rlying a variable providing new leads for better understanding of the molecular basis of this phenotype with features partially overlapping Noonan syndrome, the most family of developmental diseases. 
C21 .4 common RASopathy. We also document that somatic mutations rarely A mutation in PAK3 with a dual molecular effect deregulates the RAS/ occur in juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia, a childhood myeloproliferati- MAPK pathway and drives an X-linked syndromic phenotype ve/myelodysplastic disease caused by upregulated RAS signalling, defining P. Magini1, T. Pippucci1, I. Tsai2, S. Coppola3,4, E. Stellacci4, A. Bartoletti-Stella5, an atypical form of this RhAaeSmatological disorder rapidly progressing to acu- D. Turchetti1, C. Graziano1, G. Cenacchi6, I. Neri7, D. M. Cordelli8, V. Marchiani8, R. te myeloid leukaemia. Two of the three identified mutations affected known Bergamaschi9, G. Gasparre1, G. Neri10, L. Mazzanti11, A. Patrizi7, E. Franzoni8, G. Romeo1, D. Bordo12, M. Tartaglia4, N. Katsanis2, M. Seri1; oncogenic hotspotsC oafe norh agbednietiss, ealnegda cnosnferred variably enhanced RRAS 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di function and stimulus-dependent MAPK activation. Expression of a RRAS Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University Medical mutant homolog in enhanced RAS signalling, and en- Center, Durham, NC, United States, 3Centro Nazionale per le Malattie Rare, Istituto gendered protruding vulva, a phenotype previously linked to a RASopathy- Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina causing SHO
C2  mutant. These findings establish a functional link between Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 5Laboratorio di Neuropatologia, RRAS and RAS signalling, and reveal an unpredicted role of enhanced RRAS Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, Università di Bologna, Bologna, function in human disease. Italy, 6U.O. Anatomia e Istologia Patologica, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e 
C21 .6 Neuromotorie, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 7U.O. Dermatologia, Dipartimento A New Mouse Model for Costello Syndrome di Medicina Specialistica, Diagnostica e Sperimentale, Università di Bologna, Bologna, T. Sorg1, B. Arveiler2, M. Birling1, G. Bou About1, M. Champy1, F. Dupuy2, I. Goncalves1, Italy, 8U.O. Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, M. Jagla1, H. Jacobs1, H. Meziane1, G. Pavlovic1, N. Philip2, F. Radvanyi2, R. Rossignol2, M. Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 9Pediatria d’Urgenza, Dipartimento di Scienze Roux1, S. Sigaudy2, Y. Herault1, D. Lacombe2; Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 10Istituto di Genetica 1ICS, Illkirch, France, 2CHU, Bordeaux, France. Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 11S.S Malattie Rare e Sindromologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 12IRCCS AOU S. Martino - IST. Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Costello Syndrome (CS) is a distinctive rare multisystem disorder compri- Genova, Italy. sing characteristic prenatally increased growth retardation, coarse facial PAK3 features, redundant skin with deep palmar, plantar creases and papillomata of later onset. CS patients present also laxity of smaHll- Rjoaisnts, tight Achilles Loss of function mutations in contribute to non-syndromic X-linked in- tendons, cardiac malformations, and developmental delay. The primary cau- tellectual disability (NS-XLID) by affecting dendritic spine density and mor- se of CS was associated to the germ line activation of oncogene, with a phology. Linkage analysis in a three-generation family with affected males common missense mutation G12S in 80% of the patients. Here we describe showing intellectual disability, agenesis of corpus callosum, cerebellar hy- the generation and the consequent phenotypic characterization of a gene- poplasia, microcephaly and ichthyosis, revealed a candidate disease locus in tically He-nRgainseered mouse model of CS, by introducing the oncogenic G12S Xq21.33q24 encompassing over 280 genPeAsK. 3By sequencing all coding exons mutation by homologous recombination into the mouse Ras gene. The effect of the X chromosome, we identified a single novel variant within the linkage of the G12S mHu-Rtaatsion was evaluated on behavioral, visual, metabolic, region, affecting a conserved codon of . Biochemical studies showed cardiac and histological traits in young adult animals. The behavioral ana- that, similar to NS-XLID-associated lesions, the predicted amino acid substi- lysis revealed that G12S mutant males displayed reduced locomotHor- tution (Lys389Asinn )s ialbicoolished the kinase activity of PAK3. In addition, it con- aRcatsivity, accompanied by decreased muscle strength and altered motor coor- finer vrietdro a dominant negative function to the protein that drives the syndromic dination performance. In Ha-dRdaitsion, the cardiac exploration revealed that phenotype. The tridimensional model of the mutated proteins and G12S mutants exhibit a hypertensive phenotype combined with tachy- inhibition of protein neosynthesis by cycloheximide treatment re- cardia. In conclusion, the G12S mutant mice showed a polysyndromic vealed that NS-XLID mutations make the inacitni vveiv koinase unstable and prone phenotype reproducing some of the CS features observHe-dR ains patients. The to degradation, while Lys389Asn confers stability to PAK3 protein, which future study of the here-described CS mouse model should have a significant escapes its physiologic deNg38r9adation. Finally, studies in zebrafish em- impact of our understanding of CS disease. The use of G12S mutant bryos showed that PAK3 leads to a perturbation of the MAPK signaling mice as a CS mouse model opens up new fields of investigation to better and to alterations of cerebral and craniofacial structures, through an uncon- understand the pathophysiology of the disease and to evaluate drugs dedi- trolled kinase-independent function. Our data expand the spectrum of phe- cated to the reduction of the disease associated symptoms. notypes associated with PAK3 mutations, characterize a novel mechanism 
C22 .1 resulting in a dual molecular effect of the same mutation with a complex The impact of reporting exome and whole genome sequencing: PAK3 functional deregulation, and provide evidence for a direct functional Predicted frequencies of primary, secondary and incidental findings impact of aberrant PAK3 function on MAPK signaling, with the generation based on modelling of a phenotype that could be included within the clinical spectrum of Ras- L. Burnett1,2,3, L. C. Ding1, R. M. Lew4, D. Chesher1,2, A. L. Proos1; 1Pathology North, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney Medical School, opathies. 
C21 .5 University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3School of Information Technology, University Activating mutations in RRAS underlie a phenotype within the of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, QEII Research RASopathy spectrum and contribute to leukaemogenesis Institute for Mothers and Infants, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. F. Pantaleoni1, M. Jaiswal2, E. Flex1, S. Martinelli1, M. Strullu3, E. K. Fansa2, A. Caye3, A. De Luca4, F. Lepri5, L. Pannone1, S. Paolacci1, G. Bocchinfuso6, C. Rossi7, A. Farrotti6, O. Fenneteau8, B. Brethon9, P. Cianci10, E. Di Schiavi11, A. Selicorni10, B. Dallapiccola5, I. C. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) has re- Cirstea12, L. Stella6, M. Zenker13, B. D. Gelb14, H. Cavé3, M. R. Ahmadian2, M. Tartaglia1; leased practice guidelines recommending reporting of incidental findings 1Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore (IFs) from exome and whole genome sequencing by Massively Parallel (Next di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 2Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie II, Medizinische Fakultät der Heinrich-Heine Universitat, Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Genetics Department, Generation) Sequencing for multiple conditions. Policy statements from ad- Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 4Laboratorio Mendel, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura ditional agencies are still being developed, with many attempting to take a Carattere Scientifico-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Roma, Italy, 5Ospedale Pediatrico into consideration the predicted increase in workload of reporting IFs and “Bambino Gesù”, Roma, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche, Università secondary findings. We describe the effects on rates of various diagnostic “Tor Vergata”, Roma, Italy, 7UO Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, findings of changing the sensitivity, the specificity, the implications of va- Italy, 8Biological Hematology Department, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, rying diagnostic criteria and a priori prevalence, and of increasing the num- 9Pediatric Hematology Department, Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 10Genetica ber of included conditions. 48 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, MITeAthLoYds |: WWeW deWve.lEoSpeHdG a .sOimRpGle mathematical model based on binomialABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index 
C22 .4 International views on sharing incidental findings from whole probability for predicting rates of diagnostic findings. We primed and vali- genome research dated the model using published variant frequencies and population carrier A. Middleton1, M. Parker2, C. Wright1, H. Firth1, E. Bragin1, M. Hurles1, O. DDD Project1; frequencies. Monte Carlo simulation was used to predict population carrier 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Ethox Centre, University frequencies as a function of numbers of potentially deleterious genomic va- of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. riants in sampled individuals. Results: The model correctly calculates observed rates of IFs and genetic carriers. Changing the model’s parameters shows that even minor changes Whilst genome-wide sequencing in a research setting may be used to ex- in diagnostic criteria or sequencing accuracy causes large variation in rates plore the genetic basis of a phenotype it also offers the chance to opportu- of diagnostic findings. nistically screen for additional results unrelated to the research project but Conclusion: Our model correctly explains observed rates of diagnostic fin- relevant to the participants’ future medical health (termed ‘incidental fin- dings. Key drivers of rates include diagnostic criteria, variant frequency, dings’, IFs).There is a wealth of medical and ethics literature supporting the disease penetrance, and sequencing and bioinformatics accuracy. Rates of feedback of IFs, yet there are limited empirical work offering a voice from IFs are relatively insensitive to even large increases in the number of condi- both professional and public stakeholders directly affected by this. tions included, but rates of genetic carriers are very sensitive to the number A cross-sectional, web-based survey investigated the attitudes of 6944 in- of conditions tested. These findings have great relevance to recommended dividuals from across 91 countries towards searching for and sharing IFs. practice and policy. Participants included 4961 members of the public, 533 genetic health pro- 
C22 .2 fessionals, 843 non-genetic health professionals and 607 genomic resear- Defending the child’s right to an open future concerning genetic chers. information Eighty percent of participants believed that IFs from sequencing studies A. L. Bredenoord1, M. C. de Vries2, J. J. van Delden1; 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Julius Center, dept Medical Humanities, Utrecht, should be made available to research participants if they want them. Treata- Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, dept Pediatrics, Leiden, Netherlands. bility and perceived usefulness of the data were important with 98% perso- nally interested in learning about life-threatening conditions that were pre- ventable. However, only 31% of participants thought genomic researchers There has been a discussion regarding the ethical acceptability of genetic te- should actively search for IFs that were not relevant to their research study. sting of children for years, resulting in the majority view that minors should Genetic health professionals were the most likely to take this view (OR = only be tested for early onset disorders where treatment or preventive opti- 3.09, CI 2.23-4.28, P < 0.0001). This may be due to their appreciation of the ons exist. Two principles underlie this consensus: first, the beneficence-based complexities involved in translating genomic data in the clinic. Participants best interest standard that urges physicians to test for clinically relevant and felt that genomic researchers should be able to focus on their research que- actionable results. Second, the child’s right to an open future principle that stion without being forced to actively search for IFs, potentially at the ex- urges physicians not to test for adult onset disorders and carrier status, in or- p Ce 2n 2s .5e of their study. der to preserve the child’s future autonomy right to make its own decisions, Newborn screenings and whole genome sequencing: the real need of also concerning the possible obtainment of genetic information. a genuine public involvement The emergence of next generation sequencing (NGS) technology seems to M. Tomasi1, A. Santosuosso2; challenge the previous consensus. There now is a growing list of commen- 1University of Trento, Trento, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. tators and examples from practice showing disagreement on whether con- ditions that do not have immediate consequences for the health of the child should be disclosed to parents. The American College of Medical Genetics In the last decade newborn-screening programs and whole genome sequen- and Genomics for example recently proposed to relinquish the current di- cing are making their way in clinical practice. stinction between pediatric and adult genetic testing policy, thereby aban- The question we focus on is whether the intrinsic persistence in time of ge- doning the child’s right to an open future, while the American Academy of netic characters (monitored in newborn-screening programs), once combi- Pediatrics maintains the previous consensus. ned both with the rules governing bio-banks which store those information In this paper we explain the normative rationale that underlies the current and the natural lifelong evolution of personal individuality (from infancy to debate on a child- versus family centred genetic testing policy and argue that old age), creates an apparently inextricable set of problems. the right to an open future should remain a leading ethical principle in ped- In this paper we have the ambition simply to draw a list of them in order to i Ca 2tr 2i .c 3 genomics. open up a space for a public interdisciplinary discussion about new arising Implementation of a duty-to-recontact system in molecular and challenges that need to be framed and faced by public policies. clinical genetics: perspectives from professionals and patients Some examples are: M. Plantinga1, W. Lamers1, A. V. Ranchor2, M. A. Verkerk3, E. Birnie1, I. M. van Langen1; - The complex and not yet unraveled relationship between the gradual evo- 1UMCG, Clinical Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2UMCG, Health Psychology, Groningen, lution of the interested person and epigenetic developments. Netherlands, 3UMCG, Medical Ethics, Groningen, Netherlands. - Regulations of parents’ opting in/out screening programs and the chances of modifying their choices during time. - The involvement of relatives and future siblings. Advances in DNA-diagnostic techniques and NGS are leading to more dia- - The (im)possibility of a real opt out during the phase of reconsent. gnoses, but also to interpretation problems. Many findings cannot be inter- - Difficulties arising from the organizational rules of biobanking in relation preted yet, but may prove medically relevant in the future. Currently, there to the described long lasting process of consent. is no moral or legal obligation to recontact former patients. Many geneticists - Privacy issues deriving both from the stable relationship between person nevertheless consider it desirable to recontact patients when important and collected data (impossible anonymousness) and the possibility of con- new information arises. The UMCG (Groningen, NL) is investigating whether trol over informational flows. to develop a recontacting system in clinical genetics and how one could be We maintain it is necessary to foster a real engagement of community in ge- implemented. We explored how professionals and patients from our univer- nuine discussion on a) benefits of a universal system of genetic monitoring sity hospital feel on these two issues. We organised a focus group discussion and b) ethical and legal implications for personal rights. 
C22 .6 with 12 professionals (clinicians, clinical geneticists and laboratory staff) Current Developments in the Regulation of Direct-to-Consumer and two group discussions with 3 and 5 patients, respectively, in which we Genetic Testing in Europe discussed the desirability and requirements for successfully implementing L. M. Kalokairinou1, H. C. Howard2, P. Borry1; recontacting. Both professionals and patients agreed that recontacting is 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. desirable and implementation could be successful if the following require- ments are met: (1) provide a guideline describing the responsibilities of molecular geneticists, genetic counsellors, and patients. This would also In recent years direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing has provoked a lot specify what information requires recontacting, which information should of debates and lead to various statements and opinions of professional so- be given priority, and how recontacting should take place; (2) availability cieties, medical associations and governmental bodies. In October 2013 the of a lab-based databank containing up-to-date genetic information and the European Parliament voted a Regulation on In Vitro Diagnostic Medical De- possibility to automatically match new genetic information, e.g. on former vices. This document is waiting for approval by the Council of the European variants of unspecified significance, with patients/groups for which the Union which might still provide amendments to the text. When approved, information is important; (3) patient’s preferences regarding recontacting this new Regulation is expected to introduce important regulatory changes (e.g. what type of information and which recontacting medium to use); (4) in the field of medical devices, and especially in the field of genetic testing. development of e-health devices facilitatinEg SauHtoGm 2at0ic1 re4c o| nMtaIcLtiAngN. , ITALY |I nW thWis Wpr.eEseSnHtaGtio.On, RwGe aim to present and evaluate the major impa4ct9 ofABSTRACTS CONCURRENT SESSIONS Back to index this Regulation on the field of DTC genetic testing. First, adopting the cur- rent proposal will mean that genetic tests, including both health-related and lifestyle tests, will be subjected to a pre-market assessment by independent notified bodies. Second, according to the risk class they fall into, IVD devices will have to comply with revised requirements for clinical evidence. Third, the proposal requires appropriate genetic counseling for all genetic tests and classifies them as “prescription only”. Finally, DTC advertising of devices classed as prescription only will be banned. Full implementation of these provisions would greatly impact DTC genetic testing companies as the pre- sent offer and advertising would no longer be tolerated. This work aims to clarify the proposed amendments and contribute to the ongoing discussion regarding the desirable degree of genetic testing regulation and the appro- priate balance between promoting innovation and securing consumers’ sa- fety by using legal tools. 50 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ESHG POSTERS 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 3SpadiaLab a.s., Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic. 
P01 .002-M Chromosome methylation and hydroxymethylation patterns are dynamically reprogrammed during human preimplantation The human X chromosome is characterized by genomic instability and development rearrangements, associated with various X-linked disorders such as mo- A. V. Tikhonov1,2, O. A. Efimova1,2, A. A. Pendina1,2, M. I. Krapivin1, I. D. Fedorova2, T. V. derate intellectual disability, muscular dystrophies or reduced fertility. In Kuznetzova1,2, V. S. Baranov1,2; the Laboratory of Medical Genetics that operates as a department of IVF 1Saint-Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2D.O.Ott Research clinic, we are preferentially focusing on fertility connected scope. Here we Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. show two women presenting amenorrhea associated with de-novo X chro- mosome aberration. First, we report on the case of a 23-year-old woman presenting phenotype close to isochromosome i(Xq) with short size and We analyzed the distribution of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) and 5-me- primary oligo-amenorrhea. Classical cytogenetic observation revealed a thylcytosine (5mC) in metaphase chromosomes from IVF-produced human deletion of the chromosomal region Xp11-Xpter. With using FISH, CGH and triploid zygotes and morphologically abnormal cleavage stage embryos. To mBAND methods, de novo duplication in the chromosomal region Xq25q28 obtain metaphase chromosomes, zygotes and embryos were treated with was also discovered. As the second case, we describe 30-year-old woman 0.1% colchicines, 0.9% sodium citrate and fixed with freshly prepared 3:1 who was referred to our IVF clinic because of infertility and amenorrhoea. methanol:acetic acid. Then, QFH/AcD-banding technique was applied and At the age of 18 years, she was placed on oral contraceptive pills for cycle cytosine modifications were detected by indirect immunofluorescence. activation. Now she has been experiencing amenorrhea again and she has In zygotes, parental sets of chromosomes had reversed patterns of me- been unsuccessful to become pregnant. The cytogenetic analysis revealed thylation and hydroxymethylation. Paternal sets, detected by the presence de novo deletion in the Xq21.2-qter region. Further analysis by FISH, CGH of chromosome Y, contained little 5mC, but were enriched in 5hmC, while and mBAND methods led to the revelation of Xp22.31-pter duplication. If we maternal chromosomes were heavily methylated and contained little 5hmC. had contented ourselves only with the classical cytogenetic analysis, both Thus, active demethylation in zygotes involves both parental genomes, but is cases could be underestimated as simple X chromosome deletions. However, more intensive in paternal genome. Metaphase chromosomes from zygotes our detailed observations led us to suspect that a complex aberration may had band-specific distribution of 5hmC: R-bands, but not G-bands and peri- be present. These two cases show that conscientious cytogenetic analysis centromeric heterochromatin, were enriched with 5hmC. In contrast, 5mC at 550 ISCN bands level in combination with other molecular methods is did not demonstrate band-specific distribution. In 3-cell embryos, chromo- essential for accurate diagnosis. 
P01 .005-S somes with sister chromatids differed both in the levels of 5hmC and 5mC Anti Mϋllerian Hormone (AMH) association analysis on about 1,000 were identified. Number of these asymmetric chromosomes in blastome- caucasian women highlights 2 suggestive loci res decreased with each cleavage division up to the blastocyst stage. At the C. Barbieri1, M. Traglia1, V. Vanni1, T. Nutile2, S. Ulivi3, L. Portas4, C. Sala1, C. Masciullo1, blastocyst stage asymmetric chromosomes were rarely encountered. This M. Cocca1,3, L. Pagliardini1, M. Ciullo2, P. Gasparini3, M. Pirastu4, P. Panina1, E. Papaleo1, A. advocates for the replication-dependant loss of 5hmC and 5mC. La Marca5, D. Toniolo1; Thus, maternal and paternal chromosomes demonstrate reverse patterns 1Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Research Institute, Milan, Italy, of 5hmC and 5mC at the zygote stage. The number of both methylated and 2Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council (CNR), Napoli, Italy, hydroxymethylated chromosomes decrease during cleavage divisions, sug- 3Institute for Maternal and Child Health–IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 4Institute gesting replication-dependant loss of modified cytosine. of population genetics, National Research Council (CNR), Sassari, Italy, 5Institute of Supported by RFBR, Administration of St. Petersburg, OPTEC grant and sti- Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. pend from RF President. 
P01 .003-S Single-tube multiplex-PCR panels of highly polymorphic STR markers AMH is a dimeric glycoprotein member of the TGF-β superfamily expressed for application to prenatal and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis of in the growing follicles of the ovary. AMH concentration in serum essenti- alpha- and beta-thalassemia and fragile X syndrome ally reflects the ovarian follicular pool. AMH levels decreases during repro- M. Chen1, A. S. C. Tan1, H. Law2,3, S. S. Chong1,4; ductive life, becoming undetectable after the menopause. Serum levels vary 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2KK Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 3Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, broadly by the age of decrease of female fertility (~ 41 years): the discovery Singapore, 4National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. of genetic variants responsible for the high variability could be useful to pre- dict fertility and age of menopause. AMH levels were measured in serum of 946 genotyped fertile women <=40 Alpha- and beta-thalassemia and fragile X syndrome (FXS) rank among the years old, 709 from the Italian Network of Genetic Isolates (INGI) and of 237 most common monogenic disorders globally. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) and from the Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit of San Raffaele Hospital. pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) of these disorders are usually A meta-analysis for AMH adjusted for age was performed on genotypes im- performed by direct mutation detection. Flanking polymorphic markers puted to the low variants enriched 1000G panel. Two suggestive loci were provide alternative indirect mutation detection through linkage analysis, identified: a locus on chromosome 6 (MAF=0.017; p=8.05E-08) and a se- or serve to corroborate direct mutatiionn s itleicsoti ng results. Currently, limited cond locus on chromosome 3 (MAF=0.22; p=2.21E-07). numbers of linked markers have been optimized and validated HfoBrA PHNBDB/ Meta-analysis will have to be enlarged by additional samples to increase the PGDF oMf Rth1ese diseases. We performed mining to identify 24, 99 and statistical power of the association analysis. Several hundred samples will 122 short tandem repeats (STRs) within 1 Mb on either end of the , be provided by different italian sources and 4,000 young women from Esto- and loci, respectively. Markers with low heterozygosity (HET) and/or n Pi 0a 1 w .0il 0l 6b -e M available to replicate the results. polymorphism information coHnBteAnt (PIC) after preliminary analysis on 16 Clinical and cytogenetic features of de novo Wolf-Hirschhorn (4p-) anonymous DNAs were dropped, prior to large scale testing on 288 oHr B4A802 syndrome and partial trisomy 7p confirmed by array comparative anonymous DNAs. The 9-plex STR set (0.68≤PIC≤0.92; 0.71≤HET≤0.93; genomic hybridization 10≤alleles≤34) can be further multiplexed with the Y1 box or othHeBr B Y. Suk, Y. Kim, S. Seo, H. Chi, Y. Cho; exonic fragments for simultaneous deletion/point mutation detection with Samkwang Medical Laboratories, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. linkage analysis,H foBrB either HbBart’s or HbH disease. The 15-plex STR set (0.70≤PIC≤0.89; 0.74≤HET≤0.90; 10≤alleles≤23) is furtheFrM mRu1ltiplexed with additional exonic fragments to allow simultaneous thalassemia Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a well known genetic condition caused majorF MmRu1tation detection with linkage analysis. The 13-plex STR set by a partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4. Although the critical (0.40≤PIC≤0.86; 0.49≤HET≤0.87; 6≤alleles≤17) can be analyzed in parallel region for determining the phenotype is at 4p16.3, the great variability in the with CGG repeat expansion mutation detection for FXS, using aliquots extent of the 4p deletion and the possible contribution of additional gene- of whole genome amplified (WGA) product. All three single-tube multiplex- tic rearrangements lead to a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations. Here, PCR STR assays have been optimized for use on genomic DNA, single cells, we report perinatal diagnosis and molecular cytogenetic characterization as well as WGA products of single cells. of a newborn infant with WHS and partial trisomy of 7p. The patient was a 
P01 .004-M female neonate with facial dysmorphia including ocular hypertelorism, mi- Two unusual unbalanced X chromosome rearrangements: a case crognathia, both preauricular pit, low set ears, and short and stubby fingers. report M. Exlerova1, V. Wernerova1, V. Horinova1, I. Slamova1,2, H. Filková2, V. Vallova2, P. Fetal agenesis of the corpus callosum was suspected by cranial ultrasono- Kuglik2, J. Sobotka3, P. Texl1; graphy. Laboratory analysis showed that she had acute renal failure. Chro- 1Sanatorium Helios ltd., Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, mosomes analysis by G-banding revealed 46,XX,add(4)(p16.3) karyotype. To delineate the origin of additional genomic gain in chromosome 4, array ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 51 comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was performed. Array CGH sho-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Medicina Clinica e Molecolare, Università degli studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. wed a 1.34 Mb sized loss on chromosome 4p (4pter-->16.3) and a 32.48 Mb sized gain on chromosome 7p (7pter-->14.3). Therefore, the final karyotype of the patient was defined as 46,XX,der(4)t(4;7)(p16.3;p14.3). The parental The discovery of fetal DNA in maternal plasma has provided a new source of karyotypes were normal. In this case, we describe for the first time, as far as fetal genetic material that can be safely obtained from maternal blood and we know, the clinical and cytogenetic analysis of a patient with concomitant successfully processed for non invasive genetic diagnosis (NIPD). We descri- occurrence of partial of Hirschhorn (4p-) syndrome and partial trisomy 7p. be a protocol for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of β thalassemia with a This report suggests that the array CGH would be a valuable diagnostic tool next generation sequencing approach and Ion Torrent technology. Eighteen f Po 0r 1 id .0e 0n 7ti -f Sying the origin of small additional genetic materials. experiments of NIPD of β-thalassemia have been carried in cfDNAs of wo- Preimplantation genetic screening of copy number variations men who underwent PD for β-thal. In total, we have amplified and sequen- (CNVs) using oligonucleotide-based array comparative genomic ced 47 amplicons mapping in the beta-globinic gene cluster and further 3 hybridization amplicons (ZFX/ZFY, SRY and TSPY1) useful to detect fetal sex and fractio- P. Kuglik1,2, D. Paralova3, J. Smetana1,2, V. Vallova1,2, A. Mikulasova1,2, R. Gaillyova2, V. nal fetal DNA. In the validation phase we have included the parental DNAs Hubinka3, L. Slivkova3, S. Machac3, M. Koudelka3; and trophoblast DNA to infer parental haplotypes inherited from the fetus. 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute of Experimental Biology, In the meanwhile we have developed a protocol to infer parental haplotypes Faculty of Science, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University without fetal information. The method is based on haplotype selection by Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Reprofit International Ltd., Brno, Czech Republic. allele-specific long-range PCR (LR-PCR) with allele-specific primers with the 3‘ base complementary to the mutated or to the normal allele for the most common β-thalassemia mutations. These reactions were performed Chromosome aneuploidy is the most prevalent genetic abnormality in hu- with an high fidelity polymerase able to amplify genomic targets extending man embryos and represents the leading genetic cause of miscarriages. In both downstream and upstream the causative mutations. By this approach, view of this fact, diagnosis of embryos for chromosome abnormalities using the 69.4% of fetal haplotypes, mainly of paternal origin, has been correctly array-CGH, i.e. preimplantation genetic screening (PGS), is suitable way to identified in the cfDNAs processed. Following these encouraging results, we improve clinical outcomes in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF). are working in order to improve the performance of our platform by ex- In our work we analyzed of the whole genome profiles from trophoecto- tending the analysis to a higher number of SNPs and by developing specific derm cells in 23 patients and 9 healthy donors (DEM). Overall, we evaluated algorithms of analysis. 
P01 .011-S 118 embryos using oligonucleotide-based CytoSure Single Cell Aneuploidy Prenatal diagnosis of severe X-linked chondrodysplasia punctuata in Array 8x15K. The copy number abnormalities (CNAs) were found in 23.7% 8 female fetuses of all embryos. While incidence of CNAs in DEM embryos was 11.8% of M. Lefebvre1,2,3, F. Dufernez4, T. Rousseau5, j. Thevenon6,2, B. Aral6, N. Gigot6, J. Desir7, C. samples, CNAs in patient´s embryos occurred in 28.6% of samples. Aneu- Daelemans8, F. Jossic9, S. Scmitt10, R. Mangione11, F. Pelluard12, C. Vincent-Delorme13, J. ploidies of chromosomes were observed in 26.7%, segmental imbalances Labaune14, N. Bigi15, D. D’Olne16, M. Gonzales17, S. El Chehadeh1,2, G. Mace5, P. Sagot5, P. were proved in 6.8% of embryos. In patient´s cohort, we found overall 35 Vabres2, L. Faivre1,2, N. Laurent3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2; different CNAs. The most common aneuploidies were trisomy 21 and 13 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes (both 8.3%), whereas the most frequent losses of genetic material were Malformatifs de l’Est, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 2GAD :EA4271 monosomy 8 (12.5%) and 18 (8.3%). Two patients had embryos with com- «Génétique des Anomalies du Développement» (GAD), FHU-TRANSLAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Service d’Anatomo-Pathologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, plex aneuploidy. Segmental CNAs were found in 5q, 8p, 8q, 14q and 16p. In France, 4APHP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Biochimie B, Laboratoire de Référence pour DEM embryos, we observed two 2 structural CNAs (gain 13q; loss 7p) and le Diagnostic Génétique des Maladies Rares, Paris, France, 5Service de Gynécologie, 2 cases with aneuploidies (trisomy 19, monosomy 18). This study shows Hôpital Le Bocage, Dijon, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Dijon, that oligonucleotide array is novel progressive tool for sensitive genome- Dijon, France, 7Center for Medical Genetics, Hospital Erasme, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, wide analysis of chromosome instability and opens the route towards high- 8Institut de Recherches Interdisciplinaires en Biologie Humaine et Moléculaire, Hôpital resolution preimplantation screening which improves selection of embryos Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 9CHU Nantes, Laboratoire and implantation rates. Supported by OP VK CZ.1.07/2.4.00/31.0155 and d’anatomopathologie A, Nantes, France, 10CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 11Department of Gynecology, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0183 
P01 .008-M 12Service de pathologie, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 13Service de Génétique Copy Number Variation (CNV) in azoospermic males Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 14Hôpital de la K. L. Eiklid1, I. Holm2, K. Waagner Birkeland2,3; Croix Rousse, Lyon, Lyon, France, 15Génétique médicale, CHRU Arnaud de Villeneuve, 1Deparment of medical genetics,Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Deparment of Montpellier, France, 16Pathological Anatomy and Cytology Centre, Brussels, Brussels, medical genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Oslo and Akershus University Belgium, 17Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie Médicales, Université Paris VI, Hopital College of Applied Sciences, Oslo, Norway. Trousseau, Paris, France. We tested 95 males from the biobank at Department of Medical Genetics, Conradi-Hunermann-Happle (CDPX2) syndrome is a rare X-linked dominant Oslo University Hospital for Copy Number Variations (CNV). All males were skeletal dysplasia. It is usually lethal in males, while affected females show azoospermic and referred for infertility testing, but no futher information wide clinical heterogeneity. Mutations have been reported in EBP, which is was known. They had normal karyotype, and no deletion in AzF region on involved in cholesterol biosynthesis. To date, severe prenatal occurrence has chromosome Y nor mutations in the CFTR gene. As controls we used 94 ma- been reported in only 6 females. les from our biobank, who had fathered a child and did not have the abbera- In order to characterize this severe phenotype, we analyzed the 8 prena- tion found in their child on aCGH. tally-diagnosed female cases of severe EBP mutations listed in France. The The samples were run on Agilent technology array comparative genome mean age at prenatal diagnosis was 22 weeks of gestation. The ultrasound hybridization with 180K and 400K resolution according to the manufactu- features included mainly bone abnormalities: shortening (7/8) and bowing res procedure. 23 patients were run on 180K aCGH against a single sample of the long bones (4/8), stippled epiphyseal cartilage (5/8) and irregular control, 35 against a multisample control, and 37 patients on a 400K array aspect of the rachis (5/8). The pregnancy was terminated in 6/8 cases. Fe- with multisample control. We found totally 1863 CNVs in the patient group tal examination revealed ichthyosis in all cases and skeletal X-rays showed (19.6/patient) and 973 (10.3/patient) in the control group. For patients and constant epiphyseal stippling, with frequent asymmetrically shortened long controls run with same resolution (180K) we found 9.2 and 10.3 CNVs per bones and bowing. All cases appeared de novo except for two fetuses with patients. moderately affected mothers, who presented ichthyosis and short stature, The CNVs in the control group were subtracted from the patient group. and one case of germinal mosaicism. In order to explain the high intrafa- We also eliminated CNV’s in regions with no known genes. The remaining milial clinical heterogeneity, the X-inactivation pattern was studied in one 154 chromosome regions were checked for CNV’s known for expression or familial case. Skewed X-inactivation was found in the mother’s lymphocytes function in testis in the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV). There were no (cDNA study showed that the wild allele was mainly expressed) and random major large chromosome regions common for all patients and no regions X-inactivation was found in the different fetal tissues affected. earlier described as candidate genes. This left us with 12 new interesting In conclusion, we report additional cases of severe prenatal CDPX2 presen- small CNV regions not described before, that might affect male infertility. tations in female fetuses. Even though the majority of these were de novo 
P01 .010-M cases, our familial cases argue for careful genetic counselling in this con- Non invasive prenatal diagnosis of beta-Thalassemia: application of dition. Ion Torrent sequencing and long-range PCR haplotyping in 18 cfDNA samples L. Saba, A. Picciau, M. Masala, V. Capponi, M. Rosatelli; 52 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .012-M Fetal Fraction estimate in twin pregnancies using directed cell-free DNA analysis analysis to first trimester combined screening (FTS) for trisomy 21 risk as- C. Struble1, A. Syngelaki2, A. Oliphant1, K. Song1, K. H. Nicolaides2,3, D. Hollemon1; sessment in a general pregnancy population. 1Ariosa Diagnostics, San Jose, CA, United States, 2Harris Birthright Research Centre of This prospective multi-center blinded cohort study compared HarmonyTM Fetal Medicine, Kings College Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Fetal Prenatal Test, a directed cfDNA test, with FTS using first trimester PAPP-A, Medicine, University College Hospital, London, United Kingdom. hCG and nuchal translucency measurement. Women with a singleton fetus presenting in the first trimester for routine prenatal screening for fetal an- euploidy were eligible. Participants had both FTS and Harmony. FTS results Objective: To estimate fetal fraction (FF) in monozygotic and dizygotic twin were provided as part of routine care. Participants and care providers were pregnancies. blinded to Harmony results, calculated as probability scores. Pregnancies Methods: Maternal plasma samples were obtained from 35 monochorionic were followed for newborn outcomes. Invasive test results or neonatal twin pregnancies with male fetuses (monozygotic) and 35 dichorionic preg- phenotype,with karyotype confirmation in cases of suspected aneuploidy, nancies discordant for fetal sex (dizygotic) at 11-13 weeks’ gestation. Cell- were used for trisomy 21 identification. Harmony, FTS results and outcomes free DNA was extracted and chromosome-selective sequencing with digital were reported to an independent data coordinating center. Primary outco- analysis of selected regions (DANSR TM ) was carried out. The fetal-fraction me was comparison of the area under the ROC curve for trisomy 21 test optimized risk of trisomy evaluation (FORTE TM ) algorithm was used to performance of the Harmony and FTS. estimate FF using polymorphic alleles. In dizygotic twins the FORTE algo- 18,955 women were enrolled across 38 centers in USA, Canada and Europe rithm was modified to estimate the smallest FF contribution of the 2 fetuses. from March 2012 to April 2013. The mean maternal age was 30.6 (18-52) In both types of twins, FF was also determined by analysis of Y-chromosome years. The mean gestational age was 12.4 (10-14.3) weeks. Follow-up is sequences. Results: In monozygotic twins, the median total FF was 14.0% complete. (range 8.2-27.0%) and in dizygotic twins the median smallest FF was 7.9% Study results will be presented. Implications for use of NIPT for trisomy 21 (4.9-14.0%). There were significant associations in FF between the methods risk assessment in the general pregnancy population will be discussed. 
P01 .015-S using polymorphic alleles and Y-chromosome sequences for both monozy- A case report of a high level 46,XX/46XY true chimerism without gotic (r = 0.951, p < 0.0001) and dizygotic (r = 0.743, p < 0.0001) twins. clinical effect in a healthy female who gave birth to healthy twins after Conclusions: The study demonstrates the feasibility of an approach for cfD- IVF NA testing in twin pregnancies. This involves estimation of total FF in mo- K. Adamová1, M. Godava1, R. Vrtěl1, J. Dostál2, J. Ehrmann3, Z. Slobodová3, M. Kvapilová1, nozygotic twins and estimation of the lower FF of the 2 fetuses in dizygotic H. Filipová1, P. Čapková1, R. Vodička1; t Pw 0i 1n .s 0. 13-S 1Department of Medical Genetics and Foetal Medicine, University Hospital and Palacky Prenatal Diagnosis of Aneuploidy by Cell Free Fetal DNA in Maternal University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Center of Assisted Reproduction – Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital and Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Plasma Republic, 3Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathgology, University Hospital and M. Saberi1, M. Akbari2; Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic. 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Chimerismis a rare event in humans when two or more genetically distinct cell lines occur in an individual. It is mostly connected with ovotesticu- This study examined the methylation difference in AIRE and RASSF1A bet- lar disorder of sexual develompent. We now present a case of high level ween maternal and fetal DNA, and the implication of this difference in the 46,XX/46,XY identification of free fetal DNA in maternal plasma and in prenatal diagnosis chimerism in a healthy woman who was karyoptyped prior to IVF. The fe- of trisomy 21. Maternal plasma and amniotic fluid samples were collected notype of the proband was that of a normal woman with an unambiguously from 30 singleton pregnancies. Methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes in female external and internal genitalia.The XX/XY cell lines were detected in digestion of differential maternal-fetal methylation followed by fluorescent peripheral lymphocytes, buccal mucosa, urine sediment and also in all other quantitative PCR (MSRE + PCR) were employed to detect trisomy 21. Dia- subsequently biopted tissues: skin, both ovaries, gnosis of trisomy 21 was established according to the ratio of fetal-specific peritoneum and endometrium.The male cell line was detected by FISH AIRE to RASSF1A that are hypermethylated in maternal plasma and are not technique(CEP X/Y SateliteIII DNA probes) in all samples at a propotion of digested with methylation sensitive restriction enzymes. All of the results 20-50%. The presence of SRY was confirmed using PCR. The chimerism was were approved with karyotype results. Based on the data from 22 euploidy confirmed by STR multipexes pregnancies, the 95% reference interval of the fetal AIRE/RASSF1A ratio in on chromosomes X, 13, 18, 21 and by STR markers kit (AmpFlSTR Identifiler maternal plasma was 0.33-1.77, which was taken as the reference value for PCR Amplification Kit). The determining the numbers of fetal chromosome 21 in 30 pregnancies. First- result of the analysis proved tetragametic origin of the chimerism.Our pro- ly, 18 from 22 euploidy pregnancies were detected euploid correctly and 4 band underwent three cycles of IVF with own oocytes and ICSI. The third cases incorrectly so the early sensitivity rate was 81.81% (18/22). But by cycle was successful. ET of 2 embryos was performed and after normal pre- repeating the test with better digestion, the four cases made correct results ganacy healthy female twins were born. so the final sensitivity rate was 100% (22/22). All of the eight trisomy 21 
P01 .016-M pregnancies were diagnosed with this method correctly so the specificity Cell culture conditions of chorionic villous samples do not modify the of this method was 100%. Also with performing STR-Typing and checking genomic imprinting pattern at locus 11p15.5 paternal alleles in maternal plasma and comparison with maternal alleles L. Paganini1, S. Giangiobbe1, R. Silipigni2, R. Falcone1, E. Bonaparte1, M. Calvello1, M. F. in 16 loci, the protocol of cell free fetal DNA extraction from plasma were Bedeschi3, S. Guerneri2, S. M. Sirchia4, M. Miozzo5,6, S. Tabano1,6; confirmed. 1Division of pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
P01 .014-M Milano, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Non-invasive EXamination of Trisomy (NEXT) Study: Directedcell-free Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 3Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda DNA analysis versus 1st trimester combined screening for Trisomy 21 Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Health Sciences, Università risk assessment in a large Routine pregnancy population degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 5Division of patologi, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda T. Musci1, M. Norton2, H. Brar3, B. Jacobsson4, G. Swamy5, A. Ranzini6, M. Tomlinson7, L. Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 6Department of Pathophysiology and Laurent8, L. Pereira9, H. Cuckle10, J. Spitz11, D. Hollemon1, R. Wapner12; Transplantation; Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. 1Ariosa Diagnostics, San Jose, CA, United States, 2University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Perinatal Diagnostic Center, Riverside, CA, United States, 4Sahlgrenska University, Goteborg, Sweden, 5Duke University School of Medicine, Methylation of the CpG islands is a common epigenetic marker of gene re- Durham, NC, United States, 6St. Peter‘s University Hospital, New Brunswick, NJ, pression. Monoallelic and parental-specific DNA methylation pattern at the United States, 7Northwest Perinatal Center, Portland, OR, United States, 8University of Imprinting Control Region 1 (ICR1) and 2 (ICR2) regulates the expression California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, 9Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland, OR, United States, 10Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, United of IGF2/H19 and KCNQ1/CDKN1C domains at the imprinted locus 11p15.5. States, 11Perinatal Quality Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 12Columbia Alterations of ICR1 and ICR2 methylation state are common in Beckwith- University, New York, NY, United States. Wiedemann (BWS) and Silver-Russell (SRS) syndromes and a robust mole- cular investigation is crucial to support phenotypic evidences, particularly in prenatal diagnosis for BWS. Since it is known that cell culture conditions Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) with cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is high- could per se modify the epigenetic signature of the cells, we aimed to com- ly accurate for fetal trisomy evaluation in high-risk pregnancies. Routine pare ICR1 and ICR2 methylation profile in fresh chorionic villus samples pregnancy population NIPT performance has not been evaluated in a large (CVS) with the corresponding cell cultures (CVC) to verify whether methyla- prospective study. Our objective was to coEmSpHarGe N 2I
P0 T1 w4i t|h M diIrLecAteNd ,c fIDTNAAL Y |t iWonW at WICR.Es SisH stGab.lOe aRftGer cell culture. By pyrosequencing we analyzed 9 5 C 3VS and their relative CVC from healthy pregnancies that underwent prenatalABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index diagnosis for maternal age. The range of methylation levels of ICR1 and ICR2 flow. 100% of assayed CNV regions (n=34) were detected using a reference in control CVS was previously reported by our group (ICR1: 38-48%; ICR2: set of 31 samples with known chromosomal aberrations. Low-pass whole- 37-47%). Herein, we found that the mean methylation percentage of ICR1 genome sequencing data, with approximately 0.01x read coverage, allowed and ICR2 remains stable after cell cultures: CVS= ICR1: 44% ± 1,7%; ICR2: the rapid ≤10 hour analysis of aneuploidies from research samples with 42% ± 1,8%, CVC= ICR1: 44% ± 2,3%; ICR2: 42% ± 3,1%. The high stability extremely low initial input DNA amounts—even from a single cell. Using a of such genomic imprinted regions makes them useful to be investigated in control set of 10 samples with known chromosomal aberrations, 100% of prenatal diagnosis. the copy number changes were found, ranging from gains or losses of who- 
P01 .019-S le chromosomes to subchromosomal alterations tens of megabases (Mb) in Prenatal diagnosis: chromosomal microarray in fetuses with size. The Ion PGM™ System minimizes the high cost and complexity of next- increased nuchal translucency E. M. Vestergaard1, D. Lildballe1, R. Christensen1, O. B. Petersen2, I. Vogel1; generation sequencing and, with Ion Reporter™ Software, facilitates user- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, defined CNV and aneuploidy detection, with three sensitivity options so that 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, copy number analysis workflows can be tuned to achieve desired levels of Denmark. sensitivity and specificity. 
P01 .022-M Fetal intracerebral hemorrhage and cataract: think CO
L4 A1 E. Colin1, A. Denommé-Pichon1, A. Guichet1, M. Gorce1, S. Chevalier2, E. Tournier- Chromosomal microarray has significant advantages over standard meta- Lasserve3, L. Sentilhes4, D. Bonneau1; phase karyotyping for detecting large chromosomal imbalances and alte- 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 2Department of rations smaller than 10 MB in size. The method has besome an important Ophthalmology, CHU Tours, Tours, France, 3Reference Center for Rare Vascular Diseases diagnostic instrument in the prenatal setting for pregnancies with abnormal of the Eye and the Brain, Lariboisière Hospital, Paris, France, 4Department of Obstetrics ultrasound findings. In our clinical setting (The Central Region, Denmark), and Gynecology, CHU Angers, Angers, France. more than 90 % of pregnant women receive combined 1st trimester scree- ning and 2nd trimester anomaly scan via the public health care system. Sin- ce January 2013 we have used a two-tiered approach for invasive diagno- The CO
L4 A1 gene encodes the alpha1 chain of type IV collagen, a crucial stics of all foetuses with nuchal translucency > 3.5 mm (99 percentile) in 1st component of nearly all basement membranes. Mutations in CO
L4 A1 were trimester pregnancies. This consists of a fast prenatal analysis for common first associated with cerebral microangiopathy and familial porencephaly aneuplodies by QF-PCR followed by chromosomal microarray on samples and have later been implicated in a clinicopathologic broad-spectrum af- with normal QF-PCR test results. The analysis methods used are the Eluci- fecting the brain, eyes, kidneys and muscles. Recently, CO
L4 A1 mutations gene QST*R kit (GenProbe) and comparative genomic hybridization-based have also been identified prenatally in fetuses with intracranial hemorrhage microarrays (SurePrint G3 Human CGH microarray 180K, Agilent). DNA (ICH). We report two additional prenatal cases of CO
L4 A1 mutations in fe- was extracted directly from chorionic villus samples using the Maxwell® tuses with ICH and cataract. system. Case 1: Fetal ultrasound examination (US) at 23 weeks’ gestation (WG) sho- We demonstrate the usefulness of microarray testing in this clinical setting wed left cataract, left ventriculomegaly and hyperechogenic lesion of basal based on our laboratory experiences. ganglia. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 32 WG confirmed the 
P01 .020-M subependymal hemorrhage affecting the left hemisphere. Clubfoot as an indication to perform array-cgh on prenatal diagnosis Case 2: Fetal US examination at 31 WG showed hyperechogenic lesion in left even when isolated? hemisphere with thalamic echogenicity and bilateral cataract. Fetal MRI at E. Andreucci1, R. Biagiotti2, E. A. Maiandi2, S. Covezzi2, G. Marseglia3, A. Guarino2, E. 32 WG showed a left-sided periventricular parenchymal hemorrhage and Cariati2, S. R. Giglio1,4; 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Medical mild ventriculomegaly. Surgical Feto-neonatal Department, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, In both these cases, the involvement of CO
L4 A1 was evoked because con- Italy, 3Genetic Diagnostics Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Medical genital cataracts had been previously reported in association with ICH in Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences, University pediatric cases. of Florence, Florence, Italy. The sequencing of CO
L4 A1, performed on fetal DNA after termination of pregnancy, evidenced two heterozygous novel missense mutations c.2317G>A (p.Gly773Arg) and c.3005G>A (p.Gly1002Asp) in fetuses 1 and We report on the first pregnancy of a 31 year old healthy female. At 13+2 2 respectively. weeks of gestation, a combined test was carried out, which showed a cal- The two cases reported here show that the CO
L4 A1 mutation should be en- culated risk for trisomy 21 of 1:38 (NT 1,8mm, free β-hCG 1,52MoM and visaged in fetuses with prenatal ICH especially in the presence of lens abnor- PAPP-A 0,22MoM). The patient decided to undergo chorionic villus sampling malities at US examination. Molecular confirmation of a CO
L4 A1 mutation which showed a normal foetal karyotype (46,XY). At 17+6 weeks of gestati- may have important implications for the outcome of the pregnancy and for on an ultrasound showed isolated bilateral clubfoot, no further genetic te- genetic counseling. 
P01 .023-S sting was offered. At 19+6 weeks of gestation the ultrasound confirmed the Validation And Clinical Application Of A Next-Generation Sequencing isolated bilateral talipes equinovarus and at 23+5 weeks of gestation hypo- (Ngs)-Based Protocol For 24-Chromosome Aneuploidy Screening Of spadia and dilated hyperechogenic bowel was also noted: array-CGH testing Embryos on foetal DNA was offered and the patient accepted. The array-CGH analy- F. Fiorentino1, A. Biricik1, S. Bono1, L. Spizzichino1, E. Cotroneo1, G. Cottone1, F. Spinella1, sis showed a de novo 3,4Mb deletion on 5q31.1 (131825068-135229731) F. Kokocinski2, C. Michel2, M. Minasi3, E. Greco3; encompassing, among many others, the PITX1 gene, whose heterozygous 1“GENOMA“ - Molecular Genetics Laboratory, ROME, Italy, 2BlueGnome Ltd, Cambridge, mutations have been associated with congenital clubfoot and other skeletal United Kingdom, 3European Hospital, Reproductive Medicine, ROME, Italy. anomalies. Patients with partially overlapping deletions have been descri- bed in the literature and most share common features like developmental delay, short stature and dysmorphic features. The pregnancy was interrup- The rapid development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies ted at 30 weeks of gestation. This case might suggest that clubfoot, which has generated an increasing interest in determining whether NGS could be is generally considered a mainly isolated congenital defect and for which reliably used for preimplantation genetic screening (PGS), i.e. for compre- no further genetic testing is offered in prenatal diagnosis, might be the first hensive aneuploidy screening of human embryos produced from patients sign of a more complex picture which could also include other congenital undergoing in-vitro fertilization treatments, with the purpose of identifying defects and, possibly, developmental delay. Should we consider clubfoot, and selecting for transfer euploid embryos. e Pv 0e 1n . 0w 2h 1e -n S isolated, an indication to perform array-CGH on foetal DNA? We performed a large validation study to determine the accuracy of a NGS- CNV and Aneuploidy Detection by Ion Semiconductor Sequencing based 24-chromosomes aneuploidy screening protocol. NGS ability to accu- A. Rico1, K. Rhodes2, F. Hyland2, K. Konvicka2, R. Gottimukkala2, G. Altun2, C. Roth2, C. rately identify aneuploidy was assessed in three steps: 1) a blind evaluation Dowds2; of karyotypically-defined chromosomally abnormal single cells; 2) a retro- 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, Saint Aubin, France, 2Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, spective blinded assessment of 244 embryos previously analyzed by array- United States. comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH); 3) a prospective trial involving a parallel evaluation of 192 blastocysts, from 55 clinical PGS cycles, with both NGS and aCGH techniques. Ion Torrent™ semiconductor sequencing, combined with Ion AmpliSeq™ The NGS method was robust, with 454/454(100%) samples yielding results. technology, provides simultaneous identification of copy number variants Aneuploidy diagnoses were fully concordant with those obtained using (CNVs), single nucleotide variants (SNVs), and small insertions and deleti- aCGH technique. NGS was also able to detect chromosomal mosaicism in o5ns4 (indels) from a research sample by means of aE sS inH glG e i2 nt0 eg1 r4 at e| dM wI oL rA k-N, 5IT 4A /5L 4Y (1 | 0 W 0%W ) oW f m.E oS saH icG em.O bR ryG os assessed. Clinical application of the NGSABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Erandio, Spain. protocol revealed 76(39.6%) euploid blastocysts. Following transfer of 50 embryos, 30 women had a sustained pregnancy (63.8% clinical pregnancy Objective: To analyze trends in the number of invasive procedures and the rate/ET; 64.0% implantation rate). incidence of chromosomal abnormalities over a 20-year single institution This is the first study reporting extensive validation and clinical application experience of NGS for PGS purpose, allowing identification and transfer of euploid em- Methods: Data of 16,894 invasive prenatal procedures performed between bryos resulting in healthy pregnancies. Evidence of accuracy demonstrates 1993 and 2013 in Bizkaia were retrospectively reviewed, with particular that NGS represents a reliable high-throughput methodology for compre- emphasis on indications hensive aneuploidy screening, capable of detecting whole chromosome an- and number and type of abnormal results. Results: Traditionally, maternal euploidies and segmental changes in embryos, with the potential to revolu- age has been the main referral reason for prenatal testing (69.3%) but du- t Pi 0on 1i .z 0e 2 p 5r -e Simplantation diagnosis. ring the last 3 years, prenatal screening has become the A new case of Apert‘s syndrome detected prenatally in Romania most important clinical indication, decreasing the number of invasive pro- M. Militaru1, A. Trifa2,3, R. Popp2, C. Andrei3, M. Stefanut3, T. Kovacs4, M. S. Militaru2,3; cedures performed. Related to karyotype analysis, chromosomal abnorma- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacie“Iuliu Hatieganu”, Department of Pediatrics lities were detected in 348 out of the 16,894 (2.55%) cytogenetic studies. 2, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacie“Iuliu Hatieganu”, Among chromosome aneuploidies (1.55%), the most frequent ones were Department of Medical Genetics,, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3Genetic Center, Cluj-Napoca, classical autosomal aneuploidies (1.09%): Trisomy 21, 18 and 13 were dia- Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacie“Iuliu Hatieganu‘‘ Department of gnosed in 115 (0.94%), 23 (0.07%) and 9 (0.06%) cases respectively. Sex Obstetric and Gynecology I, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. chromosome neuploidies were found in 59 cases (0.46%), being Klinefelter Syndrome the most common sex aneuploidy diagnosed (0.16%). Balanced rearrangements corresponded to 0.67% of the structural abnormalities Apert’s syndrome (Acrocephalo-syndactyly) is a rare congenital condition while unbalanced rearrangements were found in 16 cases (0.15%). Con- characterized by primary craniosynostosis, mid face malformations and clusion: Nowadays, positive prenatal screening has progressively replaced symmetrical syndactyly of the hand and feet. The incidence of Apert’s syn- advanced maternal age as the main referral reason for amniocentesis. Our drome is about 15/1.000.000 live birts and is inherited in an autosomal do- study based in 16,894 amniocentesis contributes to establish a standard re- minant fashion, but sporadic cases are also frequent. Case report: A 32-year- ference incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in pregnancies. Our data old, gravida 4, para 0 woman was referred for fetal evaluation at 22 weeks of also confirm the karyotype as a reliable method for detecting complex chro- gestation because of digital abnormalities in the fetus. A prenatal ultrasound mosome abnormalities, providing an important basis for prenatal counse- at 22 weeks of gestation revealed frontal bossing, low set ears, depressed ling and for prenatal screening policy in the national strategy. nasal bridge, digital fusion, and bilateral syndactyly of the hands and feet. 
P01 .028-M Amniocentesis was performed and the cytogenetics and the molecular test Observations following commercial implementation of a cell-free was done. A DNA testing for the FGFR2 gene was immediately performed DNA (cfDNA) and single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based non- using uncultured amniocytes, which revealed a heterozygous (
P253 R) mu- invasive prenatal aneuploidy test (NIPT) tation in the FGFR2 gene. The karyotype was normal, 46,XY. The woman K. Curnow, E. Valenti, A. Ryan, M. Banjevic, S. Shchegrova, M. Hill, B. Zimmermann, M. Hall, Z. Demko, M. Rabinowitz; decided to discontinue the pregnancy, and a male baby was delivered with Natera Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States. frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia and bilateral syndactyly of the hands (mittenhands) and feet. Conclusions: A molecular analysis of FGFR2 using uncultured amniocytes is useful for rapid confirmation of Apert syndrome Objective: To describe the clinical observations following implementation at prenatal diagnosis. The baby was the first case with Apert‘s syndrome of a SNP-based non-invasive prenatal aneuploidy test in more than 28,000 confirmed by genetic testing in Romania. 
P01 .026-M pregnant women. Could a combination of QF-PCR and SNP-array methods replace Methods: 28,709 consecutive cases reported since March 2013 for NIPT. Iso- standard karyotyping in CVS? lated cfDNA was amplified via multiplex PCR targeting 19,488 SNPs covering J. Hodacova, V. Becvarova, N. Jencikova, H. Pekova, J. Horacek, J. Sehnalova, M. Louckova, chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, and Y. Sequencing data was analyzed the NATUS R. Mansfeldova, E. Svobodova, V. Nedomova, L. Hnykova, H. Hroncova, M. Putzova, I. algorithm. Reports were issued describing risk for trisomy 21, trisomy 18, Soldatova, L. Krautova, D. Stejskal, M. Trkova; trisomy 13, and Monosomy X, and in a subset of cases triploidy, sex chro- Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic. mosomes trisomies and fetal sex. All reports included fetal cfDNA fraction. ( Follow-up information on samples receiving a high-risk result for trisomy 21, trisomy 18, trisomy 13, or Monosomy X was collected from providers. In the 2010 - 2014 period 689 chorionic villus sampling CVS) were suc- Results: 510 (1.8%) cases received a high-risk NIPT result for any of the four cessfully performed. QF-PCR and a complete chromosomal examination main indications (325 trisomy 21, 83 trisomy 18, 41 trisomy 13, 61 Mono- (karyotyping) was a standard examination schema for all samples. Abnor- somy X). Of the 28,709 cases, 49% were under 35 years of age. 17,529 low- mal results were found in 184 samples (26.9 %). Totally 165 (89.7 %) ca- risk results and 358 high-risk results were reported to centers participating ses out of these 184 pathological results has been announced by QF-PCR in follow-up efforts. A response to requests for follow-up information was (most frequently an autosomal aneuploidy) prior to karyotyping. This is in received for 317/358 (88.5%) of the high-risk patients; including 120 calls contrast to 19 abnormal findings detected only due to classic chromosomal (33.5%) with karyotype. These requests identified 21 false positives (8 tri- examination (9 balanced aberrations, 9 mosaics of both autosomes and somy 21, 1 trisomy 18, 8 trisomy 13, 4 Monosomy X). Two (0.01%) trisomy gonosomes, 1 unbalanced aberration). In the same period of time 102 CVS 21 false negative results were voluntarily reported. (with normal karyotype and QF-PCR results) were evaluated by SNP-array Conclusions: Performance of this SNP-based approach in a clinical setting, (Illumina). Well-defined pathogenic microdeletions or microduplications when adopted by a large and diverse population and distribution base, ap- were detected in 7 CVS (6.8 %) indicated from following reasons: increased pears consistent with previously reported validation performance charac- nuchal translucency (5 cases), heart defect (1 case) and anal and esophageal teristics. atresia (1 case). 
P01 .029-S In our study, an examination of CVS based on QF-PCR method only would Non-invasive prenatal testing of fetal aneuploidies and follow-up let 19 abnormal findings (2.5%) undetected out of which only 10 (1.45 %) G. H. Schuring-Blom1, M. G. Elferink1, P. van Zon1, O. Akkermans1, K. A. Kusters1, W. van are defined as pathological (9 mosaics of both autosomes and gonosomes, Haren-van ‚t Woud1, E. de Bruijn2, G. C. M. L. Page-Christiaens3, K. D. Lichtenbelt1, M. J. A. van Kempen1, I. J. Nijman1, G. van Haaften1, B. van der Zwaag1, E. Cuppen1, J. K. Ploos van 1 unbalanced aberration). In all 10 cases we suppose that these aberrations Amstel1; would be detected by SNP-array evaluation. In addition to it, re-examination 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, of CVSs with normal karyotypes and QF-PCR results by SNP-array allowed Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Instutute, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, us to detect another 7 submicroscopic pathological abnormities. Based on Netherlands, 3Department of Obstetrics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, these data we consider the classic karyotype examination to be still an inva- Netherlands. luable part of the CVS testing procedure. 
P01 .027-S Invasive prenatal diagnosis in bizkaia: a 20-year experience I. Huerta1,2, M. Télez1,2, M. Arrieta2, M. Barasoain2, L. Iglesias3, I. Riveiro1, J. Muga3, M. In the Netherlands the Minister of Healstth has licensed noninvasive prenatal Longa3; trisomy testing (NIPT) as from April 1 2014, for women with a risk above 1GENETIC Laboratory, Bilbao, Spain, 2Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology 1:200 based on the first trimester combined test . In anticipation, we valida- and Animal physiology, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the Basque ted the SOLiD WildFire on 154 blood samples obtained from pregnant wo- Country, Leioa, Spain, 3Virgen de Begoña Clinical Analysis Laboratory (Medikosta), men opting for invasive testing. We show a false negative result in a trisomy 18 case: a growth retarded fetus, small placenta, and maternal BMI of 29 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 55 may have resulted in a low fetal fraction. We also present a case of a super-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Milano, Italy, 2Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 3A.O. Papa Giovanni XXIII, Medical Genetics Unit, Bergamo, numerary derivative chromosome, partly consisting of chromosome 13 ma- Italy, 4Andrological-urology unit and IVF center, San Paolo Hospital, Milano, Italy, terial: an example of unexpected findings with NIPT. In 2013, thousands of 5Department of Health Sciences; Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. Dutch women had NIPT performed abroad, at their own expense. In one of these women, who had received normal NIPT results, fetal anomalies were seen at the 20 week ultrasound. Invasive testing showed a trisomy 18. NIPT ESX1 mRNA expression was previously investigated by our group in testi- was repeated in our centre prior to amniocentesis, and it clearly indicated cular biopsies of infertile men and correlated to the presence of residual a trisomy 18. Placental and fetal biopsies, investigated with FISH after ter- spermatogenesis in Non Obstructive Azoospermic (NOA) patients. Here, we mination of pregnancy, confirmed this finding. Data of the initial NIPT could further deepen this issue investigating by real-time PCR ESX1 expression in not be shared with us, which prohibited tracing of the source of this false both testicular fragments (TF) and seminal fluids (SF) of 78 NOA men. The negative finding. False negative, false positive and unexpected results will aim was to verify whether a positive ESX1 expression in TF or even in SF be obtained with NIPT. For safeguarding and examining follow up samples, was predictive of a successfully sperm recovery at TESE/microTESE. Con- leading to a further understanding of possible underlying biological causes, cerning TF, ESX1 mRNA levels: 1) significantly decrease with the increasing close interaction between specialists involved is essential. This is also vital of spermatogenesis defect, as classified by histology; 2) are higher in dilated to ensure adequate care and counseling for couples confronted with such tubules, likely containing spermatozoa, compared to thin ones. In addition, results. the presence of a positive or negative testicular expression of ESX1 strongly 
P01 .030-M correlates (p<0.0001) with positive or negative sperm recovery at surgery. Dyscordant Chromosomal Finding in Monozygotic Twins Regarding SF, ESX1 mRNA expression was detected in the ejaculate of 44/56 P. Losan, M. Hasch; azoospermic men, at lower levels than normospermic men (p<0.05). No si- Genetika Plzen, Pilsen, Czech Republic. gnificant differences were found in ESX1 expression levels among samples with different degree of spermatogenic failure, based on histological clas- sification. Regarding spermatozoa recovery and ESX1 expression in SF, the Losan P.,Hasch M., Planetova S.Genetics-Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic two variables were concordant in 33/56 (59%) of cases. The overall data We investigate a patient PL aged 34 after spontaneous pregnancy in 17 th reinforce a correlation between a positive ESX1 mRNA detection and resi- weeks of her gestation with monozygotic twins having dyscordant chromo- dual spermatogenesis in testes of NOA patients, indicating a role of ESX1 as somes. Literature describes mosaicism only in over 20 cases if more foetal predictive spermatogenesis molecular marker. We can speculate that in SF tissues were examined. Our case report refers to different twins chromoso- discrepancies between ESX1 expression (+) and sperm retrieval (-) could be mal finding represented by lines 47, XXX/45, X. Amniocentesis because of attributed to limitations in surgery techniques for sperm recovery. patological NT (4,7mm ) by fetus B proved fetus A (47, XXX/46,XX), and fetus 
P01 .033-S B (45,X/46,XX ). In our first genetic examination by QF PCR we demostrated The importance of fœtal pathology. Regional assessment report for trisomy of chromosome X in fetus A, and chromosome monosomy X in fetus Montpellier for the years 2010 to 2012 B. Second FISH analysis of native amniocytes proved in fetus A chromosome P. Blanchet, N. Bigi, Y. Musizzano, S. Doutre, D. Genevieve, P. Sarda, M. J. Perez; X in 79% of its nuclei (21% with normal set of chromosome XX), in fetus B Genetic Center - Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France. monosomy of chromosome X in 95% of nuclei (5% with normal set of chro- mosome XX). The 3 rd FISH exmination of cultured amniocytes confirmed in fetus A trisomy of chromosome X in 95% of its nuclei (5% with normal set of The Languedoc-Roussillon region in the South of France has a population of sex chromosome), in fetus B monosomy of chromosome X in 98% of nuclei about 2 800 000. Over the period extending from 2010 to 2012 the number (2% with normal set of sex chromosome). Pregnancy finished in 25 th week of births in this region was 91 715. Over the 3-year period 910 requests for by spontaneous delivery (stillborn fetus B with monosomy X, 1120g/30cm, termination of pregnancy (TOP) were authorized. 92% of these TOPs were fetus A with trisomy X 675g/30 died 17 days after delivery owing to sepsis). done for serious congenital anomalies. 50% of the TOPs were performed Our case report is shrouded in question: at what stage of embryonic deve- for serious malformation syndromes without a precise genetic cause deter- lopment occurred an error? mined during the prenatal period. In order to characterise fœtal anomalies, 
P01 .031-S maternities in the region are encouraged to send fœtuses to the Fœtal Pa- Embryo quality and early pregnancy loss after IVF thology Unit for genetic investigations and an autopsy. Over the 3-year-peri- P. Motyreva, M. Serkova, K. Sinkov, S. Ustinov, I. Ayzikovich; od 985 fœtuses were received for expertise either following accidental fœtal Avicenna Medical Center, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. demise or TOP (n=436). In 30% of cases fœtal pathology showed additional anomalies undetected on fœtal ultrasound examination and in 7% of cases the pathology results considerably modified the initial prenatal ultrasound Genetic disorders are of the most common reasons of early pregnancy loss. diagnosis. In fœtuses addressed for diagnosis of a syndrome, genetic inve- Chromosome abnormalities can be found in up to 70% karyotypes of cho- stigations and autopsy revealed 20% chromosome abnormalities and in 6% rionic villi after miscarriages of both spontaneous and IVF pregnancies. of cases put a name on various malformation syndromes (VATER associa- Here we find out if embryo quality is a sufficient criterion of successful tion, CHARGE, Smith Lemli Opitz syndromes, osteochondrodysplasias, ⋯). pregnancy outcome after IVF, and identify the relationship between the em- The malformations most commonly implicated were central nervous system bryo morphology and chromosomal pathology in spontaneous abortions or anomalies (33%), skeletal anomalies (30%), heart defects (18%) and uri- missed miscarriages. nary tract malformations (14%). Fœtal pathology clarifies fœtal anomalies, We analyzed 45 samples from patients underwent dilation and curetta- determines whether a particular genetic syndrome is involved and reveals ge after IVF. Chromosome preparations were made using direct mate- chromosome anomalies undiagnosed before TOP. This information is impor- rial processing, GTG-stained or FISH was performed on chromosomes tant for families (genetic counselling) and for the physicians who managed 13,16,18,21,22,X,Y. the interrupted pregnancy or decided on the TOP. Embryo transfer (ET) was performed at the day 5 of embryo development. 
P01 .034-M In the most (76%) cases 2 embryos per woman were transferred. All em- Analysis of FMR1 and FMR2 genes in women with primary ovarian bryos were divided into groups based on their quality. Day 5 blastocysts AA insufficiency from the Basque Country were defined as ‘excellent’; AB, BA, BB as ‘good’; BC, CB, C as ‘poor’ quality. M. Barasoain1, G. Barrenetxea2, I. Huerta1,3, M. Télez1,3, A. Carrillo2, C. Pérez2, E. Ortiz- Chromosome abnormalities were found in 53% cases. In these cases 25% Lastra4, J. González4, B. Criado5, M. Arrieta1; 1Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology. Faculty of were ET of excellent embryos, 63% were ET of good, and 12% were ET of Science and Technology. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Center for poor. In abortions with normal karyotype 33% of ETs were with excellent Reproductive Medicine and Infertility Quirón Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain, 3Virgen de Begoña embryos, 66% with good. Control group was 53 cases of live birth after IVF Clinical Analysis Laboratory (Medikosta), Erandio, Spain, 4Department of Medical- at the same period of time. In these successful pregnancies 41% were ETs Surgical Specialities. Faculty of Medicine. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, with excellent embryo quality, which is significantly higher than in patholo- Spain, 5Cooperativa de Ensino Superior Politecnico e Universitario, Porto, Portugal. gy group. Otherwise, embryos of excellent and good quality also need pre- implantation genetic diagnosis, because chromosomal anomalies in more t Ph 0a 1n . 07 30 2% -M cases could be identified using this technique. Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is an ovarian dysfunction defined as ir- ESX1 gene expression is a predictive marker of residual regular menses and elevated gonadotrophin levels before or at the age of 40 spermatogenesis in azoospermic males years. Several genes have been reported as having significance in POI but S. Tabano1,2, A. Pansa1,3, S. Melis4, S. M. Sirchia5, E. Bonaparte2, D. Giacchetta4, M. the FMR1 (intermediate and premutation alleles) is one of the most impor- Castiglioni4, G. M. Colpi4, M. Miozzo1,2; tant genes associated with it. The FMR2 gene has also been related with the 1Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation; Università degli Studi di Milano, development of this condition. A group of 68 women with POI and 47 con- trol women from the Basque Country has been analyzed. Considering the 56 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, FIT MA RL 1Y g e| n W e, tW heW nu. mES beH r G of. wO oR mG en carrying at least one allele with >35 CGGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index repeats (intermediate and premutation alleles) was statistically higher in also observed, as expected, that cffDNA increases together with gestational patients (26.47% vs. 0%). The patient group was divided in three categories age. concerning their ovarian condition. Among patients with amenorrhea and The experimental data demonstrate that non-invasive and molecular me- elevated FSH levels, the frequency of alleles between 35 and 54 CGG was sta- thodologies are able to determine the fetal sex and quantify the cffDNA. 
P01 .037-S tistically higher than in controls (15% vs. 0%). This frequency is also stati- FSHB -211 G/T polymorphism affects hormonal levels and sperm stically higher among women with irregular menses and elevated FSH levels parameters (11.11% vs. 0%). Regarding the FMR2 gene, small alleles with fewer than 11 L. Tamburino1, V. Tomaselli2, N. Barone1, R. Condorelli1, L. Cimino1, S. La Vignera1, E. repeats have been associated with premature ovarian failure. The frequency Vicari1, A. Calogero1; of these alleles in this study is not statistically different (3.68% vs. 3.19%). 1Department of Medical and Pediatric Sciences, Section of Endocrinology, Andrology The data suggest that carrying more than 35 CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene and Internal Medicine. University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 2Department of Political and might be related with the development of POI. However, the FMR2 gene has Social Sciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy. not a clear association with this ovarian dysfunction. FSHB 
P01 .035-S FSHB Follicle stimulating hormone receptor gene alterations and ovarian gene transcription is the rate-limiting step for FSH production. The response to gonadotropins in Iranian infertile women -211 G/T single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNFPS)H iBs the only genetic S. Zari Moradi1, A. Mohseni Meybodi1, N. Masoudi1, M. Totonchi1, N. Mirghavam Aldin2, M. Ashrafi2, M. Akhound3, H. Gourabi1; variant which has a major effect on serum FSH concentrations in men. The 1Department of Genetics at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of this SNP on male in- for reproductive Biomedicine ,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department fertility. The SNP was analyzed in 83 men with oligoasthenozoospermia/ of Endocrinology and Female Infertility at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, azoospermFiaS (HgBroup 1) and in 82 normozoospermic controls (group 2). Ge- Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of notyping of SNP was performed by Real-time PCR with TaqMan Genotyping Iran, 3Department of Epidemiology and Reproductive Health at Royan Institute for Assay. The genotypes frequencies were: 74.4% (GG), 22.7% (GT) and Reproductive Biomedicine, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR,, 2.9% (TT). The distribution frequency of heterozygous and homozygous T Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. carriers was significantly different between the two groups: 65.8% of GT heterozygotes and 100% of TT homozygotes were found in group 1 (Z- test, p=0.0057). The T allele frequency was statistically different in the two Diminished Ovarian Reserve(DOR) and Ovarian Hyper Stimulation groups: 18,6% and 7,9% in group 1 and 2, respectively (Z-test, p=0.007). Syndrome(OHSS) are infertility disorders in which women’s ovaries don’t Moreover, the FSH serum levels were differently distributed with a trend have proper response to gonadotropins. Follicle stimulating hormone(FSH) from the highest values in the GG genotype to the lowest levels in the TT has a critical role in the maturation of the ovarian follicles from the antral genotype (Kruskall-Wallis test: p=0.037). The T allele was associated with to the graffian stage. FSH will start a signaling cascade in the granulosa cells significant declining levels of LH, testosterone (GG+GT vs. TT and GG vs. after sitting on its receptor(FSHR). Alteration of this receptor may change TT (p<0.05, ANFOSVHAB) and sperm concentration (p<0.05, Median test). The- follicle maturation and therefore result in improper response to gonadotro- se results corroborate the observation that the highly conserved promoter pins. We investigated the association of FSH receptor gene alteration in DOR regions of the gene have a regulatory function on the transcription and OHSS patients. The presence of P.Ala307Thr, P.Ser680Ala, P. Ala665Thr of this gene and demonstrate convincingly that the promoter variant may and Mut.Val341Ala were analyzed in a case control study. 31 Iranian DOR be involved to the modulation of testicular functions both in healthy and and 34 Iranian OHSS patients were selected as the case group. 30 Iranian infertile men. fertile women were enrolled as the control group. The patients DNA were 
P01 .038-M extracted from their peripheral blood and amplified by relevant primers. Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of Huntington disease in the For determining allelic variant status all PCR products were analyzed by Netherlands; a validation study Sequencing. The results were unexpected; the homozygous Ser680 and J. M. E. van den Oever, E. K. Bijlsma, E. Bakker, M. J. van Belzen, E. M. J. Boon; Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Ala307 variants seem to be significantly associated with OHSS. The FSHR P.Ala665Thr genotype frequency was similar in all patients and controls. The number of oocytes retrieved was comparable between patients with different FSHR genotype. Although data are accumulating with evidence Huntington disease (HD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, that suggesting that the ovarian response to gonadotropins is mediated by dif- presents with motor symptoms, cognitive iHmTpTairment and psychiatric di- ferent genetic alterations, as in some previous studies homozygousity for sturbances. HD is caused by the expansion of an unstable polymorphic Ser680 was significantly associated with DOR, the optimal biomarkers and trinucleotide (CAG)n repeat in exon 1 of the gene. the efficacy of the tests still remain to be evaluated. Our facility is the only laboratory for diagnostics of HD in the Netherlands. 
P01 .036-M About one third of the requests for molecular prenatal diagnostics we recei- New molecular approaches for the detection of free fetal DNA ve are for HD. However, molecular testing is performed on fetal DNA derived C. Germani1, M. V. Capogna2, R. Cascella1, M. Ragazzo1, S. Zampatti1, C. Strafella1, G. from invasive procedures. Therefore, there is a request for alternative, less Novelli1, A. Pietropolli2, E. Piccione2, E. Giardina1,3; 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, School of Medicine, University of Rome invasive methods. Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) using total cell- “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 2Section of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Academic Department free DNA (cfDNA) from maternal plasma for the detection of paternally in- of Biomedicine and Prevention, University Tor Vergata , Rome , Italy, Rome, Italy, herited mutations in the fetus is achievable for a range of genetic disorders. 3Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare UILDM, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. In this study, we have explored the use of NIPD for HD. We have compared our methods to previously described methods and subsequently optimized and validated them. One of the major effort in medical genetics is the development of non-inva- Since 2010, n=17 couples have been included in this validation study, resul- sive prenatal diagnosis, aimed to replace current invasive methodologies. It ting in maternal blood samples from n=22 pregnancies. Using a combination is well known that the circulating free fetal cells may be employed as a new of PCR and fragment analysis, paternally inherited fetal CAG repeat length alternative source of DNA for prenatal diagnosis, in order to avoid the risks was determined using total cfDNA. All results were confirmed on genomic associated to invasive diagnosis. The cell free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in mater- DNA derived from chorionic villi. nal plasma or serum allows the development of non-invasive method for The full range of fetal CAG repeats tested in this cohort was 15-70 repeats. the detection of chromosomal and molecular diseases. The same approach We show that paternally inherited repeats in the intermediate and affected can be even applied to determine fetal sex and the risk for X-linked genetic range can be detected in a large background of maternal cfDNA. In addition, disorders. ins and outs of detecting trinucleotide repeats in fragmented cfDNA from To date, several techniques, such as PCR, Real Time PCR, Next Generation maternal plasma will be discussed. 
P01 .039-S Sequencing, have been employed for cffDNA analysis. Here we propose a Perinatal hypophosphatasia: A case of extreme intrafamilial new molecular technology (Plexor® HY System), based on Real Time PCR variability for fetal sex determination. The Plexor® technology takes advantage of the D. Myles Reid1, K. Fong2, S. Keating3, S. Viero4, K. Chong1; specific interaction between two modified nucleotides and the reduction 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical in fluorescence. The qPCR approach allows the simultaneous quantificati- Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, on and detection of fetal sex in pregnant women. Peripheral blood samp- 2Department of Medical Imaging, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, les were obtained from 50 pregnant women at the 12th to 14th gestational ON, Canada, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Pathology and Laboratories, week and the cffDNA was isolated from maternal plasma. North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. Determination of fetal sex of all samples demonstrated a concordance of 100% with the results obtained by traditEioSnHalG m 2et0ho1d4 ( k| aMryIoLtyApNin,g )I.T WAeL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 57ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a clinically diverse condition characterized by Microsatellite analysis of genomic DNA extracted from tissues of both fetu- defective bone and/or teeth mineralization in the presence of low activity of ses as well as from the blood of both parents revealed loss of heterozygosity serum and bone alkaline phosphatase. Perinatal lethal and infantile forms for two markers located inside the deleted region. Missing alleles originated of HPP have autosomal recessive mode of inheritance with prenatal ultra- from the mother. sound and postnatal x-rays showing extreme skeletal hypomineralization The results of molecular and cytogenetic studies strongly suggest that the that often results in neonatal death. Intrafamilial variability for autosomal maternal gonadal mosaicism could be the cause for the increased risk of recessive conditions is rare and HPP is not an exception; however, occasio- recurrence in described case. nally unexplained variations have been noted among affected siblings. We The possibility of germline mosaicism is of particular concern when coun- report a family with extreme variability in the perinatal presentation of HPP. selling the parents of a child with a de-novo chromosomal abnormality. 
P01 .042-M The couple had two pregnancies affected with HPP confirmed by DNA ana- Gene Expression Patterns in a disturbed Karyotype: Keys to the lysis showing compound heterozygous mutations in the ALPL gene. Fetal ul- Clinical Conundrum of Klinefelter Patients trasound in the first affected pregnancy showed short long bones, fractures F. Tüttelmann1, R. Bongers2, S. Werler2, N. Bogdanova1, J. Wistuba2, S. Kliesch2, J. and demineralization of the skull at 16 weeks gestation. The second affected Gromoll2, M. Zitzmann2; pregnancy had normal skeleton and normal growth of long bones at both 1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 2Centre for Reproductive Medicine and 16.5 and 19.5 weeks gestation ultrasound. Both pregnancies were termi- Andrology, Münster, Germany. nated in the second trimester. Fetal autopsy on the first fetus confirmed the prenatal ultrasound findings while external examination and x-rays on the second fetus showed few significant findings of perinatal HPP. This case em- Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) is the most common chromosome disorder in phasizes that in HPP prenatal diagnosis should rely on molecular analysis men (47,XXY), exhibiting marked phenotypic variation, frequent hypogona- rather than ultrasound and suggests that other genetic or prenatal environ- dism and increased mortality. It is unclear to what extent the genetic impact mental factors can significantly modify the phenotype even in known lethal of the supernumerary X-chromosome contributes to the pathology. skeletal dysplasias. EXAKT (Epigenetics, X-chromosomal features and Clinical Applications in 
P01 .040-M Klinefelter syndrome Trial) involves 132 KS men and their parents asses- Additional Genetic Testing in case of increased Nuchal Translucency sing a wide range of clinical parameters in comparison to male and female and normal Karyotype K. Muru1,2, T. Reimand1,2,3, M. Sitska1, R. Zordania1, Ü. Murumets1, P. Ilisson1, K. Õunap1,2; controls (n=50 each) in relation to genetic investigations. The objective was 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories,Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, to elucidate gene expression patterns in KS and whether these would be Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of related to inherent pathologies. Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and Translation Medicine, University of Tartu, Gene-expression was substantially disturbed in KS vs. both control groups. Tartu, Estonia. The differential expression of 36 not only X-chromosomal genes puts these phenotypical males into a genetic framework located between men and wo- men with normal karyotypes. A range of these genes has previously been In fetuses with increased nuchal translucency (NT ≥ 3 mm), after exclusion attributed to gender-specific modulations of immune responses. The KS fetal chromosomal anomaly, more than 100 different developmental/gene- cohort exhibited increased insulin resistance/inflammatory status, a pro- tic syndromes are reported, most of them are unique and difficult to diagno- coagulatory state, higher waist circumference, dyslipidemia and an altered se before birth. At the same time the anxiety of prospective parents needs to cardiac rhythmogenic setting. The extent of clinical dyshomeostasis was as- be reduced and exclusion of at least some genetic disorders may be helpful. sociated with the expression of dysregulated genes. Paternal origin of the Our study group consisted of 51 fetuses with increased NT and normal ka- supernumerary X-chromosome was an additional confounder regarding in- ryotype (analyzed at Tartu University Hospital in 2012-2013). For genetic sulin resistance and cardiac phenotype. testing the arrayed primer extension system was used, allowing to examine In KS patients, the supernumerary X-chromosome contributes to a num- different genetic diseases with same test: Noonan syndrome (NS) (PTPN11, ber of pathologies by altering gene expression patterns: insulin resistance, SO
S1 , KRAS, RAF, MEK1); Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS); congenital dyslipidemia, enhanced inflammation markers as well as altered cardiac adrenal hyperplasia (CAH); and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Of 51 tested rhythmogenic setting are involved; this was observable independently from pregnancies we found four positive for NS with the following mutations: one testosterone substitution treatment which may have attenuated responses with p.Asp61Asn in PTPN11, and three with p.Pro655Leu in SO
S1 ; and one in KS. case of CAH (homozygous mutation p. Pro454Ser in CY
P21 A2). The muta- Funding IZKF Münster CRA03/09; DFG WI2723/4-1 
P01 .043-S tion p.Pro655Leu in SO
S1  was inherited from healthy parent at least in two Klinefelter Syndrome testicular gene expression profile by a whole cases (in one case parental testing is ongoing); and in literature the muta- transcriptome approach tion is proposed to be as polymorphism. No SMA or SLOS cases or carriers V. Gatta1,2, M. D‘Aurora3,2, A. Ferlin4, S. Franchi2, S. Sperduti3,2, L. D‘Onofrio3,2, R. Selice4, C. were detected and there were only two CAH carriers in our group. In con- Foresta4, G. Palka5, L. Stuppia1,2; clusion: only in two cases (4%) the test gave valuable information for family; 1Department of Psychological, Humanities and Territorial Sciences, School of Medicine in three cases this test gave concern and uncertainty about fetus’s health. and Health Sciences, “G. d’Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy, 2Center of Excellence on Therefore it is questionable whether this particular test would be the best Aging (Ce.S.I.), Chieti, Italy, 3Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, “G. d’Annunzio” choice for additional testing. University, Chieti, Italy, 4Centre for Male Gamete Cryopreservation, Department of 
P01 .041-S Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, “University of Padova”, Padova, Two familial cases with interstitial deletion of chromosome 13 due to Italy, 5Department of Oral Health and Biotechnological Sciences, School of Medicine and maternal germline mosaicism Health Sciences, “G. d‘Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy. A. Zagorac1, A. Blatnik1, D. Krgović1, B. Zagradišnik1, F. Mujezinović1, N. Kokalj Vokač1,2; 1University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty Maribor, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. Klinefelter Syndrome (KS) is the most common sexual chromosome abnor- mality (47,XXY) and represents the first genetic cause of male infertility. The mechanisms leading to KS testis degeneration are still unclear and no thera- De-novo structural chromosome aberrations are usually interpreted as a py is so far available for affected patients. result of a random event during parental gametogenesis and the recurrence The present study is aimed to unravel information about molecules playing a risk therefore is estimated to be very low. key role in the disruption of the spermatogenesis. We report on a case in which the same supposedly de-novo deletion recur- Gene expression profiles analysis of KS azoospermic testis versus normal red in a second pregnancy. testis, could provide useful information about the molecular basis of the alte- The patient was referred to our institution for fetal karyotyping in her first ration of the spermatogenesis. pregnancy due to a positive first-trimester screening test. Karyotype after Transcriptome analysis was performed carrying out gene expression profile amniocentesis at 17 weeks gestation showed an interstitial deletion of chro- by a whole genome microarray approach on testis biopsies obtained from 6 mosome 13: 46,XX,del(13)(q22q32). To define the exact deleted region an azoospermic non-mosaic KS men and from 3 controls, for a total of 12 expe- array-CGH was performed, indicated one copy of 13q31.1q32.1, 15,9 Mb in riments. T-test and False Discovery Rate were used to evaluate differentially range. The ultrasound examination at 23 weeks of gestation showed cere- expressed genes. Identified transcripts were analysed by Ingenuity Pathways bellar hypoplasia, severe ventriculomegaly as well as associated facial fea- Analysis software to disclose genes biological functions. tures – hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia and micrognathia. The pregnancy Data analysis revealed the differentially up- and down-expression, in KS was terminated. Both parents were found to have normal karyotypes. testis versus the control ones, of 656 and 247 genes related to Endocrine In the second pregnancy, chromosomal analysis of the fetus showed an system development and function, Lipid metabolism, Reproductive disease, id 5e 8ntical interstitial deletion of chromosome 13 as EthSeH onGe f2ou0n1d4 in | tMhe IfLirAstN , FITreAe LrYad |ic Wal sWcavWen.EgiSngH, aGn.dO CRelGl death. pregnancy.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Take together these data show the presence of several genes involved in testis microenvironment deregulation leading to the spermatogenesis failure. There are two common polymorphisms in luteinizing hormone beta-subu- This information, associated with an early diagnosis could help to unravel nit (LHβ) gene, which form the variant LHβ (v-LHβ). These polymorphisms p Po 0s 1s .i 0b 4le 4 t -h Merapeutic targets for testis failure prevention and limitation. change the amino acid sequence (Trp8Arg and Ile15Thr) of the protein. The Immunoelectron microscopy reveals massive expression of laeverin hormone with v-LHβ (Arg8/Thr15) was shown to have higher bioactivity in microvesicles in preeclamptic placentas (tests in vitro) but shorter lifetime in vivo. The presence of v-LHβ is asso- M. Nystad1,2, V. Sitras3, G. Acharya1,2,4; ciated with reduced woman´s fertility, menstrual disorders and abortions. 1Women’s Health and Perinatology Research Group, Department of Obstetrics and Female IVF patients with at least one v-LHβ allele tend to be hypo-respon- Gynaecology, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsoe, Norway, 2Women’s Health ders to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. Thus, we propose that women and Perinatology Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health with v-LHβ would be in a lower risk to develop an ovarian hyperstimulation Sciences, University of Tromsø, Tromsoe, Norway, 3Department of Obstetrics and Fetal syndrome (OHSS). Medicine, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Clinical In our study, 102 fertile male-controls, 149 fertile female-controls and 58 Sciences, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. patients affected by OHSS type III-V were analyzed. The genotype was de- termined by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). The preva- lence of v-LHβ allele was 10,1% in female controls, 14,7% in male controls Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific syndrome characterized by hyperten- and 6,0% in OHSS patients. sion and proteinuria. It complicates 5-10% of pregnancies and is a major There was no statistical difference between Czech control men and women cause of maternal mortality world-wide. Laeverin (aminopeptidase-Q) is a in genotype or allelic frequencies (P=0,22; P=0,12, respectively). The Czech plasmamembrane-bound aminopeptidase that is specifically expressed in population frequency of v-LHβ is closest to the prevalence from Iceland, Ita- the human placenta. We reported previously that the mRNA levels of laeve- ly and The Netherland. rin gene are significantly up-regulated in preeclamptic compared to healthy There was no difference between female controls and OHSS patients in ge- placentas, indicating that laeverin might play a role in the pathophysiology notype or allelic frequencies (P=0,41; P=0,25, respectively). The protective of preeclampsia. Immunofluorescence studies have indicated that laeverin effect of the v-LHβ from OHSS was not confirmed, but this needs to be veri- protein is highly expressed in the cytoplasm, instead of the plasmamembra- fied in a larger cohort. ne, of villous trophoblasts in preeclamptic placentas. In this study, we used Supported by grants IGA NT13770-4/2012, project for conceptual develop- immunoelectron microscopy to investigate the subcellular localisation of ment of research organization 00064203 and OPPK CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. laeverin protein. Ultrathin sections of high pressure freezed (Tokyasu me- 
P01 .047-S thod) tissue samples of four placentas (two from healthy women and two Genetic basis of male infertility: Belorusian Centrum of Reproductive from women with severe preeclampsia) were fixed and labeled with prima- Medicine data. ry antibody raised against laeverin, followed by antibody conjugated with S. Zoukovskaya, K. Mosse, N. Rumiantsava, L. Savenko; gold particles. Double labeling with markers for endoplasmatic reticulum Center of Reproductive Medicine, Minsk, Belarus. (ER) and Golgi apparatus (GA) were also performed. We found laeverin in the ER, GA and massive expression in microvesicles within the cytoplasm of villous trophoblasts, extracellular space and in the fetal capillaries in pree- Genetic factors play an important role in male infertility etiology. clamptic placentas. Since the ER and GA in normal placentas did not show We present the data of spermatogenetic impairment infertile couples re- any evidence of accumulation of laeverin, we hypothesize that dysregulation ferred to ART. Results. 601 mentally normal men with azoospermia/severe of transport or folding of laeverin might have a role in the development of oligozoospermia were examined using cytogenetic and moleqular methods. preeclampsia. Klinefelter’s syndrome (KS, 47,XXY) was found in 11 (1,8%) patients. Dif- 
P01 .045-S ferent AZF regions Yq microdeletions (DelAZF) were detected in 34 (5.6%) Leri Weill syndrome findings in an infertile man with 45,X/46,X,derY, patients. AZFc deletion calculated for 29 cases (85,3%) with a chance of re- t(Y;Y)(p11.2;q11.21) and SHOXY deletion trieving sperm by testicular biopsy (TESE) and performing ICSI: spermato- K. Yararbas1, B. Saglam Ada2, F. Alp2, B. Cavdarli3, A. Ocal2, S. Gurkan1, G. Karatas1, I. Akin1, K. Bilecen1, E. Laleli Sahin1, A. Tukun1; zoa were received in 15 cases (51.7%) for following cryopreservation. Two 1Duzen Laboratories Group, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Etlik Zubeyde Hanim Women Health AZFb and 3 AZFb+c deletion’s patients showed sperm absence in testicu- Teaching and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara Numune Teaching and lar tissue. 2 men with complete AZFa+b+c region’s deletion didn’t under- Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. go TESE/ICSI. 16 (2.6%) CFTR gene mutation’s heterozygote carriers were identified: dF508del (10 cases), CFTR2,3del (3), 2184insA (2), 1677delTA (1). Counseling: Partners-carriers of CFTR gene mutations have 25% risk Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) or syndrome is a rare genetic disorder of affected outcome, DelAZFc male - 100% deletion’s transmission risk for with skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature, mesomelia, and Ma- sons. We recommended donor sperm using or adoption for KS and DelAZFb; delung deformity. We report a 29-year-old male with Leri Weil Syndrome DelAZFb+c; DelAZFa+b+c’s patients.ARTs: 12 DelAZFc patients underwent phenotype. The patient was referred from Urology department because IVF+ICSI procedures. 5 couples (41.6%) got pregnancy: 3 pregnancies re- of azoospermia. Infertility was the first complaint that forced him request sulted in healthy girl delivery, two - ongoing (12 and 22 weeks gestation). medical achievement. The patient had short stature with macrocephaly, Preimplantation testing was performed for 2 couples with CFTR gene mu- mesomelia, Madelung deformity, and exaggerated flattened vertebral spine tations heterozygote’s status for both partners. Two pregnancies were ob- adressing Leri Weill syndrome. Simultaneously regular consultations, radio- tained: one is developing successfully, other resulted in miscarriage. Conclu- graphic and other procedures and genetic analysis was planned. Conventio- sion. KS/Yq microdeletions are specific for a severe spermatogenic failure. nal cytogenetic analysis and Y chromosomal microdeletion scan was per- Genetic testing permits to establish the origin of azoospermia, prognoses, formed. No microdeletions were present on the loci sY14(SRY), sY84, sY86 ART strategy’s selection and to avoid unnecessary treatment. 
P01 .048-M (AZFa), sY127, sY134 (AZFb), sY254, sY255 (AZFc), sY152, sY153 (AZFd) X chromosome-linked CNVs in male infertility: discovery of and RBM1. Chromosomal analysis revealed a mosaic finding of two series: duplication load and recurrent deletions with potential clinical 45,X and 46,X, with a der(Y), possibly t(Y;Y)(p11.2;q11.21). Additional me- relevance taphase FISH analysis with a commercial probe mix targeting DXZ1, LSI SRY C. Chianese1, D. Lo Giacco2, C. Giachini1, G. Forti1, E. Ars2, E. Ruiz-Castañé3, C. Krausz1; supported the mosaic numerical finding with 15% of the metaphases only 1Department of experimental and clinical biomedical sciences, University of Florence, showing one DXZ1 signal without LSI SRY and 45 chromosomes counted Florence, Italy, 2Molecular Biology Laboratory, Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, on DAPI stain. Whole chromosome painting FISH studies demonstrated that 3Andrology Service, Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. the derived Y chromosome consisted of only Y chromosomal material. SHOX analysis by FISH technique revealed absence of SHOX signal but 2 DYZ si- gnals on derived Y chromosome. Finally, chromosomal microarray findings The X-chromosome genetic content is predicted to be important in sperma- (Affymetrix Cytoscan 750K SNP Array platform) confirmed a SHOX deletion togenesis but its role in male infertility remains unknown. We investigated with no additional significant findings above cut-off values. whether X-linked copy number variations (CNVs) might have clinical signi- 
P01 .046-M ficance in idiopathic infertile men. We previously detected by a-CGH a num- The prevalence of luteinizing hormone beta-subunit gene ber of CNVs including 16 patient-specific gains and 3 recurrent deletions on polymorphisms in Czech population and patients with ovarian Xq, exclusively (CNV67) and prevalently (CNV64; CNV69) found in infertile hyperstimulation syndrome patients. Among the 14 gains, we selected 5 for further qPCR analyses on a P. Peldová, J. Chrudimská, M. Macek jr., M. Macek sr.; Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - 2nd Faculty of larger study population including 276 idiopathic infertile patients and 327 normozoospermic controls. The difference in duplication load was statisti- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |c WallyW dWiffe.EreSnHt (Gp=.O1.6R5Gx10-4). PAR1-linked DU
P1 A displayed the hig5he9stABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .051-S Transcriptomic profiling of spermatozoa of infertile men with frequency (1.44% of patients) and we hypothesize it may cause spermato- abnormal sperm morphology genic failure by disturbing meiotic X-Y pairing or by affecting the correct B. Chylikova1, M. Hodulova1, J. Ariagno2, O. Seda1, G. Mendeluk2, A. L. Kierszenbaum3, F. regulation of a gene potentially influencing spermatogenesis (PP
P2 R3B). Liska1; Concerning the 3 deletions, 627 patients and 628 controls were tested for 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University each deletion with PCR+/−. CNV64 and CNV69 were significantly more fre- in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Laboratory of Male Fertility, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University Clinical quent in patients than controls (p>0.05). CNV67 was detected exclusively Hospital “José de San Martin”, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, in patients (1.1%) and was maternally transmitted. The oligozoospermic 3Department of Pathobiology, The Sophie Davis School of Biomedical Education, The City phenotype of one carrier versus his normozoospermic non-carrier brother University of New York, New York, NY, United States. strongly indicates a pathogenic effect of the deletion on spermatogenesis. MAGEA9, an ampliconic gene reported as independently acquired on the human X chromosome with exclusive physiological expression in the testis, The pathogenesis of oligo/astheno/teratospermia is unknown in most pa- is likely to be involved in CNV67. Our investigation further indicates an as- tients. Especially, the proportion of genetic and environmental factors has sociation between X-linked CNV burden and spermatogenic impairment and been hard to tease apart. However, transcriptomic or proteomic approaches identifies the first X chromosome-linked recurrent deletion and duplication can identify common dysregulated genes or pathways in sperm, that are with clinical significance. 
P01 .049-S substantial for their function, regardless the ultimate etiological factor. A novel m.9588G>A missense mutation in the mitochondrial COIII We analyzed twelve semen samples according to WHO criteria (2010). Four gene as a cause of low sperm motility in asthenozoospermic Tunisian of the participants were fertile donors, clinically and andrologically normal, infertile men who had achieved pregnancy in a period less that twelve months and got a S. Baklouti-Gargouri1,2, M. Ghorbel3, A. Sellami4, F. Fakhfakh5, L. Ammar-Keskes5, L. live born baby in the last year. Seven samples were from infertile patients ex- Ammar-Keskes5; amined in our clinic that presented with oligospermia and abnormal sperm 1Laboratory of Molecular, Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sfax, Sfax, head morphology, including decapitation. We performed genome-wide ex- Tunisia, Sfa, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of Histology, Sfax Faculty of Medicine, University pression analysis using Affymetrix HuGene2.1ST microaarays. of Sfax, Tunisia., Sfax, Tunisia, 3Laboratory of Molecular, Human Genetics, Faculty of The principal component analysis revealed substantial overlap between Medicine, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, SfaX, Tunisia, 4Laboratory of Histology, Sfax Faculty of Medicine, University of Sfax, Tunisia., sfax, Tunisia, 5Laboratory of Molecular, normal and abnormal samples. These results indicate that despite the com- Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, sfax, Tunisia. mon result of morphologically abnormal spermatozoa, the underlying cau- ses of the infertility might be diverse. Surprisingly four genReIPs Kw4ere markedly different between fertile and infer- Infertility affects 10-15% of the population, of which, approximately 40% is tile sperm samples: an uncharacterized gene, a small nucleolar RNA gene, a due to male etiology consisting primarily of low sperm count (oligozoosper- microRNA gene and . Protein kinase RIPK4 is known to phosphorylate mia) and/or abnormal sperm motility (asthenozoospermia). Furthermore, the adaptor protein DV
L2  (dishevelled 2) to activate the Wnt signaling pa- it has been demonstrated that mtDNA base substitutions can greatly influ- thway. In fact, the ortholog DV
L1  has a role in regulating spermiogenesis via ence semen quality. Wnt signaling. In this study we performed a systematic sequence analysis of the mitochon- The project was supported by University of Buenos Aires, Science and Tech- drial genes (cytochrome oxidase III (COIII) gene in 64 infertile men suffe- nology, no. UBACYT-CB06, to G.M.; and Ministry of Health of the Czech Re- ring from asthenozoospermia (n=31) in comparaison to normozoospermic p Pu 0b 1l .i 0c 5 n 2o -. M NT12269-5. infertile men (n=33) and fertile men (n=150) from Tunisian population. A Decrease of meiotic cohesins with maternal age in human oocytes novel m.9588G>A mutation was found in the sperm’s mitochondrial DNA M. Tsutsumi1, R. Fujiwara1, H. Nishizawa1, H. Kogo2, H. Inagaki1, T. Ohye1, T. Kato1, T. (mtDNA) in all asthenozoospermic patient and was absent in the normozoo- Fujii1, H. Kurahashi1; spermic and in fertile men. The m.9588G>A mutation substitutes a highly 1Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan, 2Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan. conserved Glutamate at position 128 to Lysine. In addition, PolyPhen-2 ana- lysis predicted that this variant is ‘‘probably damaging’’. This novel missense mutation (m.9588G>A) detected in the mitochondrial COIII gene as a cause Aneuploidy of fetal chromosomes is one of the causes of pregnancy loss or of low sperm motility in asthenozoospermic Tunisian infertile men congenital birth defects. It is known that the frequency of oocyte aneuploidy 
P01 .050-M increases with maternal age in humans. Recent data have highlighted the New candidate genes for oligoasthenoteratospermia as a potential contribution of cohesin complex in the correct segregation of meiotic chro- cause of human male infertility mosomes. In mammalian oocytes, cohesion is established during the fetal K. Veselá1, I. Hrdlicka1, B. Chylikova1, R. Mihalova1, K. Rezabek2, F. Liska1; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University in Prague, First Faculty stage and meiosis-specific cohesin subunits are not replenished after birth. of Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of This raises the possibility that the long meiotic arrest of oocytes facilitates Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine and the deterioration of cohesion leading to the age-related increase in aneuplo- General University Hospital, Prague 2, Czech Republic. idy. We here examined the cohesin levels in dictyate oocytes from different age groups. Samples were obtained from the ovarian tissues of 8 women (age range: 19-49 years) and also from 2- and 10-month-old female mice. Oligoasthenoteratospermia (OAT) is a condition characterized by the pres- Ovarian tissue sections were immunostained using cohesin antibodies and ence of sperm with abnormal morphology. The causeCsF oTfR OAT are unknown the cohesin levels were determined by immunofluorescence. The levels of in most cases. Routine genetic examination of patients with nonsyndromic the meiosis-specific cohesin subunits, RE
C8  and SM
C1 B, were found to be male infertility (Y-chromosome microdeletions and mutations) does decreased in women aged 40 and over compared with those aged around not cover this phenotype. Given the hundreds of genes identified as essential 20. An age-related decrease in meiotic cohesins was also evident in mice. for male fertility in animal models it is probable that substantial fraction of Interestingly, SM
C1 A, the mitotic counterpart of SM
C1 B, was readily detec- cases with genetically caused OAT remains undetected. Our study aims for table in human oocytes but only barely in mice. The mitotic cohesin levels mutation screening of selected candidate genes which were linked to OAT in of mice slightly increased with age. These results suggest that, mitotic and animal models. CAPZA3, meiotic cohesins may act in a coordinate manner in humans to maintain WCDeC s4e2l,e CctDeCd1 c4aBn, dCiNdTatReO gBe, nCeSsN wKh2Aos2e, GmOuPtCa,t HioOnO iKn 1m, HodReBl, oOrAgZa3n,i OsmDF i1n,t eRrIfMerBiPn3g the levels of this protein over a sustained period. The decreased meiotic co- with S sPpAeTrAm16at. ogenesis and was demonstrated like OAT. We selected hesin subunit levels with age impairs sister chromatid cohesion leading to CFTR i Pn 0c 1re .0a 5se 4d - Msegregation errors. and We performed genealogy, karyotyping and mutation analysis of Maternal plasma miRNA analysis of fetuses with congenital heart gene and Y-chromosome microdeletions. Control group are men with defects normospermia. PCR amplified exons of the selected genes were sequenced O. Biro, L. Lazar, J. Rigo Jr., B. Nagy; using GS Junior next generation sequencer. Semmelweis University, 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. To date we accumulated 131 cases and 88 controls. Sequencing is completed for 41 patients and 8 controls. We found 6 peCrDsoCn4s2 wCiNthT RchOrBo,mHoOsOoKm1al abeRrIrMa-- tBiPon3 and one man with Y-chromosome microdeletion. We detected 115 known Congenital heart defects (CHD) are common developmental malformations sequence variants and 18 novel variants (in , CNTRO B R aInMdB 
P3  and often associated with chromosomal disorders. The major focus of cur- ). The clinical significance of the novel variants is uncertain, however, we rent research is examining free fetal nucleic acids in maternal circulation ai- identified two likely damaging frameshift variants (in and ). ming to create new noninvasive screening methods. The miRNAs are short, The study is supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic grant No. non-coding RNA molecules that play important part in regulation of euka- N6T0/12269-5 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, rIT yoA tiL cY g e| n W e eW xpW res. sE ioS nH . TG h. eO aR imG of this study was to investigate the role ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .057-S miRNA as potential universal fetal marker in NIPT miRNAs in heart development, measure miRNA concentration and expres- T. Sedlackova1, G. Repiska1, G. Minarik1,2,3; sion in maternal blood. 1Comenius University in Bratislava, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Molecular Peripheral blood samples were collected from 53 women, 27 of them had Biomedicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Comenius University in Bratislava, Faculty of healthy and 26 had fetuses with congenital heart defects. Blood samples Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. were centrifuged and miRNA was extracted from plasma. MiRNA concen- tration was calculated by Nanodrop spectrophotometer. By using Gene On- Introduction tology and mi.RBase databases we searched folre tt-h7ocse miRNAs which can be detected in plasma and are associated with chromosomal and congenital : Circulating miRNA molecules are currently studied as poten- heart defects These criteria were fulfilled by miRNA of chromosome tial diagnostic markers in many physiological and pathophysiological condi- 21. qRT-PCR was carried out to validate the miRNA’s expression. tions such as oncological diseasMese, thheoadrts diseases and pregnancy. The aim of There was nol est-i7gcnificant difference between the miRNA concentrations our study was to determine if circulating miRNAs can be used as potential in the two groups (6.05 ng/µl vs 5.36 ng/ µl). We found significant diffe- universal fetal marker in NIPT. : Circulating miRNAs were isolated rences in the concentrations between the control and patient group from plasma of pregnant women and miRNA samples were divided into two (1.12±3.19 ng/µl vs. 0.00047±0.00083 ng/µl; p<0.0001). groups depending on fetal gender. Firstly, expression levels of 91 miRNAs Fetal-derived miRNAs are part of the free nucleic acidsle fto-7ucn d in maternal were established in three female and three male samples by two-step RT-qP- plasma, expression studies reveals new opportunities for congenital heart CR. Five miRNAs (miR-378, miR-122, miR-20b, miR-320a, miR-320b) whose defect research and diagnosis. According to our study seems to be a expression levels significantly differ between two groups were chosen for potential biomarker for fetal CHD. further analyses. Subsequently, expresion levels of five selected miRNAs 
P01 .055-S were evaluated in 14 female and 15 Rmeasluel stasmples by two-step RT-qPCR. Dif- Overexpression of mir-21 and mir-221 in preeclamptic placentas ferences between groups were tested using Student t-test with p<0.05 was M. Vazan1, I. Svecova2, J. Danko2, Z. Lasabová1; consider as statistically significant. : After the first part of this study 1Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Dept. of where panel of 91 miRNAs were investigated, five miRNAs significantly dif- Molecular Biology, Martin, Slovakia, 2Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Martin, Slovakia. fer in their expression levels between two sample groups. However, there were no significant differences in expressioCno lnevcleulss ioofn five selected miRNAs between sample groups, when expression levels of these miRNAs were de- Preeclampsia is a multisystem disorder with partial genetic and immunolo- termined in a greater number of samples. : Our study showed, gical etiology; the apoptosis is thought to play a role in the development of that none of evaluated miRNA molecules in this work is not suitable as the preeclampsia. The microRNAs are small noncoding molecules involved in universal fetal marker. However, since our work addressed only limited regulation of cellular processes including apoptosis. Here we designed a 96- number of miRNA molecules, for determination if circulating miRNAs can well reaction plate for the analysis of 21 microRNAs in duplicates which b Pe 0 1u .s 0e 5d 8 a -s M universal fetal marker, further studies are needed. are known to be involved in the apoptosis regulation and are expressed in Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita caused by compound placenta - pro- apoptotic miR-1, let-7c, let-7g, mir-200c, mir-143, mir-205, heterozygosity to Ashkenazi founder mutation and a novel splice mir-122, mir-409-3p, mir-449, mir-708, mir-149, mir-204,mir-133, anti- mutation in NEB gene apoptotic - mir-214, mir221, and mir 222, and miRNAs with both the anti- M. Feingold Zadok1, R. Maymon1, D. Chitayat2, M. Injeyan2, O. Reish1; apoptotic and apoptotic targets mir29a and mir29c. The normalization was 1Assaf Ha‘Rofe Medical Center, Beer Yaakov, Israel, 2Mount Sinai Hospital, University of performed against RNU44. The microRNAs were extracted from placental Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. tissues obtained after delivery from preeclamptic women and healthy con- Background trols. After stem-loop primer reverse transcription in one tube, the samples NEB were analyzed on the plates and evaluated by deltadelta Ct algorithm. The : Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a heterogenous disorder. A ho- aberrantly expressed miRNA were validated by TaqMan MicroRNA Assay by mozygote 2502bp deletion in - had been detected in 1:40,000 Ashke- relative quantitation with the standard curves The analysis of 21microRNAs nPaaztii eJenwtss (AJ). Most cases have congenital hypotonicity that might progress, revealed overexpression of mir-122, mir-21, mir-221, mir- 29a, mir- 29c but arthrogryposis is relatively rare. and mir-449 The validation was performed on 13 additional preeclamptic : Three affected siblings with arthrogryposis and an increased placental samples collected after delivery and 6 placental samples from nMuecthhaol dfosl da n/d c yRsetsicu hltysgroma in two, were detected at 11-15 weeks of gesta- normal delivery; a significant overexpression of mir-21 and mir-221 with tion. Parents were AJ with non-contributory family history. p=0.0055 (CI95% 25.2 to 123.47) and p=0.0047 (CI95% 12.16 to 57.20) : Histopathology with electron microscopy of muscle was observed, respectively. Although the validation on larger number of samples suggested NM on two siblings. DNA sequencing confirmed com- samples is necessary, the analysis of miRNA deregulation can help in the pound heterozygosity to the known Ashkenazi mutation (maternal) and identification deregulated signaling in preeclamptic placentas for detection sDpilsiccue smsiuotna:tion c.9619-2A>G (paternal) predicted to disrupt the intron 66 of new biomarkers. splice acceptor site. 
P01 .056-M The Lsupdltickee estit ea lmutation reveYoalneadt hi ne to aulr. patients, has been Analysis of micrornas expression profile in human placentas from previously detected in two unrelated affected AJ with clinical stigmata of pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia arthrogryposis ( . ICHG 2011; Prenatal Diagnosis, A. S. Glotov1, V. S. Pakin1, E. S. Vashukova1, M. M. Danilova1, E. S. Mihailin2, O. N. 2012). The detection of this mutation in several AJ families suggests it is Arzhanova1, V. S. Baranov1; 1Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2State either hot spot site or a new AJ founder mutation. Further studies should be Budget Institution of Health „Maternity hospital №10“, St.-Petersburg, Russian performed to validate its carrier frequency among this population. Also, the Federation. severe stigmata in affected patients harbNoEriBng this splice mutation, suggests its critical role in disease pathogenesis. In line with this, when arthrogrypo- sis detected prenatally, screening of the should be considered. 
P01 .059-S Preeclampsia is a main cause of maternal and neonatal mortality and mor- Familial chromosomal translocation t(3;5)(q26.2;p14): clinical bidity However, the origin of this disease is rather obscure so far. MicroRNAs characterization of affected members with neural tube defect as a (miRNAs) as a key a regulators of gene expression in cell proliferation, apo- common clinical feature ptosis, and embryogenesis, whereas their abnormal expression has been E. Benusiene1,2, E. Preiksaitiene1,2, V. Sliuzas1,2, S. Tumene1,2; suggested in various common disorders. The objective of this study was 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, to compare expression profiles of miRNAs in placentas from preeclampsia Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu patients with these ones from normal term pregnancies. The expression Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. profiling of five patients was performed with Ion Torrent semiconductor sequencing. Fourteen miRNAs (miR-181a-5p, mir-143, miR-143-3p; miR- 126-5p; mir-369, mir-136, miR-136-5p, mir-142, miR-142-3p; mir-516a-1, A 26-years-old woman was referred for prenatal diagnostics because of ag- mir-516a-2, mir-519a-1, mir-518c and miR-518c-3p) were significantly gravated obstetric anamnesis. Her first child (male) was born at 34 weeks overexpressed in preeclampsia placenta compared to these ones in the con- of gestation via S/C due to polyhydramnios and hypotrophy. Hypotonia, trols. The results are important prerequisite for further molecular studies of dysmorphic facial features and multiple congenital malformations were genetic and epigenetic contributors in preeclampsia. observed, including hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, hypopla- The work was supported by grants of Russian Federation President № stic cerebellum, congenital heart defect, optic nerve dysplasia, micropenis, 16.120.11.5773-MC. hypospadias, syndactyly, and suspected spina bifida occulta. The newborn died at age of 1 month. According genealogy, proband’s mother had a mis- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 61 carriage at the 14th week of gestation and stillborn at 26 weeks of gestationABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .062-M Preliminary experience with the management of positive results of with uncertain gender and myelomeningocele. non invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) in a reference centre During this pregnancy at the 27th week of gestation ultrasound scan sho- V. Bianchi1, B. Gentilin1, C. Cesaretti1, M. Calvello1, R. Fogliani2, S. Guerneri3, M. Di Segni3, wed polyhydramnios and multiple congenital anomalies in the fetus. On the L. Cerutti3, P. Ilardi3, F. Lalatta1; 31st week of gestation the fetus died in the uterus. Autopsy findings were 1Clinical Genetics Unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, pulmonary atresia, transposition of the great vessels, horseshoe kidney, Milan, Italy, 2Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit, Prenatal Diagnosis Unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics cerebellum hypoplasia, hydrocephalus, clubfoot, and spina bifida. Subtelo- Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. meric FISH was performed to the proband and balanced translocation ish t(3;5)(qter-,pter+;pter-,qter+) was detected. Karyotype was 46,XX,t(3;5) (q26.2;p14). During the past year techniques enabling non-invasive prenatal testing for The clinical phenotype of affected family members is similar and could the most common trisomies have become available clinically. An increasing result from the combination of dup(3q) and del(5p) syndromes. Only few number of women have been offered the test in connection with their first cases of (3;5) translocations have been reported to date. Detailed clinical trimester screening, regardless of their level of risk. Pregnancies with a po- description of affected family members brings new data for the characteri- sitive test are often referred to our Centre for genetic counseling and inva- zation of this rearrangement. 
P01 .060-M sive procedures as recommended. To this end, we have created a flow-chart The Effect of Radiofrequency Waves on Pregnant Mice in association to assist these patients who are not receiving enough information at time of with Genes involved in Neuronal Migration sampling. Clinical aspects of the test, its limits and reasons for false positi- A. G. S. Yildirim1, E. Karaca2, O. Gozen3, B. Durmaz2, O. Cogulu2, T. Yildiz4, O. Yeniel1, M. ves are discussed and a guaranteed follow-up is scheduled to collect data at Ergenoglu1, C. Gunduz5, E. Koylu3, S. Sagol1; time of birth. Between July 2013 and January 2014 6 patients with positive 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Izmir, NIPT (2 trisomy 21, 1 trisomy 18, 1 monosomy X, 1 47,XXY, 1 triple X) were Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Physiology, Izmir, Turkey, referred. All patients underwent an amniotic fluid procedure and only one 4Ege University, Faculty of Science, Department of Physics, Izmir, Turkey, 5Ege University, case of trisomy 21, which had fetal anomalies at ultrasound, was confirmed. Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey. Normal results were obtained in the other 5. Two term placentas have been studied, the others being ongoing pregnancies. Since false positive cases of chromosome aneuploides after NIPT may have different underlying biologi- The advancements in technology have improved human life in numerous cal causes ,(the majority, however, are due to placental mosaicism) we belie- ways, and concerns have been raised regarding health and safety issues in ve that the cytogenetic analysis of term placentas should be acquired in all parallel with the spread of those developments. One of those concerns has such cases so as to increase our knowledge about the relationship between been focused on radiofrequency waves because of common usage in daily cffDNA and the fetal genome. Genetic counselling should always be carried life, such as mobile phones. The aim of this study is to evaluate change in ex- out before and after testing to reduce misinterpretation of test validity. 
P01 .063-S pression levels of 7 genes (Dcx,Tuba1a, Ywhae, Arx, Reln, Large, Flna), which Non-invasive prenatal detection of a mosaic trisomy 16 are involved in neuronal migration following the exposure of radiofrequen- B. Bayindir1,2, P. Brady1, N. Brison1, L. Dehaspe1, S. Ardui1, J. Houdt1, K. Van Esch1, E. cy waves. A total of 16 mice were included in the study. They were divided Legius1, T. Ravel1, K. Devriendt1, J. Vermeesch1; into two groups as study and control. Each group consisted of 6 female and 2 1Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Universita degli studi di male mice. Study group was exposed to 0.725 W/kg SAR value for 12 hours Pavia, Pavia, Italy. per day continuously by establishing an exposure system throughout preg- nancy. A total of 29 offspring in the study group and 12 in the control group were achieved. Gene expression analyses were performed by using real time The presence of cell free fetal DNA in the maternal circulation has allowed RT-PCR. Significantly increased expression levels were found in 5 (Arx, Dcx, for the development of methods, which allow for non-invasive detection of Large, Reln, Ywhae) out of 7 genes in the study group. In conclusion expos- fetal chromosomal aneuploidies. Our laboratory offers non-invasive prenatal ure to radiofrequency waves in pregnancy may cause significant changes in testing (NIPT) with an innovative pipeline that utilizes all of the information those gene expressions involved in neuronal migration, which may also be provided by shallow depth whole genome sequencing to identify possible related with brain anomalies. aneuploidies of all chromosomes. We have encountered one case, referred 
P01 .061-S because of high trisomy 21 risk (1/14), with unusually high Z-score (5.7) Confined placental mosaicism in a case of false positive NIPT result for the chromosome 16 indicating the presence of a trisomy 16. Follow-up for trisomy 18 with direct FISH and array analysis of amniotic fluid cells showed a low- R. Raynova1, I. Bradinova1, K. Vladimirova1, M. Panova2, A. Savov1; 1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, level mosaicism (between 7 and 20%). The finding of low level mosaicism is Bulgaria, 2First Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria. contrasting with the high Z-score which suggests the presence of trisomy 16 in the majority of the cells. This discrepancy could be explained by confined placental mosaicism and, if so, should be taken into account in subsequent Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) of cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) for fe- counseling. Whereas the gynecologist suggested interruption, the family de- tal aneuploidy risk assessment has been shown to be both highly sensitive cided to continue the pregnancy with expert ultrasound monitoring of the and highly specific. False positive rates can be as low as 0.1%. However, dis- f Pe 0ta 1l . 0d 6ev 4e -l Mopment following clinical genetic counseling. crepancies between positive NIPT result and fetal karyotype on chorionic Non-invasive detection of fetal deletions or duplications by low villus sampling or amniocentesis may occur. The source of aneuploidy may coverage massively parallel sequencing be due to maternal mosaicism, maternal malignancy, true fetal mosaicism, a C. ZHANG, W. Xie, X. Pan, F. Chen, Y. Gao, W. Wang; demised co-twin, an anembryonic sac, confined placental mosaicism. BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. We present a case of a 38-year-old woman, pregnant in 16 gestational weeks, referred to our Unit for amniocentesis due to positive NIPT for trisomy18. The ultrasound scans were unremarkable. To report the performance of fetal chromosomal deletions/duplications de- DNA was extracted from uncultivated amniocytes, amplified with commer- tection by the massively parallel sequencing (MPS) of maternal plasma DNA, cial QF-PCR kit Aneufast (Molgentix SL, Barcelona, Spain) and analyzed on we recruited 1,324 participants and performed the MPS test in a double- ABI 3130xl. Karyotyping was performed on cultured amniocytes using stan- blind study. The peripheral blood of each participant was obtained before dard protocol. invasive sampling at 10-28 weeks’ gestation with a median of 21 weeks. QF-PCR and cytogenetic analysis showed normal results, trisomy 18 was Plasma DNA was extracted and sequencing. About 0.08 fold sequencing data excluded. per sample was generated and the bioinformatics analysis was performed The pregnancy was still ongoing, with no pathological findings on routine using FCAPS algorithm. Deletions / duplications, ranged from 3.07 Mb to ultrasound scans. Cytogenetic and molecular-genetic analyses are to be 26.98 Mb, were suspected in 17 of the 1,324 samples, of which 16 were con- done after delivery. sistent with the results of fetal karyotyping / aCGH. In one case the suspec- Since fetal cell-free DNA mostly originates from invading trophoblast cells, ted abnormality was not confirmed by karyotyping, representing a false this false-positive result may be due to mosaicism confined to the placenta positive case. No false negative case was observed in the remaining 1,307 (CPM). CPM occurs in 2% of the viable pregnancies and before the introduc- low-risk samples. The sensitivity and specificity for detection of fetal chro- tion of NIPT was most often detected by direct analysis of chorionic villus mosomal deletions / duplications were100% and 99.92%, respectively. Our sampling. study demonstrated the MPS-based test is feasible and of high sensitivity Our case illustrates that follow-up with diagnostic testing of chorionic villus and specificity in detecting fetal chromosomal deletions / duplications. sampling and/or amniotic fluid for abnormal NIPT results should be perfor- 62 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG med and that pre- and posttest counseling is important.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .065-S Nonivasive prenatal KEL genotyping using TaqMan Real time PCR and by capillary electrophoresis minisequencing Introduction: Microdeletions, which may result in mental and physical J. Böhmova1, R. Vodicka1, M. Lubusky2, I. Holuskova3, M. Studnickova2, R. Kratochvilova1, handicaps, are challenging to detect using cell-free DNA-based NIPT due to E. Krejcirikova1, M. Janikova1, I. Dhaifalah1; their smaller size. Additionally, sample rarity and the later gestational ages 1Dept of Medical Genetics and Fetal Medicine University Hospital and Palacky University at which samples are generally collected complicate test performance vali- Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology dation. We created artificial pregnancy plasma DNAs (plasmArts) to circum- University Hospital in Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Transfusion Department vent these issues, demonstrating accurate detection of five microdeletions: University Hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. 22q11.2, Cri-du-Chat, 1p36, Prader-Willi, and Angelman. Methods: DNA isolated from cell lines, affected or unaffected children, and their unaffected mothers, was treated to generate nucleosomal ladders, mi- Introduction: There are two reasons for establishing a methodology for no- micking maternal/fetal cfDNA fragment lengths. These “cfDNAs” were mixed ninvasive determination of KEL genotypes in early pregnancy. To identify to mimic fetal fraction distributions in the target gestational age population, fetuses which are at risk of hemolytic disease of fetus and newborn by allo- and were analyzed alongside pregnancy plasmas using the PanoramaTM immunized pregnant women and to prevent alloimmunization during preg- NIPT, which reports copy number and associated confidence for each chro- nancy. Aim: KEL noninvasive determination of fetal genotype from cffDNA in mosome. 469 samples (111 artificial mixtures of mother/child DNA derived plasma KEL negative pregnant women using TaqMan assay and minisequen- from 5 affected and 1 unaffected children and their unaffected mothers, 6 cing (SNaPshot). Project is supported by IGA MZ CR: NT12225. Material and affected and 352 unaffected pregnancy plasmas) mimicking various fetal methods: 1) TaqMan assay involving region of KEL (K/k) polymorphism and fractions were tested. region of AMELY gene as an internal control was tested in DNA samples from Results: NIPT correctly distinguished affected and unaffected “pregnancy” leukocytes of k/k, K/K and k/K men. 2) SNaPshot: Determination of sen- plasmArts, suggesting that mixtures behaved similarly to maternal plasma sitivity threshold KEL calibration was performed using a dilution series. It cfDNA. This SNP-based assay detected deletions to as low as 3.9% fetal frac- was tested 141 samples of cffDNA from maternal plasma in the first trime- tion. The anticipated false positive rate based on the observed fetal fraction ster. Results: 1) TaqMan assay: KEL genotypes determined from leukocyte distributions and unaffected pregnancy plasma measurements is ≤1%. DNA were distinguishable, but there was fluorescence background. So there Conclusions: PlasmArt samples generated appropriate NIPT results, allo- wasn´t able to exactly distinguish between false positive fluorescence back- wing robust test performance validation for rare conditions. This approach ground and fetal DNA admixture. 2) SNaPshot: On the basis dilution series it accurately identified pregnancies with a fetus affected by various microdele- was possible to detect less than 0,78% admixture of K allele corresponding tions. This will increase NIPT clinical coverage and allow for earlier prenatal DNA concentration of 0,04 ng /μl. Seven fetuses with allele K were found screening for sub-chromosomal deletions. in 113 k/k mothers, which corresponds to about 4-5 % of the population 
P01 .068-M frequency. It wasn´t possible to determine KEL genotype at 8 fetal samples Discordant results between non-invasive prenatal testing by maternal due to KEL maternal heterozygous genotype. Conclusion: SNaPshot assay is plasma sequencing and fetal ultrasound examination more suitable to distinguish fetal KEL genotyp, than TaqMan assay. E. Pelo, G. Marseglia, C. Pescucci, D. Parrini, F. Marin, M. Betti, E. Lisi, F. Gerundino, F. 
P01 .066-M Sbernini, E. Contini, M. Benelli, F. Torricelli; Feasibility of utilization of semiconductor based low coverage SOD Diagnostica Genetica AOUC, Firenze, Italy. genomic sequencing in noninvasive prenatal trisomy 21 detection G. Repiska1, E. Nagyova2, K. Soltysova2, J. Budis3, R. Sysak4, M. Gerykova-Bujalkova5, B. Vlkova-Izrael1, T. Szemes2, G. Minarik1,6, I. Hudecova7, D. Porubsky7, H. G. Schuring-Blom7, Over the past year, noninvasive prenatal screening (NIPS) based on massive- M. J.A. van Kempen7, M. Elferink7, E. de Bruijn8, G. C.M.L. Page-Christiaens9, I. J. Nijman7, ly parallel sequencing to align and count DNA fragments floating in the plas- H. K. P. van Amstel7, E. Kuppen7,8, G. van Haaften7; 1Institute of Molecular BioMedicine, Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of ma of pregnant women, has become clinically available into prenatal care as Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University an advanced screening test. We report here a case of discordant results in in Bratislava Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of fetal sex determination between NIPS and ultrasound examination. The pa- Computer Science, Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Mathematics, Physics tient was referred to our clinical genetic service at 23 week of gestation due and Informatics, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Gynecology and Ostetrics, St. to discrepancies between NIPS results performed in a different center and Cyril and Method Hospital, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Department fetal ultrasound examination. In particular, a first NIPS report was of a nor- of Clinical Genetics, Medirex a.s., Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, mal female fetal karyotype but subsequent ultrasound examination showed Slovakia, 7Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Hubrecht Institute and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, a fetal male gender. The result of a second NIPS analysis on a new plasma Netherlands, 9Division of Perinatology and Gynecology, University Medical Center sample offered and performed by the same center was of increased risk for Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Turner syndrome. After genetic counseling, amniocentesis was performed at 23 wog. FISH analysis with a probe targeting SRY gene showed a single signal for SRY onto an almost intact X chromosome, revealing an X-Y cryptic Recent studies focused on utilization of next-generation sequencing (NGS) chromosomal translocation: 46,XX.ish der(X)t(X;Y)(p22.3;p?)(SRY+). Array- technology in non-invasive prenatal detection of trisomy of chromosome 21 CGH showed a subtelomeric deletion of about 2.28 Mb in Xp22.33 and the (T21) showed high sensitivity and specificity if more than 10 milion of read presence of the short arm of Y chromosome. To exclude the possibility of per sample were used. For these analyses high-throughput NGS systems are phenotypic consequences due to haploinsufficiency of SHOX gene, MLPA needed. The aim of our study was to test feasibility of usage of NGS proto- subtelomeric analysis was carried out. These case support the recommen- col with approx. 5 milion of reads per sample and to estimate sensitivity dation that NIPT should be regarded as a screening test and offered in the and specificity of such testing. In our study high-risk group samples of 42 context of genetic pre-test counseling as well as post-test counseling for pregnant women, represented by 37 samples without and 5 with trisomy 21 screen positive individuals. Diagnostic testing is recommended to confirm bearing fetus confirmed by previous invasive procedure were analyzed by p Po 0s 1it .0iv 6e 9 N -SIPS results. low coverage genomic sequencing on IonTorrent PGM. For T21 detection Z- Older mother’s perspectives on non-invasive prenatal testing for fetal score calculation was used. In all 5 samples with T21 fetuses Z-score above abnormalities and adult-onset conditions in the United Kingdom 3 was recorded. In non-trisomic and trisomic samples on average 5 463 516 L. M. Jackson, A. O‘Connor, L. Goldsmith, H. Skirton, Applied Health Genetics Research and 6 292 096 mapped reads per sample were used in Z-score calculation, Group; respectively. In non-trisomic and trisomic samples Z-scores were -0.26 (SD Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom. = 1.15) and 7.65 (SD=3.73) on average, respectively. So in our small sca- le study 100% sensitivity and specificity were recorded. According to our results low coverage sequencing based on IonTorrent PGM sequencing is Since the 1970’s there has been a steady increase in England and Wales in suitable for noninvasive prenatal trisomy testing, however, a further study the number of women having a baby at the age of 35 or over. Birth rates for based on data from larger sample cohort is needed for more precise calcu- this group have risen from 6% in 1974 to almost 20% in 2012. lation of sensitivity and specificity of our current protocol. The study conti- The use of new technologies such as non-invasive prenatal testing and geno- nues on greater group of samples. This study was supported by grant ITMS me or exome sequencing may result in the opportunity for women to request 26240220067 funded by ERDF. fetal testing for a range of conditions. While there is considerable support 
P01 .067-S from prospective parents and health professionals for non-invasive prenatal Validating non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) using artificial and testing for single gene disorders, ethical concerns have been identified. It actual pregnancy plasmas: accurate detection of five microdeletions M. P. Hall, N. Wayham, J. Babiarz, J. Hu, J. Tong, P. Lau, S. Sigurjonsson, M. Hill, B. has been suggested that prenatal testing discriminates against people with Zimmermann, M. Rabinowitz; disability and there are fears it may become routine. Detecting multiple ge- Natera Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States. netic conditions in the fetus may facilitate detection of adult-onset conditi- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |o Wns.W ThWis .hEaSs HseGrio.OusR imGplications for parental decision making. 63ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index In this study we aimed to explore the attitudes of mothers aged 35 or over We report prenatal diagnosis of a fetus with partial trisomy of 4q31-qter towards new diagnostic techniques for prenatal diagnosis of foetal abnor- and partial monosomy of 22q13.3-qter. A 35-year-old woman was referred mality. Women who had given birth in the UK within the last 12 months for prenatal diagnosis at 28 weeks gestation because of fetal hydrothorax were recruited using a novel recruitment strategy via Twitter. Here we pre- and polyhydramnios detected by ultrasound. Amniocentesis was performed sent the initial findings relating to NIPT and testing for adult-onset conditi- and routine G-band analysis of cultured amniocytes showed additional ma- ons. Mother’s considered the reduced risk to the pregnancy and extra time terial of unidentifiable origin at the long arm of one chromosome 22. Ka- to make a decision as being major advantages of NIPT whilst voicing con- ryotype was 46,XX,der(22)add(22)(q13.3)?. Further molecular cytogenetic cerns regarding health service readiness and test accuracy. Concerns about characterization of the additional genetic material was carried using FISH. testing for adult-onset conditions included increased psychological burden Six commercial FISH were used: two centromeric chromosome probes on parents and respecting the child’s autonomy. 4(D4Z1) and 14/22(D14Z1/D22Z1); two whole chromosome paints 4 and 
P01 .070-M 22; two locus specific probes 22q13.3(SHANK3) and 22q11.2(N25); two Prenatal diagnosis and outcome in Noonan Syndrome D. Liebrecht, C. Daumer-Haas, S. Minderer, T. Schramm, C. Bagowski, M. Shoukier, K. P. subtelomeric probes 4p(D4
S3360 ) and 4q(D4
S2283 ). The extra chromo- Gloning; somal material was found to be derived from chromosome 4 de novo and Pränatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany. fetal karyotype was redesigned as 46,XX,der(22)t(4;22)(q31.3;q12)dn. A girl was delivered at 38 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 3000g and AS 10/10. She has mild dysmorphic features including dolichocephaly, Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder caused microretrognathia, small skin folds on ears, without other anomalies. At the by heterozygous mutations of several genes within the RAS/mitogen activa- age of one year she shows slight developmental delay especially in motor ted protein kinase pathway. NS is characterized by short stature, minor facial skills development. Reported children with distal partial trisomy 4q have and cardiac anomalies. Frequent prenatal ultrasound findings are increased the wide phenotypic variability which could be related to the location of the nuchal translucency in addition with distended jugular lymphatic sacs, cy- breakpoints and associated monosomies of the other chromosomal parts. stic hygroma, hydrops, hydrothorax, ascites, polyhydramnios, cardiac and Partial trisomies of 4q31 to 4qter in general were associated with only mild renal anomalies. There is high variability of clinical symptoms even within phenotypic anomalies like slight (mental) retardation and/or dysmorphism single families. We present a retrospective study of 23 prenatally diagnosed which is consistant with our case. Further follow up is necessary especially cases with mutations in PTPN11, SO
S1 , RAF1 genes from a cohort of 330 b Pe 0c 1a .u 0s 7e 3 o -Sf monosomy 22q13.3-qter. fetuses with ultrasound findings indicating NS and normal karyotype. Cases Prenatal diagnosis of UPD using genomic SNP array in a foetus with were seen in a single tertiary center between 2005 and 2014 by an expert ultrasound abnormalities. team of experienced sonographers and human geneticists. Prenatal ultra- C. Castagnini1, G. Marseglia2, C. Pescucci2, U. Ricci2, G. Traficante1, F. Gerundino2, C. sound findings, molecular genetic data and postnatal phenoptype will be re- Giachini2, F. Marin2, C. Romolini2, M. Trafeli2, F. Gensini1, M. Genuardi1, F. Torricelli2; ported. Some cases are exemplified with clinical, ultrasound and molecular 1Department of Biomedical, Experimental, and Clinical Sciences “Mario Serio”, University genetic data. In our study we want to emphasize the importance of prenatal of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy. molecular testing of Noonan genes (panel) in cases with an increased nuchal translucency and at least one additional feature mentioned above. Progno- sis depends on molecular genetic findings in conjunction with ultrasound We report the case of a 35-year-old gravida 1, para 0 referred at 18 weeks of abnormalities which can change dramatically in the course of pregnancy. gestation (wg) because of several fetal malformations. First trimester scree- The occurrence of severe progredient hydrops or hydrothorax in the second ning test showed an increased risk for trisomy 21 with a nuchal translucen- or third trimester is associated with a high risk for an unfavourable outco- cy of 4,1 mm; the fetal karyotype was 46, XY. Ultrasound scanning at 17 wg me. Genetic counseling remains demanding due to the high variability in the showed increased fetal biometry (>95°), small thorax, flaccid abdomen wall, prenatal and postnatal spectrum of symptoms in NS and the difficulty to give ambiguous genitalia. At 19 wg the patient optioned for pregnancy terminati- a reliable prognosis. on and the fetal autopsy showed cleft palate, microglossia, edematous short 
P01 .071-S neck with a prominent occipital region, low-set ears, ambiguous resembling Follow up of 30 prenatally diagnosed cases of osteogenesis imperfecta male genitalia with hypospadias and short limbs with joint contractures. The G. Baujat, K. Lambot, A. Lebre, T. Attie-Bitach, J. Bengoa, J. Bernard, B. Bessieres, A. Millischer, S. Monnot, L. Salomon, P. Sonigo, A. Munnich, M. Le Merrer, V. Cormier-Daire; fetal roentgenograms showed bell-shaped thorax with coat-hanger. SNP ar- Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. ray analysis was performed on DNA from fetal tissue. Data analysis revealing two regions of runs of homozygosity in 14q: the first one is a subcentrome- ric region of about 10 Mb, the second is a subtelomeric region of about 9 Mb. Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a heritable connective tissue disorder, cha- Trio analysis performed by two computational tools (UPDtool and SNPtrio) racterized by a wide clinical spectrum, ranging from few fractures in mild for detection and classification of uniparental isodisomy (UPD) confirmed cases to perinatal lethality. During pregnancy, if severe formOs bajreec utisvuea:lly paternal uniparental iso/heterodisomy of chromosome 14. In particular, easily early recognizable, the mild and moderate forms may lead to noto- data revealed a region of isodisomy in 14q11.2-q12 from genomic position riously difficulties in the evaluation of the postnatal prognosis. Methods: to 20.2 Mb to 30.4 Mb, a region of heterodisomy in 14q12-q32.2 from 30.9 Mb evaluate the contribution of prenatal imaging, family history and molecular to 97.9 Mb, and a terminal region of isodisomy from genomic position 98 Mb analysis in the postnatal prognosis in osteogenesis imperfecta. to to telomere. Results was validated by the analysis of microsatellite markers analyze retrospectively the prenatal features (fetal ultrasound exRaemsuinltast:ion across chromosome 14. This result may contribute to prenatal identification and 3D CT-scan), family history and postnatal outcomes (phenotype and ge- o Pf 0 s 1im .0i 7la 5r -l Sy affected patients. notype) of 30 cases diagnosed antenatally as OI in our hospital. In Reporting the outcome of molecular PGDs from a single laboratory in 15 cases, the severe fetal presentation led to pregnancy termination. Among Iran the 15 remaining cases that are still alive, 4 are considered as severe, 6 as S. Zeinali1,2, P. Fouladi2, F. Rahiminejad2, S. Sabeghi2, K. Fatemi2, L. Rejali2, A. Sarhadi2; moderate and 5 as mild. The family history appears to be the besat pprreionraital 1Dep’t of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, predictor of postnatal severity. We emphasize the sensitivity of the 3D-CT Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Lab of Dr. Zeinali, scan. Molecular screening was nota h peolpstfeurli ionr ithe prognosis given to Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the parents. No correlation between the severity of skeletal phenotype and the genotype was demonstrated Conclusio.n I:mportantly, in 3 cases with marked bowing of the long bones, a significant improvement of the bone de- Reporting results of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for single formities was observed after birth. OI is today easily diagnosed gene disorders, gender typing, HLA matching and chromosomal aneuploi- during pregnancy based on the improvement of the recent imaging tools; dies from 2009. We used mainly multiplex nested PCR containing several however, the postnatal prognosis is still often difficult to evaluate, highligh- short tandem repeats (STR) and sometimes gene fragments for sequencing. ting the value of a family history. PGD were mainly offered for families with common genetic disorder in Iran 
P01 .072-M specially beta-thalassemia, HLA matching, PKU, sex typing, chromosomal Prenatal diagnosis of de novo partial trisomy 4q3l→qter and partial aneuploidies and Hemophilia A. In total we have performed PGD for 29 ca- monosomy 22q13.3→qter ses (total of 158 blastomers). For ladies with advanced age only few (1-4) K. Crkvenac Gornik, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, M. Miklos, S. Huljev Frkovic, L. Ljiljana, R. eggs could be retrieved. In total only 46 blastomers could be implanted. Lasan Trcic, D. Begovic; Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Our results show that in total 36 blastomers were tested for F8 linked STRs, Zagreb, Croatia. 5 for PKU (BH4, PTS gene), 8 for PKU (PAH gene), 8 for Deafness (GJB2 gene), 8 for Epidermolysis Bollusa and HLA matching, 20 for β-Thalassemia, 84 64 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, fIoTrA aLnYeu |p WloidWieWs a.nEdS fHinaGll.yO gRenGder selection was done on 132 blastomers. Some of these figures belong to two or three types of simultaneous testingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (e.g. thalassemia and sex selection or thalassemia and HLA typing). hybridization (aCGH) on blastomeres. Current methodology does not take Implantation was succeeded to pregnancies and child births in 3 families into account the phase of the cell cycle, despite the variable copy number and one is still pregnant. The birth outcome was a twin healthy boys for status of different genomic regions in S phase. To evaluate the accuracy of hemophilia A (born on May 2011), a triplet boys for gender and aneuploi- single cell array CGH, different cell cycle phases from three cell lines deri- dies selections (born on December 2013), a carrier boy for β-thalassemia ved from patients with different chromosomal imbalances were sorted by was born on February 2014 and another twin hemophilia A pregnant at 8 flow cytometry. Ten single cells were picked per cell line per cell cycle phase, weeks. whole genome amplified and analyzed by BAC arrays, the most commonly 
P01 .076-M used platform for PGD purposes. In contrast to G phase, where the imba- Pre-case haplotyping of the two monogenic diseases in one family in lances were efficiently identified, the log2 intensity ratios of less than half Gennet: Marfan syndrome and SMA I. Soldatova, M. Putzová, L. Krautová, D. Rašková, L. Vykysalá, J. Míka, P. Potužníková, R. of the probes in the regions of interest were above the detection threshold Křen, D. Stejskal; in 17/26 analyzed S phase cells. The results demonstrate that the accuracy GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic. to detect segmental chromosomal imbalances is reduced in S-phase cells, which could be a source of misdiagnosis in PGD. Hence, the determination of the cell cycle phase of the analyzed cell is of great importance and should Genetic pre-case haplotyping (PGH) is an important constituent of the pre- be taken into account during the analysis. This knowledge may guide future implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). In our center we have performed t Pe 0c 1h .n 0o 7lo 9g -Sical improvements. haplotyping studies for 86 different monogenetic diseases of all types - X- Placental growth factor (PlGF) levels for preeclampsia prediction linked, autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, translocation and small M. Macek sr.1, A. Kestlerová2, M. Pešková1, D. Springer3, M. Turnovec1, R. Vlk4, I. Špálová4, deletions. The list of diagnosis for which we can offer PGD is being continu- V. Novotná2, J. Feyereisel2, M. Macek jr.1; ally extended. PGD is available for a large number of monogenic disorders. 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University For most couples requiring PGD, common pre-case haplotyping analysis Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, of disease-associated haplotype is derived from family anamnesis. We are Institute for the care of mother and child, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, 1st Faculty of Medicine Charles University presenting a case in which affected haplotype will be determined by stan- Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 2nd Faculty dard PGH analysis . In this family 2 affected haplotypes were detected which of Medicine Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. are associated with AD disease - Marfan syndrome - OMIM # 154700 and AR disease- Spinal Muscular Athrophy(SMA) - OMIM # 253300. During the first PGD cycle in the year 2013 (11.2013): 11 cumulus-oocyte-complexes The aim of the study was to verify the possibility to predict preeclampsia (COCs) were retrieved. 9 blastomeres were biopsied. All tested embryos (PE) after the 20th week of gestation by reliable cut-off levels based on PlGF were analysed .2 embryos were affected of SMA , 3 embryos were affected analysis at the time of pregnancy termination within weeks 24-41. Con- of Marfan syndrome .2 embryos were diagnosed as monosomy of chr.5 car- trol PlGF levels for weeks 9-19 were derived from 800 cases; 100 PE sera rying high risk paternal haplotype SMN1 gene. 2 embryos did not show PCR- comprised: 17 - PE weeks 24-29, 24 (30-33), 34 (34-37) and 25 (38-41). amplification. The embryos were not re- analysed because they didn´t show PlGF was examined by DelphiaXPress Tm platform (PerkinElmer). Reliable optimal development. In this first PGD cycle no embryos were transferred PlGF control levels (3, 5, 25, 50, 75 and 95 percentiles) were established for . While there was no transfer in this case during the first PGD cycle, PGD weeks 9-19. For 1st trimester PE risk determination commercial software still increases the chances of families at risk of transmitting serious genetic was used, for weeks 14-19 levels < 3 or 5 pecentiles were applied. Inver- disorders to plan a healthy offspring. 
P01 .077-S se relationship of decreased PlGF levels to the onset of PE and its clinical Targeted capture and massively parallel sequencing for PGD of impact was documented. PlGF median level increase during pregnancy is monogenic diseases significantly retarded. Levels of PlGF for PE (weeks 24-29) correspond to Y. T. Du1, J. Li2, X. D. Zhang2, J. L. Li2, S. J. Liu2, Y. W. Xu3, C. Q. Zhou3; medians of the 11th week, PE (weeks 30-33) to week 15 and intermedi- 1BGI healthcare, Shenzhen, China, 2BGI Research, Shenzhen, China, 3The First Affiliated ate/late PE to week 17. PlGF cut off levels for 100%/95% detection rate Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. success for PE weeks 24-29,30-33, 34-37, 38-41 are 61.6/46.2, 267.8/19.5, 262.3/180.3, 168.3/146.0 (all pg/ml). Combination of 1 st trimester PE screening with software prediction of early intermediate and late PE with PGD is an important option for known carriers of monogenic diseases to 2nd/3rd trimester PlGF examination could improve the complex care not deliver healthy babies. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the most widely only for PE, but also for other adverse risks of HELLP syndrome, SGA, pre- used method in PGD for monogenic disorders. However, in order to establish term delivery and IUGR including increased efficacy of 1st trimester aneu- a robust PCR based PGD protocol, extensive preclinical experiments are nee- ploidy screening. Supported by FN Motol (00064203, Modern Therapy), IGA ded to ascertain the efficiency and reliability of the procedure, which is a NT13770 and OPPK CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. 
P01 .080-M labor-intensive, time-consuming and costly process. Integrative transcriptome-based approach for association studies: Many clinical applications based on targeted Massively parallel sequencing identification of new genetic markers for preeclampsia (MPS) have been reported. In this study, we explored the applicability of tar- E. Trifonova1, N. Ershov2, T. Gabidulina3, V. Serebrova1, V. Stepanov1; geted MPS for PGD of monogenic disease. Isolated single lymphocytes were 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, used to evaluate the genotyping accuracy of target-MPS at single-cell level at Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2The Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch first. Then two families carrying mutation of the HBB causing β-thalassemia of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3The Institute for were tested using targeted MPS. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Pedigree haplotype analysis was applied in the following analysis and doub- Tomsk, Russian Federation. le-blind design was used in the study. Over hundred of informative SNPs flanking both sides of the disease causing mutation were detected for each embryonic haplotype. The average interval Preeclampsia is a common pregnancy-specific disorder with unknown etio- between informative SNPs and gene mutation was within 10 kb. The final logy diagnosed in 5-17% of pregnancies. It is the leading cause of maternal result was 100% consistent with the diagnosis provided by the reference and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Our prior genome-wide transcriptio- laboratory, and the whole test was finished within a week. nal profiling of placental tissue led to a novel set of 63 preeclampsia candi- The new targeted MPS based method will make the PGD for monogenic di- date genes (differentially expressed genes, (Fold Change >1.5, FDR<0.1)). In sease more accurate, faster and more affordable, providing benefit to many this report, we present preliminary study on the role of variability in some patients requiring PGD for monogenic disease. of these genes in the genetic susceptibility to preeclampsia. We analyzed 51 
P01 .078-M tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) in 12 genes (ANKRD37, Single cell segmental aneuploidy detection is compromised by S phase E. S. Dimitriadou1, N. Van der Aa2, J. Cheng1, T. Voet2, J. R. Vermeesch1; BC
L6 , BHLH
E40 , CCSAP, CORO2A, DGKG, GPT2, PLIN2, RDH13, SIGLE
C6 , SY- 1Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Department of Human Genetics, KU D
E1  and ZNF175) in 514 patients with preeclampsia and 627 women with Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Laboratory of Reproductive Genomics, Department of Human uncomplicated pregnancies from Russian, Buryat and Yakut populations Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. using MassArray iPLEX (Sequenom). We have detected significant associa- tions for preeclampsia with tagSNPs in PLIN2, BHLH
E40 , DGKG, RDH13, SYD
E1  genes in Russian and Buryat population. In Yakut population, only Carriers of balanced translocations are at high risk for unbalanced game- three genes (BHLH
E40 , CORO2A, GPT2) are associated with increased risk tes which can result in recurrent miscarriages or birth defects. Preimplan- of preeclampsia. tagSNPs in ANKRD37 and ZNF175 genes were associated tation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is often offered to select balanced embryos. with preeclampsia in Buryat population only. Interestingly, we found an as- This selection is currently mainly performEedS bHyG ar r2a0y 1co4m |p MaraItLivAe Nge,n IoTmAicL Y |s WociWatioWn .wEiSthH pGre.eOclRamGpsia for twenty out of the fifty-one studied polym6o5r-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index phism. This results demonstrate the high informative value of the integrati- sex determination and determining defects in sex chromosomes X and Y. ve approach in studies of the genetic components of preeclampsia and show The method is based on the evaluation of fragment’s relative abundance of that allelic variations of the differentially expressed genes in placental tissue cell-free DNA (cffDNA) in maternal plasma. The fetal fraction of the total free are associated with preeclampsia in different ethnic groups. Nevertheless, DNA is 5-25 %, according to the stage of pregnancy. Extraction of cffDNA the clinical significance of these findings remains to be determined. This exploits the fact that cffDNA is significantly smaller than the maternal DNA, work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant with fragments approximately 200bp in size. cffDNA subsequently subjects №14-04-01467). to whole-genome sequencing using next-generation sequencing platform 
P01 .081-S based on the semiconductor sequencing technology. Examination method Molecular understanding of the FMR1 premutation and Fragile Prenascan is perfomable between 10 and 21 weeks of pregnancy, only after X-associated Premature Ovarian Failure C. Caslini, A. Crespi, G. Pietrini, A. Marozzi; genetic counseling. Diagnostic sensitivity of the method is about 96 % to de- MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE, Milan, Italy. tect the tested trisomy. The specificity of the test exceeds 99,7 %. Efficiency of the test is 99,9 % for the cases of trisomy 21, 98,8 % for trisomy 18 and 98,7 % for trisomy 13. The main limitation of the test is low concentration CGG repeats expansion (55-200 units, premutation range) in the 5’UTR of of cffDNA in maternal plasma. Test results can be distorted by foreign DNA if FMR1 gene (Xq27.3) is associated with Fragile-X Tremor/ Ataxia Syndrome the mother received transfusion or transplantation of stem cells. and Premature Ovarian Failure (POF). FMR1 premutation represents the From October 2012 to December 2013 1263 patients were tested . Positivity most significant single gene variant associated with POF, however no stu- was found in 22 cases, false pozitivity in 4 cases. False-positive patients were dies are available to evaluate its pathogenic effect in the ovary context. As t Pe 0s 1te .0d 8b 4y - a Mmniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling with normal results. for FXTAS, an RNA-mediated toxic gain of function could be hypothesized A unique ring chromosome 20 in a fetus with a complex heart for FX-POF. Human granulosa cell line were transfected with plasmid contai- malformation ning 76CGG repeat elements in the 5’-UTR of EGFP reporter under the con- M. J. V. Hoffer1, M. Koopmans1, K. Teunissen2, L. Groenewegen1, I. Bogerd1, S. trol of CMV immediate early promoter (CMV-76CGG-EGFP), or with CMV- Bhagwandien-Bisoen1, M. H. Breuning1, N. S. den Hollander1, M. C. Haak2; EGFP as control. By RNA immunoprecipitation, the interaction of 76rCGG 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. for rCGG-Repeat Binding Proteins (rCGG-RBPs), previously identified, was of Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. tested. 76rCGG solely immunoprecipitate with heat shock proteins, some hnRNPs and proteins involved in paraspeckles formation such as SFPQ and hnRNPM, suggesting that in vivo premutated FMR1 mRNA differs from the A 31-year old woman was referred at 20+6 weeks gestational age becau- wild type in making RNA-protein complexes. In this regard in premutated se of abnormalities at the standard anomaly scan. Advanced ultrasography granulosa cells a deregulation of structural components paraspeckles was showed a double outlet right ventricle with transposition of the great arte- observed suggesting an alteration of splicing. Furthermore an “heat shock ries and a hypoplastic left ventricle. Furthermore a mandibular retrognathia like” response associated with a reduced cell viability in human ovary gra- was noticed. Amniocentesis was performed for RAD and array analysis. The nulosa cells expressing expanded CGG mRNA was observed, indicating a to- pregnancy was terminated at the parents request and external post-mortem xic role of premutated mRNA itself in the ovaries. This work is supported by examination revealed mild dysmorphic facial features including mild micro- Telethon grant GG
P009126 . gnatia and low set ears. SNP-array analysis showed a duplication deletion 
P01 .082-M rearrangement in the long arm of chromosome 20. The interstitial duplica- DNA copy number variations in women with premature ovarian tion was 20,5 Mb and the adjacent deletion was 240 kb in size. Karyotyping insufficiency revealed a ring chromosome 20 in all analysed cells. Fluorescence in situ O. Tšuiko1,2,3, O. Žilina1, M. Nõukas1,4, K. Haller-Kikkatalo3,5, A. Salumets3,2,5, A. Kurg1; hybridisation analysis demonstrated that the duplication was inverted. Pa- 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, rental chromosomes were normal indicating that this unbalanced rearran- 3Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian gement occurred de novo. Only a few cases with a ring chromosome with a Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Obstetrics and telomere deletion and an additional inverted duplication have been descri- Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. bed so far. These inv dup del chromosomes are the result of an asymme- tric breakage of a dicentric chromosome that has been formed to stabilize a broken chromosome. The ring formation represents a new mechanism, in The cause of premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) remains unknown in addition to telomere capture, through which inv dup del chromosomes can many cases. In recent years many studies have focused on the genetic fac- stabilize. In conclusion this study presents a prenatal case with a ring chro- tors of POI. Conventional karyotyping analyses have identified several X mosome 20, which presented with ultrasonographic anomalies initially. 
P01 .085-S chromosome regions that harbour genes critically required for normal func- A 3 years worldwide experience with Prenatal BACs-on-BeadsTM for tioning of the ovaries. Due to rise of DNA microarray technology, it has been prenatal diagnosis in over 9.500 pregnancies shown that in addition to X chromosome rearrangements, POI is associated F. Grati1, D. Molina Gomes2, C. Dupont3, V. Alesi4, L. Gouas5, N. Horelli-Kuitunen6, K. Choy7, with aberrations in autosomal chromosomes. Single-nucleotide polymor- J. Martínez-Conejero8, A. Gonzales9, K. Piotrowski10, R. Genesio11, G. Queipo12, L. Marcato1, phism (SNP) arrays are useful in identifying single genes and genome regi- F. Bru2, B. Benzacken13, A. Novelli4, P. Vago5, K. Piippo6, T. Leung7, S. De Toffol1, B. Herve2, ons responsible for the onset of POI. The present study included 700 women A. Tabet3, G. Simoni1, F. Vialard2; with idiopathic POI with the cessation of ovarian function before 40 years 1TOMA Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A, Busto Arsizio, Italy, 2CHI Poissy St Germain, of age. Women with a history of gynaecological surgery, cancer treatment Poissy, France, 3Hôpital Robert Debré-AP-HP, GHU Nord, Paris, France, 4Ospedale San Pietro Fatebenefratelli, Roma, Italy, 5CHU de Clermont Ferrand, Clermont Ferrand, and genetic syndromes were excluded. Genomic DNA samples were provi- France, 6United Medix Laboratories Ltd, Helsinki, Finland, 7Chinese University of Hong ded by Tartu University Hospital and Estonian Genome Centre and analysed Kong, Hong Kong, China, 8Iviomics SL, Valence, Spain, 9CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, for copy number variations (CNV) and runs of heterozygosity (ROH) using 10Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 11University ‚‘Federico II‘‘, Naples, high-resolution SNP arrays. The majority of detected CNVs fall within the Italy, 12Hospital General de México, Mexico, Mexico, 13Hôpital Robert Debré-AP-HP, Paris, common polymorphic regions, while others have clinical significance and France. harbour previously reported and novel POI candidate regions and genes. Identified aberrations include a 24Mb Xp22.33-p21.3 hemizygous deletion and a novel microdeletion in 15q21.3. In addition to CNV, numerous ROH Chromosomal microarrays are the gold standard in prenatal cases with ul- regions were detected, which may possibly contain homozygous mutations trasound abnormalities+normal karyotype. In low-risk pregnancies their in POI associated genes. DNA microarrays are a suitable tool for evaluating use is still controversial because of their diagnostic yield in relation to genomic imbalances in POI patients when compared to the conventional cy- that of variants of unclear significance. CoTnMsequently some laboratories, togenetic methods. The present study provides novel data on associations for low-risk pregnancies, adopted PNBoBs (in combination with karyo- between the genomic variants and aberrations and POI phenotype. type) a transitional test investigating 9 critical-regions associated with 
P01 .083-S dominant microdeletion syndromes with known genotype-phenotype cor- Prenascan in Gennet, non-invasive prenatal test trisomy S. Horáčková, J. Vávrová, F. Zembol, I. Marešová, M. Putzová, D. Stejskal; relationsTM. We present the experiae npcreio orif 12 worldwide laboratories using Gennet s.r.o., Praha 7, Czech Republic. PNBoTBMs +karyotype. The purpose was to evaluate the usefulness of PN- BoBs in pregnancies with low risk of microdeletion/microdupli- cation syndromes (advanced maternal age,AMA; maternal anxiety,MA; in- Prenascan project was created in the Czech Republic in cooperation with creased risk after maternal serum screening for Down syndrome,MSS-DS; Health BGI Europe. Project introduced into clinical practise non-invasive soft marker/s). 9648 samples were analyzed: 17.4% AMA, 22.2% MSS-DS, p6re6natel test for trisomy of chromosomes 13, 18, 2
E1 S wHitGh t2he0 p1o4ss |i bMiliItyL AofN , 8IT.1A%L YM A| ,W 36W.0%W u.EltSraHsoGun.Od RabGnormalities and 7.1% for unknown origin. Successful rate was 96.7%; false negative incidence 0.56% related to chro-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index TM mosome abnormalities not coveTrMe d by PNBoBs but detectable by karyo- means. The families opting for PND or PGD for inherited cardiac diseases type. In 0.31% of cases PNBoBs was reflexeTdM by FISH for further charac- have experienced a severe phenotype or a severe family history of SCD. Ne- terization. Overall abnormal results (PNBoBs +karyotype) were observed vertheless, the number of patients continuing with PND and PGD is low. 
P01 .088-M in 9.1% of cases; a microdeletion/microduplication was retrieved in 0.7% High resolution chromosomal microarrays in prenatal diagnosis of cases (n=69); the majority of them (68.1%) involved Di George syndro- significantly increase diagnostic power me critical-region (deletion=32; duplication=15). 23 cryptic imbalances B. Oneda1, R. Baldinger1, R. Reissmann1, I. Reshetnikova1, P. Krejci1, R. Masood1, N. were found in low risk pregnancy leading to an additional diagnostic yield Ochsenbein-Kölble2, D. Bartholdi1, K. Steindl1, D. Morotti1, M. Faranda1, A. Baumer1, R. of about 1/246 in the low-risk pregnancies; 41 were detected in high risk Asadollahi1, P. Joset1, D. Niedrist1, C. Breymann3, G. Hebisch4, M. Hüsler5, R. Mueller6, E. pregnancies providing a 1.8% of additional detection rate (1/54). We will Prentl7, J. Wisser2, R. Zimmermann2, A. Rauch1; present incidence of cryptic unbalances stratified by indication for prenatal 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Division of Obstetrics, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Swiss Perinatal Institute, diagnosis that was surprisingly higher than expected basing on theoretical Zurich, Switzerland, 4Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kantonsspital incidence (1/1700). 
P01 .086-M Frauenfeld, Frauenfeld, Switzerland, 5Division of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Hospital Detection of 7p14 deletion in a fetus with aortic coarctation: genetic of Männedorf, Männedorf, Switzerland, 6Obstetric clinic, Winterthur, Winterthur, and fetal morphology data Switzerland, 7Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kantonsspital Winterthur, L. Cardarelli1, I. Mammi2, F. Di Giovanni3, E. Nalesso1, S. Gomirato1, L. Michelotto1, K. Winterthur, Switzerland. Marchioro1, M. Duca1, G. Abatangelo1; 1Lab Citotest - Consorzio GENiMED, Sarmeola di Rubano (PD), Italy, 2Dolo Hospital - ULSS 13, Dolo (VE), Italy, 3Mirano Hospital - ULS
S13 , Mirano (VE), Italy. Objective: The objective of this study was to determine for the first time the reliability and the diagnostic power of high-resolution microarray testing in routine prenatal diagnostics. Methods: We applied high-resolution chromo- We present tthhe case of a fetus with aortic coarctation suspected by ultra- somal microarray testing in 464 cytogenetically normal prenatal samples sounds at 26 gw, in which an interstitial deletion 7p12.3p14.2 was identi- with any indication for invasive testing. fied on amniotic fluid. The deleted region, confirmed by FISH and aCGH ana- Results: High-resolution testing revealed a diagnostic yield of 6.9% and lyses, spanned in the range chr7:36,671,630-46, 039.765bp, and involved 1.6% in cases of fetal ultrasound anomalies and cases of advance maternal several genes, as GLI3, ccm2, GCK, txndc3. age (AMA), respectively, which is similar to previous studies using low-reso- Decipher db shows at least 5 subjects with a microdeletion involving this lution microarrays. In 3 (0.6%) additional cases with indication AMA an ab- region, all with delayed psychomotor development, dysmorphisms and ab- erration in susceptibility risk loci was detected. Moreover, one case (0.2%) normalities of the extremities. One of the subjects also presented coarctati- showed an X-linked aberration in a female fetus, a finding relevant for future on of the aorta. family planning. We found the rate of cases, in which the parents had to be The literature also reports some cases of del(7)(p14) and Greig Cephalopo- tested for interpretation of unreported copy number variants (3.7%), and lysyndactyly, an autosomal dominant disorder associated with GLI3 aploin- the rate of remaining variants of unknown significance (0.4%) acceptably sufficiency, characterized by a distinct combination of craniofacial, foot and low. Of note, these findings did not cause termination of pregnancy after ex- hand malformations. Digilio et al reported a deletion 7p14 with cardiac ano- pert genetic counseling. The 0.4% rate of confined placental mosaicism was malies (non-compacted myocardium, VSD, ASD and aortic valve dysplasia). similar to that observed by conventional karyoytyping and notably involved Five other subjects, with cytogenetically visible deletions 7p14, had more a case of placental microdeletion. severe findings as microcephaly, dysmorphism and mental retardation. Conclusion: We conclude that high-resolution prenatal microarray testing is After several genetic counseling sessions with the equipe of the prenatal a reliable technique that increases diagnostic yield by at least 17.3% when center, the parents decided for ToP. compared with conventional karyotyping, without an increase in the fre- Fetal autopsy identified cranio-facial dysmorphisms, a complex CHD with quency of variants of uncertain significance. 
P01 .089-S aortic coarctation, ASD, VSD and left ventricle hypertrophy, Meckel‘s diverti- Noninvasive detection of a balanced fetal translocation from maternal culum, accessory spleen and horseshoe kidney. plasma This case underlies that ultrasound, genetic testing (including aCGH) and S. Kim1, T. Jensen1, D. van den Boom2, C. Deciu1, M. Ehrich2; genetic counselling should be included in the protocol of pregnancies with 1Sequenom Laboratories, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Sequenom Inc., San Diego, CA, fetal malformations, once again reinforcing the necessity for the different United States. specialists involved in prenatal diagnosis to cooperate in the identification of a complex fetal phenotype, to offer a prognosis that may help parents in t Ph 0e 1ir .0 p 8r 7eg -Snancy options. Noninvasive prenatal testing based on massively parallel sequencing (MPS) Prenatal diagnosis and Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for of circulating cell free DNA (ccfDNA) from pregnant plasma offers a po- inherited cardiac diseases in the Netherlands: an overview werful tool for detecting fetal chromosomal aneuploidies and other copy E. A. Nannenberg1, J. J. van der Smagt2, M. W. Wessels3, J. P. van Tintelen4, A. A. M. Wilde1, number variations; however, copy neutral structural rearrangements have R. H. Lekanne Deprez1, C. E. de Die-Smulders5, I. Christiaans1, Y. Arens5; proven challenging. We aimed to detect and characterize a balanced fetal 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Utrecht Medical Center, Utrecht, specific translocation event by sequencing ccfDNA from maternal plasma. Netherlands, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Simulations were used to develop an algorithm which leverages base incre- Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Maastricht University Medical Center, mental changes in mapping characteristics of ccfDNA to identify paired end Maastricht, Netherlands. reads potentially harboring structural rearrangements. We then applied this methodology on high coverage 100bp paired end data from ccfDNA isolated from a 38 year-old pregnant donor carrying a fetus with a balanced trans- Inherited cardiac diseases are associated with an increased risk of sudden location. Our algorithm identified the known translocation (p=1.21e-8) and cardiac death (SCD). Common hallmark is the variable disease expression discounted the likelihood of others, enabling the base specific localization of and incomplete penetrance. Therefore the phenotype varies widely bet- the breakpoints. Furthermore, while no evidence of chromothripsis existed, ween and within families. PND and PGD provide carriers of a mutation that we identified a 6bp deletion present within der(8) which is absent from the causes an inherited cardiac disease the possibility of having a child without der(11) reciprocal rearrangement after de novo assembly of 76 chimeric the familial gene mutation and reduce the risk of SCD in their children. The reads. Overall, we have demonstrated here the first proof of concept study advice from the National Board for PGD indications is to be hesitant with detecting and characterizing a balanced fetal specific translocation by se- PGD in inherited cardiac diseases due to reduced penetrance and variable quencing ccfDNA from maternal plasma. expression of the phenotype. 
P01 .090-M In this study, we evaluated the number of PND and referrals for PGD for in- Prenatal diagnosis and follow-up of a Patient with ASPM primary herited cardiac diseases in the Netherlands in the past 15 years. microcephaly MCPH PND was performed for three different inherited cardiac diseases: Hyper- Y. Tunca1, C. Badoer2, E. S. Cakar3, F. Libert4, H. Akar1, M. Abramowicz5; 1Medical Genetics Department, GATA, Gulhane Military Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) (n=2), Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) 2IRIBHM, ULB, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 3Medical Genetics (n=1) and Long QT syndrome (LQTS) (n=1). Couples came for PGD intake Department, Zekai Tahir Burak Women’s Health Education and Research Hospital, for HCM (n=9), Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) Ankara, Turkey, 4Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme - ULB, Université Libre de (n=3), DCM (n=9), NCCM (n=1), LQTS (n=2), Brugadasyndrome (n=2), and Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 5IRIBHM, ULB and Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme - idiopathic VF (n=3). After intensive counseling one couple (DCM) choose ULB, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. to continue the PGD procedure. Another couple (idiopathic VF) started the procedure, but withdrew after the genetic test was made, because of ethical ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 67 considerations. The other couples choose to fulfill their child wish by other Primary microcephaly is a heterogeneous disorder of brain developmentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index where the brain is too small since birth but otherwise normally formed. It Conventional karyotyping of the LTC demonstrated a non-mosaic 45,X. Sin- results from an insufficient production of mature neurons during neuroge- ce no abnormal findings were detected on ultrasound, a confined placental nesis. Many genetic defects have been identified in pAriSmPMary microcephaly, mosaicism was suggested as a possible explanation for the discordant fin- the common pathobiological endpoint being an alteration in the cell-cycle dings. A subsequent amniocentesis revealed a normal male genotype with timing and fate determination of neural progenitors. is the most fre- QF-PCR. Karyotyping, on the contrary, demonstrated a mosaic pattern with quently involved gene in the Microcephaly, Primary Hereditary (MCPH), au- 45,X and a structural rearranged Y chromosome, probably an i(Yp). Addi- tosomal recessive phenotype. Detailed prenatal and postnatal phenotypic tional FISH confirmed the presence of an isochromosome of the short arm reports are currently lacking. We report on a Turkish family where the se- of the Y chromosome. The case presented here demonstrates that caution cond child, a 36 months old boy, presented with typical MCPH. The parents should be taken when conflicting results are observed in CVS - even if a nor- were firAsSt PcMousins, and the mother was in the 9th week of her third preg- mal profile is obtained with QF-PCR in a follow-up amniocentesis. This case nancy. Next generation sequencing of the proband‘s DNA showed a homo- further illustrate that mosaicism for an abnormal cell line can result in a zygous mutation, a 1bp insertion in exon 18 causing a frameshift and normal QF-PCR profile. 
P01 .093-S premature stop codon, c.6513dupA (p.Val2172SerfsX7). Both parents were Persistent Elevated Population-based Rates of Congenital heterozygous for the mutation. They opted for prenatal diagnosis, and am- Malformations (CM) and Elevated Whole Body Counts (WBC) of 137Cs niocytes DNA showed homozygosity for the mutation. The pregnancy was among Pregnant Women in the Polissia Region of the Rivne Province continued, and the parents declined further examinations. This case illustra- in Ukraine. tes the power of high throughput sequencing for rapid prenatal diagnosis of W. Wertelecki1,2, B. Ievtushok1,3, L. Yevtushok1,3, N. Zymak-Zakytnia4,5, Z. Sosyniuk1,3, S. MPCH, where phenotypic correlations should eventually help understand Lapchenko6, I. Kuznetsov6; how MCPH genes shape various parts of the cortex, central gray matter, and 1OMNI-Net Ukraine Birth Defects Programs, Rivne, Ukraine, 2Division of Dysmorphology other parts of the encephalon. and Teratology, University of California-San Diego., San Diego, CA, United States, 3Rivne 
P01 .091-S Regional Medical Diagnostic Center, Rivne, Ukraine, 4OMNI-Net Ukraine Birth Defects Identification of rare CNVs involving genes acting in oocyte Programs, Khmelnytsky, Ukraine, 5Khmelnytsky Perinatal Center, Khmelnytsky, Ukraine, maturation and differentiation in a cohort of patients affected by 6OMNI-Net Ukraine Birth Defects Programs, Lutsk, Ukraine. Primary Ovarian Insufficiency I. Bestetti1,2, C. Castronovo1, M. Crippa1, R. Rossetti3, A. Pistocchi2, C. Caslini2, C. Sala4, D. Toniolo4, L. Persani3,5, A. Marozzi2, P. Finelli1; Background: We established a population-based surveillance of CM in the 1Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Rivne (R) province of Ukraine. The northern half of R or Polissia (P) is Medicine, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3Laboratory of Endocrine and Metabolic polluted by Chornobyl ionizing radiation. Analyses of observations during Research and Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, IRCSS Istituto Auxologico 2000-2009 demonstrated elevated population-based rates of specific CM; Italiano, Milano, Italy, 4Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Research that prenatal exposure to alcohol was an unlikely cause as well as WBC Bq Institute and Vita Salute University, Milano, Italy, 5Department of Clinical Sciences and counts of pregnant women residing in P that often were above the officially Community Health,University of Milan, Milano, Italy. set safe limits (Wertelecki et al., in Congenital Anomalies, 2014 in press). Objectives: determine the degree of persistence of population-based rates of CM, patterns of alcohol use during pregnancy and of WBC patterns among Primary Ovarian Insufficiency (POI) is a heterogeneous group of disorders pregnant women. with an incidence of 1:10,000 women by age 20, 1:1,000 by age 30, 1:100 Methods: adherence to procedures of the European CM monitoring consor- by age 40. Despite the identification of numerous candidate genes in POI tium (EUROCAT); analysis of CM patterns among 180,559 births in R during women, the genetic origin has been clarified only in about 20% of the pati- 2000-2011; and analysis of WBC obtained from 9,169 pregnant women in ents. The patients showing the most severe phenotype, characterized by the R during 2008-2012. absence of pubertal development and primary amenorrhea (PA) and 46,XX Results: persistence of higher rates in P than in non-P of conjoined twins, ovarian dysgenesis, are indeed rare but the search for genetic variations in teratomas, neural tube defects, microcephaly, and microphthalmia; less pre- this extreme phenotype may be more effective in identifying novel pathoge- valent prenatal exposures to alcohol in P; and persistence of elevated WBC nic mechanisms. (above 3750 Bq) in 19% of pregnant women residing in P and nearly 0.2% To unveil new POI causative genes we searched for rare high-penetrance among those residing in non-P. CNVs involving genes essential for ovarian function in a cohort of 46,XX pa- Conclusions: Higher rates of specific CM, for the most part blastopathies, tients affected by PA. Forty-three patients were processed by high resolution and elevated WBC of incorporated 137Cs by pregnant women are persistent array-CGH. Thirty-seven patients were found to bear 98 CNVs not reported in the P region of the Rivne province. The evidence is sufficiently compelling to date in healthy subjects according to the Database of Genomic Variants to call for a shift from descriptive epidemiology toward cause-effect investi- (DGV), and 11 CNVs already reported in DGV but relevant to gene content, gations of IR impacts on CM in Rivne-Polissia. 
P01 .094-M for a total of 109 CNVs. Several of these genomic alterations include genes The VEGF+405 G/G Genotype may Influence Embryo Implantation in implicated in: meiotic resumption, oogonia maintenance, first-polar-body ART extrusion, DNA repair, follicle adhesion/migration regulation, actin remo- Z. Rokhsattalab1, H. Gourabi2, M. Hasanzad1; delling, cholesterol endocytosis, Ca2+ homeostasis. 1Islamic Azad university Medical Science Branch of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic Once characterized by other molecular and bioinformatics approaches, the of Iran, 2Department of Genetics at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan results of this study are promising to expand the knowledge about the mole- Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cular pathways involved in POI pathogenesis and probably provide the basis for a more accurate genetic diagnosis of POI patients. 
P01 .092-M Conflicting results QF-PCR and karyotyping due to structural Repeated implantation failure (RIF) is the main problem after using assisted aberration of the Y-chromosome reproductive techniques (ART). The main causes of RIF as a multifactori- K. B. M. Hansson1, N. S. den Hollander1, M. E. van Huizen2, J. Lind3, L. Groenewegen1, M. al problem include decrease in endometrial receptivity, defects of embryo Hoogenboom1, J. Zonneveld1, M. J. V. Hoffer1; or combinational. Successful embryo implantation depends on trophoblast 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Gynaecology proliferation, migration and invasion to the endometrium, all associated and Obstetrics, Haga Hospital, location Red Cross, The Hague, Netherlands, 3Dept. with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) as the major protein in of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Haga Hospital, location Westeinde, The Hague, stimulating of angiogenesis. This study aimed to determine the associati- Netherlands. on betweenVEGF+405G/C polymorphism and RIF in infertile women. The patients group included 74 women with >3 RIF and the control group con- sisted of 149 healthy fertile women. Genotypes and allele frequencies of Quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) is an accurate VEGF+405G/C polymorphism were determined by PCR-RFLP method and and efficient technique for rapid prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 13, 18 and verified by Sanger sequencing. The frequencies of GG, GC and CC genotypes 21 and aneuploidies of the sex chromosomes. Discordant results between in patients group were 31.1%, 48.6% and 20.3%, respectively while tho- QF-PCR and karyotyping have occasionally been reported, mostly due to se frequencies in controls were 2.0%, 47.0% and 51.0% respectively. The mosaicism. frequency of GG genotype was significantly higher in patients than con- A 20-year old female underwent chorionic villus sampling at 13 weeks’ ge- trols (p<0.001). CC genotype frequency was higher in controls than pati- station because of an increased risk of a chromosomal aberration after first ents (p<0.001). The frequency of GC genotype did not show any difference trimester screening. Ultrasound investigation demonstrated no abnormali- between groups. C as the wild allele was more frequent in controls while ties. The results from the QF-PCR analysis were interpreted as a possible frequency of G as the mutant allele was higher in patients (p<0.001). The m6o8saic 45,X/46,XY because of the low contributioEnS oHf tGhe 2 Y0 c1hr4o m| MosoILmAe.N , VIT EA GFL +Y 0| 5W GW /GW ge. nE oS tyH pG m.O ayR G 4 e influence embryo implantation and lead toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index RIF in ART candidates. Since this is the second report on association of this others. However 50% of cases fail to reveal an identifiable cause and are polymorphism with RIF, further studies in different ethnic populations re- therefore classified as idiopathic. q Pu 0i 1re f 9o 5r -d Setermining this association. We investigated the AaBssCoBc1iation of polyCmYoPr1pAh1isms in oxidative stress rela- .0 tCeOdM gTenes with CidAiTopathic RM. 331G CidLiCo pathic RM patiGePnXts4 and 197 conNtRroFl2s Gene-gene interactions and the risk of recurrent miscarriages in EG- were genotySpOeDd 2for rs1O0G4G51642, rs1048943 and rs464
C6 O9M03T, VEGF and its receptor genes M. Su; rs4680, rs17880664, rs17883901, rs713041, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng-Kung University Hospital, rs6721961, rs4880, and rs1052133. A protective effect of Tainan, Taiwan. rs4680-G allele on RM was shown in individual SNAPB aCnBa1lysCiOs:M PT =, 0G.
P0 X0416, OR =O G0G.417, 95% CI 0.29 - 0.75. The multi-factor dimensionality reduction (MDR) approach revealed gene-gene inteAraBcCtBio1nsC OfoMrT GPX4, OGG1 , and Endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor (EG-VEGF) and genes. Cumulative gene risk score analysis demonstrated that more its receptor genes (PKR1 and PKR2) play an important role in human early than three risk alleles in the genes , , , and were as- pregnancy. Our previous study showed that PKR1 and PKR2 polymorphis- sociated with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage P = 1.2 x 10-3, OR =1.97, 95% ms are associated with recurrent miscarriages (RM). This study was con- CI 1.31- 2.97. In silico data interpreting by GeneMANIA analysis revealed ducted to find EG-VEGF, PKR1 and PKR2 variants in the coding regions of genetic, physical, pathway and coexpression networks for these four genes. idiopathic RPL patients and further evaluate gene-gene interactions in 3 The current study shows that cumulative effects of genetic variability in oxi- genes. Two hundred and ninety one blood samples from 142 RPL women dative stress-related genes may play a role in the recurrent miscarriage with and 149 controls were nucleotide sequenced in the coding regions of EG- n Po 0 1k .n 0o 9w 8n -M etiology. VEG, PKR1 and PKR2. Gene-gene interaction was evaluated in 3 gene vari- Results of conventional karyotyping and 5 thrombophilic gene ants using multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method. One each mutations in a Turkish population with recurrent pregnancy loss nonsynonymous variant of 3 genes were identified, and PKR1(I379V) and Y. Özen, H. Gürkan, H. Tozkır, S. Ulusal, E. Göncü, D. Eker; PKR2(V331M) were significantly associated with idiopathic RM (p=0.006 Trakya University, Edirne, Turkey. and p=0.002, respectively). Genetic interactions were founded not only bet- ween PKR1(I379V) and PKR2(V331M), but also among EG-VEGF (V67I), PKR1(I379V) and PKR2(V331M) (p=0.01 and p=0.01, respectively). Women Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is the spontaneous loss of clinically esta- carried low-risk genotypes reduced 77% risk of experiencing miscarriages blished intra-uterine pregnancy before the fetus has reached viability compared with those carried high-risk genotypes. The present study corr- Here we present the cytogenetic data of couples and prevalence of 5 throm- oborates the clinical relevance of the EG-VEGF system in human early preg- bophilic gene mutations among 175 women referred with RPL to our cen- nancy, and provides evidence for the gene-gene interactions of EG-VEGF and ter. P PK 0R 1. 0va 9r 6ia -Mnts. Chromosome analyses were performed in 179 couples with two or more Study of chromosomal alterations and polymorphisms of MTHFR, consecutive miscarriages before 24 weeks’ gestation between 19.10.2011- Factor V and Prothrombin genes in patients with recurrent 31.12.2013 using GTL banding. MTHFR c.677C>T and c.1298A>C, Factor II miscarriage referred to Royan Institute c.20210G>A, FactorV (Leiden) c.1691G>A and plasminogen activator inhi- K. Farahmand1, H. Kalantari2, M. Totonchi2, M. Hashemi1, S. Shahzadeh-fazeli2, f. bitor-1 (PAI-1) 4G/5G genotypes were determined using SNP primers desi- Reihani2, H. Gourabi2, A. Mohseni Meybodi2; gned by the manufacturer (NLM Diagnostics, Italy). Melting curve 1Islamic azad university tehran medical science branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, analysis has been performed with labeled probes using Real-Time PCR me- 2Department of Genetics at Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute thod (Qiagen, Rotor Gene). for Reproductive biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Table 1 shows the detail of the cytogenic findings of couples with RPL. The frequencies of studied 5 thrombophilic gene mutations in women referred with RPL were summarized in Table 2. Introduction: Recurrent miscarriage(RM) is defined as two or more conse- The prevalence of parental chromosomal aberrations was greater in our cutive pregnancy losses before 20 weeks of gestation which is an impor- study (8.4%) than in most studies in the literature, which quote a 3% - 5% tant clinical problem, with an incidence of 1%-3% among couples wishing prevalence. to have children. There are several factors in the etiology of RM. One of the Comparing our results of 5 thrombophilic gene mutations with other stu- main genetic causes involve in the pathogenesis of RM is balanced chromo- dies we suggest considering the mutations in FV Leiden G1691A, MTHFR somal rearrangements in one or both of partners. In 4%-8% of couples with 
C677 T and PAI-1 4G/5G genes in women Cwyittohg eRnPiLc . RM, at least one of the partners has chromosomal abnormality. After chro- Cytogenic Table 1: Details of cytogenic findifningds ionfg cso aumpleosn wg imthe RnP L findings among women by n (%) n (%) mosomal abnormalities, thrombophilia was identified as a major cause of by conventional conventional karyotyping RM, with a rate of up to 40%, especially in the first half of pregnancy. karyotyping Methods: The patients group included 1100 Iranian couples(2200 individu- als) referred to Royan Institute between 2004 and 2013. Karyotyping was 156 152 performed using standard cytogenetic techniques. Besides, thrombotic gene 46,XX (87,1%) 46,XY (84.9%) polymorphisms were studied in 128 women who had a normal karyotype 45,X 2 (1,11%) 47,XXY[3]/46,XY[47] 1 (0,55%) .The results were compared with 70 healthy womenF Va sL ceoidnetnrolP grroothurpo.mbin- [2]/46,XX [48] 46,XY, Results: A bMnToHrmFRal karyotypeMs TwHeFrRe found in 124 people, 83 women 45,X[4]/46,XX[96] 1 (0,55%) 1 (0,55%) t(4;10)(p14;p13) (3.77%) and 41 men (1.86%). The frequencies of , 46,XY, 45,X[6]/46,XX[94] 1 (0,55%) 1 (0,55%) G20210A, 
C677 T and A1298C mutations in patients were t(2;3)(q35;q25.2) 46,XY, 10.93%,4.68%,43.75% and60.15%, respectively. These frequencies in con- 45,X[5]/46,XX[95] 1 (0,55%) 1 (0,55%) t(1;8)(q25;q22) trol group were 2.85%,2.85%,34.28% and5.71% respectively. 45,X[3]/47,XXX[2]/49,XXXXX[1] 46,XY, Conclusion: Sex chromosome mosaicism is the most commonly detected /46,XX[94] 1 (0,55%) t(6;14)(p23;q24) 1 (0,55%) chromosomal abnormality in couples with RM who are candidates for of- 46,XX, 2 (1,11%) 46,XY, 4 (2,23%) fering PGD.Patients with combined thrombophilic mutations are at higher inv(9)(p11q13) inv(9)(p11;q13) 46,XX, 46,XY, risk for RM than women without these mutations.The most important issue 1 (0,55%) 1 (0,55%) t(1;6)(p11;q11) inv(9)(p12;q13) with hereditary thrombophilia‘s is the prevention of maternal thrombosis. 46,XX, 46,XY, 1 (0,55%) 1 (0,55%) Key words:Recurrent Miscarriage,Thrombophilia,Karyotype t(11;18)(p13;q11.2) inv(5)(p15;q31) 
P01 .097-S 45,XX, Polymorphisms in oxidative stress related genes and recurrent rob(13;14)(q10;q10) 1 (0,55%) 46,XYqh+ 7 (3,91%) miscarriage 46,XX, 46,XY, 3 (1,67%) 3 (1,67%) I. V. Volodin1, M. B. Khadzhieva2; 16qh+ 9qh+ 1Moscow State Universitet, MOSCOW, Russian Federation, 2N.I. Vavilov Institute of 46,XX, 2 (1,11%) 46,XY, 1 (0,55%) 21pss 1qh+ General Genetics, MOSCOW, Russian Federation. 46,XX, 46,XY, 1 (0,55%) 1 (0,55%) 21ps+ 22pstk+ps+ 46,XX, 46,XY, 2 (1,11%) 2 (1,11%) Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is one of the important problems of modern re- 9qh+ 21pss 46,XX, 46,XY, productive medicine. RM affects approximately 1 – 5 % of all couples trying 3 (1,67%) 1 (0,55%) 1qh+ 9qh+, 16qh+ to conceive. Various factors have been identified that influence miscarriage, including parental chromosomal abnormaElitSieHs,G en 2do0c1ri4ne | dMysIfuLnActNio,n I, TaAndL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 69ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index th Table 2: Frequencies of 5 thrombophilic gene mutations of women with RPL consecutive pregnancy losses before the 24 week of pregnancy, occurs in Homozygous FII MTHFR FV Leiden MTHFR1298 PAI-1 approximately 0,5-3% of reproductive-aged women. Results from animal Wild Type Prothrombin 677 Heterozygous 151 81 Homozygous 5G model studies demonstrate the importance of circadian rhytms in repro- 168 (96%) 70 (40,2%) Mutation (86,3%) (46,2%) 28 (27%) ductive health. The aim of this study was to examine whether there is an Homozygous 7 (4%) 23 82 79 (45,4%) Heterozygous association between genetic variability in the primary clock genes CLOCK Mutation (13,1%) (46,8%) 4G/5G 40 (39%) and ARNTL and RSA in the Slovene population. The study group consisted Homozygous 4G - 1 (0,6%) 12 (7%) 25 (14,4%) 35 (34%) of 152 unrelated women with RSA and control group of 170 age-matched 175 175 175 174 103 women. Altogether, 8 SNPs were tested, 4 in CLOCK (rs6811520, rs6850524, 
P01 .099-S rs11932595 and rs13124436) and 4 in ARNTL gene (rs3789327, rs1481892, The role of HLA-genes in complex immunogenetic preconditions for rs4757144 and rs12363415). The significance of association for inχdividual idiopathic recurrent pregnancy loss K. Sosnina, O. Terpylyak, D. Zastavna, N. Helner; SNP was calculated to compare the allelic frequency and genotype distri- Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine. bution in patients and control subjects using the Chi-Square test ( 2). After using Bonferroni correction significant differe∙nce in distribution of CLOCK rs6850524 polymorphism genotypes were found-6 in patients with RSA in Influence of HLA-system on reproductive losses is considered from the comparison to controls, with P-value of 2.9010 and odds ratio equal to standpoint of search for specific HLA genes, the similarity of spouses in 2.65 (95% CI: 1.68 to 4.18). Other SNPs in CLOCK and ARNTL genes did HLA-antigens, or the study of modulating properties of HLA-system in the not display any significant association with RSA susceptibility. We provide gene network complex. Aim. To analyze the distribution of allelic polymor- evidence for association between genetic variation in CLOCK gene and RSA. phism of the HLA-DRB1, DQA1, DQB1 genes and HLA-G 14-bp insertion/ Further studies are required to validate the results obtained in the Sloveni- deletion polymorphism in married couples with RPL. Results. Complex ana- a Pn 0 1p .o 1p 0u 2la -Mtion. lysis of distribution and frequency of allelic variants of genes HLA-DRB1, Prenatal diagnosis for hereditary cancer in the Netherlands HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 was conducted for 200 married couples with C. J. Dommering1, L. Henneman1, A. Van der Hout2, M. A. Jonker3, A. C. Moll4, H. Meijers- recurrent pregnancy loss of undefined genesis. It was determined that al- Heijboer1, DNA-diagnostic laboratories the Netherlands; lele DRB1*0301 is an allele-aggressor in the group of women with RPL, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University and possessing this allele presents three-fold increased risk of idiopathic of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences, pregnancy loss for a woman (OR = 3.4;CI95%:1.0-11.1). The results demon- VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Ophthalmology, VU University strated probable significant increase in frequency of genotype +14 bp/+14 Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. bp of HLA-G 14-bp insertion/deletion polymorphism (p < 0.05) in women Background with RPL against the control group. The study demonstrated over two-fold increase of the risk of pregnancy loss for women-carriers of homozygous Since the 1980s the genetic cause of many hereditary tumor genotype by allele of insertion(+)14 bp 3‘ UTR region of HLA-G gene (OR = syndromes has been elucidated. As a consequence, carriers of a deleterious 2.65;CI 95%:1.06-6.68). mutation in these genes can opt for prenatal diagnoses (PND). We investi- It was determined that the increase in total homology of spouses by 50% gated uptake of PND in the Netherlands for retinoblastoma (Rb) and com- and more in allelic polymorphism in loci HLA-DRB1, HLA-DQA1 and HLA- pared this with use of PND for five other hereditary tumor syndromes, i.e. DQB1 presents twelve-fold increased risk of idiopathic pregnancy loss for a familial adenomatous polyposis (FMAPe)t,h Voodns Hippel-Lindau’s disease (VHL), woman (OR =12.8;CI95%:1.63-100.27).Conclusions. Changes in the major hereditary breast ovarian cancer (HBOC), neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2), hystocompatibility complex genes can cause the failure of female reproduc- and Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS). A questionnaire was mailed to tive function and lead to the early fetal loss. 
P01 .100-M all DNA-diagnostic laboratories assessing: 1) Number of independent muta- Association study of miR-196a2 rs11614913 polymorphism with risk tion positive families identified until January 2013 2) Number of PNDs per- of idiopathic recurrent pregnancy loss in Iranian women fRoersmueltds for these syndromes until that date One-sided Fishers-exact test was M. Amin-Beidokhti1, F. Karamaldin2, R. Mirfakhraie1, S. Zare-karizi3, M. D. Omrani1; used to compare uptake of PND for Rb with the other five tumor syndromes. 1Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shafa 11.8% of mutation positive Rb families used PND, whereas uptake Hospital, Semnan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad University Varamin Pishva ford eth neo ovtoher syndromes was between never and 6.5%. For Rb PND was used Branch, Varamin, Islamic Republic of Iran. both by couples with a 50% risk and by healthy couples with a child with a mutation (2-3% risk). Overall uptake for PND was significantly higher for Rb than foCro FnAcPlu, HsiBoOnC and NF2. If just Rb couples with a 50% risk Introduction: Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL) is defined as the occurrence were taken into account, only a significant difference was found between Rb of two or more consecutive pregnancy loss prior to 20th week of gestation. and FAP and HBOC. Large differences in the use of PND between There are several leading causes of RPL including uterine anatomical de- tumor predisposing syndromes were observed. Highest uptake was obser- fects, genetic factors, infectious, immunological, environmental and blood ved for Rb and other childhood hereditary tumor syndromes, which is of dyscariasis. However, despite in a large number of cases no cause has been relevance for physicians caring for these families. identified and is classified as idiopathic. Recent studies have implicated 
P01 .103-S miRNAs in endometriosis, preeclampsia, infertility and RPL. Therefore; the Double Robertsonian translocation of chromosomes 13, 14 and 15: a aim of the present study was to investigate the association of miR-196a2C>T case report (rs11614913) with RPL. A. Vizule1,2, I. Grinfelde2,3, J. Bars3, A. Stamere4, I. Teilane4; 1Faculty of Continuing Education, Rīga Stradiņš University, Riga, Latvia, 2Medical Methods: We conducted a case-control study of 185 Iranian women: 85 pa- genetics clinic, University Children’s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Prenatal diagnostic tients with at least two unexplained consecutive pregnancy losses and 100 department, Medical genetics clinic, University Children’s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, healthy controls with at least one live birth and no history of pregnancy 4Laboratory Department, University Children’s Hospital, Riga, Latvia. loss. Patients with recurrent pregnancy losses due to anatomic, hormonal, chromosomal, infectious, autoimmune, or thrombotic causes were excluded from the study group. Genotyping was performed using tetra-primer ampli- Introduction. Robertsonian translocations (RT) are among the most com- fication refractory mutation system PCR (T-ARMS-PCR). mon balanced structural rearrangements in humans that occurs in the Results: Significant difference in distribution of miR-196a2 rs11614913 ge- acrocentric chromosome pairs (chromosomes 13-15, 21-22). Robertsonian notypes was found in RPL patients in comparison to controls, with P-value translocations comprise complete centromere fusion of the long arms of of 0.04 and odds ratio equal to 2.69 (95% CI: 1.03-7.03). two acrocentric chromosomes, and the two short arms are lost. Conclusion: We provide evidence for association between genetic variati- Materials and methods. Trisomy 13 with double RT was characterised by on in miR-196a2 and recurrent pregnancy loss. Further studies will be re- standart karyotype analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization method quired to validate the significance of the studied genetic variation in diverse (FISH) with probes for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y with critical regi- e Pt 0h 1n .i 1c 0 p 1o -p Sulations. ons (RB1, D18Z1, D21
S259 /D21
S341 /D21
S342 , DXZ1, DYZ3) from Abbott Genetic variation in Circadian Rhythm Genes are associated with Molecular, Inc. Vysis AneuVysion DNA Probe Kit. Recurrent Spontaneous Abortions Case report. A pregnant 22-year old woman was referred to the prenatal ge- P. Lavtar, M. Volk, L. Zemljič, A. Maver, B. Peterlin; netic counseling after ultrasonography performed at 13 weeks of gestation Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. revealed congenital fetal abnormalities, including polydactyly of both upper limbs and bilateral cleft lip and palate. First trimester biochemical scree- ning showed decreased pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A) R7ec0urrent spontaneous abortion (RSA), the occuEraSnHceG o f2 t0h1re4e |o rM mILoAreN , aITnAd LhYum | aWn cWhoWrio.EniSc HgoGn.aOdoRtrGopin (HCG), calculated risk for trisomy 18ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .106-M Prenatal detection of a case with Simpson- Golabi-Behmel syndrome was 1:105. Triple marker screening showed decreased alpha-fetoprotein as a consequence of GP
S3  and GP
S4  gene duplications (AFP) and HCG, and normal free estriol levels. Risk recalculation with the N. Kokalj Vokac1,2, N. Tul Mandič3, D. Krgović1, A. Blatnik1, F. Mujezinović1; FMF-2012 software (Fetal Medicine Foundation) adjusted risk for triso- 1University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty, University of my 13 showed 1:55. Diagnostic amniocentesis performed at 15/16 weeks Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 3University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. of gestation revealed trisomy 13 by FISH and later 45,XX,+13,der(13;14) (q10;q10),der(14;15)(q10;q10) using standart karyotype analysis. Conclusions. Currently the estimation of recurrence risk for future pregnan- We describe the case of Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome (SGBS) discove- cies is impossible because parents refused to investigate their karyotypes. red prenataly. Fetal scan in 23rd week of pregnancy identified male fetus with There could be several possible explanations for double Robertsonian trans- macrosomia, macrocephalia, dilatation of 3rd and 4th ventricle, hyperecho- location. genic gut, agenesis of corpus callosum, cistical dilatated interhemispheric 
P01 .104-M fissura, macrosomic kideny and liver, and kidney polyhydramnion. Sex chromosome classification by cell free DNA analysis of maternal Amniocentesis was performed. Molecular kariotyping using ISCA 4x180K plasma in a general obstetrical population arrays reveled two intersticial microduplications on Xq26.2 in size of 574 C. M. Coffeen, P. L. Devers, D. Chudova, K. Jones, R. P. Rava, A. J. Sehnert; Illumina, Redwood City, CA, United States. kb and 115kb. A larger microduplications encompassed four OMIM genes, including whole GP
C4  gene. A smaller microduplications was located within Objective: the GP
C3  gene and embraced exons 6 and 7 of the longest transcript of this To examine the performance of noninvasSitvued pyr Deneastigaln :t esting gene. CNVs were inherited from the mother. (NIPT) by sequencing maternal plasma cell-free DNA for fetal sex chromo- Persons with this SGBS are frequently affected by embrogenic tumors of kid- some classification in a general obstetrical population. Blood neys. Also the mother had Wilms tumor in her childhood. The pregnancy was samples were prospectively collected from pregnant women at 21 US sites terminated because of ruptured amniotic membrane and amniotic leakage. in the Comparison of Aneuploidy Risk Evaluation (CARE) study (clinicaltri- An autopsy of the infant confirmed organomegaly seen on ultrasound. In als.gov NCT01663350). Patients undergoing serum screening for fetal aneu- addition, a ventricular septal defect, a complete agenesis of the corpus cal- ploidy were followed to birth. Sex chromosome status was classified blindly losum, cerebellar hypoplasia were observed. Distinct facial features were by NIPT and compared to clinical outcome based on newborn physical ex- also present, including hypertelorism, short nose with broad nasal bridge, aRmesinualttsio: n, or karyotype if performed. Sensitivity, specificity and exact 95% macrostomia and macroglossia, nail hypoplasia, and an extra rib. confidence intervals based on the Clopper-Pearson method were calculated. GP
C3  and GP
C4  are the two genes in which mutations are known to cau- Sex chromosome classification by NIPT and outcomes were avai- se SGBS. There are only few reports on duplications of GP
C3  gene and one lable for 1,948 subjects. 1,935 (99.3%) were classified as XX or XY by NIPT. report of duplication of CPG4 gene causing SGBS in the literature. Mostly Sensitivity and specificity for predicting female were 97.7% (CI:96.6-98.6) deletions and mutations of GP
C3  gene are described. In our presentation and 99.2% (CI:98.4-99.6), respectively, and 99.2% (CI:98.4-99.6) and 97.7% p Po 0s 1s .i 1b 0le 7 r -Sole of two genes involved in SGBS is discussed. (CI:96.6-98.6) for predicting male. Two fetuses classified XY by NIPT had am- The correlation between transcript expression levels of nuclear biguous genitalia at birth; one showed mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,XY. NIPT encoded and mitochondrial encoded genes in single human oocytes classified 13 (0.67%) samples with sex chromosome aneuploidy (SCA). Nine during oocyte maturation with Monosomy X (MX) - all bearing normal-appearing female infants; one A. Allahveisi1, M. noruzinia2, M. ghaffari novin3, A. Dehghanifard4; hCaodn cplruesniaotna:l karyotype 46,XX. Three cases classified XXX by NIPT appeared 1Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, female at birth and one classified XXY appeared male. 2Department of medical genetic, Faculty of Medical sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, Results demonstrate that NIPT has excellent performance in Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Sarem the general obstetrical population for sex chromosome classification.Mo- Cell Research Center (SCRC), Sarem Women’s Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. saicism, maternal contribution or co-twin demise may explain discordance. NIPT is useful in cases of ambiguous genitalia, pregnancies at-risk for sex- linked disorder, or when SCA is not readily detectable by ultrasound/new- Introduction: Impairment of human oocyte maturation during oocyte matu- born examination. 
P01 .105-S ration is a cause of infertility in infertile women. Therefore, Oocyte matura- The XY female: prenatal discrepancy between phenotype and tion is important in successful reproductive outcome of assisted reproduc- genotype in bichorial diamniotic twin, what’s the differential tion technologies (ART). Mitochondria,which are the most organelle in the diagnosis? oocytes,have in important role during oocyte maturation. Little is known E. Pompilii; about mitochondrial genomes during oocyte maturation .This aim was to Medical Genetics Unit, St Orsola Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, BOLOGNA, identify the correlation between transcript expression levels between mito- Italy. chondrial and nuclear encoded genes included the cytochrome C oxidase1 (MT-CO1) gene and the nuclear respiratory factor 1(NRF1) as well as the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) genes , which using by single- Sexual differentiation depends upon a series of complex events. A 32aa, cell real-time PCR during human oocyte maturation. 27 consenting women healthy pregnant woman underwent a routine prenatal ultrasonographic aged 21-35 years, with male factors were selected for ovarian stimulation examination at 12 weeks’ gestation that showed a bichorial diamniotic twin and ICSI procedures. pregnancy with female sex fetuses. Upon personal desire of the mother, am- Results:at the germinal vesicle (GV) stage oocytes ,no significance corre- niocentesis was performed at 15+1 weeks of gestation. Ultrasonographic lation between the relative expression levels (P>0.05),whereas there was examination at the time of the procedure confirmed, in both fetuses, nor- significant correlation between the relative expression levels of nuclear mal fetal anatomy with female external genitalia. However, amniotic fluid (TFAM,NRF1) and mitochondrial (MT-CO1) encoded genes at the stages of karyotype analysis was discordant with the female ultrasonographic sex, metaphase I (MI)and metaphase II (MII)stages of oocytes (P<0.05). revealing a 46,XY male karyotype in both of them. Fetal re-exanimation was Conclusion:human oocyte maturation is associated with the increased cor- performed with 3D and 4D ultrasound for fetal sex, and a female genitalia relation between transcript expression levels of nuclear ( TFAM , NRF1) and was confirmed again. One hypothesis was the search for the presence of mu- mitochondrial (MT-CO1)encoded genes. Thus, any defect correlation bet- tation on SRY gene on chromosome Yp11.3, causing 46,XY complete gonadal ween transcript expression levels of nuclear mitochonderial genes leads to dysgenesis or XY sex reversal. the analysis has revealed no mutation in the impaired developmental oocyte competence. analyzed gene. The other hypothesis was the analysis of androgen receptor 
P01 .108-M (AR) gene. The molecular analysis showed a single nucleotide deletion in Prenatal molecular diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias - a single center codon 766, that resulted in a frame-shift mutation in the steroid binding experience T. Schramm, S. Minderer, K. P. Gloning, C. Daumer-Haas, M. Shoukier, M. Lindner, C. domain of the androgen receptor 
P766 fsX. As expected, the carrier mother Bagowski; had both normal and mutant AR genes. After genetic counseling the couple Pränatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany. decided upon voluntary termination of the pregnancy at the 20th week of gestation. The autoptic examination of both fetuses confirmed the external female genitalia and revealed the presence of sever hypoplasic uterus and Skeletal dysplasias are a large, heterogeneous group of conditions involving abdominal testes that confirmed by histopathological examination. the formation and growth of bone. Some skeletal dysplasias are associated with additional abnormalities in other organ systems. Prenatal diagnosis relies primarily on fetal ultrasound findings, but molecu- lar analysis is used to confirm the presumptive diagnosis and to determine ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 71 the recurrence risk.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The diagnosis of a substantial number of the most frequent skeletal dyspla- EM (52/904; 31/904) than in the CVS (32/904; 14/904; p<0.05). Multiple sias can be confirmed in a short period of time by molecular genetic analysis hypomethylation in both tissues occurred more frequently than hyperme- of the involved genes (e.g. thanatophoric dysplasia, diastrophic dysplasia, thylation (96/1808; 33/1808; p<0.001). Thus, abnormalities of imprinting campomelic dysplasia, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome or hypophosphatasia). maintenance in the EM cells derived from epiblast progenitors are asso- We present a retrospective analysis of 300 cases diagnosed prenatally by an ciated with fetal loss in first-trimester. 
P01 .111-S expert team of experienced sonographers and human geneticists. The study Gonadal mosaicism for structural autosomal rearrangements with was carried out at a single tertiary center during the last 20 years. non-centromeric breaks: data from 76 carriers suggests male-specific We demonstrate clinical findings and molecular genetic data and construct selection against abnormal cell lines and association of clinical work-ups for the diagnosis of ,,difficult“ cases (e.g. short rib-polydactyly syn- manifestation with a high proportion of abnormal cells dromes, Filamin B associated skeletal dysplasias). Molecular genetic testing N. V. Kovaleva1, P. D. Cotter2,3; was conducted in 186 cases. We were able to establish a final diagnosis in 1The Turner‘s Scientific and Research Orthopaedic Institute for Children, St.Petersburg, 118 cases - which is equivalent to a detection rate of 65%. Some cases are Russian Federation, 2University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United exampflified with clinical, radiological, pathological and molecular genetic States, 3ResearchDx, Irvin, CA, United States. data. We want to point out the importance of molecular genetic diagnosis for confirming the clinical diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias and providing exact Mosaicism for chromosomal structural rearrangements (Rea) is rare. There information for genetic counselling. is much to learn about the timing and mechanisms of Rea formation and 
P01 .109-S maintenance, and clinical manifestation. The question as to whether the Susceptibility loci for neurodevelopmental disorders - genetic proportion of abnormal cells in cultured blood is significant remains open. counseling and pregnancy management A recent study showed a strong female preponderance among carriers of L. Govaerts, M. Srebniak, K. Diderich, M. Joosten, S. Riedijk, S. van der Steen, S. van der Steen, F. de Vries, D. Van Opstal, R. Galjaard; mosaicism for Reas with pericentromeric breaks indicating female-specific Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. instability in early embryos (Kovaleva NV. AJMG,136A:401-13). Objectives: Objectives (i) Comparative analysis of the male/female ratio in carriers of gonadal mo- saicism (GM) for balanced and unbalanced Reas, (ii) comparative analysis of : SNP genomic array may detect susceptibility loci for neurodeve- the proportion of cells with unbalanced Rea in blood cultures of asympto- lopmental disorders (SL), with possibly an increased but unquantified phe- matic and affected carriers. Method: Review of mosaicism for normal line/ nMoettyhpoidc:a l risk. This study evalua tperse t-thees te fcfoeucnt soefl rinegle asing the SL to pregnan- structural Rea cases of known sex identified from the literature. Results: (1) cy management. Psychological aspects will be reported separately. Among carriers of GM for balanced Rea (all asymptomatic) there was a ty- post-Etevsetr gy epnaettiiecn cto ruencseeilvinegd with “all pathogenic re- pical male predominance, 18M/15F, unlike the strong female predominance sults will be communicated”. among carriers of GM for unbalanced Rea (both asymptomatic and affec- The concentrated on the phenotype of the parti- ted), 9M/34F, p<0.001. (2) Only one of eight male carriers with poor repro- cular SL, its incidence in the normal and affected postnatal population and ductive history was reported to have sterility, the others had partners with the difference between postnatal and prenatal ascertainment. Targeted pa- spontaneous/habitual abortion. (3) Seven of eight (88%) affected carriers rental array testing was offered. Extensive ultrasound (US) examination was of unbalanced Rea displayed a high proportion (≥50%) of abnormal cells oRfefseurletds: when the SL (postnatally ascertained) was asso ciated with physical compared to 2/27 (8%) in asymptomatic carriers, p<0.01. Conclusions: A abnormalities. Psychological help was available in all cases if needed. strong female prevalence among carriers of GM for unbalanced Rea suggests In 36 cases out of 2108 ongoing pregnancies aSL was found. male-specific selection against abnormal cells rather than impairment of 1. Two couples with an increased risk for aneuploidy and no US abnormali- male gametogenesis. A high proportion of abnormal cells detected in cultu- ties opted for TOP. Both couples already had “a bad feeling” about the preg- red T-lymphocytes is associated with clinical manifestation of chromosomal nancy before testing. They received psychological help. Pathological exami- i Pm 0b 1a .1la 1n 2c -e M. nation (N=1) revealed no structural abnormalities. Parental subfertility is not associated with an increased risk of a de 2. For parents with fetal US abnormalities the SL was usually considered as novo mutation or microdeletion in the offspring lCeosnsc ilmuspioonrtsa:nt. The US abnormalities were the reason for TOP. M. L. Haadsma, J. Seggers, J. E. H. Van Kammen - Bergman, A. Hoek, H. Groen, H. E. K. De 3.The inherited nature of SL seemed reassuring. Walle; In 5,5 % (2/36) of the SL cases the pregnancy was terminated University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. due to the presence of the SL. Further follow up of the families and their Background in vitro children is needed to evaluate the significance of prenatal diagnosed SL, to offer early intervention when neurodevelopmental disorders emerge and to Children born after fertilisation (IVF) with or without evaluate the psychological impact of prenatally discovered SL. intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) are at increased risk for congenital 
P01 .110-M anomalies. Recent publications suggest that the underlying parental sub- Origin of multilocus methylation defects of imprinted genes in first- fertility is mainly responsible for this risk increase, rathdeer nthovaon the IVF/ trimester spontaneous abortions ICSI procedures, but it is unclear how. Our study aimed to identify whether M. V. Lepshin, E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev; Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical offspring of subfertile couples are at increased risk for a mutation Science, Tomsk, Russian Federation. oMra mteircriaoldse alentdio mn.ethods Data were used from the birth defects registry Eu- Genomic imprinting is one of the most important epigenetic mechanisms of rocat Northern Netherlands. We included malformed foetuses and children fetal growth regulation. Our studies demonstrated that multilocus methyla- born between 1997-2010 (N=5709). Of those, 5249 were born to fertile tion defects (MLMD) at imprinted genes may be responsible for pathology of couples and 460 to subfertile couples (83 adftee rn oIVvFo, 95 after ICSI, 282 concei- early embryonic development. The aim of the present research was analysis ved naturally after a time to pregnancy >12 months). We analysed whether of origin of MLMD in first-trimester spontaneous abortions (SA). Chorionic parental subfertility was associated with mutations or microdele- villus samples (CVS) and extraembryonic mesoderm (EM) were collected tRioensus.lts from 217 SA from women who underwent abortion procedures. Induced de novo de novo abortion (IA) with normal karyotype (n = 60) were investigated as a control From the 5709 malformed cases, 156 (2.7%) had a monogenic group. The DNA methylation patterns of 7 imprinted genes were analyzed in cdoen ndoivtioon resulting from a mutation and 61 (1.1%) had a both tissues using MS-PCR, including analyses of 51 imprinted genes from 15 chromosomal microdeletion. Parental subfertility was not associated with SA and 4 IA by GoldenGate Methylation Cancer Panel I microarray. Compa- mutations (ORde 0 n.8o8v,o 95%CI 0.47-1.63) or microdeletions (OR 1.04, rative analysis of epimutations distribution between studied tissues allows 95%CI 0.41-2.60). Subgroup analyses showed that IVF or ICSI alone were the identification its somatic or germinal origin. Presence of epimutations in not associated with a event either. Adjustment for paternal and ma- both tissues indicates about mistake reprogramming in the primordial germ tCeornncallu asgieo ndi d not change the results. de cells during gametogenesis. Whereas tissue-specific compartmentalisation novo of epimutations allows suggesting independent sporadic epigenetic events Parental subfertility, IVF and ICSI are not associated with in various embryonic germ layers after its divergence. No epimutations were mutations or microdeletions in odfef snporviong. These results suggest that found in the 60 IA samples. Somatic MLMD in SA occurred more frequently the previously established increased risk of congenital anomalies after IVF/ than germinal epimutations (129 epimutations per 1808 alleles vs. 32/904; ICSI is not explained by an increase in events. p7<02.001). Multiple somatic epimutations were founEdS mHoGre f2re0q1ue4n |tl yM inIL thAeN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .113-S Prenatal detection of TAR syndrome V. Cejnova1, V. Harmas1, M. Wilimska1, M. Putzova2, L. Krautova2, J. Stekrova3, K. station week) and 30 fertile controls with no miscarriages. We investigated Hirschfeldova3, J. Lastuvkova1; mutations in genes responsible for cloating and fibrinolysis, including FV 1Regional Health Corporation, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, 2GENNET, Prague, Czech Leiden, FV H1299R, FII G20210A, MTHFR 
C677 T and A1298C, F XIII V34L, Republic, 3Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles PAI -1 4G/5G and EPCR H1 and H3 haplotypes using reverse PCR Vienna University, Prague, Czech Republic. lab CVD StrippAssays. Our results showed no statistically significant diffe- rence in prevalence of specific gene mutations between two tested groups. However, prevalence of heterozygous mutations as well as total number of Thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome is a rare genetic disorder mutations (homozygous and heterozygous) was significantly higher in RPL that is characterized by the absence of the radius bone in each forearm and group than in control group (40% vs 24% and 26% vs 15% respectevly, p a markedly reduced platelet count that results in life-threatening bleeding <0,01). Each woman with RPL had at least three mutations in examined episodes (thrombocytopenia). genes, while the average number of mutations in control group was 1.75. Rare proximal microdeletions of 1q21.1 are found in the majority of patients Several studies have proposed that risk for RPL may be associated with ad- but are also found in unaffected paRrBeMnt8sA. .Recently it was shown that TAR ditive effect of several mutations in genes involved with coagulation process syndrome is caused by the compound inheritance of a low-frequency non- rather than to some specific mutations. Our findings confirm these assump- coding SNP and a rare null allele in tions. Pregnancy itself represents a protrhrombotic state, which combined We present chromosomal, molecular, fetal ultrasound and pathological fin- with multiple thrombophilic gene polymorphisms may contribute to adver- dings in a case of TAR syndrome diagnosed prenatally. In the first pregnancy se pregnancy outcome. 
P01 .116-M (2010), ultrasHoFuEn2d PeExaXm11inBation CaDt 12620 weeks of gestation revealed bilate- Trisomy 16 Detected In Chorionic Villous Samples; Evaluation of 10 ral absence of the radii, pregnancy was terminated. A 1q21.1 microdeleti- New Cases on including , and genes was found using MLPA. Both S. Basaran1, B. Karaman1, M. Kirgiz2, I. H. Kalelioglu3, R. Has3, H. Kayserili1, A. Yuksel3; parents were analyzed in order to determine the parental origin of the dele- 1Medical Genetics Dep, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Premed, Genetic tion, which was subsequently identified in the healthy mother. The second Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Gynecology and Obstetrics Dep., Istanbul Medical pregnancy (2012) ended in miscarriage. The third pregnancy (2013) with Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey. the same ultrasound fRinBdMin8gAs, was terminated. Then the Sanger sequencing was used to analyze the DNA sequence of the region spanning the 5′UTR and the first intron of the gene in the fetuses (2010, 2013) and parents. Since trisomy 16 (T16) is a lethal chromosomal abnormality, it is very rarely Genotyping of the sequence demonstrated the presence of comRpBouMn8dA hete- diagnosed in ongoing pregnancies, even in the first trimester. rozygote for the 5′UTR (rs139428292) and intronic (rs201779890) SNPs We present ten new T16 cases detected in chorionic villous samples. Re- in the father. Both fetuses had compound inheritance of an SNP ferral indication was increased first trimester-screening test (FTST) risk in (rs201779890 G>C) and a deletion in the 1q21.1 region. Now is the family eight cases, with additional pathological ultrasound (US) findings in two, i Pn 0 t 1h .e 1 1P 4G -D M process. pathological US in one, and positive triplet test results in the other. Patholo- Tetrasomy 13q31.3q34 due to two marker chromosomes in a fetus gical US findings included intrauterine growth retardation, generalized ede- with increased nuchal translucency ma, cystic hygroma, omphalocele, oligohydramnios, echogenic intracardiac A. Stembalska1, G. Jagielska2, J. Gil1, A. Jarczynska1, E. Szmida1, I. Laczmanska1; focus, choroid plexus cyst, and hyperechogenic bowels. 1Department of Genetics, Wroclaw, Poland, 21st Department and Clinic of Gynaecology Combined risk of FTST in eight cases ranged between 1:2 to 1:62. PAPP-A and Obstetrics, Wroclaw, Poland. levels were decreased in six cases (range 0,05-0,29 MoM). βhCG levels were over 2,10 MoM in five cases. T16 was detected by karyotyping using direct preparation and/or long term Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are a group of struc- cell culture (LTCC) techniques in all cases, showing mosaic status in only turally rearranged chromosomes that cannot be identified by conventional one. Two cases (one unsuccessful DP, and one with normal DP results) were cytogenetic techniques. Prenatally sSMC are present in about 0.075% of the further investigated with I-FISH using centromeric chromosome 16 probe, tests and postnatally in 0.044% of live born children. An overall risk of an and T16 mosaicism was demonstrated. abnormal phenotype is about 30%. Eight cases were followed up by amniocentesis. Mosaic T16 was detected in We report on a 31-year-old woman (first pregnancy, after IVF) referred for only one of six by karyotyping, and I-FISH indicated mosaicism in four cases genetic counselling because of increased foetal nuchal translucency (5,5mm and normal results in two. at CRL 55,9mm) and increased risk of trisomy 21 (1:11) and trisomy 18 Our results are compatible with the literature, showing that the most sen- (1:207) in first-trimester combined prenatal screening. Ultrasound scan- sitive screening test for T16 is the FTST, with the most reliable parameter ning at 17th week of gestation revealed no heart defects but an increased being PAPP-A. I-FISH studies are helpful in the clarification of low-level mo- nuchal fold, left-sided diaphragmatic hernia and hydronephrosis. saicism in AF cells, when T16 was found in chorionic villous samples. 
P01 .117-S Cytogenetic studies of amniocytes showed a karyotype as follows: Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT): Laboratory experiences of 48,XX,+mar1,+mar2. Parents’ karyotypes were normal. To determine the PrenaTest® origin of the markers, array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was W. Hofmann, U. Schoeck, J. Bonnet, S. Groemminger; used (Agilent SurePrint G3 Human CGH Microarray Kit 4 x 180K platform). Te- LifeCodexx AG, Konstanz, Germany. trasomy of the region 13q31.3 to 13q34 - arr[hg19] 13q31.3q34(92507936- 115092648) was showed. The pregnancy was terminated at 18th week of gestation. Post mortem ex- Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is an emerging new option in prenatal amination revealed dysmorphic facial features, head and body dispropor- care. The commercially available PrenaTest® has been introduced in Euro- tion (head diameter: 8cm, CRL 12,5cm), wide neck, ambiguous genitalia. pe in August 2012 and exhibits sensitivities and specificities over 99%. The No other malformations of the internal organs, except listed above, were laboratory experiences from routine application of NIPT are reported and found. test accuracy, limitations as well as patient profiles are discussed. It is known that a risk of an abnormal phenotype associated with de novo Within the past eighteen months about 8,000 successful PrenaTest® ana- sSMC derived from chromosome 13 (or 14, 21, 22) is about 7%. Molecular lyses have been reported, with 98.0% negative results. 1.7% were positive characteristic of sSMC is important for genetic counselling and genotype/ for trisomy 21, 0.4% positive for trisomy 18 and 0.1% positive for trisomy phenotype correlation. 
P01 .115-S 13. According to ad hoc feedback from ordering specialists there were one Additive effect of thromobhilic gene polymorphisims is associated false-negative result for trisomy 18 and 13 false-positive results (one T13, with recurrent pregnancy loss ten T18 and two T21) up to now. Further analysis revealed that one dis- I. Joksic1, M. Sopic2, J. Joksic2; cordant positive T21 case was caused by a fetus papyraceus as determined 1Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Pharmacy, Belgrade, by investigation of the placenta after birth, the other discordant T21 case Serbia. was reported back by the responsible doctor as a known case of a vanishing twin. For one discordant positive T18 case, the fetus had a euploid karyo- type after amniocentesis, but placental material exhibited 80% cells with Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is a heterogeneous condition affecting up to trisomy 18 in FISH analysis. 5% of women of reproductive age. Thrombophilias (acquired and inherited) It is intriguing that the majority of discordant results of NIPT and invasive have been postulated as one of the causes of RPL. Here we examined the diagnosis seem in fact to be consequences of fetal vs. extra-fetal cytogenetic prevalence of nine thrombophilic gene polymorphisims among women with discrepancies or due to undiscovered vanished twins. These findings suggest history of recurrent miscarriages and fertilEeS coHnGtro 2ls0. T1h4e s|t MudyIL inAcNlud, eIthdT A70L Y |t hWatW bioWlo.gEicSaHl rGea.sOonRsG rather than methodical failures play the major 7ro3le. women with history of at least two early pregnancy losses (before 20 ge-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P01 .120-M Partial Trisomy 6q detected in Prenatal Diagnosis This confirms a strong collaboration between geneticists and gynecologists R. Pinto Leite1, P. Botelho1, M. Souto1, R. Nogueira2,3, A. Carvalho1, O. Moutinho1, M. specialized in ultrasonography and further analysis of discordant results. Martins1; 
P01 .118-M 1Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Centro de Performance of in-house non-invasive aneuploidy test using benchtop Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 3Universidade do Minho, Braga, Portugal. next generation sequencing system M. Hýblová1, G. Minárik2, R. Sysák3, M. Geryková-Bujalková4, B. Vlková2, L. Striešková1, J. Budiš5, S. Bokorova1, J. Turňa1, T. Szemes2; 1Department of Molecular biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Partial distal trisomy 6q is a rare event and is characterized by a distinct Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Gynecology and phenotype which includes microcephaly, acrocephaly, joint contractures Ostetrics, St. Cyril and Method Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Clinical and profound psychomotor retardation. The authors present a case of a 30- Genetics, Medirex Inc., Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and year-old pregnant woman referred to prenatal diagnosis due to ultrasound Informatics, Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. anomalies. It was the first pregnancy of a non-consanguineous couple with no familial or personal story of anomalies. Parents karyotype was perfor- med. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a chromosome 15 with an increase p Since the discovery of cell-free fetal DNA in 1997 by Dennis YM Lo, the main arm similar to a variation in length of heterochromatic stalks on the short goal was formulated - a reliable method for non-invasive fetal aneuploidy arm. Both parents presented a chromosome 15 with satellites but differednet detection. The arrival of next generation sequencing technologies finally fnroovmo the one detect at the amniocytes. Subtelomeric FISH analysis revealed gave scientists a proper tool to reach this goal. Today, so called large next a trisomy of 6q27-qter present at p arm of chromosome 15 - it was a generation sequencing instruments are used for the so called non-invasive rearrangement. The parents decided to terminate the pregnancy and prenatal aneuploidy testing. Few years ago, so called benchtop next genera- foetal autopsy was required. Several polymorphic variants were described tion sequencers were introduced, which allowed researchers worldwide to in human chromosome 15 including increased amounts of short arm hetro- start adopting wide range of novel methods benefiting from next generation chromatin (ph+), interpreted as a normal polymorphism. In the majority of sequencing. However, they were generally considered not to be sufficiently cases partial trisomy 6q results from a balanced chromosomal rearrangdee- parallel for non-invasive aneuploidy test. mnoevnot in one of the parents, usually of maternal origin. There have also been In our study, we used one of benchtop next generation sequencers, the Mi- rare cases in which partial trisomy 6q has appeared from spontaneous ( Seq by Illumina, to test its ability to detect aneuploidy. Plasma DNA from ) errors very early in embryonic development. The authors compared pregnant was isolated, fragment libraries were prepared and sequenced the cytogenetic and the foetal autopsy findings with those described in the in multiplex setup. Data was analysed using in-house pipeline. A set of 20 literature. Every new case of a rare chromosomal alteration should be re- samples (average read count 2 870 322 with SD 603 708) high risk group ported in order to establish a genotype/ phenotype correlation, improving pregnancies with confirmed euploid fetus was used for training of our ana- risk evaluation and genetic counseling. 
P01 .121-S lysis pipeline. Analysis of testing set including 5 samples with T21 fetus re- Assessment of chromosomal changes in trophectoderm cells in sulted in 100% specificity and 100% sensitivity. Based on our results we be- relation to maternal age lieve that performance of benchtop next generation sequencers is sufficient M. Hruba1, D. Brotanova1, R. Vlckova1, L. Hradecky1, P. Novakova1, N. H. Zech2; for non-invasive prenatal aneuploidy testing. In addition, the inherently hig- 1IVF Zentren Prof. Zech, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 2IVF Zentren Prof. Zech, Bregenz, Austria. her flexibility of benchtop systems could be of benefit for short turnaround and low sample throughput demands. This research was supported by ERDF grant with ITMS 26240220067. 
P01 .119-S Unbalanced chromosomal changes in embryos are one of the main causes 12 Mbp chromosomal gain on 7p detected prenatally without major of low human fecundity, with their incidence presumably increasing with dysmorphic features maternal age. In the aim to assess the frequency of whole chromosomal and H. Duba1, D. Müller1, M. Maurer1, F. Lausegger2, C. Herbst2, R. Kraschl3, D. Kuchernig3, S. segmental changes in relation to maternal age, we evaluated 224 trophec- Deutschbauer4, G. Webersinke4; toderm samples by aCGH (for details see table below). Our results showed 1Humangenetische Untersuchungs- und Beratungsstelle, Landes- Frauen- und a statistically significant increase in embryos with abnormal chromosomal Kinderklinik, Linz, Austria, 2Gynäkologie- und Geburtshilfe, Perinatalzentrum, Klinikum results with advancing maternal age. Overall, 539 chromosomal changes in- Klagenfurt am Wörthersee, Klagenfurt, Austria, 3Kinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Klinikum Klagenfurt am Wörthersee, Klagenfurt, Austria, 4Labor für Molekularbiologie und volving similarly all chromosomes, with slightly higher frequency on chro- Tumorzytogenetik, Krankenhaus Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria. mosomes 15, 16, 21, 22, were described. The frequencies of losses and gains were not significantly different. The rising complexity of changes with high- er maternal age was caused predominantly by increasing numbers of whole We describe a prenatally detected 12 Mbp chromosomal gain on 7p. Amnio- chromosomal abnormalities whereas frequency of segmental changes was centesis was performed due to risk for a chromosomal abnormality after shown to be independent on maternal age. first trimester screening. No of No of No of whole Mean Mean No Mean No of No of of whole Cytogenetic analysis revealed a duplication on chromosome 7p in the Group abnormal segmental chromosomal chromosomal segmental chrom. foetus. A SNP array was carried out showing a 12 Mbp gain - ISCN: (according embryos changes changes changes changes changes arr[hg19]7p21.3p15.3(13,146,026-25,348,884)x3. to maternal / No of / No of / No of per abnormal per per A literature review revealed one report from Miller et al. (Am J Med Genet age) analyzed chrom. chrom. embryo abnormal abnormal embryos changes changes 1979;4(4):323-32), describing a man with a duplication of the segment embryo embryo 7p21 to 7p25 with severe mental deficiency but normal growth. (1) 30/60 45/83 38/83 (46%) 2.8 1.5 1.3 ≤ 32y (50%) (54%) In order to exclude a balanced rearrangement of the parents, conventional (2) + chromosome analysis was performed. The mother showed the same dupli- ˃ 32y 63/94* 80/221 141/221 3.5 1.3 2.2 (67%) (36%) (64%) cation as the foetus. A SNP array confirmed the cytogenetic result. < 40y ++ The mother presented without major dysmorphic signs and showed no in- (3) 55/70** 49/235 186/235 4.3 0.9 3.4 tellectual disability. She had finished basic education. *≥ (420)y vs (1) P (07,90%4) (21%) (79%) Pregnancy was continued due to missing ultrasound abnormalities and the + (2) vs (1) P 0,006 inheritance of the maternal duplthication. ** (3) vs (1) P 0,00008 After caesarean section at 34+6 gestation week the premature infant pre- ++ (3) vs (1) P 0,00000005 sented with a weight of 2340g (
P38 ), length 46.0cm, OFC 31.7cm and AP- GAR 9/10/10. 
P01 .122-M The slightly cyanosed girl showed mild facial dysmorphisms as deep set Our contribution to rescue line hypothesis for a case of Turner ears, mild retrognathia and mild hyperplasia of the clitoris. No further clini- syndrome. cal abnormalities were reported. 19 days after birth the girl left the hospital M. Libik1, N. Ptáková1,2, J. Paděrová1,2, D. Novotná1, J. Chudoba1, J. Drábová1,2, V. Krulišová1,2, M. Vlčková1, M. Macek jr.1,2, M. Macek sr.1,2; in a good general state of health (weight 2486g). Two subsequent controls 1University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles University 2nd Faculty of revealed no major clinical abnormalities. Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. The case report shows the importance of testing parents after a pathological prenatal result and that a 12 Mbp 7p duplication not necessarily causes a major malformation. Turner syndrome (45,X) is the only viable monosomy in humans, about 1% of recognized conceptus with this karyotype survive to livebirth. Ultrasound examination in 12th week of gestation disclosed hygroma coli cysticum with 74 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG initial signs of hydrops. The NT was 6,2 mm. The QF-PCR analyses from na-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tive CVS was 46,XY. The long-term CVS cultivation revealed 45,X as well as 9.91;p=0.032). QF-PCR and FISH. The same results were found in post mortal examination Comprising the allele frequencies of VKOR
C1  gene rs9926231 across diffe- of muscule cells cultures. These findings suggest that in trophoectoderm rent populations revealed that its are relatively close in Moldovan popula- initiated mosaicism with the 46, XY clone and loss of Y chromosome must tions to those reported for Caucasians and Turkish. The allele frequencies occurred after fertilization. XY clone persisted in the embryo as a minor cell of VKOR
C1  gene rs9934438 are statistically significant different from data population and its prevalence increased in further chorion formation. It ex- available on NCBI-site, NCP, MASSource. plains that in QF-PCR analysis of biopsied samples 46, XY represented at Conclusion: VKOR
C1 gene rs9934438 is statistical associated with recurrent least 80% cells, while the second line 45,X was under detectable limit for pregnancy loss and increasing the risk of complications during pregnancy 
P01 .126-M this method (less than 20%). Our findings confirm recently published data, The application of post-light semiconductor-based next-generation describing similar situation for 45,X genotype derived from 46,XX. This “res- sequencing in clinical cases of preimplantation aneuploidy screening cue line” implies an origin of this disorder in mitotic loss. We also proved (PGS) with fresh embryo transfer that syncytiotrophoblast is a strong candidate for the location of the res- K. Lukaszuk, S. Pukszta, J. Liss, C. Cybulska; cue cell line. Most probably this may not be detected in extensive search for Invicta sp. z o.o., Gdansk, Poland. cryptic mosaicism. Our casuistic point out the importance of complex mole- cular genetics testing in native and long-term cultured fetal cells to provide the best reliable results allowing to make final conclusions properly. Sup- Screening of all chromosomes is now a gold standard in PGD. Although ported by grants IGA NT13770-4/2012, project for conceptual development NGS techniques are today best method of choice they require more than 24 o Pf 0 r 1e .a 1s 2e 3a -r Sch organization 00064203 and OPPK CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. hours to perform, consequently blastocyst vitrification is needed. 8 couples SNP-based non-invasive prenatal testing identifies vanishing-twin with the average maternal age of 34,4 was referred to PGS procedure from pregnancies 08/2013. All together 28 blastomeres were biopsied. The short duration M. Stosic, K. Curnow, A. Ryan, E. Kirkizlar, S. Sigurjonsson, M. Hall, Z. Demko, M. of the procedure allowed fresh embryo transfer without need of blastocyst Rabinowitz; vitrification. 7 out of 8 cases resulted in pregnancy in first cycle giving preg- Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States. nancies rate of 87,5%. 3,5 blastomers on average per cycle were biopsied, resulted in 1,25 blastomers on average per cycle with no aneuploidy detec- ted. 35,7% of embryos were euploid. We not only used cutting-edge techno- Objective: To determine the ability of single nucleotide polymorphism logy in the field of PGD but we went further and designed and preformed (SNP)-based non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) to identify unrecognized in clinical IVF-PGD procedure innovative protocol adjusted to single blasto- vanishing twin pregnancies that could otherwise confound NIPT results. mere biopsy and fresh transfer. The additional benefit is the cost 3 times lo- Method: 30,795 consecutive reported commercial samples that were recei- wer in comparison to aCGH. Developing PLS-NGS technology require use of ved for NIPT for fetal whole-chromosomal aneuploidies; known multiple the latest chemistry and software updates to improve analysis quality. The gestations were excluded. Cell-free DNA was isolated from maternal blood highest standards and stringency in quality system of results is required to samples, amplified, and sequenced. Sequencing results were analyzed using avoid diagnosis failure. New technology of PLS-NGS possess strong research the NATUS algorithm to determine the fetal chromosomal copy number and potential allowing for generation of large amount of data in scale of hours. presence of additional fetal haplotypes. Clinical follow-up for cases with ad- Our innovative single-plot short-time protocol require only single blastome- ditional fetal haplotypes is reported here. re biopsy and is adjusted to fresh embryo transfer. We put efforts in increase Results: 130 (0.42%) cases with additional fetal haplotypes were identified, of reproduction success rate by increase implantation and decrease miscar- indicative of fetal triploidy or molar, vanishing twin, or undetected twin riages rates and this aspect need to be followed up. 
P01 .127-S pregnancy. Clinical confirmation was available for 76 cases (58.5%); inclu- Analysis of the AZF region of Y chromosome in Slovak men with ding 31 (40.8%) vanishing twin, 37 (48.7%) viable twin, 2 (2.6%) molar azoospermia pregnancies, 3 (3.9%) triploid pregnancies, and 3 (3.9%) non-triploid preg- J. Bernasovska, I. Boronova, E. Petrejcikova; nancies. Of the 5 vanishing twin losses with a known date of demise, 100% University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia. of losses occurred in the first trimester, and up to 8 weeks elapsed between the loss and detection by NIPT. Conclusions: This SNP-based approach successfully identified previously Y chromosome microdeletions are the most common genetic cause of male unrecognized vanishing twin, viable twin, molar, and triploid pregnancies. infertility and screening for these microdeletions in azoospermic men is now Vanished twins have been identified in the literature as a significant cause of standard practice. Analysis of the Y chromosome in men with azoospermia false positive results in NIPT. As vanished twins are more likely to be aneu- or severe oligozoospermia has resulted in the identification of three regions ploid, and residual cfDNA could bias NIPT results, the unique ability of this in the euchromatic part of the long arm of the human Y chromosome (Yq11) method to identify additional fetal haplotypes has the potential to decrease that are frequently deleted in men with otherwise unexplained spermato- the false positive rate. 
P01 .124-M genic failure. PCR analysis of microdeletions in the AZFa, AZFb and AZFc Case-control analysis of VKOR
C1  gene polymorphisms (G1639A, regions of the human Y chromosome is an important screening tool. 
C1173 T) in women of reproductive losses from Republic of Moldova The aim of this study was to analyse type of microdeletions in men with E. V. Plingau1,2, N. Sirocova1, K. Boiciuc1, N. Usurelu1, S. Gatcan1, V. Sacara1, M. Duca2; fertility disorders in Slovakia. We evaluated 123 patients with azoospermia 1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 2University of AS RM, and with normal karyotype. All patient samples were analyzed cytogeneti- Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. cally. For PCR amplification of sequence-tagged sites (STS) of the AZFa, AZFb and AZFc regions of the Y chromosome was used Devyser AZF set. For all markers in one multiplex PCR reaction fluorescently labeled primers were VKOR
C1  reactivates the reduced form of vitamin K- essential cofactor in the used. For automaAtZeFd visualization and identification of the STS markers we γ-carboxylation of blood coagulation factors. Decreased enzyme activity used genetic analyzer 350A0ZxFLa ,(bA,cpplied Biosystems). We reported 9 cases of leads to blood clotting disorders that can cause reproductive problems. Aim dAeZlFetions in the region (7,32%). We have recorded particular types of of our research was to determine the prevalence of VKOR
C1  variant alleles deletions in each region but also a complete deletion of the whole G1639A (rs9926231) and 
C1173 T (rs9934438) and correlate genotypes region. The most frequent was microdeletion(s) in the AZFc region. In with recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) Slovak azoospermic patients the percentage of microdeletions in the AZF Materials and methods: Were tested 91 women with two or more (case) region is low, but their detection is important for subsequent therapeutic RPL, 69 women with two normal births (control) and 67 DNA samples of procedures. This work was supported by grants APVV-0716-10 and ITMS healthy Moldavian population. There was used PCR-RFLP assay to identify 26220120041. 
P01 .128-M the VKOR
C1  rs 9926231 and rs9934438 with MspI and HinfI enzymes re- Indisputable double paternity in twins caused by superfecondation spectively. The distribution of genotypes was tested for deviation from Har- W. Manoubi, A. Mili, A. M’sakni, I. Ben Charfeddine, A. Amara, I. Chatti, D. Hmida, I. dy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). Miniaoui, A. Saad, M. Gribaa; The results: All evaluated genotype frequencies were conformed to HWE Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology expectation for VKOR
C1  polymorphisms. There was identify no significant Farhat Hached Universi, Sousse, Tunisia. difference in frequency in case and control groups for heterozygous state of rs9926231 (46.2%vs54.4%).The evidential differences of VKOR
C1  T1173T genotype frequency in case and control groups (19.8%vs7.4%). There was Introduction: Paternity tests enable to establish the biological relationship identified statistically significant that patients with T1173T genotype have between a child and his alleged father. Today, this test is based on DNA fin- increased risk of complications during prEeSgnHanGc y2 (0O1R4 3 .
|2  6M; I9
L5 A%N C,I I1T.0A7L, Y |g WerpWrinWtin.Eg SusHinGg m.OaRinGly short tandem repeats (STRs) markers. Indeed, 7ea5chABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index individual receives half of its genetic heritage from his biological mother and In our diagnostic laboratory we have used NGS to analyze the 6 OCA, OA1 the other half from his biological father. Rare cases of twin pregnancy were and HP
S1  genes. This was efficient in terms of both finding mutations and induced by fertilization from two different parents. In this case, we speak rapidity. We are designing a larger panel including all syndromic albinism about a “superfecondation”. This situation is exceptionally confirmed. genes. Here, we report a case of genetically confirmed superfecondation in the con- The extensive analysis of all albinism genes will allow us to better characte- text of paternity test by DNA fingerprinting. rize gene interactions in this disease that may not be purely monogenic. 
P02 .03-S Observation: In the context of paternity, we performed a genetic study of 4 Two novel (p.
E930 X and p.
C2278 X ) mutations in ALM
S1  leading to members: a mother, her 2 twin infants, and a supposed father. This study Alström Syndrome involved the analysis of 15 STRs markers by „PowerPlex 16 System“ kit. Re- T. Piñeiro-Gallego, M. Álvarez-Satta, S. Castro-Sánchez, D. Valverde; sults were analyzed by Genotyper® v 3.7. Departamento de Bioquímica, Xenética e Inmunoloxía, Vigo, Spain. Results: Genetic analyzes were performed under the same technical conditi- ons and showed that one of the twins share the same alleles with the alleged father, while the other infant has different alleles in 11 of the 15 STRs stu- Alström syndrome (AS, OMIM#203800) is an extremely rare, autosomal re- died. Therefore, despite that these two children are twins, their biological cessive disorder with a significantly shorter life expectancy. It is mainly cha- fathers are different. racterized by sensorineural hearing loss, early onset blindness due to retinal Discussion and conclusion: The superfecondation is a rare and special ob- dystrophy, and obesity. Other reported features include recurrent pulmona- stetric situation. It is secondary to the fertilization of two eggs from the mo- ry infections, progressive renal and hepatic dysfunction, cardiomyopathy, ther by two sperm each from a different father. short stature, and endocrinological features. AS is caused by mutations in In this study, we have confirmed this situation by molecular genetics tools. the ALM
S1  gene, which encodes a protein of unknown function that locali- H 
P0 o 2w .e 0v 1e -r S, their clinical and biological implications remain unknown. zes to the basal bodies of cilia, playing a role in intracellular trafficking. Here IL-8 is associated with age-related macular degeneration in Italian we report two AS cases born to unrelated healthy parents. The diagnosis of samples AS was performed accordingly to the criteria previously defined by Marshall M. Ragazzo1, R. Cascella1, S. Zampatti1, F. Ricci2, G. Staurenghi3, F. Missiroli2, P. Borgiani1, et al. (2007). We ascertained two families with seemingly AS. Molecular F. Viola4, C. Eandi5, A. Cusumano2, F. Sangiuolo1, G. Novelli1, E. Giardina1,6; analysis was performed by direct sequencing of the known hot spots in the 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, School of Medicine, University of Rome ALM
S1  gene (exons 8, 10 and 16) according to the mutational load described “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 2UOSD Patologia retinica Fondazione PTV “Policlinico Tor in AS. We identified a homozygous mutation (c.2788G>T, p.
E930 X) in pati- Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 3Eye Clinic, Department of Clinical Science „Luigi Sacco“, Sacco ent 1 and a homozygous mutation (c.6834C>A, p.
C2278 X) in patient 2 that Hospital, University of Milan, Italy, Milan, Italy, 4UO Oculistica Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 5Department of co-segregate with the disease phenotype in family 2. Both mutations cause Clinical Physiopathology, Eye Clinic, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 6Laboratorio di a truncated protein and had not been previously described in literature. We Genetica Molecolare UILDM, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. show that direct sequencing of exons 8, 10 and 16 of the ALM
S1  gene could represent a useful tool for molecular diagnosis of AS, whilst the mutations described here may contribute to extend the mutational spectrum in AS. 
P02 .04-M Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a macular degenerative disease, Exome sequencing in 32 patients with anophthalmia/microphthalmia representing one of the main socio-economical health issues for the elderly and other developmental eye defects population worldwide. The increasing prevalence of AMD is related to pro- A. Slavotinek1, S. T. Garcia2, G. Chandratillake2, T. Bardakjian3, R. Lao4, P. Tang4, E. gressive aging of the population and affects more than one million Italian Wan4, D. Wu1, K. Umeda1, J. Tirch2, R. Tischler2, J. Harris2, M. J. Clark2, S. Chervitz2, A. people. AMD presents a multifactorial etiology with several risk factors (age, Patwardhan2, J. M. West2, A. Schneider3, P. Kwok4, S. Baranzini5, R. M. Chen2; cigarette smoking, diet). 1Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Personalis, Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States, 3Division of Medical Genes in the complement pathway (CFH) and a chromosome 10 region Genetics, Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Cardiovascular (ARM
S2 ) showed to be the most involved loci in the disease. Several studies Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United confirmed the crucial role of inflammation and angiogenesis in AMD patho- States, 5Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, genesis and progression. Given these data a screening of I
L8  gene has been CA, United States. proposed (4q12-q13) to evaluate the association of AMD with rs2227306 (C/T), that is an intronic SNP in the I
L8  gene. The results demonstrated a strong association of T allele (p = 4.15*10-5, OR = 1.39, 95% CI = 1.19-1.62) Anophthalmia/microphthalmia (A/M) is a genetically heterogeneous birth in a cohort composed of 721 cases and 660 controls, suggesting the sequen- defect for which the etiology remains unknown in more than 50% patients. cing of the entire I
L8  gene. Sequencing analysis revealed two haplotypes A/M can occur without other structural eye defects (simplex A/M), or can be associated with AMD development (A-T-T-T, p = 2.08*10-9,OR = 1.68, 95% present with other ocular findings (complex A/M), such as anterior segment CI = 1.43-1.97 and T-C-C-A, p = 7.07*10-11, OR = 0.60, 95% CI = 0.51-0.70). dysgenesis (ASD). We used exome sequencing (ACE ExomeTM, Personalis, It is notably that in human coronary atherosclerosis, IL-8 is an important Inc., 18 exomes; UCSF Genomics Core, 20 exomes; 6 were run twice) to se- mediator of angiogenesis and may contribute to plaque formation via its an- quence DNA from 32 children with A/M or other developmental eye defects giogenic properties. In this context IL-8 could represent a candidate gene for pathogenic mutations. In 19 patients with simplex A/M, we identified to link the development and progression of AMD, the smoke habits and the mutations in STRA6 (1 patient), RARB (1 patient; p.Arg387Cys), GDF6 (1 pa- o Pc 0c 2u .r 0r 2e -n Mce of cardiovascular events in these patients. tient; p.Ala249Glu) and OTX2 (1 patient; p.Gln91His) and in 9 patients with Molecular investigations in patients with oculocutaneous albinism. complex A/M, we found mutations in STRA6 in 2 patients. Putative causative F. Morice-Picard1,2, E. Lasseaux1, C. Plaisant1, J. Bouron1, C. Rooryck1,2, D. Cailley1, P. variants were identified in 3 out of 4 patients with other developmental eye Fergelot1, D. Lacombe1,2, B. Arveiler1,2; defects - a homozygous mutation in GCNT2, p.Tyr347Cys, in a female with 1Bordeaux Universitary Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 2University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, cataracts and microtia and a de novo mutation in CO
L4 A1, p.Gly773Arg, in France. a female with cataracts and cardiomyopathy. In a male with a chorioretinal defect, microcephaly, seizures and sensorineural deafness, we identified a TYR, OCA2, TYR
P1 , SL
C45 A2 maternally inherited splice site mutation and a paternally inherited mis- Oculocutaneous albinSiLsCm2 4isA 5characterized bCy1 0bOoRthF 1o1c ular and skin and hair sense mutation, p.Ala507Ser, in PNPT1 which is critical for mRNA import features. In addition to , a locus in 4q25 (OCA5) into mitochondria and has not been associated with eye defects. In one child and two new genes, (OCA6) and (OCA7) were re cently with ASD, no mutation was identified. Our overall detection rate for A/M discovered. Ocular (OA1) and syndromic aHlPbSin1ism are also known. When stu- was 6/28 (21%), illustrating high genetic heterogeneity and the need for dying 400 patients, we found 36 % OCA1, 25% OCA2, 2 % OCA3, 11%OOCCAA42, further gene discovery. 
P02 .05-S 1.25% OCA6, 0% OCA7, 6% OA1 et 1% . Deletions represent 5.6% of Molecular study of Brazilian patients with auditory neuropathy the anomalies. In two patients we found a complex rearrangement of P. Z. Ramos1, G. M. Carvalho2, A. C. Guimarães2, A. M. Castilho2, E. L. Sartorato1; that comprised the deletion of exons 2 to 19, followed by the reinsertion, 1CBMEG, Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil, 2ENT after reshuffling, of most of the deleted segment in intron 1 of the gene. Department, Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil. 17.5% of patients remain without molecular diagnosis. A first hypothesis is that mutations are located in the introns or regulatory regions of the genes. We undertook the sequencing of the entirety of the OCA1-4 genes to search Auditory neuropathy (AN) is characterized by an absent or abnormal au- for alterations not only affecting the exons. A second hypothesis is that new ditory brainstem responOsTeOsF and preserved otoacoPuJsVtKic emissions and/or OCA genes remain to be discovered. We have sequenced the exome of 11 cochlear microphonics. To date, four loci associated with nonsyndromic AN p7at6ients. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG were mapped: DFNB9 ( gene) and DFNB59 ( gene), responsibleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index DIAPH3 for autosomal recessive pattern; AUNA1 ( gene) for autosomal do- model of inheritance. Both FGFR1 and SEMA3A are implicated in Kallmann’s minant; and AUNX1 for X-linked. Connexin 26 mutations were also reported syndrome, where GnRH neuronal migration developmental abnormalities in subjects with AN. The main goal of the study was to investigate genetic typically lead to syndromic anosmia, associated with sterility. Our patients mutations in patients with clinical diagnosis of AN, to verify its importance are unusual in having isolated anosmia. All mutations are currently under and involvement in the etiology of AN in Brazilian patients. Clinical informa- further scrutiny. The results suggest that decyphering CGA pathogenic va- tion and ge GnJeBt2ic evaluation of 39 patieGnJBts6 were analyzed. We investigated riants might shed light on the embryonic development of the olfactory neu- the moMstT cRoNmRm1on causes of genetic hearing loss, including pathogenic vari- r Po 0n 2a .l s 8y -s Mtem. 0 ants in the genOeT, OdeFletions in the gene and m.1555A>G mutation Prevalence of GJB2 (CX26) gene mutations in Turkish patients with in the gene. Additionally, direct sequencing is performing for mu- autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss tation GscJBre2ening of gene. The common Spanish p.Q829X mutation in M. Gunduz1,2, E. Uctepe2, S. Unsal3, A. Ozdek4, D. Demiral5, M. Korkmaz4, A. Erdoğan3, E. the otoferlin gene was not detected in our cohort. The c.35delG mutation Gunduz1, N. Ark2; in the gene was found in two patients in homozygous genotypes. Ho- 1Turgut Ozal University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, wever, it is not established if pathogenic variants in connexin 26 could be Turkey, 2Turgut Ozal University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of otolaryngology involved with AN or if the otoacoustic emissions that were recorded fGrJoBm2 head and neck surgery, Ankara, Turkey, 3Turgut Ozal University, Graduate School Of Health Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics,Department of Audiology And Speech these subjects only represent the residual activity of few outer hair cells that Pathology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of Otolaryngology, Ministry of Health, Dıs¸kapı still alive. Further investigation is needed to clarify the link between Yıldırım Beyazıt Training and Research Hospital,, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of mutations and AN. The study of AN genetic basis is extremely important to Audiology And Speech Pathology, Ministry of Health, Dıs¸kapı Yıldırım Beyazıt Training improve the diagnosis, management, therapy and genetic counseling of the and Research Hospital,, Ankara, Turkey. affected subjects. 
P02 .06-M Targeted high-throughput sequencing for mutation detection in Bardet-Biedl Italian patients Hearing impairment is the most common sensory impairment in humans, I. Passerini1, S. Palchetti1, A. Mariottini1, C. Pescucci1, G. Marseglia1, S. Bardi1, M. affecting 2:1,000 births. At least 50%of the cases are inherited. Non-syndro- Benelli1, S. Falconi1, E. Contini1, A. Sodi2, F. Marin1, U. Menchini2, F. Torricelli1; mic hereditary hearing loss accounts for the 70% of the hereditary hearing 1AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy, 2Eye Clinic, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. loss. It is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. The single-nucleotide guanine deletion (35delG) of the GJB2 gene coding for connexin 26 was shown to be the main genetic cause of autosomal recessive Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is characterized by truncal obesity, polydac- deafness among Europeans. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the tyly, hypogonadism, developmental delay, learning disabilities, progressive prevalence of GJB2 mutations among affected individuals from Turkey. To retinopathy, renal disease and susceptibility to diabetes mellitus. Although provide appropriate genetic testing and counseling to families, we searched BBS is mainly transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner, few families fifty patients presenting with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing exhibit a tri-allelic mode of inheritance. To date, 16 different BBS genes loss from Turkey for variations in GJB2 gene by direct sequencing. Mutati- (BB
S1 -BB
S16 ) are known and BB
S1  and BB
S10  show the highest mutation ons were detected in 9 out of 28 people from 20 different families (9/28, 32 frequency in BBS patients. %). Four different mutations were identified; three of them were previously Six unrelated patients evaluated by standard ophthalmologic examination identified (35delG, V27I, 
E114 G). The remaining one alleles, K221N was no- and with a clinical diagnosis of BBS were analyzed by targeted re-sequencing vel variants which determined ‘uncertain significance’ in different database. of 130 retinopathies-related genes on HiScanSQ Illumina platform (mean However, it is reported disease causing variant by ‘Mutation Taster Data- coverage 500X). Bioinformatic analysis identified a mean of 1100 sequence base’. The most common mutations were 35delG followed by V27I with an variants per sample. Filtering pipeline (exonic function, frequency, predic- allele frequency of 21 and 7 %, respectively. There is no correlation between tion and inheritance model) leads to distil a mean of 10 candidate variants mutation types and clinical findings of patients. per sample. The candidate variants were independently validated by Sanger In conclusion, we determined GJB2 gene mutations responsible for 32 % sequencing and segregation analysis was performed. of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss in Turkish people. This We identified two known causative deletions in BB
S9  (c.1877_1880del) is higher than earlier studies which reported that the overall frequency of and BB
S7  (c.712_715del) genes and a novel frameshift deletion in BB
S10  GJB2 mutations in comparable families in Turkey is 18.9%. 
P02 .09-S (c.804_805del). Morever, a patient is compound heterozygote for two novel A novel GJB6 mutation causes autosomal dominant palmo-plantar variants in BB
S10  (c.1677_1678insA and c.1220T>C); one patient present a hyperkeratosis with hearing loss homozygous variant in BB
S2  gene (c.209A>G) and one novel heterozygous E. Trevisson1, M. Doimo1, M. Cassina1, C. Cerqua1, G. Crispino2, F. Mammano2, L. Salviati1, variant (c.538C>T) in BB
S3  gene. The last patient has two variants in BB
S12  M. Clementi1; gene both in homozygous status [c.1044del (novel) and c.61T>C (descri- 1Clinical Genetics, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Univeristy of Padova, bed)]. Padova, Italy, 2Fondazione per la Ricerca Biomedica Avanzata, Istituto Veneto di NGS approach has enabled us to detect variants in BBS genes. Although for Medicina Molecolare, Padova, Italy. described variants and ins/del frameshif variants the genotype-phenotype correlation is clear, in order to clarify tri-allelic variants’ role in BBS-onset, further association studies are required. We report a boy affected by bilateral sensorineural deafness and palmo- 
P02 .07-S plantar hyperkeratosis. The pedigree suggests an autosomal dominant pat- Neuro-developmental genes may underlie human congenital general tern of inheritance with variable expressivity. Molecular analysis of GJB2 anosmia T. Olender1, A. Alkelai1, P. Tatarskyy1, R. Isseroff1, V. Boyko1, E. Ben-Asher1, D. Oz-Levi1, E. was negative and GJB6 deletions were also excluded. GJB6 encodes connexin K. Ruzzo2, D. B. Goldstein2, E. Pras3, D. Lancet1; 30, which is highly expressed in the inner ear and in keratinocytes. There- 1The Weizmann Instiute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2Duke University, Durham, NC, fore, we sequenced the entire coding region of this gene in the proband United States, 3Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel. and identified the c.175 G>A mutation, causing a substitution of glycine 59 with an arginine residue. The same missense mutation had been previously reported in a single patient affected by post-lingual deafness and palmo- The neuronal and cell-biological mechanisms underlying vertebrate olf- plantar hyperkeratosis (Nemoto-Hasebe et al, 2009). The G59R mutation action have been studied in considerable detail, but there is a gap in our affects a highly conserved amino acid, it was absent in 100 healthy ethni- understanding of the molecular genetic basis of olfactory monogenic disor- cally matched controls and segregates with the phenotype in our family. The ders. Congenital general anosmia (CGA) affects <0.1% of the general popula- analysis by molecular modelling revealed that the residue is located at the tion, and appears in isolated or syndromic forms. We have recruited a large top of the channel formed by the hemiconnexons. All these findings strongly cohort of isolated CGA, with 66 affected families of Jewish origin. We applied indicate a pathogenetic role for the novel variant. To explore the functional whole-exome sequencing to 43 selected individuals from 8 multiply affected consequence of the missense mutation, we expressed the mutated version families. We identified in three members of one family with a rare X-linked of GJB6 in HeLa cells lacking connexins. We showed that GJB6 mutated pro- mutation in the TENM1 (teneurin 1) gene, a neuronal signal transducer that tein is localized to the plasma membrane only when co-expressed with the functions in synaptic-partner-matching between olfactory sensory neuro- wild type form. This model was employed to test the electrophysiological nal axons and target projection neurons in drosophila. The mutation affects properties of the connexons formed by both the mutated and the wild-type a highly conserved Proline residue in one of the YD domains of TENM1. In connexin 30. another family we identified candidate variants in the genes FGFR1 (hete- rozygous mutation) and SEMA3A (heterozygous mutation). Affected indivi- duals in this family obligatorily carry bothE mSuHtaGti o2n0s, 1su4g g| eMstiInLgA aN di,- gITenAicL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 77ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P02 .10-M Hearing and ageing: a complex genomic strategy leading to new genes/variants identification in European and Central Asian Identification of the causative mutations in patients affected by autosomal populations recessive non syndromic deafness (DFNB forms), is demanding due to gene- D. Vuckovic1, S. Dawson2, M. P. Concas3, M. Ciullo4, T. Nutile4, S. Cappellani5, M. Pirastu3, tic heterogeneity. After the exclusion of GJB2 mutations and other mutations P. Gasparini1,5, G. Girotto1; previously reported in Tunisian deaf patients, we performed whole exome 1Dep. Medical Sciences - University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2UCL Ear Institute, University sequencing in patients affected with severe to profound deafness, from College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Population Genetics, National four unrelated consanguineous Tunisian families. Four biallelic mutations Council of Research, Sassari, Italy, 4Inst. Genetics and Biophysics “A.Buzzati-Traverso”, were identified in three different genes, i.e. a nonsense mutation, c.208C>T CNR, Naples, Italy, 5Inst. Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS ‘‘Burlo Garofolo’’, Trieste, (p.R70X), in LRTOMT, a missense mutation, c.5417T>C (p.
L1806 P), and Italy. splice site mutations, c.7395+3G>A, in MYO15A, c.2260+2T>A, in TM
C1 . We thereby provide evidence that whole exome sequencing is a powerful, cost- effective screening tool to identify mutations causing recessive deafness in The lack of knowledge on the molecular basis of Normal Hearing Function consanguineous families. (NHF) and Age-related Hearing Loss (ARHL), prompted us to develop a 
P02 .13-S combined multiphase strategy using approx. 3000 individuals from isolated Diagnosing heterogeneous disorders such as hereditary hearing populations of Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia. Starting from our past loss with targeted Next-Generation-Sequencing: a model for experience on GWAS meta-analysis combined with expression studies (Gi- categorization and evaluation of the pathogenicity of sequencing rotto et al. 2014), the following strategy was designed: PHAS
E1 : GWAS me- variants ta-analysis for common tag-SNPs and common functional variants, PHAS
E2 : M. Sommen1, I. Schrauwen1,2, J. J. Corneveax2, N. Boeckx1, J. Van den Ende1, A. replication in independent cohorts, PHAS
E3 : SKAT gene-based test for rare Boudewyns3, E. De Leenheer4, S. Janssens4, K. Claes4, W. Wuyts1, G. Mortier1, M. Bitner- Glindzicz5, P. Coucke4, M. J. Huentelman2, G. Van Camp1; functional variants, PHAS
E4 : Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) in a selected 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2The subgroup of 250 ARHL cases/controls. During PHAS
E1  the following stron- Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United gly significant associations were identified: ITFG2 (p=6.92E-11), PCDH20 States, 3University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Center of Medical Genetics, (p=4.71E-10), SL
C28 A3 (p=2.39E-09). The last two belong to gene-families Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 5Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, UCL Institute of already known as being involved in hearing-loss and expressed in the coch- Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. lea. During PHAS
E2  four SNPs within the PCDH20 gene were replicated at nominal level (p<0.05) in the 1958 British Birth Cohort. Applying PHAS
E3 , the SKAT gene-based test for rare functional variants (0.001<MAF<0.05) DNA diagnostics of hereditary hearing loss (HL) is complicated considerably revealed highly suggestive associations (ranging from 7.97E-06 to 1.90E- because of the genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of the disease. Current- 05) for the following genes: PTPRCAP, FN1, EAF1, METRNL, PD
P2 , ARRD
C1 , ly, only 10-20% of the patients receive a clear genetic diagnosis, because only HDGF, TMOD1. two genes are analysed regularly. We developed a Next-Generation Sequen- Finally, thanks to PHAS
E4  (carried out in collaboration with CRG, Spain), cing (NGS) panel for HL, consisting of 79 known genes for all nonsyndromic WES data are now available to identify population disease-specific rare sensorineural forms HL and Usher-, Stickler- and Jervell en Lange-Nielsen variants. In vitro and in vivo functional studies will be carried out in the syndrome. 114 patients with presumed autosomal recessive nonsyndromic future to confirm the role of the whole list of genes/variants identified HL and ten patients with autosomal dominant nonsyndromic HL were ana- through the above-described phases. Up-to-date results will be presented lyzed using this panel. Target enrichment and sequencing was performed and discussed. using the Illumina TruSeq Custom Enrichment and HiSeq2000. In total 307 
P02 .11-S variants were identified in the 124 different patients. In order to deal with Targeted exome sequencing method identified Myo15A gene the large amount of variants, a classification system was set up to assign the mutations as a frequent cause of non syndromic autosomal recessive most plausible disease causing variant to each patient. Variants with a MAF hearing loss in Iran A. Bushehri1, M. Babanejad1, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, K. Kahrizi1, R. J. H. Smith2, H. below 0.003 were classified according to the variant type and predictions Najmabadi1; based on different prediction programs, in five groups ranging from defi- 1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, nitely pathogenic (class 5) to not pathogenic/no clinical significance (class Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology & Renal Research 1) at all. Approximately 3.7% of the patients had variants in two or more Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Iowa, IA, United groups. In addition there was one patient with two variants in class four. States. The current diagnostic setting is likely to be less reliable than generally as- sumed. In addition, our study shows that a straightforward, reliable and a validated classification system is necessary to use targeted resequencing in Human MYO15A is located on chromosome 17p11.2 and encodes unconven- the diagnostics of hearing loss in the future. 
P02 .14-M tional myosin XV, which is critical for the formation of stereocilia. Mutations Molecular diagnosis of Italian patients affected by hereditary Retinal of MYO15A are associated with profound autosomal recessive nonsyndro- Dystrophies, using targeted high-throughput sequencing mic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in humans, and with deafness and circling beha- S. Palchetti1, I. Passerini1, A. Mariottini1, C. Pescucci1, G. Marseglia1, L. Berti1, M. Benelli1, vior in Shaker-2 mice. To date, more than 50 mutations have been reported E. Contini1, A. Sodi2, F. Marin1, V. Murro2, U. Menchini2, F. Torricelli1; in MYO15Amost of which have been found by linkage analysis in consan- 1AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy, 2Eye Clinic, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. guineous families from countries like Pakistan, Turkey, Iranand India. In present study, we used targeted genomic enrichment and massively parallel sequencing to identify the cause of ARNSHL in probands from 94 Hereditary Retinal Dystrophies (RD) represent one of the most frequent ge- families segregating recessive deafness. In eight probands, we identified netic causes of blindness in the Western world. Because of their high clinical MYO15A mutations as the cause of ARNSHL. Of the eight mutations, 6 were and genetic heterogeneity, an exhaustive classification of RD is difficult. The present in the homozygous state, 2 in compound heterozygous state and of progressive forms may have an onset in early childhood, as Leber congenital them 7 were novel. This study implicates MYO15A as an extremely impor- amaurosis, or later in life, as Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP). There are also de- tant cause of ARNSHL in Iran. With a mutation frequency of 8.5% in our scribed many syndromic forms, as Usher syndrome (USH), and Bardet-Biedl cohort,MYO15A mutations are the most frequent cause of ARNSHL after syndrome (BBS). GJB2 mutations. 
P02 .12-M RD can be inherited as autosomal recessive (ar) or autosomal dominant Whole exome sequencing identifies new causative mutations in (ad), as well as X-linked (xl), or mitochondrial traits. Nevertheless, the ma- Tunisian families with non-syndromic deafness jority of cases are sporadic. Z. Riahi1,2, C. Bonnet3, R. Zainine4, M. Louha5, Y. Bouyacoub1, N. Laroussi1,2, M. Chargui1, In this study, we analyzed 115 retinopathies-related genes by targeted next- R. Kefi1, L. Jonard5, I. Dorboz6, J. Hardelin7, S. Belhaj Salah4, J. Levilliers7, D. Weil7, K. generation sequencing (NGS) in a cohort of 78 patient with sporadic RP, 10 McElreavey8, O. Tanguy Boespflug6, G. Besbes4, S. Abdelhak1, C. Petit7,3; patients with USH and 10 patients with BBS. 1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Laboratoire de Génomique Biomédicale et Oncogénétique, Sequence target enrichment was performed using SureSelect XT kit (Agi- Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculté des Sciences de Tunis,, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Institut de la vision, INSERM UMRS 1120, Paris, France, 4Service d’ORL et de Chirurgie Maxillo-faciale, lent). Sequencing of each library was carried out on HiScanSQ Illumina plat- CHU La Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Centre de référence des Surdités Génétiques, Hôpital form (mean coverage 500X). Trousseau, Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Paris,, Paris, France, 6Institut National de We obtained a detection rate of 100% for BBS patients, 80% for USH pati- la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U931, 63001 Clermont Ferrand, Paris, ents, and 69% for RP patients. The candidate variants were independently France, 7Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique et Physiologie de l’Audition, Paris, France, validated by Sanger sequencing and segregation analysis was performed. 8Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique du développement humain, Paris, France. Were also identified 3 large deletions in the genes EYS, RPGR and USH2A, using method CONTRA and confirmed by MLPA. 78 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, TIT hA is L sY tu d| yW coW nfiW rm. sE tS hH at G NG.O S-R baG sed mutation analyses are reliable and cost-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Methods: efficient approaches in molecular diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous high throughput molecular diagnosis system can be very helpful in clinical diseases like RD. NGS allows also a considerable reduction of costs and an diagnosis and essential in gene therapy in the future. We deve- early intervention for diseases for which there are available appropriate loped a panel based on next generation sequencing (NGS) that captures therapeutic strategies. the exons of 283 inherited eye disease genes, which includes 58 known RP 
P02 .15-S disease-causing genes. We applied 180 samples in this panel, 64 of thResee- Identification of three novel homozygous variants in the GJB2 gene in ssaumltsp:les are previous tested by Sanger sequencing, and 99 of the se samples Mexican patients with hereditary sensorineural hearing loss M. MIrna1, M. Rivera-Vega1, F. Loeza-Becerra1, L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, H. Urueta-Cuellar1, are unselected patients with clinical diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa. P. Berruecos2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias1; We presented data on our first 99 probands with RP withsystematic 1Genetica, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional evaluation of our method and comprehensive molecular diagnosis. 96.85% Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Audiologia y Foniatria, Facultad de Medicina, of each targeted regions in 4,381 exons covered by at least 20 folds. In the Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., 99 RP patients, 66.7% molecular diagnosis rate for RP disease was achieved, Mexico. while in 5 patients, molecular diagnosis were not consistent with their initi- al clinical diagnosis. We revisCitoendc tlhuessieo n5s p: atients and reclassified the clini- cal diagnosis of them. In addition, altogether 3 patients were found to carry Background: Hereditary sensorineural hearing impairment (HSHI) is a ge- copy number variant (CNV). We have systemic evaluated and netically heterogeneous disorder worldwide. Mutations in the GJB2 gene compared our method with Sanger sequencing, and have identified a large are a frequent cause of hereditary SNHL. Individuals that are homozygous number of novel mutations. The results show that our method is sufficiently for the GJB2 gene mutations manifest a wide spectrum of clinical data that accurate for molecular diagnosis, and suggest the importance of molecular ranges from moderate to profound SNHL; this suggests the participation of diagnosis in clinical diagnosis. 
P02 .18-M epigenetic and environmental factors in the phenotypic expression Objec- An integrated next-generation sequencing approach identifies tive: To describe three novel homozygous mutations in the GJB2 gene with causative mutations in a family with syndromic and non-syndromic HSHI. Materials and methods: Three subjects with prelingual HSHI were in- retinitis pigmentosa cluded in the study. Genomic DNA was extracted by conventional methods C. Méndez-Vidal1,2, N. Bravo-Gil1,2, M. González-del Pozo1,2, A. Vela-Boza3, J. Pérez- and all exons of GJB2 gene were analyzed through PCR and the DNA was Florido3, J. Santoyo-López3, S. Borrego1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2,3; sequenced on an ABI 3730XL automated sequencer. Results DNA sequen- 1Department of Genetics, Reproduction and Fetal Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine of cing analysis showed three novel homozygous mutation in the GJB2 gene Seville, Virgen del Rocio University Hospital/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Spain, that corresponded to p.V84M/p.F31I/p.W44X; /p.V84M/p.F31I/p.R32S 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Seville, and p.
E47 X/p.R32S/p.
S19 R. Parents were tested for this molecular defect Spain, 3Genomics and Bioinformatics Platform of Andalusia (GBPA), Seville, Spain. and they present an heterozygous state that allows to confirm the recessive inheritance pattern. These mutations were searching in 100 normal con- trols to discard a possible polymorphism. Conclusion: We describe three Routine molecular testing of Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRD) generally novel varieties of homozygous mutations in patients with HSHI. All patients involves mutational screening of hundreds of clinically relevant IRD genes. presented profound hypoacusia with no other anomalies. These data show Comprehensive analysis with available techniques has been challenging due that the genesis of HSHI is complex and that the genetic defects are greater to the extensive clinical and genetic heterogeneity present in this group of than expected. disorders. Here, we describe the clinical application of an integrated next-ge- 
P02 .16-M neration sequencing approach to determine the underlying genetic defects Regional distribution of the GJB2/GJB6 gene mutations in Mexican in a Spanish family with a provisional clinical diagnosis of autosomal reces- population with hereditary hearing impairment F. LOeza-Becerra1, M. Refugio-Rivera1, M. Martinez-Saucedo1, L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, H. sBiBveS 1Retinitis Pigmentosa (arRP). Exome sequencing of the index patient and Urueta-Cuellar1, P. Berruecos2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias1; immediate family members resulted in the identification of the homozygous 1Genetica, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional p.M390R mutation. Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of this Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Audiologia y Foniatria, Facultad de Medicina, variant in this family branch but did not segregate in extended BfaBm
S1 ily mem- Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., bers. Clinical reanalysis showed co-ocurrence of two different phenotypes in Mexico. this family: Bardet-Biedl syndrome in the family harboring the mutati- on and non-syndromic arRP in the extended family members with unknown causal genetic defects. To identify possible causative mutations in the arRP Background: Hereditary sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is a genetically family branch, we applied targeted resequencing on 26 IRD genes in one of heterogeneous disorder worldwide. Mutations in the GJB2 gene are a fre- the affected members using the 454 GS Junior system. The in-house custom quent cause of hereditary SNHL. There is a prevalence of certain mutati- panel was valiRdPat1ed using 18 DNA samples known to harbor mutations in ons in various populations which suggests that specific mutations may be relevant genes and allowed us to reliably identify two novel heterozygous influenced by ethnic background. Objective: To analyze the prevalence of mutations in (c.5962dupA; p.I1988Nfs*3 and c.4582_4585delATCA; GJB2, GJB6 mutations in several geographic areas of Mexico in patients with p.I1528Vfs*10) as the most likely disease-causing variants in these arRP pa- hereditary SNHL. Materials and methods: One hundred and forty Mexican tients. Taken together, these results demonstrate the value of this combined unrelated propositi with prelingual SNHL were included in the study. All pa- next-generation sequencing-based approach as an efficient screening and tients had three previous generations born in Mexico and belonged to no diagnostic tool for complex genetic disorders. 
P02 .19-S specific ethnic group. Analyses of the GJB2 and GJB6 genes and mt.A1555G Partial NMNAT1 deletions cause Leber Congenital Amaurosis were performed in all subjects. Results Twenty three homozygous mutati- F. Coppieters1, T. Fujimaki2, M. De Bruyne1, A. Baert1, M. Kondo3, A. Murakami2, E. De ons, 57 heterozygous mutations, 1 double heterozygous (GJB2/GJB6) and Baere1; 59 wild-type genotypes in the GJB2 gene were observed. Three patients had 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department the homozygous del35 mutation whereas 26 patients were heterozygous for of Ophthalmology, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, this gene defect. Only one patient with the GJB6 gene deletion was present 3Department of Ophthalmology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Mie, Japan. (it includes the double heterozygous GJB2/GJB6). The mt.A1555G mutation NMNAT1 was not detected. Conclusion: We found a great variety of mutations depen- ding on the analyzed region in patients with SNHL; 57.86% of patients had In 2012, was identified as a novel disease gene for Leber Congeni- affection in one or two alleles in GJB2 or GJB6 genes whereas 42.14% were tal AmaNurMoNsiAsT. T1he mutation spectrum contains both coding and regulatory wild-type. In some cases, allele distribution depended on region. Molecular mutations. The starting point of this study was pseudohomozygosity of a studies of more genes involved in hereditary non-syndromic SNHL are re- known NMNAT 1mutation (p.Arg237Cys, exon 5) in two unrelated Japanese quired to completely confirm the molecular basis of hearing loss in Mexican families (F1 and F2), assuming hemizygosity. Here, we aimed to identify the p Po 0p 2u .1la 7t -i Son. putative deletions. Panel base on next-generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of Copy number variation (CNV) screening was performed for all exons using inherited heterogeneous eye diseases qPCR. Subsequently, identified deletions were refined with additional qPCR M. Qi, H. Huang, X. Yi, Y. Chen; amplicons located in the breakpoint regions. Finally, the junction product BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. was amplified with long-range PCR and sequenced (Nextera XT, MiSeq, Il- Background: lumina). In F1, CNV analysis showed a heterozygous deletion of exon 4 and 5, which Inherited eye diseases are a leading cause of blindness in was subsequently refined to a region of 13.0-18.7 kb. In F2, the amplicon children and adults, a typical monogenic disease of which is retinitis pig- for exon 4 was deleted, whereas the copy number for exon 5, located down- mentosa (RP) that cause visual impairmeE nS t. H AG n a2 cc0 u1 ra4 te | , M ecoI nL iA mN ica, lI , T aA ndL Y | s W treW amW of. tE hS e H p.AG r. gO 23R 7G Cys mutation, was normal. Subsequent refineme7nt9 atABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P02 .22-M Propensity for localized provoked vulvodynia by TRPV1 and NGF the 5’end delineated the deletion to a region of 1.5-6.7 kb. Long-range PCR polymorphisms revealed a band of 2.4 kb and 2.1 kb in F1 and F2, pointing to two different T. C. Falik-Zaccai1,2, L. Kalfon1, A. Azran1, Y. Farajun1, O. Hemo1, E. Tubin1, L. Abramov3, A. deletions of approximately 16.6 kb and 4.8 kbN, rMesNpAeTc1tively. Sequencing ana- Yeshaya4, J. Bornstein1,2; lysis of the junction products is currently ongoing. 1Western Galilee Medical Center-Naharia, Naharia, Israel, 2The Galilee Faculty of In conclusion, we report the first deletions in , expanding the muta- Medicine, Bar Ilan University, Safed, Israel, 3Lis Women‘s Hospital, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4Shnaider Women‘s Hospital, Beilinson Medical Center, Petah-Tikva, Israel. tion spectrum of this gene. Hence, we presume that the high number of pa- tients in which only a single heterozygous mutation could be identified, can be explained by structural variations, requiring additional strategies apart from resequencing of the coding region. Localized provoked Vulvodynia (LPV) is a prevalent chronic pain condition. 
P02 .20-M Familial occurrence (FO) suggests genetic susceptibility in its etiology. We Prevalence and mutation analysis of NMNAT1 gene in Leber Congenital studied possible associationTsR PbVet1ween LPV in 70 affected wNoGmFen anhde speavrean- Amaurosis in Spanish population Sniansgele Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes Transient Receptor R. Sanchez-Alcudia1, S. Tatu1, F. Blanco-Kelly1, N. Reyes1, M. Lopez-Molina2, R. Perez- Potential Vanilloid type-1 ( ), Nerve Growth Factor ( ) and Carro1, A. Avila-Fernandez1, M. Corton1, C. Ayuso1; , hypothesized to be involved in the pathophysiology of LPV. Prevalence 1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Ophthalmology, IIS-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz of SNPs was compared between women with severe primary LPV and 132 University Hospital, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain. healthy, ethnically matched controls. Women participating in the study have answered a detailed questionnaire, addressing possible FO of LPV and co- morbid paTiMn conditions. TRPV1 Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the most severe blinding retinal dys- SNaPshot genotyping revealed a novel staNtiGstFi,cally significant high trophy that represents near 5% of cases. At the moment 20 genes have been prevalence of non-synonymous polymorphism rs222747 of and associated to this disease, more of them expressed in the photoreceptors rs11102930 located in the promoter region of , in women with LPV, or NinM tNheA Tr1etinal pigment epithelium, explaining around 70% of LCA cases. especially those from Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry compared to the control The ubiquitous gene encoding nicotinamide nNucMleNoAtTid1e adenylyltransferase group. Logistic regression model for rs222747 and rs11102930 frequent 1 ( ) was recently associated to this pathology using exome sequen- alleles indicates significant risk for LPV in all affected women and Ashkena- cing. The aim of this work was to screen the gene in our Spanish zi Jewish group, respectively. Significant higher rate of FO of LPV, Temporo cohort of uncharacterized LCA families. We were selected a total of 96 LCA mandibular joint (TMJ) symptoms, recurrent vaginitis and irritable bowel families previously screened for known mutations to cause LCAN uMsNinAgT 1a syndrome was found in affected women compared to h eTaRltPhVy1 controls.Ad commercial genotyping chip with negative results. Index cases of these fa- hoc analysis compared pain conditions with frequent alleles among the 202 mNMiliNeAs Tw1ere analyzed by direct Sanger sequencing of the coding women studied. Interestingly, rs222747 minor allele of was found sequence. This screening allowed us to identify five novel mutations in the in association with women presenting TMJ and women with recurrent va- gene and to characterize 6 of the 96 total families (6.25%), car- ginitis, suggesting a possible common genetic predisposition to pain co- rying all of them compound heterozygous mutations. As described in other morbidities. These data open a new horizon for understanding the patho- populations, the p.
E257 K variation which was not found in any of the 176 physiology of LPV and might lead to the development of new personalized Spanish controls tested, is the most frequent variation. Five additional fami- t Ph 0e 2ra .2p 3e -u Stic modalities. lies were found to carry the p.
E257 K common variation in heterozygosity Genetic Disorder with Diverse Modes of Inheritance Implicates with no other apparently change in the second allele. In order to fully cha- Sporadic Form of Mild to Moderate Sensorineural Hearing Loss in a racterized these families other studies (RNA expression in peripheral total Pediatric Population blood and lymphoblast cell line, intronic sequencing and others) should be N. K. D. Kim1, K. Park2,3, A. Kim2, S. Kim2, M. Kim4, S. Oh2, J. Joung1, W. Park5,6, B. Choi4; performed. 1Translational Bioinformatics Laboratory, Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical 
P02 .21-S Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul National University Mutation hotspot sequencing reveals RP
E65  as the most frequently Hospital, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Seoul mutated LCA gene in Denmark ENT clinic, Gimhae, Korea, Republic of, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Seoul G. D. N. Astuti1,2,3, M. Bertelsen4,5,6, R. W. J. Collin1,2, T. Rosenberg4,6, S. M. H. Faradz3, F. P. National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea, Republic of, 5Translational M. Cremers1,2; Genomics Laboratory, Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Korea, Republic of, 6Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University Netherlands, 2Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Division of Human Genetics, Center for Biomedical Research, Faculty of Medicine, Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia, 4National Eye Clinic for the Visually Impaired, Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, 5Department of Ophthalmology, Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 6Faculty of Health and Medical arNSHL (autosomal recessive Nonsyndromic Hearing Loss), the most fre- Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. quent mode of hereditary hearing impairment, is typically severe or pro- found. In contrast with severe or profound hearing loss of which genetic etiologies have been intensively investigated, relatively less attention into mild to moderate hearing loss has been paid. This study was designed to de- lineate genetic contributions, if any, to moderate hearing loss in a pediatric population using the next generation sequencing technologies. We perfor- Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) represents the most severe and earliest med whole exome sequencing (WES) for 12 unrelated children with mode- onset form of inherited retinal dystrophies, and affects 1 per 50,000 indivi- rate degree of hearing loss. Hearing loss from 11 of 12 probands was spora- duals worldwide. Presently, mutations in twenty genes with diverse roles in dic. We perdfoer nmoevdo bioinformatic analyses of the WES data and selected the the retina are known to be associated with LCA. The large number of LCA candidate variants compatible with either autosomal recessive inheritance genes necessitates a systematic genotyping approach in a cost- and time- pattern or autosomal dominant pattern. Strong candidate variants effective manner. Previous studCiEesP 2in9 0LCA have described some recurrent were detected in 6 (50%) of 12 probands, suggesting a strong genetic con- mutationsA IaPnLd1 mutational hotspots in particular GeUxoCnYs2 Do f LCA-associated tribution to moderate degree of hearing loss in a pediatric population. Di- genes, i.e. an intronic variant in (c.2991+
C1 R65B51A>G), a nonsense mu- verse mode of inOhTeOrGitLa,nce p SaEttRePrInN wB6as observed in this disease population tation in (p.W278*), a missense changReP iEn6 5 LRA(pT. R768W), and unlike in severe to profound hearing loss. Compound heterozygotes from various mutations clustering in exons 7 and 9 of . As gene-specific the- rapies are emerging, identifying mutationRs PinE 65 aLnRdA T can also be of deafness genes, GPR98 andPDZ7. were detected. One proband segrega- tremendous importance for patients. Sanger sequencing of these mutation ted moderate degree of hearing loss adse a n doivgoenic inheritanceM inYvHo1lv4inMg YtOw7o deafPn2eRssX 2genes, and In addition, strong candidates from ano- hotspots, and all protein-coding exons of and in 64 Danish LCA ther three subjects were selected as a mutation from , , probands revealed one or two variants in 2R2P (
E3645 %) cases. Upon the identi- and , respectively. This study, for the first time in the literature reveals fication of heterozygous variants, Sanger sequencing was performed in the a strong genetic contribution to sporadic forms of moderate hearing loss in relevant genes to identify the seconcdi sa-llele, was shown to be theR PmEo6s5t a pediatric population. frequently mutated gene in Denmark (20% vs. 8% in other Caucasian po- pulations). This is important as 9- retinoid supplementation and gene augmentation therapies have been developed. 80 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P02 .24-M Identification of genes and related mutations in 10 Iranian families with non-syndromic autosomal recessive hearing loss by whole next-generation sequencing (NGS) should be the right solution. exome sequencing In our pilot study 5 samples with familial incidence of autosomal dominant M. Babanejad1, M. Akbari2, H. Najmabadi1, K. Kahrizi1; or recessive non-syndromic hearing loss without causal mutations in GJB2 1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, gene were analyzed. The NGS was performed on IonTorrent PGM with use of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Women’s College Research Institute, Women‘s College customized Haloplex assay covering coding sequence of 32 most frequently Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. mutated NSHL associated genes. In 3 of 5 cases candidate causal mutations were identified and its presence was verified with Sanger sequencing. The detected mutations were p.H455Q With prevalence figures close to 0.2% at birth, hearing loss (HL) is the most in KCNQ4, p.G662E in MYO1A and p.T1866M in TECTA. frequent sensory impairment in childhood. In developed countries, genetic According to our results the multiparallel resequencing of panel of NSHL causes account for more than 60% of congenital HL, most often resulting in candidate genes could significantly improve genetic diagnosis of this geneti- non-syndromic deafness, which is usually autosomal recessive. caly heterogeneous hereditary disease. Nevertheless, the lack of information Hereditary nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL) in Iran is highly heteroge- about functional consequencies of low frequency variants could complicate neous, and more than 50% of patients with a presumed genetic etiology lack the variant validation process and lead to false positive results. a specific molecular diagnosis with STR analysis. Whole-exome sequencing This study was supported by grant ITMS 26240220067 funded by ERDF. 
P02 .27-S (WES) has recently opened a new page in Mendelian disease gene discovery Evidence for genetic linkage of a North Carolina-like macular - enabling to study autosomal recessive HL in a new way. dystrophy phenotype in association with digit anomalies to The aim of this study is to find more causative genes and their mutations for chromosome 5p15.32 or 9p24.1 NSARHL in Iranian families by WES. After ruling out any association to pre- V. Cipriani1,2, A. Kalhoro1,2, S. Defoort-Dhellemmes3, G. Arno1, M. Michaelides1,2, A. valent genes for NSARHL in Iran, ten families will be subjected to WES. Webster1,2, V. Plagnol4, A. Moore1,2, B. Puech3; Until now, WES has been performed with genomic DNA from affected indi- 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Moorfields Eye Hospital, viduals of two consanguineous families with profound deafness. Analysis of London, United Kingdom, 3Service d’Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-Ophtalmologie, these data revealed a novel homozygous mutation in MYO7A gene in one Hôpital Roger Salengro, Lille Cedex, France, 4UCL Genetics Institute, London, United family but co-segregation study failed to confirm this variant as the only Kingdom. cause of HL in this family. Additional clinical investigation revealed that an intra-familial phenotypic variation and existence of both syndromic and non-syndromic HL in this family is possible. Further studies to find the other Introduction: Developmental macular disorders are a rare cause of visual variants which may be associated with HL in this family, the data analysis of impairment in children, but identifying the causative genes will help un- the second family and also WES of remaining families are underway. derstand the biological pathways involved in human macular development. 
P02 .25-S One such disorder is North Carolina macular dystrophy (NCMD), an auto- Nonsyndromic hearing loss in Moravia: one fifth due to GJB2, no somal dominant fully penetrant developmental macular dystrophy. NCMD mutations in SERPINB6, TMIE, COCH, ACTG1, KCNQ4, GJB3 has been mapped to chromosome 6q16 (MCDR1) and NCMD-like disorder P. Tvrda1, P. Plevova1, P. Turska1, B. Kantorova1, E. Mrazkova2, D. Grecmalova1, A. Gregorova1, A. Hladikova1, E. Silhanova1, N. Dvorackova1; has been mapped to chromosome 5p13.1-5p15.33 (MCDR3). To date, the 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, genes underlying NCMD are unknown. The case of a British family affected 2Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of by a dominant macular dystrophy resembling NCMD in association with Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. digit anomalies was presented by A. Sorsby in 1935. We present a second GJB2 unrelated family of French origin affected by the same phenotype and re- port the results of genetic linkage studies in both families. Methods: Fifteen gene mutations are the most frequent cause of nonsyndromic hearing members of the two families, including 11 affected, were genotyped using loss. There are many other genes less frequently causing this disorGdJeBr2. The the Affymetrix 250K Sty array (238,304 single nucleotide polymorphis- aim of our study was to look for other genes mutated in Moravian popula- ms). Parametric linkage analysis under a dominant model with complete tion of patients with deafness. We have performed sequencing of co- penetrance was performed. Results: Linkage analysis identified two loci at ding region on AGBJBI32130 and Δ(GJB6-D13
S1830 ) detection using PCR and 5p15.32 and 9p24.1 with LOD score of 2.7. Given the involvement of other gel electrophoresis in 142 patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss. GBJiBal2- ADAMTS proteins in several different ocular phenotypes, all exons of gene lelic pathogenic mutations were found in 31 patients (22%) thus ex- ADAMT
S16  (5p15.32) were sequenced in affected individuals and no muta- SpElaRinPiInNgB t6h, eTiMr IhEe, aCrOinCgH d, EeSfePcNt., AInC T9G p1a, tKiCenNtQs 4( 6%) GoJnBl3y gone pathogenic tions were found. Discussion: The linkage overlap with the MCDR3 locus on mutation was found. No patient carried Δ(GJB6-D13
S1830 ).G SJeBq2u encing of 5p might indicate allelism or more likely the presence of mutations in two and SERePnINesB w6,a Ts MpeIErf, oCrOmCeHd, different adjacent developmental genes. Exome sequencing is undergoing oAnC TAGB1I,3 K1
C3 N0Q in4 13, 1 3G,J B133 , 30, 20, 14E aSnPdN 30 patients without mutation, a Pn 0d .e 2x 8p -e Mcted to shed light on the genetic basis of this disorder. 2 respectively. No pathogenic mutation was found in Identification of novel NSHL-causing mutations by whole exome and genes. In gene, two variants with unknown sequencing pathogenicity were found in two unrelated patients: c.337C>T, p.Arg113Cys M. Robusto1, C. Chiereghin1, R. Asselta1, P. Castorina2, S. Caccia1, E. Benzoni3, M. Seia3, U. (Polyphen score 1.00) and c.1797_1808delCCCACCGCECSGPCNC, p.Pro600_ Ambrosetti2, S. Duga1, G. Soldà1; Pro603del. Both variants were inherited from parents without hearing loss. 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli We cannot exclude big genomic deletion/duplication of gene on the Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università other allele in the patients. There may also be bigenWicH mRNec hanism of hearing degli Studi di Milano and Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, loss pathogenesis. So far, however, we cannoEt ScPoNn clude that these variants UO Audiologia, Milan, Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Molecular Genetic Sector, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. are causal in our patients. We are going to analyze gene encoding the whirlin protein, functionally associated with gene product espin. 
P02 .26-M Comprehensive genetic diagnosis of non-syndromic hereditary Inherited nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL) is characterized hearing loss by targeted resequencing of 32 genes with use of by a high level of genetic heterogeneity, making extremely challenging to Haloplex design and IonTorrent PGM sequencer obtain a molecular diagnosis with traditional screening methods. Whole E. Nagyova1, D. Dvorska1, T. Szemes1,2, L. Kadasi1,3, G. Minarik4,1,2; exome sequencing (WES) has been recently introduced as an alternative 1Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Natural approach to search for alleles underlying Mendelian disorders and has been Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Institute successfully applied for gene/mutation discovery. In this study, we used WES of Molecular BioMedicine, Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Medicine, to identify the pathogenic mutations responsible for NSHL in three families Bratislava, Slovakia. (NSH
L6 , 11, and 12), with a recessive inheritance pattern and at least two affected siblings. A total of 9 individuals were subjected to WES using the SeqCapEZ Exome capture kit (Roche) and the HiSeq 2000 sequencer (Illumi- Non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) is one of the most common hereditary na). In particular, the NSH
L6  patients were compound heterozygous for two diseases with incidence higher than 1:1000. It is characterized by high gene- novel mutations within the TMPRS
S3  gene (DFNB8/10 locus). Both variants tic heterogeneity as causal mutations in more than 70 genes were found to segregate with post-lingual, bilateral, high-frequency NSHL and affect evo- be associated with it. Altough mutations in single gene - GJB2, are the most lutionary conserved amino acids located within the TMPRS
S3  catalytic do- prevalent worldwide in remaining cases screening for causal mutation will main. In the NSH
L11  family, two novel missense variants were found in the be expensive and time consuming by conventional gene by gene approach. heterozygous state in OTOGL, a gene that was only recently associated with Therefore simultaneous sequencing of mEuSltiHplGe g2e0ne1s4 w |i tMh IuLtiAlizNat,i oITn AoLf Y |N WSHWL (Woto.EgeSlHin-Glik.Oe pRrGotein, DFNB84 locus). Finally, in the consanguine8o1usABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index NSH
L12  pedigree, WES coupled with homozygosity mapping analysis poin- and by progressive hearing loss in both genders. Recently, mutations in four ted out a known missense variant (rs74315438) in the CLDN14 (DFNB29 genes (i.e. HSD17B4, HAR
S2 , CLPP, and LAR
S2 ) were found to be responsib- locus) gene, coding for the claudin 14 protein. In conclusion, we provide evi- le for PRLTS, although they do not account for all cases of this genetically dence of the usefulness of WES for the diagnosis of NSHL and increase the heterogeneous condition. knowledge on the genetic defects underlying this disease. This study was In this study, we used whole-exome sequencing (WES) to identify the patho- supported by: Italian Telethon Foundation (grant#GG
P11177 ) and Fonda- genic variants responsible for PRLTS in an Italian pedigree with two affected zione Cariplo, grant N°2013-0825. siblings (one female and one male). All five family members were subjected 
P02 .29-S to WES using the SeqCapEZ Exome v2 kit (Roche) and the HiSeq2000 plat- Phenotypic and genotypic variability of Pendred syndrome R. Birkenhäger, S. Arndt, W. Maier, E. Löhle, A. Aschendorff, R. Laszig; form (Illumina). Data analysis highlighted compound heterozygosity, in both Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center patients, for two novel missense variations, p.Thr300Met (c.899C>T) and Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. p.Glu638Lys (c.1912G>A) within LAR
S2 , encoding the mitochondrial leucyl- tRNA synthetase,. The segregation of the two mutations in the pedigree is compatible with the autosomal recessive inheritance of the disease. Both Pendred Syndrome (PDS) is an autosomal-recessive disorder characterized Thr300 and Glu638 residues are evolutionary conserved, and are respec- by progressive sensorineural hearing impairment and goiter. PDS is asso- tively located within the editing domain and immediately before the KMSKS ciated with temporal bone abnormalities ranging from isolated enlargement sequence, a unique signature of the catalytic domain of class 1 aminoacyl- of the vestibular aqueduct (EVA) to Mondini dysplasia. Hearing loss is pre- tRNA synthetases. The identified mutations were confirmed to be absent in lingual in the majority of the cases; a minority of patients has a progressive an in-house database of about 3500 ethnically-matched control exomes. hearing loss later in life. Apart from the original report in 2013, to our knowledge, this is the first EVA and PDS are caused by mutations in the SL
C26 A4 gene. The SL
C26 A4 study confirming the role of LAR
S2  mutations in PRLTS pathogenesis. gene is expressed in the non-sensory epithelia of the inner ear. Additionally This study was supported by: Italian Telethon Foundation (grant#GG
P11177 ) the genes FOXI1 and KCNJ10 may also be responsible for PDS and inner ear a Pn 0d 2 .F 3o 2n -d Mazione Cariplo, grant N°2013-0825. malformations. The FOXI1 gene is involved in the transcriptional control of Whole exome sequencing in a multiplex family case of Plateau Iris the SL
C26 A4 gene. The KCNJ10 gene encodes for a K+-channel located in Syndrome the stria vascularis. In this study we analysed 167 patients with PDS and S. Mercier1,2,3, S. Küry4,3, H. Bresson-Dumont5, Y. Péréon6, X. Zanlonghi5, S. Bézieau4; EVA hearing loss to accomplish a phenotype genotype correlations for PDS 1CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Unité de Génétique Clinique, Centre de related deafness. Référence Anomalies de Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’interrégion Individual exon and intron transitions of the SL
C26 A4, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 Grand-Ouest, 9 quai Moncousu, 44093 Nantes CEDEX 1, France, Nantes, France, genes of patients were sequenced. Audiometric thresholds were performed, 2INSERM UMR1089, Atlantic Gene Therapy Institute, University of Nantes, Nantes, France, Nantes, France, 3These authors contributed equally to this work, Nantes, France, and radiologically, the vestibular aqueduct midpoint and opercular width 4CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, 9 quai Moncousu, 44093 Nantes CEDEX were measured. 1, France, Nantes, France, 5Service Exploration Fonctionnelle de la Vision de la Clinique In the analysed patients with PDS, a total of 34 different SC
L26 A4 mutations Sourdille, 3 place Anatole France, 44000 Nantes, Nantes, France, 6CHU Nantes, Service were detected, mutations could not be detected in 64 % of the cases. FOXI1 des Explorations fonctionnelles, Centre de référence des maladies neuromusculaires, 9 and KCNJ10 analyses reveal no mutation. quai Moncousu, 44093 Nantes CEDEX 1, France, Nantes, France. The present results obtained in patients with PDS indicate that this pheno- type is likely to be complex. Moreover, analysis of FOXI1 and KCNJ10 genes in our cohort suggests a minor implication of these two genes in the pheno- Plateau iris configuration (PIC) is a unique subtype of angle-closure glauco- type of EVA and PDS. mas presenting in younger patients. PIC has been recognised as one of the 
P02 .30-M anatomical mechanisms of angle closure development along with papillary The 965insA in SL
C26 A4 gene is a founder mutation in Azeri families block. The diagnosis is always based on gonioscopic and ultrasound biomi- from western Iran M. Mohseni, B. Davarnia, M. Babanejad, N. Nikzat, K. Kahrizi, H. Najmabadi; croscopy (UBM) findings. PIC-associated anterior chamber characteristics Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, include a normal central anterior chamber depth (ACD), a flat iris plane, an Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. iris root that angles sharply forward, and anteriorly positioned or large ci- Background: SL
C26 A4 liary processes. Peripheral iridotomy is proposed as a treatment. Post-irido- tomy complications, such as persistent angle narrowing or occlusion with Mutations in the gene cause both Pendred syndro- intraocular pressure elevation, give rise to the plateau iris syndrome (PIS). me [sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL), enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), An autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance with incomplete penetrance and goiter] and autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) was proposed by Etter et al. in 2006 because of a higher prevalence of PIC aMt attheer iDaFlsN/B
P4 a tlioecnutss. aPnendd Mreedt hsoynddsr:ome is the most common type of syn- in first-degree family members. To our knowledge, no familial case has been dromic HL. reported to date. We performed comprehensive clinical Here we described a multiplex family of seven affected members in two ge- and genetic evSaLlCu2a6tiAo4ns of 15 patients from four unrelated families froSLm- nerations. Two members have PIC and five have PIS with early-onset and se- tCh2e6 AA4rdebil Province in western Iran. After testing STR markers to confirm vere prognosis for some of them. Whole-exome sequencing was performed linkage to the locus, we sought to identify genetic mutations in in five of the cases. Among the about 50 candidate variants left after filtering Result sb y aSnadn geCro snecqluuesniocninsg: all 21 exons, exon-intron boundaries and the out by segregation, frequency and pathogenicity, the four more relevant promoter region of this gene. ones -according to their function- were validated by Sanger sequencing in A known frameshift mutation (965insA, the two remaining affected members. Further experimental investigations p.N322Fs7X) in exon 8 was identified in all four families. Three families and/or sequencing of additional families with a similar phenotype are nee- were homozygous for this mutation and one family was compound hetero- d Pe 0d 2 .t 3o 3 h -i Sghlight the causative gene. zygote (
L597 S/965insA). To date, this mutation has been reported only in Two Tumor Necrosis Factor promoter polymorphisms in Romanian the Iranian population, so weS LinCv2e6sAti4g ated the possibility of a founder effect. patients with Primary Open Angle Glaucoma Results from a pilot- Haplotypes were constructed by genotyping seven single nucleotide poly- study morphisms throughout the gene, thus identifying a single haplo- R. Simionescu1,2, R. Caisan3, L. Voinea2, A. Popa Cherecheanu2, C. Bara2, R. Sfrent- type that co-segregated with the 965insA mutation. We conclude that this Cornateanu2; mutation originates from a common founder in the west province of Iran. 1OCULUS, Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
P02 .31-S Bucharest, Romania, 3National Hematology Institute prof C.T. Nicolau, Bucharest, Identification by whole-exome sequencing of two novel LAR
S2  Romania. mutations in an Italian family with Perrault syndrome G. Soldà1, M. Robusto1, P. Castorina2, U. Ambrosetti2, R. Asselta1, S. Duga1; 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università degli Glaucoma is a complex group of optic neuropathies, characterized by the Studi di Milano and Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, UO degeneration of the optic nerve, eventually leading to blindness. Primary Audiologia, Milan, Italy. Open Angle Glaucoma (POAG) is the most common form of disease, affec- ting 8 million people. The risk factors for POAG include genetic background. TNF-alpha polymorphisms were studied in different populations regarding Perrault syndrome (PRLTS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characte- their influence on susceptibility of POAG. ri8ze2d by ovarian dysgenesis and premature ovarianE faSilHurGe ( 2PO0F1)4 in | f eMmIaLleAs,N , WITeA aLimYe |d W to WinvWes.tEigSatHe Gtw.oO TRNGF-α polymorphisms regarding susceptibility to POAG. To our knowledge, this is the first study of TNF polymorphismsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in Romanian POAG patients. We assessed 258 subjects (112 POAG patients solved cases was 56.7%. Interestingly, in 54% of the solved cases we were and 146 healthy unrelated matched controls) for -857C/T (rs1799724) and able to detect mutations which were not previously described in literature -308 G/A (rs1800629) TNF-alpha polymorphisms. These were genotyped at the date of the medical report. 70% of these cases show exclusively a new by Real Time PCR (Taqman SNP Genotyping Assays C_2215707_10 and mutation in case of dominant or x-linked inheritance and two new mutati- C_7514879_10 respectively, Applied Biosystems, USA). Statistical analysis ons in case of recessive inheritance. 30% show one new and one previously was performed using the SNPStats program for genetic association studies described mutation. (http://bioinfo.iconcologia.net/SNPstats); p-values ≤0.05 were considered Therefore, we conclude that NGS is the most promising tool to identify significant. known as well as unknown mutations for this gUeSnHet2iAcally hEigYhSly heteroge- All studied groups were in HWE for both polymorphisms. The frequencies RnePoGuRs, PdRisPeFa3s1e entitCyD. NHeRw1 mutations were found in 47 different genes. Ge- of minor alleles -857T and -308A were similar in POAG patients and con- nes most frequently affected by mutations were and followed by trols (0.22/0.10 and 0.21/0.13 respectively). There was no significant diffe- and . rence in SNPs regarding the allele carriage or genotype frequency between The high number of novel mutations detected in our cohort shows the ad- POAG and control subjects. Three main haplotypes were constructed with vantage of NGS over often used conventional chip-array analysis that assay similar frequencies in patients and controls -857C/-308G/, 857T/-308G only known mutations. 
P02 .36-M and -857C/-308A: 0.683/0.661; 0.218/ 0.205 and 0.98 / 0.133 respective- Splice factor-based gene therapy to correct mislocalization of the ly. There was no significant association between the global haplotype and ciliary protein RPGR in retinal degeneration POAG (p-value = 0.5). R. Da Costa1, E. Glaus1, A. Tiwari1, B. Kloeckener-Gruissem1,2, W. Berger1,3,4, J. Neidhardt1; Conclusion: TNF-alpha polymorphisms (-857C/T and -308G/A) seem not 1Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren, Switzerland, to influence susceptibility of POAG. These results should be confirmed on 2Department of Biology, ETHZ, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Zurich Center for Integrative larger patients’ cohort. Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Neuroscience 
P02 .34-M Center Zurich (ZNZ), University and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Genetic screening for disease-associated mutations in human retinal diseases using whole exome sequening (WES) A. Tiwari1, A. Bahr1, S. Feil1, J. Neidhardt1, W. Berger1,2,3; 1Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, University of Zürich, Schlieren, Switzerland, Retinal degenerations (RD) and other genetic diseases are often caused by 2Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), Zürich, Switzerland, splice site mutations. This type of mutation accounts for approximately 20% 3Neuroscience Center Zürich (ZNZ), University of Zürich and ETH Zürich, Zürich, of all pathogenic sequence variants associated with retinal degeneration. Switzerland. Previously, we reported the identification of an X-linked RD patient that sho- wed skipping of exon 10 in the RPGR mRNA. To treat this mutation-induced splice defects, we applied mutation-adapted splice factors. In case of the spli- Monogenic diseases of the retina and vitreous affect approximately 1 in 2000 ce factor U1snRNA, the adaptation yielded an increase in its affinity towards individuals. They are characterized by tremendous genetic heterogeneity the mutated splice site. This novel gene therapeutic approach was highly and clinical variability of symptoms involving more than 20 different clinical efficient in increasing the amount of correctly spliced RPGR transcripts in phenotypes and mutations in more than 200 genes. Clinical manifestations minigene splicing assays and patient-derived fibroblasts. of retinal degenerations (RD) range from mild retinal dysfunctions to seve- In this study, we aimed at evaluating the efficacy of the U1-based therapy re congenital forms. A detailed clinical diagnosis and identification of the on the protein level. We established an assay to locate the RPGR protein in underlying mutations are crucial for genetic counseling of affected patients patient-derived and control skin fibroblasts. In control fibroblasts, we found and their families, for understanding genotype-phenotype correlations and that the RPGR protein locates along the primary cilia including basal body, developing therapeutic interventions. transition zone and axoneme. In contrast, patient-derived cells showed mis- We make use of WES and have established a reliable and efficient high- localization of the RPGR protein restricted to the basal body and transition throughput analysis pipeline of next generation sequencing (NGS) data to zone. Upon treatment with mutation-adapted U1, localization of RPGR along identify disease-causing mutations in RD. Our data indicate that this ap- the axoneme was significantly increased compared to control treatments. proach enables us to genetically diagnose approximately 56% of the pa- We conclude that the efficacy of the U1-based gene therapy is sufficient to tients (N=28) with mutation(s) in known disease-associated genes. Thus, correct not only misspliced transcripts but also their translated proteins. 44% of the cases, that do not carry mutation(s) in a known gene, are cru- Thus, the adaptation of U1snRNA is a promising technique to treat patients cial for identification of novel candidate genes and biological pathways un- who carry pathogenic splice defects. 
P02 .37-S derlying the disease phenotype. Amongst identified mutations, 47% were Homozygous deletion of glutamate receptor gene GRID2 causes new previously described in the literature while 53% are novel. The types of human hotfoot mutant phenotype, characterized by early-onset mutations included missense mutations (47.4%), frameshift insertions or cerebellar ataxia and retinal dystrophy deletions (26.3%), stop gains (15.8%) and mutations predicted to interfere K. Van Schil1, M. Karlstetter2, F. Meire3, M. Bauwens1, H. Verdin1, F. Coppieters1, E. with splicing (10.5%). In conclusion, WES can rapidly identify mutations in Scheiffert2, N. Deconinck4, T. Langmann2, E. De Baere1; various families affected with different forms of RD. Functional studies of 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, the identified mutations are needed to understand the underlying disease Belgium, 2Department of Ophthalmology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, mechanisms, which in future might aid in the development of therapeutic 3Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Queen Fabiola Children‘s University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Queen Fabiola Children‘s approaches. 
P02 .35-S University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium. Large number of new mutations found in patients with inherited retinal dystrophies using Panel-based Next Generation Sequencing N. Gloeckle1, S. Kohl2, J. Mohr1, F. Battke1, A. Sprecher1, M. Schubach1, K. Hoertnagel1, A. It was our aim to identify the genetic cause of early-onset autosomal reces- Bernd3, B. Wissinger2, J. Neidhardt4, W. Berger4,5,6, S. Biskup1; sive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA) associated with retinal dystrophy in a consan- 1CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 2Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Clinic for Hereditary guineous family. GRID2 Retinal Degeneration, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4University of Homozygosity mapping and choop1y5 JnuGmRIbDe2r analysis revealed a homozygous Zurich, Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, Schlieren, Switzerland, 5Zurich Center deletion of exon 2 of , p.(Gly30_Glu81del), in the proband, compatible for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, with mouse hotfoot muGtaRnItD 2 . encodes an ionotropic glutama- 6Neuroscience Center Zurich (ZNZ), University and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. te receptor known to be selectively expGrreisds2ed in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Here, we demonstrated mRNA expression in human adult retina and retinal pigment epithelium. In addition, expression was demonstrated In inherited retinal dystrophies (RD) genetic heterogeneity is a well known in different stages of murine retinal development. GRID2 protein expression feature. Therefore, we used next generation sequencing (NGS) technology as was observed in both murine and human retina, more specifically in photo- a tool to identify known as well as unknown mutations in RD. receptor inner segments, the outer plexiform layer and ganglion cell layer. More than 150 genes associated with RD were selected from literature or In order to rule out involvement of mutations in another gene, whole exome databases. A custom target-in-solution-enrichment was used, followed by sequencing was conducted but did not reveal any other disease-causing mu- sequencing on either the SOLiD 5500xl or the Illumina HiSeq 2500 plat- tations, supporGtRinIgD 2the phenotype observed here represents a single clinical form. Variants were annotated using transcript, variant, medical as well as entity. GRID2 population frequency databases. Identified mutations were validated using We identified as underlying disease gene of early-onset ARCA with Sanger sequencing. retinal dystrophy, expanding the clinical spectrum of deletion mu- We analyzed 300 patients with all forms of RD including syndromic forms tants, which thus far only involved cerebellar but no retinal phenotypes. such as Usher-syndrome and Bardet-BiedlE sSyHndGro m20e. 1T4he | dMeteILctAioNn ,r aItTeA oLf Y |W We WdemWo.nEsStrHatGed.,O foRr Gthe first time, GRID2 mRNA and protein expres8si3onABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain. GRID2 in human and murine retina, providinGgR Mev6idence for a novel functional role of GRID2 in the retina. To the best of our knowledge is the second Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a heterogeneous group of inherited retinal dys- glutamate receptor gene, apart from , leading to retinal disease when trophies ultimately characterized by the loss of photoreceptors leading to mutated. Finally, we provided further evidence for evolutionary conservati- blindness. The molecular diagnosis of RP has long been hampered by the lar- o Pn 0 2o .f 3 a 8 h -Motfoot fragile site between mouse and human. ge genetic heterogeneity of this group of disorders. The clinical application Homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing identified four of next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques may overcome, in part, the- novel candidate retinal dystrophy genes se limitations. In this study, we conducted whole exome sequencing (WES) M. M. Alrashed1,2; to uncover the genetic cause of arRP in a consanguineous Spanish family, in 1Department of clinical laboratory sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, King which genotyping and resequencing microarrays failed to identify the gene- Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of genetics, King Faisal specialist tic defect. This strategy allowed the detection of one rare homozygous muta- hospital and research center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. tion located in exon 1 of 
C2 ORF71 gene (c.1795T>C, p.Cys599Arg). Although this variant has been previously annotated (rs377190272), it has only been detected in heterozygosity in one control individual out of 6304 exomes Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) are a remarkably genetically and pheno- from the Exome Variant Server database, being probably an asymptomatic typically heterogeneous group of inherited eye diseases, with over 190 causa- carrier. Moreover, the variant co-segregated with the disease in the exten- tive genes identified to date. In the highly consanguineous Saudi population, ded family and was absent in 400 matched chromosomes. Clinically, patient autosomal recessive forms of IRD are thought to account for the overwhel- with mutation p.Cys599Arg shows signs of typical RP and resembles other ming majority of cases. Consanguinity is known to increase the frequency patients with missense mutations in this gene. Taking into account the high of recessive disorders since it increases the coefficient of inbreeding, which prevalence of carriers of deleterious mutations in RP genes among the con- is a measure of the percentage of the genome that is identical by descent. trol population, and the growing number of experiments in which new va- Homozygosity mapping, targeted candidate gene analysis and whole exome riants identified by exome sequencing are reported, identifying real novel sequencing were used to identify the causes of IRD in the Saudi population. mutations is an increasingly difficult task. All together this data allow us to Mutations in R
P1  were found to be a common cause of recessive RP in the conclude that rs377190272 is the most likely causative mutation underlying Saudi population. Novel and previously identified homozygous mutations the phenotype arRP in this family. 
P02 .42-M in the KCNV2 gene were identified in a cohort of patients with a distinct Panel-based Next Generation Sequencing as an efficient technique to recessive retinal disorder, ‘cone dystrophy with supranormal rod response,’ detect mutations in Italian patients with Retinitis Pigmentosa demonstrating phenotype/genotype correlation. In addition, a founder ho- M. Zuntini1, C. O. Pierrottet2, F. Sirocco1, A. Nicoletti1, S. El Shamieh3, I. Audo3, N. mozygous CAB
P4  mutation was identified . Causative homozygous mutati- Orzalesi2, C. Zeitz3, M. Bertelli1; ons were also found in the IRD genes RB
P3 , RDH12, CRB1, BB
S4 , CNGA3, 1MAGI Human Genetics Institute, Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Department of Ophthalmology, CNGB1, EYS, RLB
P1 , ABCA4 and PCDH12. Four novel candidate genes for San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan (MI), Milan (MI), Italy, 3INSERM, U968, Paris retinal degeneration were identified in this study. Potentially pathogenic ho- F-75012, Paris, France. mozygous variants were identified in EM
C1  (c.G430A, p.A144T), KIAA1549 (c.2399_2400insAA, p.T800fs809X), GPR125 (c.
C2504 G, p.
S835 C) and DHX29 (c.
C2738 T, p.A913V). In the majority of cases (31 families) the ge- Inherited retinal disorders affect approximately 1 in 2000 individuals netic cause of IRD was identified, demonstrating the power of homozygosity worldwide. Symptoms and associated phenotypes are really variable and, m 
P0 a 2p .p 3i 9n -g S and whole exome sequencing. to date, more than 150 genes have been implicated. Retinitis pigmentosa Next-generation sequencing for retinal dystrophy: two years‘ clinical (RP), a degenerative disease of the retina, accounts for approximately one- experience half of cases. Molecular diagnostics for RP patients by Sanger sequencing T. Gale, S. Barton, S. Ramsden, G. Black, G. Hall; is hampered by genetic and clinical heterogeneity. Next generation sequen- Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. cing (NGS) technology provides a new approach for RP genetic testing, allo- wing for the screening of other known retinal disease genes in addition to RP genes, particularly important due to their clinical and genetic overlap. Retinal dystrophy (RD) is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous To test NGS potential for RP molecular diagnosis, we analyzed a panel of group of conditions; it can be syndromic or non-syndromic and follow domi- 123 retinal disease genes by targeted NGS in a cohort of 95 Italian probands nant, recessive or X-linked inheritance. Since April 2012 we have been using with non-syndromic RP. All identified genetic variants entered a systematic next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology with a panel of 105 known data analysis pipeline for their prioritization and prediction of pathogeni- retinal genes; genetic testing and the potential identification of causative city, followed by direct sequencing validation. Here, we report preliminary mutations is now available for a much broader range of patients with RD results on 52 probands, for which data analysis and Sanger validation have than was previously possible. been completed. Our screening resulted in a molecular diagnosis for 47 RP We are currently conducting a notes-based review to evaluate our clinical patients, comprising 18/20 recessive, 11/11 UdSoHm2iAnaAnBt,C aAn4d 
E1 Y8S/2N1R s2pEo3radic delivery of this service and its impact on families; we will present data on a cRaPs1es. A total of 92 likely causative variants in 45 different genes were iden- cohort of 40+ patients who have undergone NGS testing for retinal dystro- tified; 46/92 are novel mutations. The genes , , , and phy. Analysis so far shows a wide age range (2-87 years) of patients, around were more frequently affected than others. In this group of 52 patients, 50% of whom have no family history. NGS proved to be an efficient (diagnostic rate: 90%), faster and less time A common reason for testing is to clarify the mode of inheritance for the consuming method compared to conventional ones for molecular diagnosis sake of children or other relatives. Patients also underwent testing to clarify o Pf 0 g 2e .4ne 3t -i Scally heterogeneous diseases such as RP. a diagnosis or prognosis, for example, whether the co-occurrence of hearing Hypomorphic variants in the splice factor genes DHX38 and loss in the family was due to Usher syndrome. SNRN
P200  are associated with autosomal recessive retinitis We have reported a range of results: clearly pathogenic mutations (50-60% pigmentosa detection rate), negative test results, and unclear or ambiguous results re- M. Khan1,2, M. Ajmal1,2, K. Neveling1, S. Micheal1,3, M. Azam1,2, A. I. den Hollander1,3, R. W. J. quiring additional family samples and careful genetic counselling. Collin1,4, R. Qamar2,5, F. P. M. Cremers1,2,4; We will present data on the impact and value of NGS testing for families and 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, clinicians, including incidental carrier findings and unexpected results such Netherlands, 2Department of Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical as altered inheritance pattern or change in management. Our experience Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Nijmegen Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud suggests NGS testing for retinal dystrophy is relevant for a significant num- University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Al-Nafees Medical College & Hospital, Isra b Pe 0r 2 o .4f 0p -a Mtients. University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Exome sequencing reveals a rare pathogenic mutation in 
C2 ORF71 as the underlying genetic defect in a Retinitis Pigmentosa family. M. González-del Pozo1,2, N. Bravo-Gil1,2, C. Méndez-Vidal1,2, A. Vela-Boza3, J. Santoyo- Purpose: To identify the underlying genetic defects in two consanguineous López3, J. Dopazo3,4,5, S. Borrego1,2, G. Antinolo1,2,3; families with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP). 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. Hospital Methods: Ophthalmologic analysis was performed in selected persons from Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en both families, that included visual acuity assessment, fundoscopy and elec- Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Seville, Spain, 3Genomics and Bioinformatics Platform of Andalusia (GBPA), Seville, Spain, 4Department of Bioinformatics, Centro de troretinography. Genome-wide homozygosity mapping was performed for Investigación Príncipe Felipe., Valencia, Spain, 5Functional Genomics Node (INB), Centro multiple affected and unaffected individuals using single nucleotide poly- morphism arrays. After exclusion of arRP-associated genes residing in ho- 84 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, mIT oA zyL gY o u| sW reW gioW ns. , E thS eH prG ob.O anR dG s were analyzed using whole exome sequen-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index cing. Pathogenicity of the candidate disease-causing variants in the homozy- patients we confirmed Pendred syndrome by identifying genotypes R409H/ gous regions was assessed by in-silico analysis. c.919-2 A>G and 
L445 W/c.2089+1G>A. 
P02 .46-M Results: Ophthalmologic examination revealed typical features of RP in both Prevalence of mutation с.11864G>A (p.Trp3955X) in the USH2A gene families. In the first family a homozygous missense variant, c.3269G>A;p. in patients with Usher II Syndrome from Volga-Ural Region of Russia (Arg1090Gln), was identified in SNRN
P200 , which previously was impli- L. U. Dzhemileva1,2, S. L. Lobov1, D. U. Kuznetzov1, R. R. Valiev3, A. S. Mukminov2, V. L. cated in autosomal dominant RP (adRP) and shown to impair splicing. In Ahmetova1, R. I. Khusainova1, A. S. Karunas1,3, I. M. Khidiyatova1,3, N. A. Barashkov4,5, S. A. the second family a missense mutation, c.995G>A;p.(Gly332Asp), was iden- Fedorova4,5, O. L. Posukh6,7, E. K. Khusnutdinova1,3; tified in DHX38, which encodes the pre-mRNA splicing factor PR
P16  and 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Academy of previously has not been associated with arRP. The DHX38 variant shows a Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Ufa Branch FGBI NCC Otorhinolaryngology FMBA of Russia, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, Department of Genetics and lod score of 3.25, which is highly suggestive of linkage. Segregation analysis Fundamental Medicine, Ufa, Russian Federation, 4Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex indicated that both variants segregated with RP in respective families, in Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, an autosomal recessive manner. In-silico analysis supported the causality of Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 5Institute of Natural the p.(Arg1090Gln) and p.(Gly332Asp) variants. Sciences, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Laboratory of Molecular Conclusions: Since the SNRN
P200  variant p.(Arg1090Gln) appears only to Biology, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 6Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian be causative when present homozygously, we hypothesize that it is a hypo- Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, morphic mutation. So far mutations in pre-mRNA splicing factor genes have Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 7Novosibirsk National Research State University, Department of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. only been associated with adRP, thus this is the first report that implicates defects in the splicing machinery proteins DHX38 and SNRN
P200  to be as- sociated with arRP. 
P02 .44-M Usher Syndrome (US) is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by R
S1  gene exon 2 deletion in a large Pedigree with X-linked juvenile a combination of congenital hearing impairment and retinitis pigmentosa. retinoschisis To date, ten genes have been associated with US, representing up to 90% A. Nicoletti1, L. Ziccardi2, L. D‘Agruma3, S. Cecchin1, O. Palumbo3, S. Benedetti1, M. of cases. Three types of US are known and differ by onset of the symptoms, Rendina3, M. Bertelli1; 1MAGI Human Genetics Institute, Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Neurophthalmology Unit – severity and progressiveness of deafness and additional vestibular dysfunc- IRCCS Fondazione Bietti, Rome, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della tion. Patients with type II US have congenital bilateral sensorineural hearing Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy. loss that is mild to moderate in the low frequencies and severe to profound in the higher frequencies, intact vestibular responses, and bilateral retinitis pigmentosa. Juvenile retinoschisis (XLRS) is a vitreo-retinal disorder characterized by 40 unrelated Usher II type families (60 patients) from Volga-Ural Region of early-onset cystic macul ar dys RtrSo1phy that can evolve in central atrophy, thus Russia were studied using genotyping microarray (Usher, Asper-Biotech) for leading to blindness. More than 200 disease-causing mutations have been screening 614 mutations in genes CDH23, MYO7A, PCDH15, USH1C, USH1G, reported in the X-linkedgene (Xp22). The clinical diagnosis is based on USH2A, GPR98, CLRN1, DFNB31 and automatic sequencing of Usher’s ge- instrumental ocular examination and can be confirmed by molecular gene- nes. Diagnosis was based on pedigree data, ophthalmologic, audiological tic testing. InM tehtihs ordeps:oRrtS, 1we present the molecular characterization of an and vestibular examination. XLRS family with 4 affected mRSa1les and a pedigree suggestive of an X-linked We revealed homozygous and heterozygous genotypes for the с.11864G>A inheritance. gene point mutations screening was performed (p.Trp3955X) mutation (USH2A) in six unrelated families among Russian, by PCR e direct sequencing. gene coRpeys unlutsm: ber variation was assesRseSd1 Tatar and Chuvash patients with Usher II syndrome. We found four patho- by “home made” MLPA analysis and by SNP-array analysis using CytoScan genic mutations in coding region of 8 patients (p.Glu4458fs, p.Trp3955X, HD Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). the exon 2 fragment of p.Glu4078fs, and p.Gly1392X), confirming their clinical diagnosis. The most gene failed to amplify in the proband;R gSiv1en the strong suspicion of a dele- frequent USH2A gene mutation was с.11864G>A (9/80 alleles; 11,25%). tion a confirmation was made by MLPA and SNP-array: all affected males Mutation с.11864G>A in heterozygous state was also found in one Russian were poCsoitnivcel ufosiro enx: on 2 deletion of gene. Carrier females were also subject out of 1066 examined individuals from 16 various populations of identified. SNP-array analy sRiSs 1showed a deletion of less than 7 kb including Eurasia: Bashkirs, Tatars, Chuvashes, Udmurts, Komi-Permyaks, and Mord- exon 2. this is the first report of a deep characterization of a vins, Russians, Belarusians, Ukrainians, Veps, and Karelians, Abkhazians, whole exon deletion in the gene, accounting in 10% of XLRS. SNP-array Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Yakuts, Altaians. Study was supported by grants (№12-04- analysis mapped the deletion breakpoint in an intronic region rich of several 00342_а, №12-04-98520_r_vostok_a, №14-04-97002_r_povolgie_a, №14- repeated elements, thus prone to rearrangements. Female carriers can be 0 
P4  0- 29 .7 40 70 -
S7 _r_povolgie_a,№14-04-01741_A). easily detected by MLPA analysis that represents a useful test in terms of SOX2 whole gene deletion without ocular malformation but with t Pi 0m 2e . 4a 5nd -S costs for copy number detection. isolated bilateral third degree microtia : a new manifestation of SOX2- Spectrum of SL
C26 A4 gene mutations in Slovak NSHL patients related disorders? M. Pecimonova1, K. Ottonellova1, A. Soltysova1,2, L. Kadasi1,2; E. Ranza1, K. Varvagiannis2, E. Stathaki1, S. Gimelli1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1, F. 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Department of Molecular Biology, Sloan Béna1; Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of 1HUG, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. SOX2 Nonsyndromic hearing loss is characterized by hearing impairment that is -related eye disorders are characterized by anophthalmia and/or mi- not associated with other signs and symptoms. This form of deafness ac- crophthalmia, which is usually bilateral and severe. Molecular genetic te- counts for 70% of all inherited hearing loss and it is caused mostly by mal- sting of this gene, including sequence analysis and MLPA (for large gene formations of structures in the inner ear. A large number of genes is asso- deletions), identifies mutations in about 10-20% of individuals with such ciated with nonsyndromic hearing loss, including CLDN14, CO
L11 A2, GJB2, ocular involvement. Other common findings include brain malformations, GJB3, GJB6, KCNQ4, MYO1A, MYO15A, MYO6, MYO7A, POU3F4, SL
C26 A4, oesophageal atresia and male genital abnormalities. Postnatal growth failu- TECTA, TMPRS
S3 , and many others. re with pituitary insufficiency, seizures, sensorineural hearing loss, delayed In the Slovak population, mutations in GJB2, GJB6 and mitochondrial genes motor development and learning difficSuOlXti2es are described. Recent studies were only screened to date. In our work we focused on the mutation scree- have demonstrated a broaderS OoXc2ular phenotype in cases with missense ning of the SL
C26 A4 gene, which was found as another of the most prevalent mutations, consistent with a role for in both posterior and anterior disease genes in NSHL. The SL
C26 A4 gene encodes a protein called pendrin, segment development. Severe (OMIM 184429) mutations (whole gene which functions as an anion transporter of mostly chloride, iodide and bi- deletion/nonsense mutation) with complete loss-of-function alleles, almost carbonate ions across the membranes of cells of the thyroid, inner ear, and uniformly result in anophthalmia/microphthalmia. kidneys. Recessive mutations in this transporter are associated with hearing We report the case of a newborn female, evaluated at birth for isolated bila- loss DFNB4, which is accompanied by an enlargement of vestibular aque- teral third degree microtia. All investdigea tnioonvos (cardiac, abdominal, cerebral, duct. Mutated pendrin affects the levels of fluid in the inner ear that leads to ophthalmologic) were normal. SOX2 malformation and hearing loss. Array-CGH analysis has shown a 40 kb deletion of 3q26.33 In our work, we screened 324 patients for mutations in the SL
C26 A4 gene. (chr3:181407035-181442290) [hg19] deleting the entire gene. We found several missense mutations, of which the most frequent were G6V More detailed ophthalmSoOlXo2gic evaluations confirmed the absence of any (probably non-pathogenic), R185T, R409H, T416P, 
L445 W, R470H, Y530S, ocular abnormality. The girl benefits from osseous conduction hearing aids. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 85 
L597 S, and two splicing mutations c.919-2 A>G and c.2089+1G>A. In two Is there a link between deletion and microtia, consistent with resultsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SOX2 CY
P11 B1 of a recent study showing under-expression of SOX 2in human auricular mon cause ofC CYoPn1g1eBn2it al Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH). It is caused by muta- chondrocytes from microtia samples ? OurS cOaXs2e also confirms the reduced tions in the gene localized in 8q21, 40 kb distant from its highly penetrance of the ocular phenotype, even in severe mutations, and rai- homologous gene codifing for aldosteroCnYeP 1sy1nBt2h/aCsYeP. 1
P1 aBth1o logi- s Pe 0s t .h 4e q -Muestion of a further broadening of -related disorders…. cal alleles derived from the asymmetricC rYePc1o1mBb1i/n CaYtiPo1n1 oBf2 t hese two genes 2 8 have been described. The formation of a chimeric gene Exome sequencing identifies POU3F4 p.Ala116fs mutation among leads to 11ß-OHD; instead the chimeric gene causes the family with hearing loss U. Lechowicz1, A. Pollak1, P. Stawinski1, A. Podgorska1, M. Mueller-Malesinska1, M. glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA). As the detection of these Oldak1,2, L. Korniszewski1, H. Skarzynski1, R. Ploski3; rearrangement is still laborious or indirect, our objective was to project a 1World Hearing Center, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Kajetany/ synthetic probe set for multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of (MLPA) analysis in order tCoY sPi1m1pBl1ify theC dYePt1e1cBti2on of these chimeric genes Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of and other variation in the copy number of these genes. We disegned a set of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. 8 specific probes for both and genes to be used with the commercial control kit SALSA MLPA 
P300  Human DNA reference (MRC-Hol- land). The methods was tested on 15 control samples and then applied to 6 One of the most common genetic diseases in human is hearing loss (HL). The patients with the suspition of 11ß-OHD. The analysis with the CY
P11  probe majority of cases are nonsyndromic (70%) and 1-5% are nonsyndromic X- set has led to the identification of one copy number variation in an adult pa- linked. Most cases are due to mutations in a single gene. Nevertheless, DNA tCiYePn1t 1wBit2h/ CaYdPre1n1aBl1 r ests misdiagnosed as 21-hydroxylase deficiency and not diagnostics for hearing loss are challenging, since it is an extremely hetero- properly treated. He resulted compound heterozygous for a novel chimeric geneous trait. Although more than 70 causative genes have been described gene, with the breakpoint region locolized within intron for the nonsyndromic hearing loss alone, diagnostic application of the sci- 2, and the known A306V mutation. In conclusion, the described MLPA kit re- entific progress has lagged behind. Some previous reports have shown that presents an optimal complement to DNA sequence analysis in patients with „next-generation DNA sequencing techniques“ have the potential to offer a 11ß-OHD, enabling detection of deletions, duplications or chimeric genes. 
P03 .02-M novel testing platform that could test all known genes in a sensitive, specific A Novel mutation of FGD1 in four members of a Turkish Family with and cost-efficient manner. In this study, whole exome sequencing (WES) for Aarskog-Scott Sydrome and growth hormone Therapy direct genetic diagnosis in NSHL was used. Sequential filtering of variants H. A. Korkmaz1, F. Hazan2, M. Hosgor3, N. Unal4, A. Vahabi5, C. Dizdarer1, T. Ajlan6,7; obtained from WES, bioinformatic analyses, and Sanger sequencing valida- 1Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, tion identified premature termination p.Ala116fs mutation in POU3f4 gene Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behçet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, as the candidate disease-causing mutation in the family. POU3F4 belongs to Turkey, 3Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, a subfamily of transcription factors, which are characterized by 2 conserved Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, deoxyribonucleic acid-binding domains, a 75- amino acid POU- specific do- Turkey, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Urmia University of Medical Sciences, Urmia, main and a 60-amino acid homeodomain, both helix-turn-helix structural Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara deoxyribonucleic acid-binding motifs. In this study clinical features and ge- University, Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey, 7Duzen laboratory Groups, Genetics Division, Ankara, Turkey. netic analysis of a male child from a Polish family with congenital deafness and POU3F4 p.Ala116fs mutation is described. Usually clinical features of DFNX2 (DFN3) often include a mixed, progressive hearing loss, temporal Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS), also known as facio-digito-genital dysplasia bone anomalies, and stapes fixation. 
P02 .49-S is a rare, clinically and genetically heterogeneous conditionF cGhDa1racterized by Common copy number variations on the origin of disease short stature, and facial, limb, and genital anomalies. The best characterized P. Rendeiro1, M. Amorim2, R. Lemos1, C. Ventura1, Á. Pereira1, A. Sousa1, R. Cerqueira1, J. form of the syndrome which was caused by mutations in is inherited Sá1, J. Pinto Basto1, L. Nunes2, P. Tavares1; as an X-linked trait (MIM#305400). This gene located on the short arm of 1CGC Genetics, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital D. Estefânia, Lisboa, Portugal. chromosome X (Xp11.21), includes 18 exons. The population prevalence of AAS is probably lower or equal to 1/25 000. The clinical singns may range from mild to severe. Herein, clinical features and intrafamilial heterogeneity of four affected individuals in a Turkish AAS family with a novel mutation Introduction: It is well established the relation between CNV and intellectu- were presented. Only one of these patients had received growth hormone al disability and/or autism, as it is the existence of a large number of CNV therapy and this treatment provided height velocity gain in our patient. not associated with disease. These polymorphisms although benign, could 
P03 .03-S represent a risk of disease when occurring in homozigosity, or when combi- Deciphering variability of PKD1 and PKD2 genes in Italian patients ned, depending of its genetic content. Objective: We present a case of a girl affected by Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) with congenital deafness, and homozygous deletion of OTOA gene, resulting P. Carrera1,2, S. Calzavara2, P. Messa3, A. Edefonti3, R. Magistroni4, F. Scolari5, P. Manunta6, from the presence of a benign CNV in each chromosome. Method: PAMS, 8 A. Boletta7, M. Ferrari1,2,6; yo was referred for genetic analysis because of congenital deafness. Conexin 1Ospedale San Raffaele, Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, Milano, Italy, 2Ospedale San Raffaele, Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Biology, Milano, Italy, 26 and conexin 30 sequence analysis was done using Sanger sequencing, 3IRCCS Policlinico,, Milano, Italy, 4University of Modena, Modena, Italy, 5University of conexin 30 deletions was done using MLPA. Exclusion of additional genetic Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 6University Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 7Ospedale San mutations was done using a proprietary mutation panel (312 mutations on Raffaele, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, Milano, Italy. 32 genes). Array CGH analysis was performed using Affymetrix Cytoscan 750K. Results: Conexin results were negative and CGC Mutation panel and direct sequencing results demonstrated absence of amplification on OTOA. ADPKD is the most common genetic nephron-pathology in humans, af- Parents testing with array CGH revealed the presence of a CNV (heterozy- fecting about 1/1000 individuals. Aim of the present work was to define gous deletion) on 16p12.2 in each. Both CNV are registered on DGV as nor- genetic variation of PKD1 and PKD2 in Italian patients affected by ADPKD. mal variants. However, each CNV encompasses the OTOA gene, thus leading Analysis of PKD1 and PKD2 variation would allow to: confirm the diagno- to the conclusion that the co-existence of two overlapping (individually be- sis in clinically uncertain/atypical cases; offer genetic counseling in at risk nign) CNVs was the mechanism leading to congenital deafness on the index families; exclude the presence of a mutation in related donors for kidney case. Conclusions: This case reveals the utility of array CGH as a complement transplantation; define gene variability in Italian patients. 576 subjects has technique in the investigation of molecular mechanisms of genetic disease been analyzed with a semi-automated Sanger protocol: 298 unrelated pati- that allowed establishing the molecular diagnosis and proper genetic coun- ents belonging to families and 171 relatives; 72 patients with no familiarity s Pe 0li 3n .g 0 1to -S this family. and 35 cases with no data about familiarity. In 90% of the 405 probands, In-house-designed synthetic probe set for MLPA identifies a novel variants were present: PKD1 80%; PKD2 4%; PKD1+PKD2 6%. 84.5% of the chimeric CY
P11 B2/CY
P11 B1 gene in a patient with 11β-hydroxylase identified variants have never been described. An average of 12 SNPs/pati- deficiency ent in PKD1 and 2 SNPs/patient in PKD2,was observed. By combining re- S. Menabò1, S. Boccassini1, A. Gambineri2, A. Balsamo1, O. Prontera2, L. Mazzanti1, L. sults for truncating and known variants we classified variants as pathogenic Baldazzi1; in 65.4% (265/405) of patients. For unclassified variants, a prediction was 1Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, S.Orsola Malpighi Hospital, attempted according to PKDB criteria. Concordance of the results obtained University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Endocrinology Unit - Department of Medical and with SIFT, AGVGD and PolyPhen2 allowed calling of 18 likely-neutral and 12 Surgical Sciences; S.Orsola Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. highly-likely-pathogenic variants. In many cases interpretation of additional information becomes relevant (i.e. family segregation increases the score for 181ß6-hydroxylase deficiency (11ß-OHD) representE s S thH e G se c2 o0 nd1 4 m o| sM t cI oL mA -N, pITaAthLoYge n| iWcitWy). WIn .pEaStiHenGts. OwiRthG no mutations detected, MLPA analysis has been performed: we identified 2 patients with a huge deletion in PKD1 (ex2-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index FOXF1 46); 1 patient with a deletion spanning exons 2-4 in PKD1; 1 patient with the pulmonary veins (ACDMPV). The observed deletion encompasses a recently deletion of the whole PKD2 gene. characterized distant regulator/enhancer of the gene. The pathologi- 
P03 .04-M cal diagnosis of ACDMPV was confirmed posthumously. As our knowledge Scattered deletion of Pkd1 in mouse kidneys causes a cystic snowball of epigenetics and the genomic landscape improves, an increasing number effect and recapitulates human polycystic kidney disease W. N. Leonhard, M. Zandbergen, K. Veraar, L. Van der Weerd, E. de Heer, M. H. Breuning, of non-coding CNVs are poised to gain clinical relevance. We suggest that a D. J. M. Peters; database of well-characterized non-coding regulatory regions be developed Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. and incorporated into CMA analysis. 
P03 .07-S Background: Novel mutations of PKD1 gene in autosomal dominant polycystic PKD1 PKD2 kidney disease (ADPKD) Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) pa- F. Khadangi, M. A. Kerachian; tients carry a germline mutation in or , leading to tPhkodu1sands of Medical Genetics Research Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Mashhad University kidney cysts. It is poorly understood why a rapid progression of the disease of Medical Scie, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. is preceded by a lag-phase of several decades. Studies in which is inac- Background PKD tivated in large percentages of cells in animal models, led to the presump- ADPKD ARPKD) ADPKD tion that inactivation of the remaining allele initiates cystogenesis, and that Polycystic kidney disease ( ) can be inherited as an auto- the progression can be accelerated by renal injuMrey.t hToo dmsi:mic human ADPKD, somal dominant ( ) or an autosomal recessive trait ( ADPK. D wPked 1lowered this percentage and found important characterisPtkicds1 of cysto- is one of the most common genetic diseases in humans affecting all ethnic genesis that have not been described before. The percentage of gPrKoDu1p s worPlKdwD2ide with an incidPeKnDce1 of 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000. is ge- -deficient cells in Tamoxifen-inducible kidney-specific -deletion netically heterogeneous and caAni marise from mutations in two genes, named mice was controlled by varying the tamoxifen dose, visualized with repor- PKDa1nd . Mutations of located on chromosome 16p13.3 are ter mice and quantified by eMLPA. SevRereaslu rletnsa:l injuries were applied. Cyst responsible for 85% of cases. PK DA1lthough there is no hotspots reported progression was followed by MRI-analysis and PKD-Prkedla1t-ed signaling was in , most mutations are seen in Mthaet deorwianl satnreda mM eetxhoonds of this gene. So, analyzed by Immuno-histochemistry. Interestingly, no pathologi- we developed a clinical assay for gene analysis using sequencing of 16 cal changes occurred for six months after scattered- deletion and re- exons from 31 to 46 in 22 patients. This study was nal injury did not trigger rapid PKD. However, in the following 3-4 months, carried out with a total of 22 patients. GenPoKmDi1c DNA was extracted from clustered cyst formation led to a sevCeroen chluumsiaonn-sli:ke PKD phenotype. This blood lymphocytes (5mRel souf lwthole blood) with standard methods and frag- shift was preceded by increased pSTAT3, pCREB, pERK1/2, LCN2 and Ki- ments were amplify using PCR. Screening of mutations was performed 67 expression near the initial cysts. Our data argue against by direct Sequencing. Sequencing result of exons 44 and 45 showed the presumption that renal injury is the major trigger for cystogenesis but one completely pathogenic mutation causing Gln4005Arg change. Two no- suggests that initial cysts themselves, by imposing persistent stress on sur- vel non-synonymous variation including Arg4091Glu and Val4035Ilu and rounding tissue, triggers a ‚snow-ball‘ effect driving the formation of new five likely neutraClo SnNcPlu isnicolnuding rs10960, rs3087632, rs3087632, rs10960, cysts. In addition, our model mimics human ADPKD more precisely and can rs3087632, rs3087632 are detected. There was no any variation in exons be used for pre-clinical testing. 35, 36 and 37. It is expected that confirmation of pathogenic 
P03 .05-S mutations can be useful for studies on disease molecular pathways. Early Identification and characterisation of six novel SERPINA1 null and prenatal diagnosis and personalized treatments recommended for fa- mutations S. Ottaviani1, I. Ferrarotti1, T. P. Carroll2, A. M. Fra3, G. O‘Brien2, K. Molloy2, D. Medicina3, m 
P0 il 3y . 0m 8e -m Mbers after genetic consoling. N. G. McElvaney2, M. Luisetti1; Molecular diagnostics of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney 1IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, disease by next-generation sequencing Ireland, 3University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. L. Obeidová1, J. Stekrova1, T. Seeman2, A. Puchmajerova3, J. Reiterova4, V. Tesar4, M. Kohoutova1; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, Charles Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is the most abundant circulating antiprotease and University in Prague and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, is a member of the serine protease inhibitor (SERPIN) superfamily. The gene 2Department of Paediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and encoding AAT is the highly polymorphic SERPINA1 gene, found at 14q32.1. Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Motol University Mutations in the SERPINA1 gene can lead to AAT deficiency (AATD) which is Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Nephrology, First Faculty of Medicine, associated with a substantially increased risk of lung and liver disease. The Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech most common pathogenic AAT variant is Z (Glu342Lys) which causes AAT to Republic. misfold and polymerise within hepatocytes and other AAT-producing cells. A group of rare mutations causing AATD, termed Null or Q0, are characte- rised by a complete absence of AAT in the plasma. While ultra rare, these Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a severe form of mutations confer a particularly high risk of emphysema. We report here the PKD with typical occurrence in neonates and infants. It is characterized by i Pd 0e 3n .t 0if 6ic -a Mtion and characterisation of 6 new SERPINA1 Null mutations. cystic dilations of the collecting ducts and congenital hepatic fibrosis. Peri- Chromosome Microarray and non-coding DNA copy number variants - natal mortality has been estimated to account 30-50% of ARPKD neonates a case of Alveolar Capillary Dysplasia at FOXF1 locus and the majority of patients develop renal failure within 5 years, however K. Schlade-Bartusiak1,2, E. Gagne1, G. Hendson1, M. L. McKinnon3; presentation of ARPKD at later age and survival into adulthood have been 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, also described. The aim of this work was to establish molecular diagnostics Vancouver, BC, Canada, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Child and Family Research Institute, of ARPKD which could be used in “at-risk” families, as fetal ultrasonography Vancouver, Canada, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University has limited reliability in early pregnancy and some abnormalities typical of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Vancouver, BC, Canada. for ARPKD become evident after 20 weeks of gestation. ARPKD is caused by mutations in PKHD1, whose longest transcript comprises 67 exons. Con- ventional mutational detection methods are therefore time-consuming and Chromosome microarray (CMA) analysis typically focuses on coding DNA relatively expensive. For this reason next-generation sequencing has been (RefSeq and OMIM genes). Although non-coding intergenic and intronic va- chosen as a suitable method. After the setting up of NGS for PKHD1 gene, riants may be critical in disease pathogenesis, copy number variants (CNV) the analysis of 9 infants/children and 1 fetus from interrupted pregnancy, in these regions are usually interpreted as variants of unknown clinical all with clinically suspected ARPKD, was carried out. Two mutations were significance. We present a case of a lethal neonatal condition in which the found in 5 patients and one mutation in 3 patients. No mutation was iden- pathogenic CNV lies in a distant, upstream non-coding region. It highlights tified in two patients, which could be caused by misdiagnosis. Interesting the importance of relevant clinical information for CMA interpretation, and combination of p.G2705fsX and p.
S2861 G in cis appeared 3 times in our the importance of the analysis of flanking regions if an identified CNV does group of patients. Next-generation sequencing seems to be relatively fast, not initially appear pathogenic. A term female, with a prenatal diagnosis of sensitive and cheaper in comparison to other methods and allows us mole- AVSD, presented with severe neonatal respiratory distress out of keeping cular diagnostics of ARPKD. Supported by the grant project IGA MZCR NT with her cardiac issues. The clindicea ln opvicoture and early lethality suggested 13090-4 and PRVOUK- 
P25 /LF1/2. congenital surfactant deficiency (CSD). Sequencing of a CSD-gene panel was normal. CMA analysis revealed a 1.5 Mb deletion at 1F6OqX2F41.1, . None of the 16 RefSeq genes mapping within the deleted region appeared cau- sative. However, this deletion is located 15
E7 S kHbG u p2st0re1a4m | o Mf ILANa, IgTeAneLY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 87 responsible for congenital alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P03 .09-S 
P03 .11-S Dysregulation of cytoskeleton organization, carcinogenesis and Whole exome sequencing reveals rare homozygous ARID1B and immune response pathways involved in Balkan endemic nephropathy heterozygous MTOR missense variants in a patient with bilateral development cystic-dysplastic kidneys and features of Coffin-Siris syndrome and R. Staneva1, B. Rukova1, S. Hadjidekova1, D. Nesheva1, O. Antonova1, P. Dimitrov2, V. tuberous sclerosis Simeonov3, R. Cukuranovic4, J. Cukoranovic4, V. Stefanovic4, M. Polenakovic5, I. Dimova1, R. A. Kosfeld, M. Kreuzer, C. Scholz, V. Riehmer, D. Horstmann, L. Pape, D. Haffner, R. G. Hlushchuk6, V. Djonov6, A. Galabov7, D. Toncheva1; Weber; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Center of Public Health and Analyses, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Vratza District Hospital, Vratza, Bulgaria, 4Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Nephrology, University of Nis, Nis, Serbia, 5Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 6Institute of Anatomy, Bern University, Bern, Switzerland, 7Institute of ARID1B variants have recently been described as a major genetic cause of Microbilogy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. Coffin-Siris syndrome, a developmental disorder associated with anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract (CAKUT). Of 82 patients with Coffin-Siris syndrome carrying an ARID1B variant and examined for renal anomalies Background: Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) is a chronic interstitial that have been described in the literature to date, 6 (7%) presented with a nephritis with endemic distribution, spreading over territories of several non-severe CAKUT phenotype. The causative ARID1B mutations detected Balkan countries. The intricate interplay between genetic background and in patients with Coffin-Siris syndrome so far were all heterozygous trunca- environmental factors is believed to be at the basis of this progressive disea- ting variants. Here, we report a rare homozygous ARID1B missense variant se leading to chronic kidney failure and associated with high incidence of detected by whole exome sequencing in a patient with bilateral cystic-dys- upper urinary tract uroepithelial cancer. plastic kidneys, bilateral vesicoureteral reflux grade IV, and a septal myo- DNA methylation is the most studied primary epigenetic mechanism that is cardial tumor. Stage 4 chronic kidney disease was diagnosed at 6 months involved in processes such as cancer, genomic imprinting, tissue differentia- of age, arterial hypertension developed, and pre-emptive kidney transplan- tion etc. Epigenetic alterations could be a major contributing factor to BEN’s tation was performed at age 3.5 years. Additionally, the patient presented elusive etiopatogenesis. with a number of features frequently described in patients with Coffin-Siris Маterials and methods: We performed whole genome DNA methylation ana- syndrome carrying ARID1B mutations, such as thick eyebrows, synophris, lysis on DNA blood samples from 159 affected individuals and 170 healthy thick eyelashes, strabism, anteverted nares, long philtrum, high arched controls assigned to 8 DNA-pools based on gender and ancestral origin (Bul- palate, sandal gap, and behavioral anomalies. However, unlike all patients garian and Serbian). After determining the methylation status of ca.27000 with heterozygous truncating ARID1B mutations, our patient had normal CpG-islands throughout the whole genome (Agilent DNA methylation array intelligence. Interestingly, whole exome sequencing also revealed a rare 1x244k) we defined the differently methylated regions (DMRs) between deleterious heterozygous MTOR missense variant inherited from a healthy patients groups and respective control groups. We then compared DMRs mother in our patient. mTOR is regulated by TS
C1 /TS
C2 , encoded by genes across different ancestral and gender groups. that when mutated can cause tuberous sclerosis associated with renal cystic Results: Analysis of the common DMRs between patient-control pairs re- disease and myocardial tumors. Therefore, the MTOR and ARID1B variants vealed that genes involved in major biological processes appear to be af- may have acted together to cause the severe bilateral cystic-dysplastic kid- fected in BEN - cell adhesion and cytoskeleton organization/regulation of n Pe 0y 3s . 1p 2re -Msent in our patient. cell cycle - 14.8% of DMRs in both Bulgarians(BG)/Serbians(SER), carci- New genetic abnormalities underlying chronic intestinal pseudo- nogenesis and metastasis - 7.41%(BG)/8.8%(SER) and immune response obstruction (CIPO) - 14.8%(BG)/6.4%(SER) respectively. F. Bianco1, L. Cordeddu2, M. D‘Amato2, M. Bamshad3, L. Francescatto3, V. Stanghellini1, G. Conclusions: Data obtained from our experiments suggest that dysregulati- Lindberg2, Z. Mungan4, C. Graziano1, T. Pippucci1, N. Katsanis5, M. Seri1, G. Romeo1, R. De on of multiple major pathways such as cytoskeleton organization; cell cycle Giorgio1, E. Bonora1; 1University of Bologna, St Orsola Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2Karolinska Institutet, regulation and immune response could contribute to BEN pathogenesis. Stockholm, Sweden, 3Center for Mendelian Disorders,University of Washington, Seattle, Acknowledgements: funded by BNSF grant DMY03/35 
P03 .10-M WA, United States, 4Koc University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Depts of Cell NGS nominated CELA1, HSPG2 and KCNK5 as candidate-genes for Biology and Pediatrics,Duke University, Durham, NC, United States. predisposition to Balkan Endemic Nephropathy D. Toncheva1, M. Mihailova-Hristova1, R. Vazharova2, S. Ivanov2, L. Balabanski2, D. Serbezov2, R. Staneva1, P. Dimitrov3, V. Simeonov4, M. Malinov2, V. Stefanovic5, R. Background and Objective: CIPO is a severe motility disorder affecting the Chukuranovic5, M. Polenakovic6, L. Jankovic-Velickovic5, V. Djordjevic5, T. Jevtovic- entire gut. Most patients are sporadic, however some CIPO cases show a fa- Stoimenov5, D. Plaseska7, A. Galabov8, V. Djonov9, I. Dimova1; milial clustering su ggesting genetic components. The aim of this study was 1Department of Medical genetics, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genomic laboratory of Malinov Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Center of Public Health and to identify a CIPO cause in a consanguineous family with several affected Analyses, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Vratza District Hospital, Vratza, Bulgaria, 5Faculty of members. Results: Whole exome sequencing in the affected individuals Medicine, University of Nis, Nis, Serbia, 6Faculty of Medicine, University of Skopje, revealed a novel homozygous mutation, p.622 Ala>Thr in RAD21, cohesin Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts,, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav cRoUmNpXl1ex subunit regulating cell replication and gene expression. RAD21 Republic of, 7Faculty of Medicine, University of Skopje, Macedonian Academy of sRcarde2e1ning in 33 sporadic CIPO patients did not show coding mutations. Sciences and Arts,, Scopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 8Institute of expression, a RADR2u1n xt1arget, was decreased in the patient’s cell line. Microbiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, 9Institute of Anatomy, morpholino knockdown in zebrafish embryos resulted in incomplete Bern University, Bern, Switzerland. oRra da2b1sent expression of , in severe reduction of enteric neurons and delayed intestinal transit. These defects could be rescued only by wild-type cDNA, indicating that the mutation found in the CIPO pedigree extin- Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) is a familial chronic tubulointerstitial guishes RAD21 functionality. Several binding sites for RAD21 were present disease with insidious onset and slow progression leading to terminal renal in apolipoprotein A/C gene cluster and its altered binding to the regions failure. The results of molecular biological investigations propose that BEN dysregulated apolipoprotein expression levels. We studied APOB promoter is a multifactorial disease with genetic predisposition to environmental risk and identified two RAD21-putative binding sites. EMSA assays showed that agents. RAD21 wild-type, but not mutant, binds these regions. We therefo re measu- Exome sequencing of 22 000 genes with Illumina Nextera Exome Enrichmen red APOB protein levels that were increased in all CIPO patients, including kit was performed on 22 DNA samples (11 Bulgarian patients and 11 Ser- the syndromic patient carrying the RAD21 mutation. Conclusion:The study bian patients). Software analysis was performed via NextGene, Provean and of these two previously unlinked pathways in patients and in model organis- PolyPhen. The frequency of all annotated genetic variants with deleterious/ ms is contributing to clarify the pathogenesis of CIPO and will bear clinical damaging effect was compared with those of European populations. Then implications for the diagnosis and prognosis of this disabling condition. we focused on non-annotated variants (with no data available about them 
P03 .13-S and not found in healthy Bulgarian controls). Genotype-phenotype discrepancy in congenital adrenal hyperplasia There is no statistically significant difference between annotated variants in due to trimodular haplotype of the RCCX module: the case of two BEN patients and European populations. From non-annotated variants with Italian families more than 40% frequency in both patients’ groups, we nominated 3 genes R. Santacroce, A. Leccese, V. Longo, C. Dimatteo, G. D‘Andrea, R. Trunzo, G. De Girolamo, M. Margaglione; with possible deleterious/damaging variants - CELA1, HSPG2 and KCNK5. Università degli Studi di Foggia, Foggia, Italy. Mutant genes (CELA1, HSPG2 and KCNK5) in BEN patients encode proteins involved in basement membrane/extracellular matrix and vascular tone, tightly connected to process of angiogenesis. We suggest that abnormal pro- Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency, ce 8s 8s of angiogenesis plays a key role in the moleculEarS pHatGho 2ge0n1es4is | o Mf BIELNA.N, eIT nA coL dY | W CW YPW 21. AE 2S gH enG e. O R anG ed b y , is autosomal recessive disorder with variableABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index incidence among the various groups. The CY
P21 A2 gene, is localized in a the FSGS-associated PAX2 mutations perturb protein function by either af- genetic unit defined RCCX module and is considered one of the most poly- fecting proper binding to DNA and transactivation activity, or altering the morphic of human genes. interaction of the transcription factor with repressor proteins, resulting in We considered new evidences about the presence of a RCCX trimodular ha- enhanced repressor activity. Thus mutations in PAX2 contribute to adult- plotype with a CY
P21 A2-like gene to explain the lack of a genotype-pheno- onset FSGS in the absence of overt extrarenal manifestations. We expand type correlation in two patients referred to our centre for a suspected Non the phenotypic spectrum associated with PAX2 mutations, which have been Classical form of CAH (N
C21 OH). shown to lead to CAKUT as part of papillorenal syndrome. PAX2 mutations To identify the presence of deletions/duplications we used Multiplex Liga- can cause disease through haploinsufficiency and dominant negative effects, tion Probe-Dependent Amplifications (MLPA) and to confirm the presence which could have implications for tailoring individualized drug therapy in of a CY
P21 A2-like gene downstream TNXA gene we used previously descri- the future. 
P03 .16-M bed amplification and restriction strategy followed by the sequencing of the Genetic and bioinformatics analysis of four novel GCK missense CY
P21 A2 gene downstream TNXB gene. variants detected in Caucasian families with GCK-MODY phenotype We validated the methods developed by recent studies and we found a good G. Malerba1, S. Costantini2, G. Contreas2, M. Corradi2, S. P. Vargas3, A. Giorgetti3, C. concordance with their results. The amplification strategy, direct sequen- Maffeis2; cing and restriction analysis of CY
P21 A1P/CY
P21 A2-TNXA PCR product in 1Section Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Regional Center for association with MLPA assay and sequencing of CY
P21 A2 gene downstream Pediatric Diabetes, Clinical Nutrition and Obesity, Department of Life and Reproduction TNXB gene, were able to identify the presence of more than one copy of Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 3Applied Bioinformatics Lab., Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy. CY
P21 A2 gene. The strategy suggested is useful to screen cases where there is no genotype- phenotype correlation. We validated the modified screening strategy to faci- litate molecular testing of CAH patients, considering the new evidence about Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene possible different haplotypes. cause a subtype of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) known as 
P03 .14-M GCK-MODY/MODY2 . Diagnostic GCK sequencing identified 16 distinct mu- Familial mediterranean fever (FMF): genetics and role of 
S100 A4 tations (13 missense, one nonsense and one splice-site substitutions, and T. F. Sarkisian1, H. Hayrapetyan1, M. Grigorian2, N. Ambartsumian2, M. T. Hansen, B. one frameshift deletion) in 23 out of 25 unrelated GCK-MODY probands, Forst, J. Klingelhofer, M. Hansen3, B. Forst3, J. Klingelhofer4; 1Center of Medical Genetics and primary health care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2University of all of which showed to co-segregate with hyperglycaemia. Four of the 13 Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark, missense substitutions (c.718A>G/p.Asn240Asp, c.757G>T/p.Val253Phe, 4Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Armenia. c.872A>C/p.Lys291Thr, and c.1151C>T/p.Ala384Val) were novel, and the nonsense mutation (c.76C>T/p.Gln26*) segregated in seven families from north-eastern Italy, suggesting a founder effect in this geographical region. Number of patients with FMF in Armenia is dramatically increasing due to We focused on the novel missense variants to test whether an accurate and genetic drift and better professional competence, treatment, genetic coun- multi-level bioinformatics approach could satisfactorily strengthen family- selling. Clinical and genetic investigations of FMF are “forced” by the high genetic evidence for potential pathogenicity of such a type of variants in social and public health problems. Common MEFV mutations account for the routine diagnostic field, where wet-lab functional assays are generally 98,71% of FMF patients and 1:3 in healthy population. 18.72% of heterozy- not viable. In silico analyses of the novel missense variants (orthologous gote carriers have abortive or mild features; no mutations detect in 1.29% of sequence conservation, SIFT, PolyPhen-2 and MutationTaster2 predictors, FMF patients. Particular MEFV mutations (M694V homozygotes) have signi- structural modeling, and splicing predictors) suggested that the encoded ficant correlation with renal amyloidosis (RA). The risk of male patients to amino acid substitutions and/or the underlying nucleotide changes are li- develop RA is four times higher than that of female patients. Colchicinothe- kely to affect GCK structure/function. In conclusion, this study shows how rapy delays RA progression, but patients with M694V-homozygous genotype a careful and multi-level bioinformatics analysis could provide effective present a more severe phenotype and a limited response to colchicine at the suggestions to help a molecular-genetic diagnosis in the absence of wet-lab nephrotic stage of RA. Patients with other genotypes have a good chance to v Pa 0l 3id .1at 7io -Sns. escape the nephrotic syndrome and to maintain renal function. Genetic spectrum of growth hormone deficiency: Findings from the Serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) α/α with M694V homozygous genotypes are Indian patient population associated with a seven-fold increased risk of developing RA, compared to S. Birla, R. Khadgawat, V. P. Jyotsna, V. Jain, M. K. Garg, A. Sharma; other SAA1 genotypes. The presence of one SAA1 α/α allele does not sug- All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. gest an increased susceptibility to RA. Association of pro-inflammation with pathogenesis of neoplasia, inflamm- atory, autoinflammatory diseases is confirmed. Correlation of 
S100 A4 Background: IsoGlaHte1d, GgHroRwHtRh PhRoOrm
P1 o,n PeO dUeIfFic1iency H (EIGSHX1D ) and combined pi- concentration with a pattern of MEFV mutations has been analyzed. Data tuitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) result in significant short stature caused demonstrating a significant increase of 
S100 A4 in plasma of 100 FMF pati- by mutations in and genes. The present ents likely implicating of 
S100 A4 in the pathogenesis of the disease. These study describes the mutation profile of GrHo1w, tGhH HRoHrRm, oPnReO PD1e ficie nPcOyU (1GFH1D.) findings suggest that chronic inflammation is mediated by 
S100 A4 and SAA patients from India. One hundred each of patients (60 IGHD, 40 CPHD) and proteins, thus therapeutic targeting of pro-inflammatory pathways should controls were recruited for screening of G and b Pe 0 3ef .1fe 5c -t Sive. Results: Consanguinity, family hiGstHoRrHy Rand mutations were present in 20%, Mutations in PAX2 Are Associated with Adult-onset FSGS 8% and 35% of the cases reGsHp1ec tively. Five novel and fouGrH r1e ported muta- E. Stellacci1, M. Barua2, L. Stella3, A. Weins4, G. Genovese2,5, V. Muto1, V. Caputo6, H. R. tions were identified (Table-1). mutations were the most common Toka2,7, V. T. Charoonratana2, M. Tartaglia1, M. R. Pollak2; change in IGHD followed by cluster deletion. A novel coding region 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, deletion and three promoter SNPs were identified. TheseP RSONP
P1 s are repor- MA, United States, 3Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 4Brigham and Women‘s ted to induce differential transcriptional activity resulting in reduced secre- Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Cambridge, tPiOonU 1oFf1 g rowth hormone. Novel insertion and nonsense mutations MA, United States, 6Università „La Sapienza“, Rome, Italy, 7Brigham and Women’s identified lead to frameshift and a truncated protein leading to GHD. Novel Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. splice site mutation in three patients from the same geographical region implies possible presence of founder effect. Conclusion: This is the first report demonstrating genetic contribution to Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a histologically defined GHD in our population wherein ‘Glu72Term’, the most common change and form of kidney injury characterized by the presence of partial sclerosis of five novel mutations were identified. Hotspot mutations reported worldwi- some but not all glomeruli. Studies of familial FSGS have been instrumen- de were absent suggesting a distinct profile. Results of the study will faci- tal in identifying podocytes as critical elements in maintaining glomerular litate timely diagnosis, counseling and intervention thereby reducing the function. Exome sequencing in members of an index family with dominant stigma associated with GHD. FSGS revealed a nonconservative, disease-segregating variant in the PAX2 transcription factor gene. Sequencing in probands of a familial FSGS cohort revealed seven rare and private heterozygous single nucleotide substitu- tions (4% of cases). Further sequencing revealed seven private missense variants (8%) in a cohort of individuals with congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). As predicted by in silico structural modeling analyses, in vitro functional stuEdSieHs dGo c2u0m1en4t e|d M thIaLtA seNve, rIaTlA oLf Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 89ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Table-1 Mutations/SNPs identified in the present study Type of S.No GHD Gene cDNA position Amino acid Nature of Frequency to determine causality. We screened a total of 61 HSCR children and iden- (N=100) position mutation/SNP tified 8 rare RET coding variants (R79W, R144H, 
P270 L, R694Q, A756V, GH1 G533S, Y1062C,D489N) and one possible splice-site variant. No rare variant gene in EDNRB were identified. The mutation frequency (15%d) eis n coovmoparable to 1 GH1 Gross deletion - ReNpoovreteld 15% previous studies. Four missense variants and one possible spice site variant cluster GH1 Deletion of have never been reported before. Four of the nine arose , while the 2 - 2% exons 3-5 remaining variants are all inherited from an unaffected parent. One patient GH1 3 rs2005171 - Reported 20% harbor two RET coding variants, one coming from each unaffected parent. IGHD promoter GH1 Functional studies showed that 7 out of 8 coding RET variants resulted in 4 promoter rs2005172 - Reported 15% significant lower expression of the phosphorylated-RET protein. Only 4 RET 5 (n=60) GHRHR rs11568828 - Reported 18% variants (R144H, R694Q, A756V, Y1062C) resulted in significantly lower promoter (Nonsense) expression of phosphorylated-ERK, a downstream component of the RET Reported 6 GHRHR c.214G>T Glu72Term 10% pathway, when compare to wild type RET. The possible splice-site variant (Missense) ReNpoovretel d (IVS 1880-4A>G) did not disturb the splicing process and, therefore, is not 7 GHRHR c.527C>T Ala176Val 3% (Insertion ) considered pathogenic. Our data suggest that 7 of the 9 identified RET vari- 8 PRO
P1  c.920insC - 2% ants are pathogenic and that not all rare RET variants are pathogenic, hence (deletion) ReNpoovretel d f Pu 0n 3c .t 2io 0n -Mal studies are essential to prove pathogenicity. 9 PRO
P1  c.112_124del13 - 2.5% CPHD (Nonsense) Translating genetic findings in functional defects: functionomics of Novel 10 PRO
P1  c.45C>T Arg16Term 2.5% hypomagnesemia-causing genes (Insertion) Novel J. H. de Baaij, F. Arjona Madueño, E. Bongers, R. Bindels, J. Hoenderop; 11 (n=40) POU1F1 c.128InsA - (Acceptor splice 2.5% Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. site) 12 c.605-1G->A - 7.5% The recent improvements of next generation sequencing techniques allow 
P03 .18-M relatively rapid and cheap identification of new gene mutations in patients Exonic de novo Mutations in Sporadic Hirschsprung Disease R. M. W. Hofstra1,2, H. Gui3, D. Schriemer4, P. Griseri5, A. Pelet6, M. Ruiz-Ferrer7, C. with familial hypomagnesemia. However, translating the genetic findings Berrios8, W. van Ijcken1, M. van den Hout1, Y. Sribudiani1, P. Tam3, C. Tang3, W. Cheng3, B. into functional assays to examine the function of the affected genes remains Eggen4, I. Matera5, G. Antinolo7, S. Lyonnet6, A. Chakravarti8, S. Borrego7, I. Ceccherini5, J. challenging because of inadequate cell models, the absence of an Mg2+ ra- Amiel6, M. Garcia-Barcelo3; dioisotope and limited availability of animal models. 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Institute of Child Health, UCL, London, United For example, we have identified new mutations in the gene CNNM2 in five Kingdom, 3University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 4University Medical Center families suffering from mental retardation, seizures, and hypomagnesemia. Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Istituto G. Gaslini, For the first time, a recessive mode of inheritance of CNNM2 mutations was L.go G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 6Université Paris 5-Descartes, Paris, France, 7Hospital Universptario,Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 8Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, observed and mutations in CNNM2 are associated with mental disability. United States. Using stable Mg2+ isotopes, we demonstrated that CNNM2 increases cel- lular Mg2+ uptake in HEK293 cells and that this process occurs through regulation of the Mg2+-permeable cation channel TRPM7. In contrast, cells Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a disorder of the enteric nervous system expressing mutated CNNM2 proteins did not show increased Mg2+ uptake. (ENS) and is characterized by the absence of enteric neurons along a va- Knockdown of cnnm2 isoforms in zebrafish resulted in disturbed brain de- riable length of the intestine. HSCR most commonly presents sporadically, velopment and reduced body Mg content. These phenotypes were rescued althdoe ungohv oit is familial in 5-20% of the patients. The sporadic form of the by injection of mammalian wild-type Cnnm2 cRNA, whereas mammalian disorder is believed to be a genetically complex disease. To assess the role mutant Cnnm2 cRNA did not improve the zebrafish knockdown phenotypes. of mutations in sporadic HSCR, we performed edxeo nmoev os equencing Altogether these data show that CNNM2 is fundamental for brain develop- on 20 HSCR patients, predominantly females with long segment HSCR andde ment, neurological functioning and Mg2+ homeostasis. tnhoevior unaffected parents. We identified and confirmed 24 mutations By establishing a novel Mg2+ transport assay using stable Mg2+ isotopes (18 SNVs, 6 Indels) in 17 different genes (1.2 per trio). Non-synonymous and the loss-of-function zebrafish model, we provide a unique system to ex- mutations were identified in RET in 8 out of 20 patients, corroborating amine the function of novel genes in Mg2+ homeostasis. These new in vitro previous findings that RET is the major genetic contributor in long-segment and in vivo models may aid to explain the function of electrolyte transpor- HSCR. A replication study in independent t Pe 0r 3s .i 2n 1 t -h Se future. Family genomics reveals disease genetics: Inflammatory bowel HSCR patients,d gee nnoev bo urden tests and functional analysis in both cell lines disease and zebra fish are currently being conducted. Interestingly, some of the ge- A. Stittrich, S. Ament, D. Mauldin, M. Brunkow, L. Rowen, G. Glusman, J. Roach, L. Hood; Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, United States. nes harboring mutations are members of pathways involved in the development of the ENSd aen ndo vthoe encoded proteins interact with known key signaling molecules. We will present all data which will enable us to make conclusion on whether, mutations in genes other that RET also con- By definition, complex diseases are caused by many different genes, but this tribute to the development of sporadic HSCR. might hold true only at the population level. We hypothesize that within fa- milies with a high disease burden, complex diseases can arise from only a 
P03 .19-S few high-effect risk variants. Assuming that all or most affected family mem- RET and EDNRB mutations screening in Indonesian patients with bers share the genomic region(s) that harbor the risk variant(s), whole-ge- HSCR, functional study and its implication in diagnostic nome sequencing is the most precise method for determination of identical- T. Widowati1, Y. Sribudiani2,3, S. Melhem2, J. Dijkhuis4, M. Viel4, P. Rochadi5, S. Y. Patria1, A. by-descent segments to narrow down the search space for disease genes. H. Sadewa6, R. Sinke4, Y. Soenarto1, R. M. W. Hofstra2; Family genomics is especially powerful in multi-generation pedigrees. In 1Department of Pediatric, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Gadjah Mada, Prof. Dr. some of the pedigrees we analyze diseased individuals are separated by Sardjito Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 2Department of Clinical Genetic, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of more than 10 meioses each of which narrows the number of candidate alle- Medicine Universitas Padjadjaran, Dr. Hasan Sadikin Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia, les by approximately half, per Mendel’s law of segregation. Family genomics 4Department of Genetic, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, furthermore permits identification of sequencing errors and detection of 5Department of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Gadjah Mada, Prof. rare variants with high confidence. Dr. Sardjito Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 6Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of In addition to our identical-by-descent detection tools we have created an Medicine Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. analysis workflow to identify and score variants according to their inheri- tance pattern, population frequency and predicted function. We are current- ly analyzing over 200 families in over 30 studies that cover a wide range of Hirschsprung diseaseR (EHTSCR) iEsD aN RmBa.j ority cause of chronic constipation diseases, from rare congenital diseases to common neurodegenerative and in children. HSCR is an inherited disease and germline mutations are fre- chronic inflammatory diseases. We present here our methods for identifying quently identified in and RET HoweEvDeNr,R dBe fining causality of mu- high confidence candidate variants for inflammatory bowel disease in fami- tations in this genetic complex disorder is difficult. Therefore, in this study lies with high disease burden. w9e0 combined sequence analysis of and EwSHithG fu 2nc0t1io4na |l MstuIdLieAsN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P03 .22-M A hemizygous mutation in retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) is a potential novel cause of congenital renal tract Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) comprise a malformations spectrum of structural malformations. CAKUT occur in 1:500 live-births and G. van de Hoek1, K. Neveling2, T. Klasson1, M. R. Havenith1, E. M. H. F. Bongers2, N. V. A. M. form the most common cause of end-stage renal failure in children. We aim Knoers1, R. H. Giles1, K. Y. Renkema1; to identify rare mutations in CAKUT candidate genes and elucidate involve- 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Radboud university medical ment in CAKUT aetiology. After in-solution enrichmeTMnt (SureSelect, Agilent), center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. 208 candidate genes were sequenced (SOLiD5500 , Life Technologies) in 460 sporadic CAKUT patients. All genes were known to play a role in human CAKUT or to disrupt nephrogenesis in animal models. We demonstrated Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) comprise coverage depth of 120X and 65% enrichment efficiency on average. After a range of structural malformations and constitute the principal cause of variant calling, filtering was performed based on sequencing depth (≥15X) end-stage renal disease in children. Although several genes have been linked and allele frequency, excluding common variants. We identified 47 indels, 20 to CAKUT pathogenesis, the genetic background remains unclear in many nonsense, 22 essential splice-site mutations, as well as 150 novel missense patients. We performed whole exome sequencing in the patient’s DNA (Su- variants in 82 genes that were predicted to be pathogenic. Of these, 71 va- reSelect, Agilent / SOLiD5500™ System, Life Technologies). Through RwPhGoRle riants in 39 genes were previously reported in The Human Gene Mutation exome sequencing we identified a novel hemizygous dinucleotide frames- Database as causal mutations for kidney-related disorders. The variants are hift deletion in the X-linked retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator ( ) currently being validated in patienPtsA aXn2d parents by Sanger seqLuZeTnSc2ing. Pre- gene of a male patient wiRtPh GuRnilateral kidney dysplasia. This mutation was liminary ddaet an oshvoow that the majority of variants are inherited, except for a confirmed through Sanger sequencing and was found to be inherited from well-known frameshift variant in and a novel variant in , which the mother. Mutations in are frequently reported in patients with pro- occurred . We conclude that our approach provides knowledge on greRsPsGivRe retinal degeneration, however its poitne nvitviaol role in kidney pathoge- the frequency of known disease-causing mutations and underlines the hete- nesis has not previously been observed. At present, we investigate the effect rogeneity of CAKUT. Results indicate the value of including novel genes in an of dysfunction on kidney development , by generating zebrafish NGS based genetic test for CAKUT, facilitating early diagnostics and genetic mutants using transRcrPiGpRtion activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs). Sub- counselling for CAKUT patients and their relatives. 
P03 .25-S sequently, complementation assays will be peirnfo vrimtroed to study the specific Renal fibrosis is the common feature of Autosomal Dominant effect of the human mutation in this vertebrate system. Also, we aim to Tubulointerstitial Kidney Diseases (ADTKD) caused by MU
C1  or characterize both wild-type and mutant RPGR , using patient-derived UMOD mutations cell-lines isolated from urine and IMCD3 (murine inner medullary collecting A. B. Ekici1, T. Hackenbeck2, V. Moriniere3, A. Pannes4, M. Buettner5, R. Janka6, S. Uebe1, A. duct) 3D cellular spheroids. To conclude, by identifying novel players in the Wiesener1, I. Hermann2, S. Grupp2, M. Hornberger7, T. B. Huber8,9, N. Isbel10, G. Mangos11, aetiology of CAKUT, we will enhance our knowledge on the molecular net- S. McGinn12, D. Soreth-Rieke13, B. B. Beck4, M. Uder6, K. Amann5, C. Antignac14,15, A. Reis1, K. works underlying normal and disrupted kidney development. Identification Eckardt2, M. S. Wiesener2; of the genetic aetiology of CAKUT will improve DNA diagnostics and genetic 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Dept. of Nephrology and counselling for CAKUT patients. Hypertension, Erlangen, Germany, 3Dept. of Genetics, Assistance Publique – Hopitaux 
P03 .23-S de Paris, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, The Prognosis of Abnormal Fetal Kidneys Germany, 5Dept. of Nephropathology, Erlangen, Germany, 6Dept. of Radiology, Erlangen, M. Rasmussen1, M. Olsen2, O. B. Petersen3, L. Sunde1; Germany, 7Dept. Nephrology and Hypertension, Offenburg, Germany, 8Renal Division 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, of the University Hospital, Freiburg, Germany, 9BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling 2Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany, 10Dept. of Renal Medicine, 3Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 11Dept. of Renal Medicine, St. George Denmark. Clinical School UNSW, Sydney, Australia, 12Dept. of Renal Medicine, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 13KfH Nierenzentrum, Miesbach, Germany, 14Inserm, U983, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 15Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Introduction: With the advent of high-resolution ultrasound scanners and Imagine, Paris, France. the offer of a 20-week ultrasound scan to all pregnant women in Denmark, a suspicion of abnormal kidneys in the fetus is raised more frequently now than earlier. The prognosis of a fetus with abnormal kidneys is often not For decades, clinically ill-defined autosomal-dominant renal diseases ori- known, which complicates decision-making and causes anxiety to parents. ginating from tubular cells and leading to tubular atrophy and interstitial Methods: A population-based cohort of fetuses diagnosed with abnormal fibrosis were reported. Patients exhibit mutations in at least 4 genes: UMOD, kidneys in the period 1st of January 2007 - 31st of December 2012 and a HNF1B, REN, MU
C1 , but are clinically indistinguishable all associated with population-based matched comparison cohort of foetuses examined in the renal fibrosis and renal failure the 3rd and 6th decade of life. In contrast to 20-week screening programme were established. what the frequently used term “Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease” (MCKD) A national query identified fetuses with cystic kidneys, echogenic kidneys, implies, development of medullary cysts is neither an early, nor a typical multicystic kidneys, renal agenesia and/or severe hydronephrosis. Severe feature, as analyzed by MRI. hydronephrosis was included in the query to avoid missing cases of multi- We now investigated 10 such families. In two large families we performed cystic kidneys, as the primary finding may have been interpreted as hydro- genome-wide linkage and haplotype analyses confirming linkage to a known nephrosis. 3.4 Mb locus MCKD1 locus on chromosome 1q21. Targeted genomic sequen- All Danish departments of obstetrics and fetal medicine use the same soft- cing of the complete linkage locus in affected and healthy individuals of the- ware for prenatal diagnostics and ultrasound examination. These data were se two families and affected individuals of further families failed to uncover merged into a national dataset of around 1000 pregnancies. Prenatal fetal any segregating variant in any of the genes, including MU
C1 . The VNTR regi- data were linked to their mothers’ data using the mothers’ civil registration on in the coding sequence of the MU
C1  was masked in these analyses due to numbers. This allows unambiguous individual-level linkage to all relevant its high GC-content and repetitive nature. After the recent publication of one data sources in Denmark, including the Danish National Patient Registry MU
C1 -VNTR insertion mutation we established SNaPshot-minisequencing and medical journals. confirming this MU
C1  mutation in 4 families. Further 3 families carried an Results: The prevalence of the various types of abnormal fetal kidneys, the UMOD mutation, leaving 3 families unsolved to date. On the basis of clinical prevalence of terminated pregnancies and measures of prognosis will be and pathological characteristics we propose the term “Autosomal Dominant discussed. This study may facilitate that parents having a fetus with kidney Tubulointerstitial Kidney Disease” (ADTKD) as a new name for this entity. abnormalities can be counselled based on valid and comprehensive data on This new terminology should enhance recognition and correct diagnosis of prognosis. affected individuals, facilitating genetic counseling and stimulating research 
P03 .24-M into the underlying pathomechanisms. Targeted sequencing of 208 candidate genes in 460 CAKUT patients 
P03 .26-M facilitates the inclusion of a novel gene set in diagnostics The promise and challenge of high throughput sequencing to discover N. Nicolaou1, I. J. Nijman1, S. van Lieshout1, G. Monroe1, A. M. van Eerde1, W. F. Feitz2, I. A. genes involved in Medullary Sponge Kidney disease L. M. van Rooij3, L. F. M. van der Zanden3, N. Roeleveld3,4, E. M. H. F. Bongers5, R. H. Giles6, V. Palazzo1, A. Provenzano1, A. La Barbera1, E. Andreucci2, B. Mazzinghi2, M. Pantaleo2, E. Cuppen1, K. Y. Renkema1, N. V. A. M. Knoers1; M. Caruso3, L. Garavelli4, G. Gambaro5, M. Materassi6, P. Romagnani6,7, S. Giglio1,2; 1Medical Genetics, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Urology, Radboud university 1Department Of Biomedical Experimental And Clinical Sciences Medical Gentic Unit, medical center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Health Evidence, Radboud university medical University Of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetic Unit Meyer Children‘s University center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Paediatrics, Radboud university medical center, Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Nephrology Unit, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Obstetrics and Pediatric Department,Arcispedale Santa Maria Netherlands, 6Nephrology and Hypertension, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Nuova Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 5Renal Unit, Department of Medicine, University- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 91ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy, 6Pediatric Nephrology Unit Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 7Department Of Biomedical Experimental And Clinical Sciences University Of Florence, Firenze, Italy. nes are among the main causes of early-onset and familial steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome. This study was carried out to assess the frequencies of mutations in these two genes in a cohort of Tunisian pediatric NS patients. Medullary sponge kidney (MSK) is a rare, developmental congenital disease Methods:Mutation analysis was carried out by direct sequencing of the characterized by diffuse ectasia or dilation of precalyceal collecting tubules. NPH
S1  and NPH
S2  genes in 18 nephrotic syndrome (NS) families. This co- It is generally considered a sporadic disorder, but an apparently autosomal hort included 6 families of congenital NS, and 12 infantile onset steroid re- dominant inheritance has also been observed. The diagnosis of MSK is ra- sistant NS or familial cases. diographic: typical pictures reveal collections of contrast medium in dilated Results: We detected likely causative mutations in 5 out of 6 families of con- papillary ducts, giving the appearance of a blush or linear striations in the genital NS studied. A total of 5 different mutations were found in the NPH
S1  mildest cases, or of bouquets of flowers when cystic dilation of the coll- gene. 3 homozygous mutations were found in the NPH
S2  gene in 3 out of 12 ecting ducts is seen. We previously described the association of MSK with infantile onset NS or familial cases. mutations in AT
P6 V1B1 and AT
P6 V0A4, responsible of distal renal tubular Conclusions: Our results show a high prevalence of disease causing muta- acidosis (dRTA), a condition characterized by hypokalemia, hyperchloremic tions in the NPH
S1  (80% congenital, 30% overall) and NPH
S2  (25% early metabolic acidosis, nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis, osteomalacia and rik- onset and 16% overall) genes in the Tunisian NS children as compared to kets. In this disorder the α-intercalated cells in the collecting duct are unable the European or Asian populations 
P03 .29-S to secrete H+ and to acidify urine. The aim of our study was to investigate, Gene Expressions In Glomerulopathies on the basis of family history and clinical presentation at various ages, the M. Safarikova1,2, E. Pazourkova2, A. Horinek1, J. Reiterova1,2, J. Stekrova1, M. Kohoutova1, relationship between MSK and dRTA: we studied first the possible role of V. Tesar2; the B1 and a4 apical subunits of the H+ATPase pump (at present 8 patients 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University show pathogenetic variations in these two subunits) and afterwards whe- in Prague a, Prague, Czech Republic, 2First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University ther other genes could be causative of this condition. We investigated, by in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech high throughput sequencing, 25 patients classified as having MSK and we Republic. studied, in addition to the role of the above mentioned genes, other genes encoding proteins expressed in the tubules and genes implicated in the coll- ecting duct system development. We will show the results of this new pilot The nephrotic syndrome is connected with both primary and secondary study. glomerulopathies. The expressions of 47 genes associated with different 
P03 .27-S kidney diseases in patients with primary and secondary glomerulopathies MODY/Type 2 Diabetes: molecular analysis of a large cohort of were studied. The aim of this study is to find prognostic factors from re- patients by Next Generation Sequencing nal biopsy. Our study was performed on the set of 118 patients. There were R. Artuso1, A. Provenzano2, L. Giunti1, B. Mazzinghi1, E. Andreucci1, L. Lenzi3, B. Piccini3, five different biopsy-proven diagnoses: FSGS, IgAN, MCD, MGN and SLE. The P. Mandich4, A. Blasetti5, E. Mannucci6, S. Toni3, S. Giglio1,2; 1Medical Genetic Unit, Meyer‘s Children University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical expressions were analysed using the real-time PCR and normalized by the Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences, University endocontrol GAPDH gene. The obtained data were analysed using softwa- of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 3Diabetology Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, re STATISTICA 10. At the beginning three genes had to be excluded for no Firenze, Italy, 4DINOGMI, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics, patient′s sample had showed the expression in these genes. The statistical University of Chieti, Chieti, Italy, 6Diabetes Agency, Careggi Hospital, Firenze, Italy. analysis using Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA was divided into three parts. The p va- lue of following genes was lower than 0.01. Firstly, all the diagnoses were compared with each other. The statistically significance was identified in Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a phenotypically and gene- nine genes mostly between FSGS and SLE patients. Secondly, patients with tically heterogeneous group of diabetes caused by single defects in at least SLE and IgAN were sorted out according to their histological foundations thirteen genes, characterised by autosomal dominant inheritance, a young and the gene expressions were compared in each diagnosis. The only si- age of onset and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction. Genetic testing for MODY has gnificant gene was in the comparison of IgAN patients. Finally, it was made become a routine procedure allowing to set up proper treatment and discri- comparison between groups of SLE and IgAN patiens, MCD, FSGS and MGN minate from type 2 diabetes (T2D) whose symptoms are often overlapping. patients. The statistically significant differences were identified in ten ge- We analysed, in the last 5 years, more than 300 Italian families with MODY/ nes. The differences were mostly between one group of SLE patients and T2D diagnosis by direct sequencing of genes GCK, HNF1α, HNF4α, IPF1 and patients with FSGS. Our study demonstrated the differences in gene expres- HNF1β, and only about 40% of the cases resulted positive. Mutations in GCK sions not only inter-diagnosis, but also intra-diagnosis. Supported by the gene account for up to 80% for all Italian MODY cases according to literature grant project PRVOUK- 
P25 /LF1/2. 
P03 .30-M data. Next-Generation-Sequencing-based molecular diagnostics for We then reanalysed the negative subjects through Next Generation Sequen- congenital and inherited kidney disease cing technology. We excluded common, non-coding and synonymous gene B. van der Zwaag, A. M. van Eerde, M. G. Elferink, P. H. A. van Zon, M. F. Stokman, K. Y. variants, and performed in-depth analysis on filtered sequence variants in Renkema, N. N. Nicolaou, H. K. Ploos van Amstel, N. V. A. M. Knoers; a pre-defined set of 102 genes implicated in glucose metabolism. We found, Department of Medical Genetics, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. in association with known heterozygous SNPs associated with diabetes, rare and pathogenetic variants, demonstrating that this approach leads to a ge- netic diagnosis in most of patients. For example, we identified new variants Congenital and inherited kidney diseases constitute the leading cause of in the RFX6 gene and in two of these cases we also detected rare variants chronic kidney disease in children. Molecular diagnostic analysis of hetero- in WF
S1  and ABC
C8 . All patients showed a good therapeutic response to geneous renal disorders has long been hampered by the size and numbers of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DP
P4 ) inhibitors. genes involved, but has become feasible with the advent of Next-Generation- This approach may help in understanding the molecular aetiology of dia- Sequencing (NGS). We set up and implemented an NGS-based test in our betes and in providing a more personalised treatment for each genetic sub- ISO15189 certified laboratory to enrich and sequence 376 genes known to t Py 0p 3e .. 28-M be causal in or associated with kidney and urinary tract disorders. Based A molecular genetic analysis of nephrotic syndrome in a cohort of on the enrichment 23 disease related genepanels covering 175 genes were Tunisian families formed, including renal cysts (50 genes), Bardet-Biedl syndrome (14 genes), M. Trabelsi1, O. Naija2, M. Trabelsi3,1, R. Meddeb3,1, H. Safraou3, N. Arfaoui1, F. Maazoul3, T. Joubert syndrome (21 genes), nephronophthisis (15 genes), congenital ano- Gargah4, F. ben Moussa5, A. Khedher6, H. Bouhamed Chaabouni3,1, R. Mrad3,1; malies of the kidney and urinary tract (40 genes) and nephrotic syndrome 1Human Genetic Laboratory Faculty medicine tunis Tunis el Manar University, Tunis, (16 genes). To reach a genotyping accuracy of at least 99%, a minimal verti- Tunisia, 2Pediatric department Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Congenital cal coverage of 15 individual reads per base is required. To deliver a compre- and hereditary diseases Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Pediatric department hensive analysis of the genepanel, a horizontal coverage of at least 98% of Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Nephrology Department, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 6Nephrology and internal medicine department, Charles Nicolle hospital, targeted bases is requested. When coverage by NGS drops below requested Tunis, Tunisia. coverage thresholds, additional “Sanger”-based sequencing is performed to fill in the gaps. In this fashion, a mutation detection rate of >95% is achieved for the genes analysed. Initial diagnostic sequencing results will be presen- Background: Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is a renal disease characterized by ted. To conclude, comprehensive genetic testing by NGS will boost the dia- heavy proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, edema and hyperlipidemia. Its pre- gnostic yield to potentially >40-50% molecular diagnoses within one clini- sentation within the first 3 months of life or in multiple family members sug- cal genepanel analyzed. Thereby delivering a swift answer to the patient and ge9s2ts an underlying inherited cause. Mutations in thEeS NHPHGS 12 a0n1d4 N P| HM
S2 IL gAe-N, a IT le Aa Lp Y in | e Wffic Wac Wy a .n Ed S c Hos Gt r .e Odu Rc Gtion for healthcare providers.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P03 .31-S Epistasic Association of CTRC and SPINK1 Gene Variants Combination with Recurrent Pancreatitis in Lipoprotein Lipase Deficiency Results K. Tremblay, C. Dubois-Bouchard, D. Brisson, D. Gaudet; Most pathogenic mutations were identified in ABCB11 (56%), followed by Université de Montréal and ECOGENE-21 Research Center, Chicoutimi, QC, Canada. AT
P8 B1 (32%) and ABCB4 (12%); including 73% missense mutations, 17% Background: truncating mutations, 7% splice mutations and 3% small deletions. Response to pharmacological therapy was insufficient in 87% of patients, Lipoprotein Lipase deficiency (LPLD) is a rare autosomal re- thus, biliary diversion and/or liver transplantation was performed in 75%. cessive disease associated with severe hypertriglyceridemia and increased One additional patient is currently listed for transplantation. risk of pancreatitis or other co-morbidities. There are important unexplai- Perioperative complications observed in patients with missense mutati- ned inter-individual variations in the incidence and severity of acute pan- ons were mild and included bleeding and coagulation problems (n=2). Life creatitis episodes in LPLD patients.O Sbejveecrtaivl eg:enes involved in proteolytic threatening complications (organ rejection requiring retransplantation, networks are associated with pancreas and lipoprotein functionsC aTnRdC could death) occurred in two patients with at least one truncating ABCB11 muta- influence pancreatitis risk in LPLD. SPINK1 To evaluate the association tion. Severe long term complications were observed in 3 AT
P8 B1 mutations between two genes regulating serine proteases, chymotMryeptshiond Cs (: CTRC) and carriers including severe diarrhea, renal failure, deafness and polyneuro- SsePrIiNnKe1 peptidase inhibitor kazal type1 ( ), and recurrence of hospita- pathy. lizations for acute pancreatitis among LPLD subjects. and Conclusion have been sequenced in a sample of 38 LPLD patients and 100 con- Truncating mutations may be associated with a higher rate of severe peri- trols. In LPLD, 18 (47%) presented a history of recurrent (≥5) hospitalizati- operative complications in liver transplantation, possibly due to a stronger ons for acute and severe abdominal pain, whereas 8 (21%) had not Ryeets bueltesn: immune reaction towards the wild type protein. With an ongoing study we hospitalized for this condition. Comparisons between studied groups were are currently evaluating this hypothesis in a larger cohort including applica- done with chi-square tests and multinominal regression analyses. t Pi 0on 3 .o 3f 4 N -MGS panel sequencing to search for additional causative genes. GCeTnReC s)equencing idenStPifIiNedK 11)5 SNPs. Genotype-stratified analyses in LPLD Genetic analysis of PKD1 and PKD2 genes in Korean patients with subjects and controls suggested an epistasic association between rs545634 autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease ( and rs11319 ( SNPs combination and recurrence of hospita- R. Choi1, H. Park2, Y. Hwang3, C. Ki1, K. Lee1, J. Kim1, C. Ahn2; lizations (p<0.001) in LPLD. Regression analyses, controlling for age, gender 1Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, and smCoTkRinCgS sPtIaNtuKs1, suggest that the risk of frequent and recurrent hospita- Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Department of lCizoantciolunssi foonr :acute pancreatitis is significantly increased in LPLD in presence Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of this - SNPs combination (OR = 41.4 [CI: 2.0-848.0]; p =0.016). of, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Eulji General Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. These results suggest that modifier genes involved in protease pathways could influence the trajectory of pancreatitis risk in LPLD. 
P03 .32-M Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (PAKDD
P1 KD) isP mKDos2t common Towards introduction of exome sequencing in pediatric liver inherited kidney disorder with progressive cyst growth and renal enlarge- transplant program ment, resulting in renal failure. Mutations in the and PgKeDne1s ac- D. Marchetti, C. Lodrini, L. Pezzoli, M. E. Sana, A. R. Lincesso, K. Migliorati, M. Iascone; cPoKuDn2t for 85% and 15% of all ADPKD cases, respectively. Although there are Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. a few studiesP KoDn 1the frequency and spectrum of mutations in the and genes in Korean patients with ADPKD, they did not sequenced entire exons of the gene but analyzed only for exon 36-46 excepting the pseu- Pediatric cholestasis shows different etiology, clinical course and prognosis. dogene region, which made it difficult to evaluate the accurate frequency Early recognition of the causes allows an appropriate treatment and ma- and the spectrum of mutations. Therefore, we performed sequence analysis nagement and plays a central role in decision-making about pediatric liver of 20 consecutive unrelated ADPKD patients for kidney transplantation by transplantation. Although each of genetic forms of cholestasis is rare, they using long-range PCR to avoid pseudogene amplification followed by exon- collectively represent a frequent causes of liver transplantation. Starting in specific PCR and sequencing of the entire exons of the two genes. All pati- 2012, we enrolled and analyzed by exome sequencing 44 pediatric patients ents met the diagnostic critPeKriDa1 of ADPKD baPsKeDd2 on the ultrasonographic with isolated or syndromic forms of liver disease. The exonic region of 2,761 findings and family history of PKD and 14 patients (70%P)K wDe1re revealed known disease-causing genes were assessed on patient and their parents to have mutationsP;K 1D12 with and 3 with mutations, respectively. using the TruSight Exome kit and 2X150 PE sequencing on MiSeq. Data ana- Among 10 novel mutations, eight mutations wPKerDe1 found in gene while lysis was focalized on phenotypic features and expected inheritance model. two mutations in gene. All were deleterious mutations except one mis- We obtained 32,799,211 reads/sample, the mean coverage was 200X and sense mutation. It is of note that 6 out of 11 mutations (54.5%) were 98.54% of target regions were >20X. We identified the genetic causes in 21 located outside the range of exon 36-46. Considering the mutation spectrum patients (diagnostic yield:47.7%). Sixty seven percent of detected mutations in Korean patients with ADPKD, long-range PCR followed by direct sequence were well known and previously described, while the remaining mutations analysis of pseudogene region should be performed for accurate molecular satisfied criteria for molecular diagnosis. Alagille syndrome and progressive diagnosis of the disease. familial intrahepatic cholestasis were the most frequent diagnosis (42.8% 
P03 .35-S and 28.6% respectively). Two patients were affected by a fructose intoleran- Primary hyperoxaluria: analysis of GRHPR, HOGA1 genes and the ce while galactosemia, Niemann-Pick disease type C and Gaucher syndrome promoter-sequence of AGXT gene in the Italian population each have been diagnosed in a single patient. These results show that the A. Pelle1, G. Mandrile1,2, A. Cuccurullo1, C. Mancini3, R. Sebastiano2, S. Varacalli2, D. F. diagnosis of children with intrahepatic cholestasis sometime is clinically Giachino1,4, M. De Marchi1,2; 1University of Torino, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Torino, Italy, challenging. Our data further expand the use of exome sequencing also in Orbassano (TO), Italy, 2Medical Genetics, San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano, Italy, restricted subtype of pediatric patients, with a strong clinical impact also in Orbassano (TO), Italy, 3University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, l Piv 0e 3r . 3tr 3a -n Ssplant program. Italy, Torino, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano, Italy, Success of liver transplantation in patients with progressive familial Orbassano, Italy. intrahepatic cholestasis: is there an association between genotype and outcome? S. M. Herbst1, J. Vermehren2, M. Melter2, U. Hehr1; Primary hyperoxaluria (PHA)G XisT ,a G rRaHrPe RautosoHmOaGlA r1ecessive disease, com- 1Center for and Institute of Human Genetics, University Regensburg, Regensburg, monly arising in childhood with nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, chronic Germany, 2Children´s Hospital, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. renal failure. Mutations in and genes are responsible of type 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Our laboratory, member of the European PH consortium (OAxGaXlTEurope), is thGeR HoPnRly Italian center offering these genetic Study aim analyses. GRHPR HOGA1 Characterization of the genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with CAuGrXrTe ntly, 81 -PH1 and 1 -PH2 patient are known in Italy. progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) and identification of In this study the AenGtXiTre coding sequence of and genes and the prognostic genetic parameters for long term outcome and success of liver promoter was sequenced in 15 patients with high cliHnOicGaAl 1suspicion of transplantation in order to improve individual treatment options. PH, negative for mutations. No point mutations were detected. Method One patient irne ssiulilctoed homozygous for the c.341-81delT variant in Genetic testing was performed for 57 PFIC index patients, including NGS pa- intron 2. This variant is noti nre-vpiotrroted in literature and was evaluated as pa- nel diagnostics for 5 children with infantile cholestasis and atypical liver hi- thogenic by prediction, generating a new acceptor splicing site (AG stopathology. Long term data (2-35 years) of 8 patients with genetically con- in c.341-79). The minigene assay demonstrated that this variant did firmed PFIC will be presented to illustrate EthSeHir Gsp e2c0ifi1c 4m e| dMicaILl pAroNb,l eImTAs.LY |n Wot WinteWrf.eEreS wHiGth. sOplRicGing. 93ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index AGXT 
P03 .38-M Renal function decay after nephrectomy: role of surgery and impact of Two patients were heterozygous for two different -promoter variants hypertension gene polymorphisms (c.-647C>T, c.-424C>T), not reported in the scarce literature nor in 1000Ge- L. Zagato1, S. Delli Carpini1, M. T. Sciarrone Alibrandi1, F. Trevisani2, P. Manunta2,1; nomes Database. These variants have been evaluated as not pathogenic be- 1Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 2Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milano, Italy. cause they do not lie in any known regulatory-transcription site. The negative results in those patients with high clinical suspicion of PH could be explained by undetected deletions (investigable by MLPA analysis The loss of nephronic mass leads to the development of hypertension and of the two major genes) or mutations in other genes involved in oxalate me- chronic renal failure, but the frequency and the rate at which this takes place t Pa 0b 3o .l 3is 6m -M, or differential diagnosis. after radical nephrectomy (RN) or nephron sparing surgery (NSS) is extre- Screening of a large cohort of Italian patients with Albright hereditary mely variable and the mechanisms have not been clarified to date. osteodystrophy and/or Pseudohypoparathyroidism phenotype for To evaluate the progression rate of renal function decay within a population subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 2 undergoing kidney surgery and to assess the influence of polymorphisms of F. M. Elli1, P. Bordogna1, L. de Sanctis2, V. Boldrin1, A. Spada1, G. Mantovani1; genes involved in essential hypertension (HT). 1Università degli Studi di Milano - IRCCS Cà Granda H Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 162 patients were followed at the Outpatient Clinic of Nephrology after a 2Università di Torino - Ospedale Infantile Regina Margherita, Torino, Italy. surgery for renal carcinoma, 75 RN and 87 NSS. The eGFR (estimated Glo- merular Filtration Rate), an indicator of renal function, was evaluated for a mean follow-up of 23.5 months. 128 genetic polymorphisms located in 70 Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a heterogeneous group of rare genetic loci candidate for HT have been tested by TaqMan OpenArray system. Sta- disorders due to end-organ resistance to the actions of PTH caused by gene- tistical analysis was performed using a General Linear Model covarying for tic and/or epigenetic defects within or upstream the GNAS locus. The clas- sex, age, BMI, blood, therapy, basal renal function and type of surgery. sification in different subtypes is based on the presence of specific somatic About the different surgical techniques, NSS patients displayed a significant and developmental abnormalities, referred to as Albright hereditary osteo- decrease of eGFR variation significantly lower than that observed in RN dystrophy (AHO), and of resistance to other hormones acting via G protein ones (-5.7 ml/min vs. -23.9 ml/min P <0.05). Two SNPs, located in SIK1 and coupled receptors. in PRKG1 genes, associated with a quicker decay of renal function (p=0.009) Despite the advances in the study of PHP molecular determinants, about -20 mL/min/1.73m2 after 12 months in carriers of SIK1 T/PRKG1 GG (n=8) 30% of patients still lack a molecular diagnosis and, in the last years, inde- vs. -4 at the same time in all the other groups (n=154). pendent groups found in a subset of PHP/AHO patients causative defects The progression of renal function decline after kidney surgery depends both classically associated to diseases with partially common phenotype, such as on surgery type (80%) and on genetic background (15-20%). 
P03 .39-S deletions of 2q37.2 associated with the AHO-like syndrome (or brachydac- Hereditary renal hypouricemia causing by defect in URAT1: a new tyly-mental retardation syndrome, BDMR). insight into molecular pathology In this study, we screened by a multiplex ligand-dependent probe amplifica- B. Stiburkova1, J. Stekrova2, M. Nakamura3, K. Ichida4,3; tion (MLPA) assay targeting the chromosome region 2q our series of AHO/ 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University PHP pts negative for GNAS defects (n=56) and we detected 3 different de- in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First letions of 2q37, overlapping but smaller than those previously described. Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague and General University Hospital, Prague, Ongoing studies will define the inheritance pattern of such deletions and Czech Republic, 3Department of Pathophysiology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 4Division of Kidney and Hypertension, Jikei University School of will allow to narrow the common critical region associated with the AHO Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. phenotype. In conclusion, our data further confirm the molecular and clinical overlap between PHP/AHO and BDMR and will hopefully help to define genes invol- Renal hypouricemia is a rare heterogeneous inherited disorder characteri- ved in the AHO phenotype. Furthermore, all PHP/AHO pts negative for GNAS zed by impaired tSuLbCu2l2aAr 1u2ric acid transport with severe complications, such genetic/epigenetic defects should be considered for further molecular inve- as acute kidney injury. So far, moSrLeC t2hAa9n 100 patients with a loss-of-function stigations to optimize genetic counselling. 
P03 .37-S mutation in the gene (URAT1, OMIM #220150) and more than Exome sequencing reveals TPO mutations in Pseudo-Pendred ten patients with defects in the gene (GLUT9, OMIM #612076) have syndrome been describedS. LTCh2e2 As1e2rum uric acid concentration in the proband was A. Denomme-Pichon1, E. Colin1,2, S. Marlin3, L. Jonard3, S. Rouleau4, S. Kury5, S. Dumont5, 1.1 mg/dL and expressed as an increase in the fractional excretion of uric R. Coutant4, D. Bonneau1,2; acid 43%. The gene analysis for the patient revealXeedn ocopmusploauenvids 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 2UMR CNRS heterozygous variants of p.G366R and p.R477H. Functional and immuno- 6214 INSERM 1083, Angers, France, 3Department of Genetics, CHU Necker-Enfants- Malades, Paris, France, 4Department of Pediatrics, CHU Angers, Angers, France, cytochemical analysis of URAT1 mutants was performed in 5Department of Genetics, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France. oocytes. The urate uptake ability decreased to similar levels seen in mock samples in p.G366R mutant expressed oocytes. The p.R477H variant sho- wed almost the same activity as the URAT1 wild type. In the co-expression Pseudo-Pendred syndrome (PPDS) is defined by the association of senso- samples, both variants p.WT/G366R and p.G366R/R477H lost their urate rineural deafness, hypothyroidism due to iodide organification defect, ab- uptake activities. Variants p.WT/R477H tended to dPecrease urate transport sence of inner ear malformation and absence of mutation in SL
C26 A4, the compared to WT single expression; however, it was s†uperior to the other two gene responsible for classical PDS. co-expression patterns (significant to WT/G366R, <0.05). Co-localization In order to determine the cause of PPDS, we performed whole exome se- studies showed an accumulation of URAT1 in the endoplasmic reticulum of quencing (WES) in a family with two children affected with hypothyroidism, the p.G366R variant and mainly retention of wild type protein by variants developmental delay, positive perchlorate test and absence of inner ear mal- p.G366R andv ipa.R477H. The findings suggest that not only a loss-of-function formation on CT-scan. Parents were healthy and non-consanguineous and mutation of URAT1 but also the dominant-negative effect cause renal hy- direct sequencing of SL
C26 A4 was normal in both patients. pouricemia loss of uric acid absorption, partly due to protein misfolding WES was performed in both patients and their father. Variants were ranked caused by accumulation of URAT1 protein in the endoplasmic reticulum. by segregation, allele frequency, protein change and degree of conservation S Pu 0p 3p .4o 0rt -: M LH13245 and PRVOUK-
P25 LF1/2. to assess likelihood of causation. Both patients were found to be compound Clinical reappraisal of SHORT syndrome at the light of the PIK3R1 heterozygous for missense mutations (Y453D and W233C) in TPO and the gene discovery father was heterozygous for the Y453D mutation. M. Avila1, J. St-Onge1,2, M. Auclair3,4,5, L. Duplomb1, M. Caron-Debarle3,4,5, M. Le Merrer6, B. In silico prediction tools determined a deleterious mutational impact of Le Luyer7, D. Héron8, M. Mathieu-Dramard9, P. Bitoun10, J. Petit11, S. Odent12,13, J. Amiel6, V. both variants on protein function. Sanger sequencing confirmed the muta- Carmignac1, J. Thevenon1,14, N. Marle1,15, M. Laville16,17, Y. Reznik18, C. Fagour19, M. Nunes19, tion segregation and found that the mother was heterozygous W233C. The J. Capeau3,4,5, O. Lascols3,4,5, F. Huet1,20, C. Vigouroux3,4,5, L. Faivre1,14, J. Rivière1,2, C. Thauvin- Robinet1,14; latter mutation was novel and both were absent in the control population. 1EA4271 „Génétique des Anomalies du Développement „ (GAD), FHU-TRANSLAD, TPO encodes thyroperoxidase which catalyzes key reactions in thyroid Université de Bourgogne, DIJON, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, hormone synthesis and mutations in TPO are responsible for thyroid dy- CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 3INSERM, UMR_
S938 , Paris, France, 4UPMC Univ Paris shormonogenesis 2A. Mutations in TPO have been reported in 4 patients 06, UMR_
S938 , Centre de Recherhe de Saint-Antoine, Paris, France, 5ICAN, Institute with hypothyroidism and deafness in a series of Israeli patients with iodide of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, ANR-10-IAHU-05, Paris, France, 6Département organification defect (Tenenbaum-Rakover, 2007) but their phenotype was de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Service de Pédiatrie, not described as PPDS. CH Le Havre, Le Havre, France, 8Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence These cases together with the present report suggest that mutations in TPO 94 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG can be responsible for pseudo-PDS.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index „Déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares“, La Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 9Service de Génétique clinique, CHU d‘Amiens, Amiens, France, 10Service de Pédiatrie, CHU Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 11Service d‘Endocrinologie, CHU Bocage, DIJON, France, presenting developmental failure of only one thyroid lobe, and an incidence 12Service de Génétique clinique, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 13UMR CNRS 6290 IGDR, of 1/2000 for general population. Majority of cases are sporadic, but the Université Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 14Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence reported familial cases are suggestive for existence of genetic, heritable con- Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l‘Est, FHU-TRANSLAD, tributors. Molecular background of the disorder remains unclear. The aim of CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 15Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 16Département d‘Endocrinologie, Diabétologie et Nutrition, Hospices Civils de Lyon, the project was a screening for abnormalities in genes playing an important Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Pierre-Bénite, France, 17CENS_Centre Européen Nutrition role in thyroid organogenesis. A microarray and exome sequencing approa- et Santé, Centre de Recherche en Nutrition Humaine Rhône Alpes, Unité INSERM 1060, ches were employed to identify novel genetic factors contributing to the laboratoire CARMEN, Université Claude Bernard Lyon, Pierre-Bénite, France, 18Service disorder. Thirty-nine TH patients participated in the study. The genetic ana- endocrinologie, CHU Côte-de-Nacre, Caen, France, 19Département d‘Endocrinologie, lysis were conducted in all patients and encompasses sequencing of TPO, Hôpital Haut Lévêque, CHU de Bordeaux, Pessac, France, 20Service de Pédiatrie 1, CHU PAX8, FOX
E1 , NKX2-1 and TSHR genes as well as copy number investigation Dijon, Dijon, France. using Multiplex Ligation Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). The MLPA analysis did not reveal any unbalanced rearrangements. In selected cohort of patients a missense mutations in PAX8 and TBX1 sequences were found. SHORT syndrome is defined by its acronym: short stature (S), hyperextensi- Microarray examination resulted in identification of a several regions poten- bPiIlKit3yR o1f joints and/or inguinal hernia (H), ocular depression (O), Rieger ab- tially involved TH aetiology. Two genomic regions show recurrence in the normality (R) and teething delay (T). We and others recently identified the cohort of sporadic, unrelated TH patients. This is a first report presenting gene, encoding for the regulatory sPuIKbu3nRi1ts of phosphatidylinositol- comprehensive screening of genes contributing to severe forms of thyroid 3-kinase (PI3K) and playing a key role in insulin signaling, as responsible of dysgenesis, in TH patients. Mutations in those genes confirm their impor- SHORT syndrome. In total, 22 cases with a and a variable phenotype tance for organ development but cannot explain the abnormal phenotype have been reported. Only 15/22 patients presented at least 3 of 5 signs of the and bilobation disturbance for majority of TH sporadic cases. Further stu- SHORT acronym. Indeed, the Rieger abnormality was found in less than half dies on molecular background of the disorder are necessary. patients (8/21), but other ophthalmological manifestations such as hyper- 
P03 .43-S metropia can be present. Hyperextensibility of joints and/or inguinal hernia Further delineation of Tenascin-X-related Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in (3/18) were also rarely reported. At contrary, some features not part of the patients with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia acronym are found at a high frequency: facial dysmorphism was typical with A. Wischmeijer1,2, S. Menabò3, M. Romagnoli1, G. Rodella1, A. Gambineri4, O. Prontera4, M. Seri1, L. Baldazzi3; enophtalmia (20/20), lipodystrophy (19/19), insulin resistPaInKc3eR (11 1/12), as 1Department of Medical Genetics, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, well as diabetes mellitus in adolescence or adulthood (8/11). In conclusion, Bologna, Italy, 2Clinical Genetics Unit, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova - Istituto di Ricovero clinical reappraisal of SHORT syndrome at the light of the gene dis- e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory – covery permitted to revise the diagnostic criteria for SHORT syndrome. The Pediatric Department, Policlinico Sant‘Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, presence of lipodystrophy and insulin resistance permit to classify SHORT Italy, 4Department of Endocrinology, Policlinico Sant‘Orsola-Malpighi, University of syndrome among the rare syndromic forms of insulin resistance. Bologna, Bologna, Italy. 
P03 .41-S Multiple SNP score associated to chronic renal disease risk predicts the eGFR of patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency is C. Zusi1, S. Bonetti1, M. Trombetta1,2, M. L. Boselli1, D. Travia2, G. Zoppini2, E. Bonora1,2, R. C. Bonadonna3; an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by cortisol with/without 1Università di Verona, Verona, Italy, 2AOUI di Verona, Verona, Italy, 3Università di Parma, aldosterone deficiency, and androgen excess. The severity of clinical mani- Parma, Italy. festations depends on the degree of 21-hydroxylase impairment caused by mutations in the CY
P21 A2 gene. Its classic form has an overall incidence of 1 per 15000 live births. CY
P21 A2 is flanked by the TNXB gene, encoding Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several loci asso- the extracellular matrix protein tenascin-X. Both, haploinsufficiency and ciated with risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD), nephropathy and reduction complete loss of tenascin-X have been associated with phenotypes similar of glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). Moreover, albuminuria and eGFR reduc- to Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). A significant portion of CAH-patients pre- tion are independent predictors of CVD. sents deletion of mostly one CY
P21 A2-allele, and up to 13% of these might The aim of this study is to explore the relationship between SNPs and CVD be a contiguous deletion extending into TNXB. and impaired renal function phenotype in Verona Newly Diagnosed type 2 We report two brothers (20 and 29 years old) with classic CAH and homo- Diabetes Study (VNDS) patients. zygous deletion encompassing CY
P21 A2 and TNXB, who were evaluated for We studied 45 CVD and 44 eGFR and/or CKD predictors SNPs in 529 GAD- clinical evidence of EDS: both present skin hyperextensibility, joint hyperm- Ab negative subjects, (mean±SEM age: 58.8±0.41 years; BMI: 30.0±0.22 kg/ obility and clinical history of multiple joint subluxations, without evidence m2; FPG: 7.17±0.08 mmol/L; HbA1c: 6.86±0.05%). The association analysis of atrophic scars or other classic EDS features. The younger brother under- was performed on 5 phenotypes: 3 CVD phenotypes (carotid arteries ultra- went surgery for inguinal hernia and rectal prolapse during adolescence. sound, lower-limb arterial ultrasound, ECG) and 2 kidney disease pheno- Cardiac ultrasound examination revealed bicuspid aortic valve, mild aortic types (eGFR, microalbuminuria). For both genetic risks was generated a ge- dilatation and mitral valve insufficiency in the older brother; cardiologic netic load score (GLS), by summing up the number of risk alleles carried by follow-up was advised. each patient. Both GLS were considered in the analysis as natural values and The parents, heterozygous carriers of the contiguous deletion of CY
P21 A2 as tertiles. Cardiovascular GLS was not associated with any of the cardiova- and TNXB, don’t show clear features of EDS. scular phenotypes (p = 0.30-0.70). Nephropathic GLS, was not associated To our knowledge, bicuspid aortic valve has not been observed in CAH with with albuminuria, while was significantly associated with decreased eGFR, tenascin-X-related EDS yet. Our findings confirm that clinical evaluation for with the score expressed both as natural value (p <0.01) and as tertiles (re- connective tissue pathology should be considered in CAH patients, especial- spectively: 84.3±1.3, 81.7±1.5 and 78.9±1.5 ml/min/1.73 m2 p<0.02), even l Py 0 t 3h .o 4s 4e - h Marboring CY
P21 A2 deletion. after age, sex, BMI, antihypertensive therapy and HbA1c adjustment. Tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type III: an autonomous clinical Conclusions: In patients with type 2 diabetes at diagnosis, genotype predicts entity or a clinical variant of type I ? Further report of an italian the residual glomerular function, suggesting that nephropathic genetic risk affected girl and her mother. c Pl 0o 3ck .4 s 2ta -Mrts ticking long before hyperglycemia. M. P. Natale1, F. Papadia1, S. Pesce1, M. Masciopinto1, M. Gentile2, F. Nicastro1, V. Lillo1, R. Fischetto1; A genome-wide search for factors contributing to thyroid 1U.O.C. Malattie Metaboliche e Genetica Medica P.O. Giovanni XXIII, A.O.U. Policlinico hemiagenesis Consorziale B, Bari, Italy, 2UO Genetica medica Ospedale “Di Venere”, Bari, Italy. B. Budny1, E. Szczepanek-Parulska1, W. Szaflarski2, T. Zemojtel3, M. Rydzanicz4, L. Handschuh3, J. Podkowinski3, E. Wrotkowska1, N. Derebecka4, H. Bluijssen4, J. Wesoly4, M. Figlerowicz3, M. Zabel2, K. Wolinski1, K. Ziemnicka1, M. Ruchala1; 1Chair and Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Diseases, Poznan Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition cha- University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Histology and racterized by craniofacial and skeletal anomalies and three different clinical Embryology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of subtypes: type I, carrying mutations in TRP
S1  gene, type II, a 8q23 micro- Bioorganic Chemistry PAS, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Human Molecular Genetics, deletion syndrome with additional features such as mental retardation and Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, exostoses, type III, with mutations in TRPSI gene and severe short stature, Poland. short metacarpals and normal intelligence. We report on clinical evaluation in a 10 year old girl presenting with disharmonious short stature, facial dys- morphisms (sparse hair, bulbous tip of the nose, long upper lip), severe me- Thyroid dysgenesis is the major cause of cEoSnHgeGnit 2al0 h1yp4o t|h MyroILidAisNm ,i nIT hAu-LY |t aWcaWrpoWph.EalSanHgGea.lO shRoGrtening and normal intelligence. Hormonal and m9e5ta- mans. Hemiagenesis of the thyroid (TH) is a rare congenital malformationABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P03 .47-S XX male sex reversal in an azoospermic proband bolic screening evaluation (including mucopolysaccaridosis disease) did not J. Nevado1, M. Alvarez-Blanco2, M. Mori1, B. Garcia2, M. Palomares1, L. Varela3, L. reveal pathologic patterns. Since few months she suffered from pelvic pain: Fernandez1, M. De Torres1; an X-ray of the hip revealed left coxa vara and a round area of osteoporosis in 1Ingemm-Idipaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario De Alcala De Henares, Madrid, the femural external side ,sclerosis of femural nucleus and of the overlying Spain, 3Hospital Universitario De Alcala De Henares, Madrid, Spain. acetabular roof. Spine X-ray brought out convex scoliosis and marked left iliac crest dysmetria, with an overcoming external subluxation of the right hip. The CT scan confirmed these data and an orthopedic follow up started. The basis of conception of genetic sex determination was initially, at least The peculiar face with short stature, brachidactyly, scoliosis, hip dislocation in mammals, limited to a form of chromosomal currency. However, the pre- led us to consider in differential diagnosis Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome sence of an entire Y chromosome isS nRoYt essential for the development of type 3: molecular analysis of TRPS 1 gene proved a new missense mutati- the male phenotype and transfer of the SRY-gSeRnYe alone could be a sufficient on (exon 7 H1233P), that was also carried by her mother, who presented a condition. Critically, mutations in the gene are linked with XY-female sex minimum clinical phenotype (face anomalies, short metacarpals,not severe reversal in mice and humans indicating that is essential for male deve- short stature). Our study could be a further clinical contribute to the deli- lopment. It appears that the only role of SRY is to upregulate the SRY-related neation of the Thricorhinophalangeal subtype III syndrome. HMG box containing gene 9 (SOX9) bipotential gonads, which results in Ser- 
P03 .45-S toli cell differentiation and, ultimately, in testes differentiation. XX male sex Renal and urinary system malformations in girls with Turner reversal is rare and in most cases is the result of translocation of the SRY syndrome gene to the X-chromosome during male meiosis. However, a recent report S. Turyk, M. Sakurai, M. Ciaccio, S. Bonsergent; by Cox et al. [
S2 O0X191] described a family, two brothers and an uncle, with 46, Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. XX male sex reversal who lacked the SRY gene and had a 600 kb duplication upstream of . We report on a case of a 38 infertile male (sent by the fertility unit) with azoospemia and hypergonadotSrOopXh3ic hypogonadism a 46 Turner Syndrome (TS), in which there is a loss of all or part of one X chro- XX male sex reversal (without SRY). A 244K aCGH in the proband showed a mosome, occurs in 1 in 2500 born femals. Renal and urinary system malfor- novel and apparently, de nSoOvXo3 duplication within gene (at Xq27.1 chro- mations with their posterior complications such as urinary tract infections mosomal region) in a complex genomic rearrangement. These data provide or proteinuria have been recognized to increase in patients with TS. In this additional evidence that gain-of-function in the XX bipotential gonad retrospective study we report a detailed clinical history and analyzed renal causes XX male sex reversal. and urinary system pathology in 32 girls with TS observed between 2000- 
P03 .49-S 2010. All 32 TS patients were evaluated by renal and collecting system utra- Identification of 65 novel mutations and genotype-phenotype sonography and if structural renal or urinary malformations were found, correlations in patients with Alport syndrome (ATS) and thin cystourethrography and centellography (DMSA or DTPA) was used. Patients basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN) mean age at renal and urological studies was 9,8 years (2-18 years). The K. Straßer1, S. Weber1, A. Kittke2, S. Rath2, P. F. Hoyer1, M. Alberer3, B. Lange-Sperandio4, L. cytogenetic findings in 32 patients with TS were: classic : 45,X in 18 pati- T. Weber5, H. Klein2, J. Hoefele2; 1Pediatric Nephrology, Pediatrics II, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, ents (56,25%), mosaic and structural aberrations of X chromosome: in 14 2Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics Dr. Klein, Dr. Rost and patients (43,75%). The prevalence of renal and urinary system pathology Colleagues, Martinsried, Germany, 3Department of Infectious Diseases and Tropical was 43,75% ( 14 patients) . The most frequent findings were urinary system Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 4University Children’s malformations 21,87% ( 7 patients) , associated with renal malformations Hospital, Pediatric Nephrology, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 9,38% ( 3 patients), while 4 patients ( 12,5%) had renal malformations alo- 5University Children’s Hospital, Pediatric Nephrology, Cologne, Germany. ne. Horseshoe kidney, malrotation or other position abnormalities, dupli- cation of the collecting system, and different ureterovesicular obstruccion were found. Conclusion: The early diagnosis of renal and urinary system ATS is characterized by hematuria, proteinuria with progression to end-sta- malformations in TS and their follow-up is crucial to reduce the morbility in ge renal disease (ESRD), eye abnormalities and sensorineural deafness. Mu- these patients. There appears to be no correlation between karyotype and tations in CO
L4 A3/CO
L4 A4 (autosomal recessive/dominant), and CO
L4 A5 t Ph 0e 3 p .4re 6s -e Mnce or type of renal or urinary system malformations. (X-linked) have been identified as underlying cause. Compared to ATS, auto- Does summation of alleles account for genetic risk and genotype- somal dominant TBMN is characterized by hematuria, minimal proteinuria phenotype association in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus? and preserved renal function. Dominant mutations have been identified in N. P. Pace, A. E. Felice, J. Vassallo; CO
L4 A3 and CO
L4 A4. University of Malta, Msida, Malta. A cohort of 167 patients and 49 relatives were genetically tested and clini- cally evaluated. In 145 patients mutations were identified, 65 of them were Introduction novel. 54% resp. 88% of the ATS patients showed only one mutation in CO- : Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and metabolic syndrome are com- 
L4 A3 or CO
L4 A4. Three TBMN and eight ATS patients (CO
L4 A3 or CO
L4 A4) mon complex disorders with a high prevalence in the Maltese population. had hearing loss, but only two of the ATS patients carried two mutations. An The aim of this study is to further define the genetic interplay between co- ATS patient with one mutation in CO
L4 A4 showed no hematuria, but pro- gnate genes from metabolic and inflammatory pathways onM theet hliokdelihood teinuria, ESRD, and hearing loss. Two patients (CO
L4 A5) showed isolated of developing T2DM in adulthood and to relate the association of certain ge- proteinuria. 26% of the ATS patients (CO
L4 A5) had hearing loss and 43% of netic profiles with defined biological and clinical endpoints. : Eight these presented the mutation at the 5’ end of the gene. hundred carefully characterised T2DM cases were recruited. Anthropome- This study comprises one of the largest genotype-phenotype correlation tric and biochemical parameters, including serum high-sensitivity C-Reac- in European ATS and TBMN patients. A large number of novel mutations tive protein (hsCRP) levels were deteRremsuinletsd, and genotyping of 43 cognate were detected. Many patients had only one heterozygous mutation in CO- genes carried out. Neonatal cord blood samples were used as the control 
L4 A3/CO
L4 A4. This might be explained either by an autosomal dominant reference population in this study. : Ten polymorphisms in meta- inheritance, the possibility of missed mutations, its function as a modifier bolic/inflammatory pathways showed significant association with T2DM. additionally to so far unidentified causative mutations, or a combination of Three loci showed significant association with lipid profile, body weight and these possibilities. Interestingly, ATS/TBMN patients can also be affected by hsCRP levels. hsCRP levels demonstrated a strong positive correlation with i Ps 0o 4la .t 0e 1d - Sproteinuria and TBMN patients rarely develop hearing loss. body mass index. Genetic score analysis showed that combining multiple Screening of 1200 FDA-approved molecules to identify genetic markers results in higher relative rCiosknsc.l uTshieo fnunctional significance pharmacological modulators of expression of ACVR1, the gene of these polymorphisms is being further evaluated using targeted siRNA- mutated in Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva. mediated silencing in cultured monocytes. : A panel of ten candi- S. Cappato1, F. Giacopelli1, L. Tonachini1, L. Galietta2, R. Ravazzolo1,2, R. Bocciardi1,2; date genes has consistently demonstrated significant association with type 1University of Genova and CEBR, Genoa, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome in the Maltese population. These gene Genoa, Italy. variants serve functional roles in inflammation and adipose tissue function. A recruited cohort of untreated newly-diagnosed T2DM serves to identify and explore genotype-phenotype association. The strong effect sizes of the- ACVR1/ALK-2 encodes for a type I BMP receptor and is mutated in Fibrodys- se alleles could be used to develop personal genetic susceptibility profiles plasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP, OMIM135100). FOP is a rare and severe for T2DM leading to personalization of care and prevention of chronic com- disease of heterotopic ossification, with a progressive and episodic course. plications. No treatment is available to the progression of the disease and great effort is devoted to better understand the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the 96 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, dITyAsreLgYu l|a WtedW BMWP. pEaSthHwGay.O asRsoGciated with FOP that may be targeted by in-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CLDN20, SELP novative therapeutic approaches. seve rFeL dGi2sease and a poor treatment response, such as the AD patient cohort The characterization of the ACVR1 promoter region provide us with the with extreme IgE levels (>10 000). Three candidate genes ( molecular tools to generate a cell-based system exploitable for High- and ) are drawn from a systematic survey of LoF variants in human Throughput Screening (HTS) of chemical compounds with potential phar- protein-coding genes, that identified rare and likely deleterious LoF alleles macological effect on the ACVR1 expression at the transcriptional level. The markedly enriched in the Finnish population at greater than 1% frequency. 
P04 .04-M cell system has been generated in ATDC cells by stable transfection of the The benign joint hypermobility syndrome: guidelines for diagnosis Luciferase reporter gene under the control of the ACVR1 promoter. and management. We describe here in detail the HTS procedure we developed and report M. Vreeburg1, M. Schouten2, J. de Vos-Houben1, A. Maugeri3, Y. Detisch1, M. van Eijsden- the results obtained with the screening of 1200 FDA-approved compounds Besseling1, D. Marcus-Soekarman4; (Prestwick Chemical Library). We identified 18 compounds, showing an 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Radboud University inhibitory effect ≥ 60%, and 8 molecules with activating properties on the Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, ACVR1 transcription. Identified hits belong to different pharmacological Netherlands, 4Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar. classes among which corticosteroids, PDE inhibitors, FANS. We are current- Introduction ly performing experimental validation of selected molecules with different assays. The hypermobility syndrome (HMS) or benign joint hyperm- In conclusion, we present a cell-based system suitable for HTS of small obility syndrome (BJHS) is a frequent condition affecting many females, chemical compounds to target the ACVR1 transcriptional activity, thereby interfering with their normal activities of daily life. Hypermobility is asso- modulating the downstream pathway. Screening of compounds approved ciated with an increased risk to develop a chronic pain syndrome. Patients for clinical purposes, may provide candidates for a drug repositioning ap- often seek medical help in later stages of this conMdeittihoond fosr therapy-resistant proach. complaints. We designed a protocol to improve the referral and manage- 
P04 .02-M ment strategy for this particular patient group. We report data on Autosomal-recessive Adams-Oliver syndrome caused by homozygous patieRnetssu (lnt=s167) referred to the department of clinical genetics to exclude mutation in EOGT, encoding an EGF domain-specific O-GlcNAc rare genetic connective tissue disorders such as the Ehlers Danlos syndro- transferase me. Based on the data of medical history, clinical examination and I. Cohen1, E. Silberstein2, Y. Perez1, D. Landau3, K. Elbedour4, Y. Langer1,4, R. Kadir1, M. Volodarsky1, S. Sivan1, G. Narkis1, O. S. Birk1,4; if indicated, DNA-investigations, the likelihood of an underlying hereditary 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute for disorder in thCeo 1n6c7lu csoiounnssellees was estimated. Further DNA-investigation Biotechnology in the Negev (NIBN) and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion was performed in 83 cases, revealing an underlying monogenetic disorder University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, in two cases. Based on our experience we provide tools to di- Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 3Division of Pediatrics, Soroka Medical Center, stinguish between the majority of patients with BJHS and those with a here- Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4The Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel. ditary connective tissue disorder. For the referring physician, the modified scoring list according to Beighton is essential to decide whether to refer or not. Individuals with the BJHS (Beighton scoring (BS) 4-6) should be refer- Autosomal recessive Adams-Oliver syndrome was diagnosed in three re- red to a rehabilitation specialist for treatment. In case of a BS of 7 or more, motely related Bedouin consanguineous families. Genome wide linkage or 6 or less with unusual features (f.e. male gender, age over 50, and/or a analysis ruled out association with known Adams-Oliver syndrome genes, positive family history) referral to a clinical geneticist is recommended for identifying a single homozygosity ~1.8 Mb novel locus common to affected further evaluation. 
P04 .05-S individuals (LOD score 3.37). Whole exome sequencing followed by Sanger A mutation in the LR
P4  gene is associated with bone mineral density sequencing identified only a single mutation within this locus, shared by all in Maltese postmenopausal women affected individuals and found in patients from five additional apparently M. Formosa, J. Borg, S. Bezzina-Wettinger, R. Farrugia, A. Xuereb Anastasi; unrelated Bedouin families: a 1bp deletion mutation in a predicted alterna- Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of tive splice variant of EOGT, leading to a putative truncated protein. RT-PCR Malta, Msida, Malta. demonstrated that the EOGT predicted alternative splice variant is ubiqui- Background: tously expressed. EOGT encodes EGF-domain-specific O-linked N-acetyl- glucosamine transferase, responsible for extracellular O-GlcNAcylation of Osteoporosis is a hereditary multifactorial skeletal disease epidermal growth factor-like domain containing proteins, and essential for characterised by low bone mass and increased fracture susceptibility. The epithelial cell-matrix interactions. F-actin staining in diseased fibroblasts low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 (LR
P4 ) controls the ac- showed apparently intact cell cytoskeleton and morphology, suggesting the tOiobnjesc otifv sec:lerostin which is a known inhibitor of the Wingless (Wnt)/Beta EOGT mutation acts not through perturbation of cytoskeleton, but through (β) catenin pathway involved in bone formation. other mechanisms yet to be elucidated. 
P04 .03-S To evaluate the effect of two non-synonymous coding polymor- Immunomodulation in Atopic Dermatitis: Inherited, Environmental phisms rs6485702 (A>G) and rs2306033 (C>T) in relation to Bone Mineral and Behavioral Risk Factors, and Evaluation of Biomarkers DMeentshiotyd (sB: MD) and different low-trauma fractures in Maltese postmenopau- T. M. Luukkonen1,2, S. Reitamo3, V. Kiiski3, J. Mandelin3, H. Virtanen3, M. Ahola3, M. sal women. Pöyhönen4,5, E. Salminen5, A. Remitz3; Research subjects were 1045 women subdivided in three BMD 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute for groups if without history of fragility fracture: normal, osteopenic or osteo- Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Skin and Allergy Hospital, University of Helsinki, porotic. Women with a fracture history were classified as cases. Genotyping Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, was performed by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment Helsinki, Finland. length polymorphism. Associations with BMD and fracture were analysed uRseisnugl tosd: ds ratios (OR) determined by logistic regression and adjusted for age. The barrier function of the skin is essentially maintained by the epidermal p Homozygosity for the rs6485702 A allele was associated with a differeFnLtGiation complex protein filaggrin, which is located in the stratum lower BMD at the lumbar spine, LS (OR=2.2 [95% confidence interval 1.1- corneum of the epidermis. Loss-of-function (LoF) mutations of the filaggrin 4p=.4] =0.03) relative to research subjects with a normal BMD. Heterpo=zygotes gene ( ) lead to an increased risk of atopic dermatitis (AD), allergic sensi- for this allele had a lower BMD pat= the femoral neck, FN (OR=1.5 [1.1-2.2] tization, as well as asthFmLGa in the presence of AD. Patients with active AD, or 0.02). Thpe> G-C haCpolontcylpues iwoans: strongly associated with LS BMD ( 0.004) clinically dry skin show a reduction of the epidermal filaggrin protein levels and to a lower extent FN BMD ( 0.04). No association with fracture risk eFvLeGn in the absence of LoF mutations. was seen ( 0.05). The LR
P4  rs6485702 variant plays a role Here we investigate the disease modifi cCaLtDioNn1 i,n C ALDDN w4i,t hC LpDrNin2c3ip, aOlC fLoNcu, sI VoLn, in BMD regulation in Maltese postmenopausal women. This polymorphism SPINrKi5sk, I VvLar, iIaLn3t1s, TaLnRd2 t, hCeLiDr Nin2f0lu, eSnEcLeP , on dFisLeGa2se severity. To identify ad- is located in the β-propeller domain which is thought to interfere with the ditional susceptibility loci we analyze b Pi 0n 4d .i 0n 6g - o Mf sclerostin and hence will not affect Wnt signalling. and variants possibly involved A novel mutation in BMPR1B gene(R486L)in a Polish family with in AD. Altogether 80 variants are genotyped from 500 Finnish patients with brachydactyly A2/C with symphalangism a detailed AD history, and from 1000 population cohort controls. M. Badura-Stronka1,2, D. Mróz3, K. Kozlowski4, K. Wicher1, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; The tight junction proteins claudin-1, claudin-4, claudin -23, occludin and 1Chair and Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, involucrin are essential for proper barrier function. However the LoF state Poznań, Poland, 2NZOZ Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland, 3Central Laboratory, Obstetric and Gynecology Clinic Hospital, Poznań, Poland, 4Department of of the encoding genes remains largely unknown. Here we suggest that LoF variation of these genes may be detectedE eSsHpeGcia 2lly0 1in4 p a| tMienILtsA wNit,h IvTeAryL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 97ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Medical Imaging, The Children‘s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia. DYN
C2 LI1 DYN
C2 LI1 gous nonsense (p.R208X) and missense (p.T221I) mutations in Two different substitutions at position 486 of the BMPR1B gene result in segregating in the family. is ubiquitously expressed and interacts a phenotype of brachydactyly A2 or brachydactyly C with symphalangism. with DYN
C2 H1 to form the dynein 2 complex important for retrograde in- Here we report a Polish family presenting this rare phenotype. traflagellar transport. The hypothetical protein caused by the nonsense On X-ray images in the 47 year old female the metacarpals are shortened mutation lacks the coiled-coil domain involved in protein interaction and and the proximal phalanges of the second fingers are hypoplastic. The left dimerization. The mutation p.T221I affects a highly conserved nucleoside finger shows a transverse radiolucent defect consistent with pseudoarthro- triphosphate hydrolase domain responsible for GTPase driven dynein pro- sis. The middle phalanges of the 2nd fingers are absent. The middle phalan- tein localization. ges of the 3rd and 5th fingers are hypoplastic/dysplastic. In the feet there is Mutations in both DYN
C2 LI1 interacting partners DYN
C2 H1 and NEK1 are hypoplasia of the 1st metatarsals with hypoplasia/dysplasia of the proximal associated with Jeune/ATD/SRP III and SRPS II/ATD, respectively. The in- phalanges. There is sclerosis of the second metatarsals. termediate phenotype in the patient can be explained by its dimerization In her 23 year old son the metacarpal of the first right finger is hypoplastic with DYN
C2 H1 and the suggested interaction between DYN
C2 LI1 and the and that of the first left finger is hypoplastic/dysplastic. The proximal pha- basal body protein NEK1. This is the first report of mutations in the light langes of both the 2nd fingers are hypoplastic and the middle phalanges are intermediate chain of the dynein 2 complex further expanding the clinical present as small bony remnants. In the left 2nd finger there is radial sublu- s Pp 0e 4c .t 0r 9u -m S of ciliopathies. xation of the distal phalanx. There is also hypoplasia of the 1st metatarsals Exome sequencing in patients with Circumferential skin creases with hypoplasia/dysplasia of the proximal phalanges. The second metatar- Kunze type: Evidence for locus heterogeneity sals are of increased density. Clinical and radiological analysis of skeletal M. Isrie1, M. Breuss2, A. Sifrim3, L. Dehaspe1, G. Peeters1, C. M. Rodriguez Rodriguez4, E. P. abnormalities suggested alteration of the BMPR1B gene. A novel mutation: Dapena4, K. Doonanco5, F. Tinsa6, S. Moortgat7, V. Marton8, A. B. Ramírez9, H. Ulucan10, E. c.1457G>T(R486L)segregates with brachydactyly in this family. Our data Koparir10, E. Karaca11, G. Tian12, N. Cowan12, D. A. Keays2, H. Van Esch1; extends mutational and radiological spectrum associated with mutations in 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Electrical BMPR1B gene and confirms existence of a universal hotspot in the BMPR1B Engineering (ESAT/SCD), KU Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium, 4Department of Paediatrics, gene for this complex phenotype, that is clearly distinguishable on radiolo- Ourense Hospital Complex, Ourense, Spain, 5Medical Genetics Services, University of g Pi 0c 4al . 0b 7a -s Sis. Alberta/Stollery Children’s Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 6Department of Pediatrics Targeted DNA sequencing of chromosome 8q22 identifies rare of the Children’s Hospital of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 7Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 8Department of Clinical Medicine, The arctic University of Norway, variants in DCSTAMP in patients with Paget’s disease of bone Tromsø, Norway, 9Servicio de Pediatría y Neonatología, Hospital de Valme, Sevilla, O. M. E. Albagha, S. Wani, S. H. Ralston; Spain, 10Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical School of Istanbul University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. University, Istanbul, Turkey, 11Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 12Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, United States. Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a common bone disease DwCitShT sAtMroPng genetic compoente anl,t N. Wate G perneevtiously identified a PDB-susceptibility locus on chromo- some 8q22 tagged by a common SNP located within the gene (Al- Congenital circumferential skin creases are extremely rare and children bagha 2011). ToR idIMenSt2i,f yD fCuSnTcAtMioPn,a Dl sPuYsSc,eptibLilRitPy1 v2ariants, we born with this feature are referred to as ‘Michelin tyre babies’ based on the investigated this locus using a targeted DNA sequencing approach. A 700kb similarity with the mascot of the French tyre manufacturer. Some of the- region containing four genes ( and ) was cap- se children have additional abnormalities including typical facial dysmor- tured using the Haloplex target enSrQicShTmMe1nt kit followed by DNA sequencing phism, cleeftt paal.late, short stature and intellectual disability. For this syndro- using the Illumina Hiseq2000 platform. A total of 244 samples were sequen- me, our group proposed the term ‘Circumferential skin creases Kunze type’ ced (143 unrelated cases without mutation, 40 controls, 48 familial (Wouters , 2011). So far, less than 10 cases have been described in the cases and 13 controls). Variants passing quality conDtrCoSlT wAMerPe subjected to literature and all occurrences are sporadic. In an international collaboration multiple filters to include missense variant, those in the 5’ or 3’UTR or those we collected DNA samples from 8 patients with Circumferential skin creases predicted as functional by the ENCODE database. In , we detected Kunze type. Exome sequencing was performed on the HiSeq2000 platform two novel variants (1 missense and 1 in 3’UTR) that were not present in our for two case-parent trios as well as two additional patients with this syndro- controls or publicly available databases including 1000 genomes. The no- me. Data analysis revealed the presence of pathogenic mutations in either vel missense mutation was detected in 3 cases and showed transmission in one of two interacting genes, providing evidence for genetic heterogeneity. familial cases. Two other missense mutaRtiIoMnSs2 w, DerPeY Sonly LfoRuPn1d2 inD cCaSseTsA M(nP= Three added intioovnoal patients with the same phenotype have also been found to 7) but they are present in 1000Genome database with MAF<0.03. No disea- carry a mutation in one of these genes. While some patients carry a hetero- se-specific mutations were detected in or ). , zygous mutation, others present with homozygous mutations. Ac- which encodes a dendritic-cell-specific transmembrane protein, is a strong curate genotype-phenotype correlations are being investigated. In addition, functional candidate gene for PDB because it is required for the fusion of we are performing functional analyses at the protein level to elucidate the osteoclast precursors to form mature osteoclasts. Our data suggest that rare pathogenic mechanism of the mutations. 
P04 .10-M variants within this gene could influence PDB-susceptibility. 
P04 .08-M The type II collagenopathies: a spectrum of disorders in 194 Italian Identification of mutations in DYN
C2 LI1, a member of the mammalian families cytoplasmic dynein 2 complex, expands the clinical spectrum of S. Bargiacchi1, E. Andreucci2, S. Giglio1,2; Jeune/ATD ciliopathies 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical Experimental and Biomedical Sciences, K. Kessler1, N. N. Hauer1, I. J. Wunderlich1, M. Fröhlich1, A. Giessl2, H. Sticht3, N. S. Falk2, J. University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University H. Brandstätter2, A. B. Ekici1, S. Uebe1, E. Seemanová4, A. Reis1, C. T. Thiel1; Hospital, Firenze, Italy. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, CO
L2 A1 Erlangen, Germany, 2Animal Physiology, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander- Mutations in the type 2 collagen gene ( ) have been described in a Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, group of dominant skeletal dysplasias with a wide degree of phenotypic se- Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. verity ranging froCmOL p2eAr1inatally lethal to mild conditions manifesting only in late adolescence or adulthood. In the past 6 years we performed mole- cular analysis of in 194 Italian probands and we identified 78 dif- ferent mutations: 25 known and 53 never described in the literature. The Disorders of brain malformations, polydactyly, kidney cysts, and skeletal phenotype was quite variable among our patients, ranging from Stickler abnormalities belong to the ciliopathy spectrum caused by defects in for- syndrome (STL), due mainly to nonsense and splice-site mutations, to more mation, maintenance and function of the primary cilium. This phenotypic severe boneC dOyLs2pAla1sia phenotypes, usually due to a doCmOiLn1a1nAt 1negative effect spectrum is present among patients with short rib-polydactyly syndromes (SED, SMED, SPD, ACG2). In 9 of our cases with a diagnosis of STL who were (SRPS), the asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD/Jeune) and Ellis-van Cre- negative at analysis we found mutations in . Considering feld syndromes (EVC). Underlying genes affect the dynein motor, intraflagel- the broad spectrum of phenotypes, the absence of mutational hot spots and lar transport complexes, or the basal body. the large size of the genes implicated in “type II-collagenopathies”, muta- After excluding known causative genes we performed exome sequencing in tional analysis by standard techniques (DHPLC, HRM and/or direct Sanger a patient of non-consanguineous parents presenting an intermediate phe- sequencinCgO)L, 2reAp1r/e sCeOnLt1 a1 Ave1ry expensive and exhausting test. We therefore notype between ATD/Jeune and EVC. We selected variants based on poten- switched to a method coupling amplicon based gene capture to continue ti 9al 8 ciliary function as identified in a yeast two-hybErSidH scGre 2en0 w1i4th | N MEKI
L1 ,A aN , bIT oA thL tY he | WWW.ESHG.O aR nG alysis and we are now extending the study basal body protein involved in SRPS II. This identified compound heterozy-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CO
L11 A2 CO
L9 A1-2 
P04 .13-S Diagnostics of connective tissue disorders: NGS gets the target when to less frequently mutated genes ( , ): this innovation has clinics wanders around i Pm 0p 4r .1ov 1e -Sd our analysis‘ reliability and turnaround times. A. Maugeri, D. van Beek, M. Smit, I. Bakker, J. Egthuijsen, Y. Waterham de Vries, R. Straver, G. Pals, E. A. Sistermans, Q. Waisfisz, M. M. Weiss; About skeletal dysplasia patients carrying two Col2a1 mutations VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. M. Barat-Houari1, B. Dumont1, A. Fabre1, P. Blanchet1, G. Baujat2, V. Cormier-Daire3, M. Le Merrer3, D. Genevieve1, I. Touitou1; Introduction 1CHRU, Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Hôpital Necker-Enfants, Paris, France, 3INSERM U781, Paris, France. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) offers a valuable tool for the diagnostics of connective tissue disorders (CTDs), in view of the large size of most of the genes involved and the complex spectrum of, often over- Background and objectives: Skeletal dysplasia are usually dominant disor- lapping, phenotypes, which makes differential diagnosis difficult. Recently, ders due to heterozygous mutations in CO
L2 A1 mutations. To report on four we designed a platform for the targeted analysis of CTDs, including Mar- cases carrying two CO
L2 A1 mutations. fan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Osteogenesis imperMfecattae,r Siatilc aknledr Methods: Bidirectional Sanger sequencing of the whole CO
L2 A1 gene. smyentdhroodmse and related disorders. In total, 42 genes were included. Based Results: Four patients carrying two different mutations were identified in a on the associated phenotypes, six gene panels were defined. series of 136 skeletal dysplasia. A solution-based target enrichment kit was designed to capture Patient 11 carried a p.Thr1439>Met paternal allele and a de novo c.1267- all exons and flanking splice sites of 42 genes. Data were analysed using an 2A>G. This latter may explain that she presented with a more severe form in-house pipeline (based on freely available software) and Cartagenia. In of Kniest dysplasia than her affected father. The p.Ala145Val, predicted as total, 309 gene panels were analysed on 290 patients refeRrreesdu lttos our Dia- benign, might not be contributive, as the p.Gly405Asp alone was shown as- gnostics. The aortic/arterial aneurysms/dissections and the Ehlers-Danlos sociated with SEDC (Meredith SP, 2007). The association of p.Arg137His and syndromes were the most requested gene panels (90%). (Likely) p.Gly213Val seems to induce a different phenotype than previously obser- pathogenic mutations were identified in 14.5% of the patients. In most of ved in a patient carrying a heterozygous p.Gly213Val (Kannu M, 2011). these patients DNA findings confirmed the clinical diagnosis or were in line Conclusion: We report here the first cases of CO
L2 A1 skeletal dysplasia with with the proposed differential diagnosis. Altogether, NGS strongly facilitated either compound heterozygous (recessive) or complex alleles. Recessive pinpointinCg otnhec lcuosriroencst diagnosis. Importantly, in a few cases NGS led to a forms of type 2 Stickler syndrome were previously associated with CO
L11 A1 different diagnosis, which had not been considered based on clinical pre- (Richards AJ, 2013). Parents’ samples from families 41, 47, and 49 are under sentation. The CTDs-NGS platform offers advantages in terms evaluation to phase the mutations and define whether they are de novo. of time-efficiency, in view of the complex spectrum of phenotypes and the a- Barat-Houari M, unpublished data, b- Unger S 2001, c- Meredith SP 2007, d- Kannu difficult differential diagnosis. This methodology helps preventing misdia- P 2011, e- Score gnosis, especially in young patient with incomplete phenotypic expression. Family Score Phenotype (MIM number) Mutation 1 Score(e) Mutation 2 The clinical phenotype of certain CTDs will possibly expand in the future. ID (e) 
P04 .14-M 11 Kniest dysplasia (156550) c.1267-2A>G 68% p.Thr1439Met 3 Functional role of the Bardet Biedl Syndrome-associated gene 9 in the (a) (b) pathogenesis of nonsyndromic craniosynostosis: disrupted primary Spondylo Epiphyseal Dysplasia 41 Congenita, SEDC p.Ala145Val 1 p.Gly405Asp 3 cilium in craniofacial ossification (183900) (a) (c) M. Barba1, C. Cicione1, M. C. Geloso1, F. Pignotti2, L. Massimi2, F. Michetti1,3, G. Tamburrini2, Stickler type 1; syndromic; non M. Caldarelli2, C. Di Rocco2, C. Bernardini1, W. Lattanzi1,3; p.Arg137His p.Gly213Val 47 syndromic ocular (108300; 2 3 1Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, (a) (d) 609508) 2Institute of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 3Latium Spondyloepimetaphyseal Musculoskeletal Tissue Bank, Rome, Italy. p.Arg940Gln p.Gly1089Arg 49 Dysplasia Strudwick type 2 3 (a) (a) (184250) 
P04 .12-M Sagittal craniosynostosis (sNSC) is a highly prevalent craniofacial malforma- Identification of a novel locus for a recessive congenital myopathy by tion, with a widely unclear etiopathogenesis. A possible involvement of the linkage analysis in an Israeli Bedouin family BB
S9  gene, encoding a protein located in the transition zone of the primary E. Muhammad1,2, O. Reish3,4, Y. Ohno5, T. Scheetz6, A. DeLuca7, C. Searby8, M. Regev3, L. Benyamini3, Y. Fellig9, A. Kihara5, V. C. Sheffield8, R. Parvari10,2; cilium, has been proposed as a result of the first GWAS carried out in 2012. 1Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty of Health Through microarray genome-wide expression profiling we have shown an Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2National Institute of altered expression of cilium-associated genes, including BB
S9 , in calvarial Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 3Genetic Institute, Assaf Harofeh Medical tissues and cells of sNSC patients. We aimed at investigating the role of BB
S9  Center, Zerifin, Israel, 4The Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, in the aberrant osteogenic phenotype of calvarial cells isolated from sNSC 5Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, patients, through gene expression analysis, immunofluorescence, gene si- Kita 12-jo, Nishi 6-Chome, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan, 6Department of Ophthalmology lencing, and differentiation assays. BB
S9  expression was significantly upre- and Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 7Department of Biomedical Engineering ,University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United gulated in cells isolated from fused sutures (syn-cells) compared to cells States, 8Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical isolated from matched patent sutures (control cells), and increased upon Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 9Department of Pathology, 5 days of osteogenic induction. Confocal microscopy showed that: syn-cells Hadassah–Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 10Shraga Segal produced less primary cilia compared to control cells; BB
S9  expression was Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben spread throughout the cytoplasm in syn-cells, while appeared organized Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel. in polarized structures surrounding the cilium basal body in control cells. Upon BB
S9  silencing in syn-cells, the expression of osteo-specific transcrip- tion factors (RUNX2 and OSX), and of SMO (key molecule of the hedgehog Congenital myopathy disorders (CMDs) are heterogeneous inherited di- pathway), were significantly down-regulated. The osteogenic potential of seases of muscle characterized by a range of distinctive histologic abnor- BB
S9 -silenced syn-cells decreased and reverted to the physiological beha- malities. We have studied a consanguineous family with a non progressive viour observed in controls. Our results suggest a functional involvement of congenital myopathy. In order to pursue a molecular diagnosis in this family, BB
S9  and primary cilium signalling, in the aberrant osteogenic signalling we performed genotyping on four patients, their parents and a healthy sib- occurring at the site of premature suture closure in sNSC, proving a possib- ling using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human SN
P5  array. We determined the le novel role of this molecular machinery in osteogenesis and craniofacial genotype calls by using Affymetrix GeneChip Genotyping Analysis Software malformations. (GTYPE) and KinSNP software. Based on the consanguinity in the family, we 
P04 .15-S hypothesized homozygosity by descent of a recessive mutation as the likely Chromosomal aberrations in complex craniosynostosis: genetic cause of the disorder. Therefore, we searched for homozygous regions con- heterogeneity helps identifying biological pathways W. Lattanzi1,2, L. Massimi3, G. Tamburrini3, M. Caldarelli3, M. Barba1, C. Cicione1, F. sistent with linkage. Three homozygous blocks (on chromosomes 6, 10 and Michetti1,2, C. Di Rocco3, C. Bernardini1, N. Bukvic4; 14) shared by the three affected individuals, heterozygous in the parents, 1Inst. Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2Latium and not homozygous in the unaffected sib were identified. Exome sequen- Musculoskeletal Tissue Bank, Rome, Italy, 3Dept. Pediatric Neurosurgery, Università cing revealed a highly suggestive mutation in a gene not previously repor- Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 4Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Policlinico di Bari - ted to be associated with myopathy in humans. The variation segregated as Inst. Genetica Medica, Bari, Italy. expected in the family, it did not appear in dbSNP, evs or the 1000 genome project, nor was it found in 134 Bedouin control individuals. Craniosynostosis (CRS) represent the most prevalent craniofacial malfor- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | m W atW ionW , o. cE cuS rH riG ng. O in R 1G out of 2500 livebirths, either as an isolated fea9tu9reABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (nonsyndromic CRS) or in complex phenotypes. A genetic basis can be found single-gene testing, mutations were identified in only 15% of the syndromic in 20-30% cases of complex CRS, with extremely high heterogeneity. The craniosynostosis patients. Possibly, because the group of tested patients was aim of this study is to describe the inventory of structural chromosomal ab- defined differently, but also because only a subset of genes was tested. By errations identified through cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic testing NGS of a small cohort, mutations were identified in additional genes in 6/23 (as a part of the diagnostic algorithm) in a sample of complex CRS patients. patients, illustrating the power of parallel sequencing. 
P04 .18-M The possible role of the genes involved in the genomic rearrangements in CYLD and Brooke-Spiegler syndrome: mutations in Hungarian CRS etiopathogenesis have been investigated in vitro, using gene expression patients, a review of published variants and a database update analysis, immunofluorescence and gene silencing assays, on calvarial stem N. Nagy1, K. Farkas2, K. Tripolszki1, A. Sulák1, L. Kemény3, M. Széll1; cells isolated from CRS patients. 1University of Szeged, Dept of Medical Genetics, Szeged, Hungary, 2University of szeged, In our center we have enrolled 253 patients affected by CRS, including 13 Dermatological Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, cases with complex phenotypes that did not resemble any clear known syn- Hungary, 3University of Szeged, Dept of Dermatology and Allergology, Szeged, Hungary. drome. In 9 out of 13 cases, standard cytogenetics and array CGH allowed evidencing a chromosomal structural mutation, encompassing. multiple alternative genomic loci (2p, 9q, 2q, 22q, 8q, 9, 10, 5, 17, and 7p, among Brooke-Spiegler syndrome (BSS; OMIM 605041) is an autosomal dominant others). Genes involved in craniofacial development have been mapped to condition characterized by skin appendageal neoplasms including cylin- those loci enabling a biological interpretation of the abnormalities. In parti- dromas, trichoepitheliomas, and/or spiradenomas. In 2000, the gene locus cular, the role of developmental genes involved in the structure and function for BSS was mapped to 16q12-13, and, in the same year, variants of the cy- of the primary cilium has been demonstrated in selected cases. lindromatosis gene (CYLD) were identified in BSS, familial cylindromato- 
P04 .16-M sis (FC; OMIM 132700) and/or multiple familial trichoepithelioma type 1 The prostaglandin
E2 -pathway as a key player in the pathogenesis of (MFT1; OMIM 601606). The gene codes for an enzyme with deubiquitinase non-syndromic craniosynostosis C. Cicione1, M. Barba1, L. Massimi2, G. Tamburrini2, G. Di Taranto1, F. Michetti1,3, M. activity. To date, a total of 81 different disease-causing mutations have been Caldarelli2, C. Di Rocco2, C. Bernardini1, W. Lattanzi1,3; published for the CYLD gene. A summary of recurrent mutations identified 1Inst. Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2Dept. in Hungarian patients and a review of published mutations is presented in Pediatric Neurosurgery, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, 3Latium this update. Comparison of clinical features in affected families with the Musculoskeletal Tissue Bank, Rome, Italy. same mutation strongly confirms that identical mutations of the CYLD gene can give rise to different phenotypes, making genotype-phenotype corre- lations difficult. Variable expression of the phenotype associated with the The etiopathogenesis of midline nonsyndromic craniosynostosis remains same CYLD mutation may reflect the influence of other genetic and/or envi- still largely unclear. We attempted to clarify this issue using microarray ronmental factors. Most mutations are frameshift (43%), nonsense (24%), comparative gene expression profiling. Among the differentially expressed splicing (16%) and missense ones (12%), but there are some reported rare genes, we focused particularly on the hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase variants as well (5%). The vast majority of the mutations (99%) are located (HPGD) gene, which encodes the prostaglandin E-2 (PG
E2 ) catabolizing en- between exon 9-20, which encodes the 3rd Cap-Glycin and the ubiquitin- zyme, whose pathway is known to be involved in osteogenic differentiation. specific protease domains of the CYLD protein, suggesting that these do- Mutations in this gene result in primary autosomal recessive hypertrophic mains are important for CYLD deubiquitinating activity. osteoarthropathy and craniosteoarthropathy. Total RNA and calvarial cells This research was supported by the European Union and the State of Hun- were isolated from calvarial specimens of both sutures and synostoses of gary, co-financed by the European Social Fund in the framework of TÁMOP- NSC patients, collected during surgery. RNA was used for exon-level mi- 4.2.4.A/ 2-11/1-2012-0001 ‘National Excellence Program’. 
P04 .19-S croarray analysis; gene expression and alternative splicing events were con- An atypical form of progressive extreme heterotopic calcification firmed using real time PCR and RT-PCR. For functional validation, calvarial in a patient with a de novo insertional translocation der(X)ins(X;2) cells isolated in primary culture were treated with scalar concentrations of (q26.1;p13.3) PG
E2 ; after 10 days of treatment cells were alternatively lysed to extract E. Flex1, E. Giorgio2, M. Silengo3, C. Defilippi4, E. Di Gregorio5, C. Bracco2,5, E. Belligni3, E. RNA or stained with Alizarin Red to analyze osteogenic differentiation. Gene Biamino3, G. B. Ferrero3, R. C. Hennekam6, M. Tartaglia1, A. Brusco2; expression profiling allowed the identification of 114 significantly modula- 1Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di ted genes and 150 alternatively spliced genes, including HPGD. Exon level Sanità, Roma, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Università di Torino, Torino, analysis of HPGD revealed that the gene encoding the active isoform of the Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze della Sanità, Pubblica e Pediatriche, Università di Torino, enzyme was significantly downregulated in synostosis-derived tissues. Upon Torino, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Radiologia, AO Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 5A.O. Città della Salute e della Scienza, S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Torino, Italy, PG
E2  treatment, cells isolated from synostoses displayed a higher amount 6Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of of osteogenic differentiation compared to patent suture-derived cells, as a Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. result of the reduced HPGD levels. The results of this study may provide the original description of an impairment in the PG
E2 -signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of premature suture fusion in NSC patients. Translational im- We report on a girl with widespread, rapidly progressive ectopic calcificati- plications may further derive from these data. 
P04 .17-S ons detected shortly after birth. Calcifications became present around most Single-gene testing and Next Generation Sequencing in a Dutch cohort joints, involving tendons and ligaments, but no internal organs or skin, and of syndromic craniosynostosis patients eventually caused almost complete immobility of the child at 2 years. Labo- J. A. C. Goos, S. M. A. Swagemakers, A. J. M. Hoogeboom, A. M. W. van den Ouweland, M. F. ratory evaluation failed to identify autoimmune disorders as well as calcium van Dooren, P. J. van der Spek, I. M. J. Mathijssen; metabolism or other biochemical abnormalities; molecular studies did not Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. identify any mutation in disease genes known to be involved in ectopic cal- Introduction cifications. Further analysis identified a de novo insertional translocation (IT). Array-CGH analysis showed a 2p13.3 duplication which was validated F GAFccRo2rdFiGnFg Rt3o literaTtWurIeS,T t1he genetic cause of craniosynosto- by qRT-PCR. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed the rear- sis can be identified in approILx1im1RatAelyT 
C2 F41%2 of theE pRaFtients. Often, mutations rangement, a der(X)ins(X;2)(q26.1;p13.3). The two breakpoints were cha- are found in , and . But mutations are also identified racterized at nucleotide level by inverse PCR. The duplication on chromoso- in many other genes (like Method, s and ). Those genes can be me 2 encompassed nine coding genes, seven completely duplicated and two sequenced all in parallel by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), leading to (ANTXR1 and MXD1) partially duplicated. ANTXR1 is interrupted in IV
S10 ; more complete diagnostics. Syndromic craniosynostosis was defi- the MXD1 coding sequence is maintained, but its 3‘-UTR is almost comple- ned as multisuture or unicoronal synostosis, familial craniosynostosis, or as tely lost. The chromosome 2p13.3 duplication is inserted into a gene desert craniosynostosis in combination with other congenital malformation FsG aFnRd2/ on chromosome Xp26.1, between ARHGA
P36  and IGSF1 genes. We suggest oFGr FmRe3ntal reTtWarIdSaTt1ion. According to protocol, these syndromic craniosyn- the phenotype in our patient is due to a likely gain of function mechanism. ostosis patients were tested by single-gene testing for mutations in , We hypothesize that the de novo insertional translocation causes a fusion , and . If these genes tested negative, other genes were analy- transcript or an altered regulation of a gene by position effect. Further stu- zed if applicable. In addition, a subgroup of 8 families (15 pRateiseuntltss, 11 cli- dies are in progress to identify the pathogenic mechanism triggering this nically unaffected relatives) and 8 isolated patients were sequenced by NGS unique phenotype. and checked for mutations in known craniosynostosis genes. TC FO1f2 o ur patient cohort, 705 patients were testedIL b1y1 RsAin gle-gene testing. MutatZioICn1s were found in 280 patients. By NGSID, mS utations were identifiCeodn icnl usion (1 p 1a 0ti 0ent, 1 unaffected carrier, 1 relative), (1 pEaStiHenGt, 22 r0e1la4tiv |e sM), ILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG (three patients, 1 relative) and in (1 isolated patient). ByABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .20-M 
P04 .22-M An 8-year-old Iranian girl with the FKB
P14 - related form of the Familial vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome caused by a mutation in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with severe myopathy, scoliosis but normal CO
L5 A1 hearing A. F. Baas1, G. Monroe1, M. Harakalova1, v. Saskia1, D. Majoor-Krakauer2, A. Bertoli- A. Kariminejad1, C. Fauth2, B. Bozorgmehr1, M. Witsch-Baumgartner3, J. Zschocke4, M. H. Avella2, F. Moll1, A. Vink1, D. Dooijes1, A. Maugeri3, G. Pals3, I. Nijman1, E. Cuppen1, N. Kariminejad1, M. Rohrbach5, G. Guinta5; Knoers1, G. van Haaften1; 1Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3VUMC, Iran, 2Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria;, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Innsbruck, Austria, 3Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University,, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, CO
L3 A1 Innsbruck, Austria, 5Connective Tissue Unit, Division of Metabolism and Children’s Different forms of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) exist, with specific pheno- Research Centre (CRC), University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. types and genes associated. Vascular EDS, caused by mutations in , FKB
P14  is characterized by a fragile vasculature with a high CriOskL 5oAf 1catastCroOpLh5iAc2 vas- cular events at young age. Classic EDS, characterized by fragile, hyperexten- Recently mutations in have been identified in patients with a no- CsiObLle5 Ask1in and joint laxity, is caused by mutations in and . To vel variant of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) characterized by progressive date, vessel rupture in four unrelated classic EDS patients with a confirmed kyphoscoliosis, myopathy and hearing loss (MIM #614557). This disorder mutation was reported. shares many clinical features with the kyphoscoliotic type of EDS (EDS VIA; In the current report, we describe a familial form of clinically vascular ECDOS-, MIM 225400) such as congenital hypotonia, progressive kyphoscoliosis, hy- Ld3iaAg1nosed in a mother and her two sons, who all three died at an early age perelastic skin and hypermobility of joints. However, there are also some from arterial ruptures. Diagnostic Sanger sequencing failed to detect a distinctive features like myopathy and hearing loss. While an increased ratio mutation in the eldest son, our index case. Next, our probands DNA of urinary lysFyKl BpPy1ri4dinoline (LP) to hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (HP) is dia- was analyzed using a next-generation sequencing approach taCrOgeLt5iAng1 ap- gnostic for EDS VIA, measurement is normal in patients with EDS caused by proximately 550 genes (possibly) linked to vascular disease (VASCULOME mutations in . project). This revealed a heterozygous pathogenic mutation in , re- Here we report on an 8-year-old girl born to first cousin parents, who pre- sulting in an essential glycine substitution in the triple helix domain, ne- sented with severe congenital hypotonia, psychomotor retardation, severe arby the C-terminus of the protein (c.4610G>T; p.Gly1537Val). This novel muscle weakness, progressive scoliosis, severe joint hypermobility of fin- mutation was present in DNA isolated from autopsy material of his brother. gers, wrists and toes, soft skin, easy bruising, bilateral clubfoot, prominent No autopCsOyL m5Aa1terial was available from the mother, but the mutation was heel and pes planus, normal hearing, nasal speech and dysarthria. Because excluded in her parents, siblings and in the father of her sons, suggesting of a suggestive clinical history by absencFeK BoPf 1h4earing impairment our in- that the CO
L5 A1 mutation occurred in the mother’s genome de novo. itial clinical diagnosis was EDS VIA, but normal LP/HP in urine ruled out This is the first descCriObLt3ioAn1 of familial vascular EDS with a pathogenic mu- this condition. Therefore we sequenced and detected a novel ho- tation in . We conclude that this mutation can give a similar vascular mozygous c.143T>A substitution in exon 1 causing a p.Met48Lys mutation. EDS phenotype as a mutation. Hearing loss, was consistently reported in the initial cohort of patients with 
P04 .23-S this novel form of EDS, in whom nonsense mutations were found. It is com- Phenotypic features of knockout mice for dermatan 4-O- pelling to hypothesize that absence of hearing impairment in our patient sulfotransferase 1 (D4ST1)-deficient Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome might reflect a partial loss of function of FKB
P14  caused by the identified (DDEDS) p.Met48Lys missense mutation, thus suggesting a possible genotype-phe- T. Kosho1,2, S. Saka2,3, N. Tsumita2,3, Y. Kasahara2, S. Mizumoto4, F. Yue5, M. Kobayashi6, J. Nakayama7, N. Miyake8, Y. Nomura3, A. Hatamochi9, Y. Fukushima1, N. Matsumoto8, K. notype correlation. 
P04 .21-S Sugahara10, K. Sasaki5, S. Takeda2, T. Okada2; Zebrafish modeling of β3GalT6-deficient Type of Ehlers-Danlos 1Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Syndrome Stresses the Importance of Glycosaminoglycans in Japan, 2Department of Molecular Therapy, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan, 3Scleroprotein and Development Leather Research Institute, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Faculty of T. Van Damme1, D. Syx1, S. Symoens1, S. Vanhauwaert1, A. Willaert1, S. Fournel-Gigleux2, Agriculture, Fuchu, Japan, 4Department of Pathobiochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, A. De Paepe1, F. Malfait1; Meijo University, Nagoya, Japan, 5Department of Histology and Embryology, Shinshu 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 2UMR 7365 CNRS- University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 6Department of Food and Nutritional Université de Lorraine (IMoPA), MolCelTEG Team, Biopôle UL, Faculté de Médecine, Environment, College of Human Life and Environment, Kinjo Gakuin University, Nagoya, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France. Japan, 7Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 8Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 9Department of Dermatology, Dokkyo Proteoglycans are important components of cell plasma membranes and ex- Medical University, School of Medicine, Mibu, Japan, 10Laboratory of Proteoglycan tracellular matrices. They are composed of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains Signaling and Therapeutics, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Life Science, attached to a core protein through a tetrasaccharide linker region. The addi- Sapporo, Japan. tion of the third residue in this linker is catalysed by galactosyltransferase II (β3GalT6), encoded by B3GALT6. We recently identified bi-allelic mutations in B3GALT6 in several individu- Dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase 1 (D4ST1)-deficient Ehlers-Danlos syndro- als from independent families with a severe autosomal recessive pleiotropic me (DDEDS), caused by recessive loss-of-function mutations in CHST14, is connective tissue disorder characterized by skin fragility, delayed wound a recently delineated form of EDS [Dündar et al., 2009; Malfait et al., 2010; healing, joint hypermobility and contractures, muscle hypotonia, intellec- Miyake et al., 2010; Kosho et al., 2011], characterized by a unique set of cli- tual disability and a spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with bone fragility nical features consisting of progressive multisystem fragility-related mani- and severe kyphoscoliosis. To characterize the function of β3GalT6 we em- festations (skin hyperextensibilty and fragility, progressive spinal and foot ployed zebrafish as an in vivo model. Whole mount in situ hybridization of deformities, large subcutaneous hematoma) and various malformations zebrafish embryos showed high b3galt6 expression levels in brain, retina, (facial features, congenital multiple contractures). Multisystem connective pharyngeal arches and notochord epithelium, corresponding to tissues that tissue fragility is caused by impaired assembly of collagen fibrils through are affected in the human patients. A morpholino-based approach was used loss of dermatan sulfate (DS) replaced by chondroitin sulfate in the decorin to characterize the developmental effects of b3galt6 knockdown in zebrafish glycosaminoglycan sidechains. Complete loss of DS in patients’ urine sug- embryos. Complete knockdown of b3galt6 is lethal, but partial knockdown gests systemic loss of DS to be the basis of the disorder. Because the pa- results in an abnormal pharyngeal cartilage phenotype and a notably redu- tients suffer from progressive multisystem fragility-related complications, ced head and eye size. These morphological changes were accompanied by a appropriate disease modeling is indispensable in view of developing etiolo- significant reduction in the total amount of sulfated GAG chains. gy-based therapy. In this study, we report phenotypic features of knockout In conclusion, our results emphasize a crucial role for β3GalT6 in GAG syn- (Chst14-/-) mice. Frozen sperm from Chst14+/- male mice were obtained thesis and development. Ongoing and future experiments aim to extensively from the Mutant Mouse Regional Resource Center, Chst14+/- mice were re- analyze the changes in GAG composition as well as to further characterize produced, and Chst14-/- mice were generated. Complete loss of DS in urine the way in which these changes impact embryonic development of e.g. carti- from Chst14-/- mice was demonstrated, suggesting these mice to reflect gly- lage and heart using different fluorescent transgenic reporter lines. cobiological abnormalities in DDEDS. Chst14-/- mice lacked congenital mul- tiple contractures, but showed perinatal lethality, reduced postnatal weight gain, mild facial asymmetricity, thoracic kyphosis, and reduced grip power and skin tenacity, compared with Chst14+/+ or Chst14+/- mice. These fea- tures could be therapeutic targets for etiology-based therapy such as AAV ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |v WectWor-Wme.EdiSatHedG g.eOneR tGherapy. 101ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .24-M University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Institute for Oral Biology, University FGF16 nonsense mutations as the underlying cause of X-linked of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Orthodontic Unit, Dental Hospital & School, University of recessive metacarpals 4 / 5 fusion Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 6Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical Center, A. Jamsheer1,2, T. Zemojtel3,4, M. Socha1, S. Stricker5, J. Hecht4,5, R. Smigiel6, A. Jakubiak7, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, P. N. Robinson4, S. Mundlos4,5,8; 8Department of Biomedical and Specialty Surgical Sciences, Medical Genetics Unit, 1Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 9Institute of Medical Biometry Informatics and Poland, 2Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Bioorganic Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 6Wroclaw Medical University, Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P) is one of the Department of Pediatrics and Rare Disorders, Wroclaw, Poland, 7Wroclaw Medical most common congenital malformations worldwide and considered to be of University, Department of Genetics, Wroclaw, Poland, 8Berlin-Brandenburg Center for multifactorial etiology. NsCL/P shows considerable phenotypic variability Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. and can be subdivided into nonsyndromic cleft lip only (nsCLO) and nonsyn- dromic cleft lip and palate (nsCLP). Genome-wide and replication studies have recently led to the identification Metacarpal 4-5 fusion (MF4; MIM%309630) is a rare congenital malforma- of 15 nsCL/P susceptibility loci. However, a number of additional genetic tion of the hand characterized by the partial or complete fusion of the 4th risk factors still await elucidation. Here we used data from a recent genome- and 5th metacarpals. The anomaly occurs either as an isolated trait or part wide meta-analysis (Ludwig et al. 2012, Nature Genetics) and combined of a genetic syndrome. Recently, using whole exome sequencing (WES), we these with results from an independent European trio cohort (n=793). In- have uncovered the genetic cause of isolated MF4. WES was performed on tegration of subgroup-information on nsCLO or nsCLP revealed rs1258763 samples form a single trio of Polish ethnicity, i.e. sporadic male proband pre- on chr. 15q13 as a novel genome-wide significant locus associated with ns- senting with isolated MF4 and his unaffected parents. The study revealed a CLP (P=1.04×10-08). The associated region maps in intergenically, between nonsense mutation (c.
C535 T; p.R179X) in exon 3 of the FGF16 gene, which the Gremlin-1 (GREM1) and Formin-1 (FMN1) genes. GREM1 is a known maps to chromosome Xq21.1. The result was than confirmed by Sanger se- antagonist in bone-morphogenetic-protein pathways which are relevant to quencing. The link between FGF16 gene mutations and MF4 was further craniofacial genesis. Sequencing the entire GREM1 coding region in 196 pa- supported by the identification of two other truncating FGF16 mutation in tients and 196 controls did not reveal a causal variant, however, a significant two unrelated male probands. Sanger sequencing showed that one index overrepresentation of rare variants within patients was observed (P=0.02). case carried a nonsense mutation (c.
C470 A; p.
S157 X), whereas the other Analyses of murine Grem1 expression during embryonic craniofacial deve- harbored a truncating frameshift variant (c.474_477del; p.
E158 DfsX25). lopment might suggest a functional role of Grem1 in lip and secondary pala- Two out of three mothers of the probands were available for testing. Upon te formation. Notably, the top variant rs1258763 has previously been shown assessment, they were clinically and radiologically unaffected and both car- to influence variation in facial morphology (Boehringer et al. 2011, EJHG, ried FGF16 heterozygous mutations. All of the FGF16 disease-causing va- Liu et al. 2012, PloS Genetics). riants identified by us were located in the last exon (exon 3) of the gene, Our results demonstrate that increasing sample sizes and precise phenoty- therefore they are unlikely to result in a nonsense mediated decay. Our study pic information might help identifying further risk loci for genetically com- shows that truncating mutations of FGF16 are associated with X-linked re- plex traits. cessive metacarpal 4-5 fusion and provides evidence for the involvement of 
P04 .27-S FGF16 in the fine patterning of the human skeleton of the hand. Study of clinical and mutational findings in 45 Russian families with 
P04 .25-S ectodermal hypohidrotic dysplasia Giant cell tumor of the bone is caused by somatic mutations in H3F3A T. B. Milovidova, A. V. Polyakov; gene while patients with giant cell tumor arising on Paget‘s disease of Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. bone shared a distinct genetic alteration G. Divisato1, D. Formicola1, M. De Lucia1, L. Pazzaglia2, D. Rendina3, L. Michou4, D. Merlotti5, M. Benassi2, T. Esposito1, L. Gennari5, F. Gianfrancesco1; Ectodermal dysplasia is a group of syndromes involving abnormalities of the 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, National Research Council of Italy, Naples, Italy, 2Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Rizzoli Orthopaedic Institute, Bologna, Italy, ectodermal structures and is comprised of more than 150 different forms. 3Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, This work is devoted to hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED). Main cau- 4Department of Medicine, Faculté de Médecine de l‘Université Laval, Quebec City, QC, ses of HED are mutations in three genes: EDA, a ligand that belongs to the Canada, 5Department of Clinical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, University of Siena, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α family, EDAR, a receptor related to the TNFα Siena, Italy. receptors, and EDARADD, a specific adaptor. The study cohort consisted of 45 Russian patients with HED was performed by us, using direct sequencing of coding region EDA gene and MRC-Holland Giant cell tumor of bone (GCT) is an aggressive bone tumor caused by the MLPA kit for search of large deletion in EDA, EDAR and EDARADD genes. uncontrolled proliferation of the spindle-like stromal cells which promote In result EDA gene mutations were found in 76% (34 patients) of cases. oHs3tFe3oAclast-like giant cells formation responsible for the osteolitic lesions. Twenty new allelic variants of HED were described by us. Repeating mu- A recent study showed that GCT is due to recurrent somatic mutations in tations are revealed, but the analysis of the polymorphic markers linked to gene in the stromal cells. We analysed a cohort of giant cell tumor of EDA gene showed absence of the founder effect. Large deletion in EDAR and bone for the presence of H3F3A mutations identifying somatic mutations in EDARADD genes aren’t found. No correlations were revealed between clini- 38 out of 44 Hca3sFe3sA (86%). In contrast, the analysis of patients with Paget’s cal features and specific mutations within a EDA gene. disease of bone (PDB) associated with giant cell tumor did not show any We present the first in Russia large hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia co- mutation in gene, at both somatic and germline level, suggesting a hort focusing on clinical manifestations in combination with mutational different genetic background. We recently reported an extended Italian fa- analysis. 
P04 .28-M mily in which 4 out of 14 PDB affected members developed multiple GCTs at Different genetic defects in four females with characteristic features pagetic skeletal sites. Clinically, all affected members had polyostotic PDB, of Incontinentia Pigmenti but subjects developing giant cell tumors showed an increased disease se- C. W. Ockeloen1, K. Dreesen2, R. Pfundt1, K. Devriendt3, A. H. Van der Hout4, T. Kleefstra5, verity with a reduced clinical response to bisphosphonate treatment and C. E. M. Carels6; an increased prevalence of bone pain, deformities, and fractures. Whole 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, exome sequencing, in this family identifies a missense mutation in a novel Netherlands, 2Department of Oral Health Sciences and Orthodontics, University uncharacterized gene. Additional genetic analysis in 7 independent affected Hospitals KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Centre of Human Genetics, University Hospitals patients with the same clinical phenotype, discloses the same mutation in all Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, patients, strongly suggesting that this clinical phenotype is due to a founder Groningen, Netherlands, 5Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6epartment of Orthodontics and Craniofacial Biology, Radboud University Medical effect. Therefore, we conclude that the GCT phenotypes associated or not Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. with PDB are due to mutations in different genes, suggesting that different molecular signatures are responsible for these two phenotypes. Introduction IKBKG/NEMO 
P04 .26-M Identification and characterization of a novel susceptibility locus for gene mutations are a well-known cause of In- nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate at chromosome 15q13 continentia Pigmenti (IP), an X-linked dominant neuroectodermal disorder K. U. Ludwig1,2, A. C. Böhmer1,2, H. Peters3, D. Graf4, P. Gültepe1,2, P. A. Mossey5, R. P. (OMIM #308300). IP is characterized by characteristic skin lesions and Steegers-Theunissen6,7, M. Rubini8, M. M. Nöthen1,2, M. Knapp9, E. Mangold2; ectodermal, ocular and central nervous system features. We collected four 1Department of Genomics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human fMemetahloe dpsa tients with a clinical IP phenotype to studyN EthMeOir molecular and Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle phenotypical features. 102 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WDirWecWt g.eEnSomHiGc .POCRR Gusing primers in the gene was usedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index NEMO to test for the classical exon 4-10 deletion. Sequence analysis of was out in three affected family members and subsequent mutation screening performed using standard Sanger sequencing. X-inactivation was measured using Sanger sequencing was performed in 8 family members (fivTeT aNffected using a methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme. An Affymetrix Cytoscan and three unaffected). A heterozygous missense mutation p. Lys29627Thr HReDs uarltrsa y was used toN dEeMteOct copy number variations (CNVs) according to was identified in the highly conserved A-band of the titin gene ( ). The the manufacturer’s protocol. mutation co-segregated with the disease in the family, and was not present The classical exon 4-10 deletionC wDa7s, SdEeCteTcMte1d, GinP oRn1e4 ,p TaEtiXe1n9t i Pn 8 47 .35 e -t Shnically matched control subjects. 0 1 and hOeGrF mODot3h)er. In another patient, a 130 kb interstitial gain in chromosome Sibs with microdeletion in maternal 14q32.2 and phenotype 17q25.3 was identified, containing five genes ( congruent to paternal isodisomy 14 aDnisdcussion . There was no skewed X-inactivation. The fourth patient was I. M. van der Werf1, E. Reyniers2, M. Mattheij2, P. Vanhaesebrouck3, P. Govaert4, J. Martin1, not molecularly investigatNedE.MO J. G. Leroy5, F. Kooy1, G. R. Mortier2; We show four female patients with a clinical IP phenotype and 1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp and Antwerp different genetic defects. deletions impair NF-kB activation, causing University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Ghent University and Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, ISPE CcTeMlls1 tSoE bCeT Mhi1g hly sensitive to apoptosis. Interestining lvyi, trao novel 130 kb 4ZNA Queen Paola Childrens‘ Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. gain of chromosome 17q25.3 was identified in another patient, inScEluCTdiMn1g . is shown to induce IFN-γ production ; IFN-γ stimu- lates apoptosis. We hypothesize that a dosis effect, caused by the duplication, induces cell death and thereby causes IP. This finding suggests A girl born to healthy non-consanguineous parents and her three-year- heterogeneity of IP and supports the role of apoptotic pathway CNVs in this younger brother showed at birth moderate to severe respiratory insuffici- disorder. ency which required long-term tracheostomy in the boy. Both neonates 
P04 .29-S were large with plump facial features, narrow thoracic cage with radiogra- CMG2/ANTRX2 gene mutation analysis in 9 families suffering from phic bell-shaped configuration. Diastasis of the abdominal wall musculature Infantile Systemic Hyalinosis and signs of distal arthrogryposis were mild in the girl and pronounced in M. Doco-Fenzy1,2, B. Demeer3, E. Landais4, A. Verloes5, M. Ramirez6, J. Martignetti7, the boy. Neuromotor development was delayed with independent walking M. Mathieu3, O. Moldovan8, J. Dragana9, N. Dahl10, T. Homfray11, S. Jagadeesh12, S. Jagadeesh12, P. Feucher1, C. Mangeonjean1, D. Gaillard1; achieved at 18 months and at 5½ years respectively. The mild intellectual 1CHU-REIMS, Reims, France, 2EA3801, SFR CAP Santé, Reims, France, 3CHU-Amiens, disability in the boy, who has persisting contractures at the wrists and an- Amiens, France, 4CHU-REIMS, PRBI, Reims, France, 5CHU-Robert-Debré, Paris, France, kles, may be correlated with bouts of therapy-resistant hypoxia during the 6Lab, Santa-Clara, AZ, United States, 7Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, NICU admission of six months duration. At night he still needs mechanical United States, 8Hopital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 9Guy‘s Hospital, London, United support with airflow. Kingdom, 10Section of Clinical Genetics, Upsala, Sweden, 11St George‘s University, London, The clinical and radiographic pattern in both sibs was compatible with pa- United Kingdom, 12Mediscan Mylapore,, Chenai, India. ternal UPD 14. However, an imprinting defect was ruled out using microsa- tellite marker analysis. Recently, the lady’s complaints about long lasting re- spiratory infections and physical tiredness prompted reexamination of this Infantile Systemic hyalinosis (ISH) is a severe rare autosomal recessive in- family. SNP array analysis using an Illumina Cyto-SNP 12v2.1 chip detected a heritance disease characterized by accumulation of amorphous, hyaline ma- microdeletion on chromosome band 14q32.2 in both sibs. The deletion with terial in skin and other organs. It leads to skin lesions, gingival hypertrophy, a minimal size of 64 kb encompasses the lncRNA genes MEG3 and MEG8 and flexion contractures of the joints, digestive tract and lymph node impairment several miRNAs. Each of these genes is subject to maternal imprinting. The with severe phenotypes in newborns. Beginning within the first few months mother is mosaic for the same microdeletion. Molecular analysis regarding of life, it is characterized by painful joints, generalized skin thickening, pa- exact size, gene content and degree of methylation is ongoing and bound to pules, periorificial nodes, hyperpigmentation over the joints, osseous nodes, contribute to more insights into the disease mechanisms involved in this failure to thrive. This disorder is progressive and usually leads to death, due imprinted region. to recurrent chest infections and diarrhea, before two years of age. The dia- 
P04 .32-M gCnMosGis2 is made by histology on skin biopAsNy TshRoXw2inCgM hGya2l/iAnNe TdRepXo2sits. Dele- Increased frequency of F5 and F2 thrombophilia predisposing terious mutations have been reported in Capillary Morphogenesis Gene-2 variants in families with unilateral limb reduction defects - a pilot ( ) alias Anthrax Toxin Receptor 2 ( ). (4q21) is study composed of 16 exons and the mutations reported in several families with A. Jamsheer1,2, M. Socha1, E. Olech1, A. Sowińska-Seidler1, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, ISH mostly concern exons 13 to 15. We report the causal mutations in 9 fa- Poland, 2NZOZ Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland. milies found using Sanger sequencing. Mutations were found in 6 affected newborns, 22 relatives, among them 6 foetus with 6 homozygote mutations, 1 composite heterozygote and 1 associated to a supposed deletion. The 8 Limb reduction defects (LRDs) are usually unilateral and affect 8 newborns different mutations found will be described. 5 of them are non-sens muta- per 10000 livebirths. Several authors hypothesized that vascular accidents tions and 3 are 1-2 base(s) deletions or duplications leading to frameshift, may account for a substantial proportion of LRDs, however the basis of such Half of them are unknown in literature with 3 mutations in exon 1 and 10 events in the fetus remains unknown. Over the past two decades, a number and 1 between intron 8 and exon 9 affecting splicing. There is no treatment of genetic thrombophilia risk factors (TRFs) have been identified and asso- for this severe disease and the prenatal diagnosis is available. 
P04 .30-M ciated with the increased risk of peri/postnatal occlusive disease and with Whole-exome sequencing identifies a TTN mutation in a multiplex a higher rate of pregnancy loss. Mutations c.G1691A(p.R506Q) in F5 and family with inguinal hernia c.*97G>A in F2 genes represent one of the most commonly tested genetic E. Mihailov1, T. Nikopensius1, A. Reigo1, C. Nikkolo2, M. Kals1, K. Aruaas3, L. Milani1, H. TRFs. In this study, a cohort of 45 proband-mother pairs, in which the child Seepter2, A. Metspalu1,3; manifested unilateral LRDs, was recruited for the analyses. The patients 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Surgery Clinic, Tartu were clinically evaluated and blood of the probands and their mothers was University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of subjected to both F5 and F2 testing. We found either F2 or F5 heterozygous Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. variant (or both) in 6 mothers (13.3%) and in 4 probands (8.9%). At least one individual carried a single (or both) mutation(s) in seven proband-mo- ther pairs (15.6%). Within this group one proband and one mother carried Inguinal hernia repair is one of the most frequently performed gastrointesti- both mutations. F5 and F2 are identified in a control population with the nal surgical procedures. Over 700,000 groin hernias are repaired annually frequency of about 1-2%. Based on our findings, we hypothesize that there both in the United States and Europe. Males are seven times more likely than is an excess of genetic TRFs in probands affected by unilateral LRDs and in females to develop a hernia and have a 27% lifetime risk of developing an their healthy mothers in comparison with control population. This may con- inguinal hernia. Risk factors that have been associated with developing in- tribute to the higher risk of antenatal vascular accidents and consequently guinal hernias include male gender, aging, pulmonary disease with chronic to LRDs. Further studies based on bigger samples are needed to support cough, and other conditions that cause constant increase of intra-abdominal our findings. pressure. Connective tissue disorders, such as Ehlers-Danlos and Marfan 
P04 .33-S syndromes, and systemic collagen subtype imbalances have also been as- Homozygous Ala529Val LMNA Mutation in Patients with sociated with increased risk of hernia. Furthermore, several studies have Mandibuloacral Dysplasia in a Turkish family demonstrated that a positive family history is an important risk factor for L. Özer1, E. Ünsal2, V. Baltacı3, S. Aktuna1, Ö. Ayvaz3, F. Akyiğit4, P. Çelikkol4, A. Şen5, S. the development of primary inguinal hernia. Balcı6; 1Mikrogen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Ankara, Turkey, 2İstanbul Bilim University The aim of this study was to investigate a multiplex Estonian family with inguinal hernia in four generations. WholEe-SexHoGme 2 s0eq1u4e n|c MingI LwAasN c,a IrTriAedL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 103ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Medical School, Department of Histology and Embryology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3İstanbul Bilim University Medical School, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, LEMD3 İstanbul, Turkey, 4Genart IVF Center, Ankara, Turkey, 5Ufuk University Medical School, have been identified in Melorheostosis. Recently it has been suggested that Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 6Hacettepe University mutation somatic mosaicism cause Melorheostosis. Most reports Medical School, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. describe single cases or are focused on orthopedic management; only few and small series have been reported in medical literature and molecular analysis data are available only for few patients. We present clinical and Mandibuloacral dysplasia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characteri- radiological information of 23 patients with Melorheostosis L(1
E4 M),D B3O S (2), zed by acroosteolysis, hyperpigmentation, mandibular and clavicular hypo- osteopoikilosis (3) or with findings of similar disease (4). Among patients plasia, bird-like facies with beaked nose and prominent eyes, delayed clos- with isolated melorheostosis until now analyzed, none has germ- ures of the cranial sutures and joint contractures. Homozygous Arg527His line mutation. Instead, we identified mutations in all BOS patients and in and Ala529Val mutationS in LMNA gene are previously reported in MAD 2LE/3M pDa3tients with osteopoikilosis. No mutation has been identified in cases patients with type A lipodystrophy. Ala529Val (c.1586 C>T) missense muta- with unclear diagnosis. These results confirm literature data, indicating that tion resulting in substition of alanin with valine may distrupt the formation germline mutations are not a major cause of isolated melorheosto- of salt bridge between arginine 527 and glutamate 537. Mutant lamin A and sis and are mainly associated to BOS or osteopoikilosis. Further studies are C proteins alters the nuclear envelope, chromatin organisation and effects needed to understand molecular bases of Melorheostosis. 
P04 .36-M the cellular processes. Intragenic deletion of the FBN1 gene in a child with mildly dilated Here we report a Turkish family with MAD. The proband was 36 years old aortic sinus: a retrotransposal event male and the first child of consanginous parents who have 3 children. He M. S. Brett, G. Korovesis, A. Lai, E. Lim, B. Cham, E. Tan; had acroosteolysis, hyperpigmentation, mandibular and clavicular hypopla- KK Women‘s & Children‘s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. sia, beaked nose,joint contractures .Aunt of the proband has also detected as MAD with consangineous parents. LMNA gene Exon 9 sequencing revealed FBN1 homozygous Ala529Val LMNA mutation in affected persons of this family. Marfan syndrome (MFS), an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder, Proband‘s parents are also detected as carrier for Ala529Val LMNA mutati- is mainly due to fibrillin 1 ( ) gFeBnNe1 m utations. MFS primarily affects the on and the other family members were detected with normal genotype. skeletal, ocular and cardiovascular systems. The vast majority of MFS cases Previously homozygous Ala529Val mutation in patients with MAD was first are caused by point mutations in with only 1-2% due to large deleti- reported by Garg et al. Up to date our study was the second report about pa- ons. Transposons are abunFdBaNn1t in the human genome and retrotransposons tients with homozygous Ala529Val mutation. Molecular studies of MAD pa- have been reported to cause disease by inserting into genes. We describe the tients will help to determine the genotype-phenotype correlation, variabili- detection of an intragenic deletion by chromosomal microarray analy- ty of phenotypic expressivity of mutations and molecular basis of disease. 
P04 .34-M sis (CMA) in a child with mildly dilated aortic sinus. Breakpoint sequencing A combined workflow for FBN1 mutation detection using next showed that the deletion was due to a SVA retrotransposition. The child was generation and Sanger sequencing methods first seen at 4 years of age. Echocardiogram showed a mildly dilated aortic K. Koczok, L. Madar, É. Oláh, G. P. Szabó, K. Szakszon, G. Pfliegler, I. Balogh; sinus. He had a history of muscular VSD (closed spontaneously) and trivial University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. mitral regurgitation. Phenotypes include frontal bossing, anteverted ears, pink striae and joint hyperlaxity. He also had a learning disability anFdB Nat1- tention deficit. CMA with an Agilent 1M array detected a 36 kb dFeBlNet1ion at Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder of connective tissue 15q21.1 which is predicted to result in a deletion of exons 7-9 of the with skeletal, ocular and cardiovascular system involvement. Sequencing of gene. Long range PCR confirmed the deletion of exons 7-9 of the gene the fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene has a 70-90% mutation detection rate in patients and the insertion of a MAST2 SVA transposon. CMA confirmed a diagnosis of with Marfan syndrome. The goal of this study was to establish a diagnostic MFS in a child who had a few MFS clinical symptoms but who did not fulfil workflow for rapid and reliable mutation detection in the FBN1 gene. the Ghent criteria. This diagnosis will enable appropriate surveillance, pati- Exons and flanking regions of the FBN1 gene were amplified in 65 ampli- ent management and genetic counselling. To the best of our knowledge, this cons using published and newly designed primers. Our workflow was based is the first report of MFS caused by retrotransposition. 
P04 .37-S on the followings: 1) exons containing homopolymer regions (n=16) were Panel-based Next Generation Sequencing - a powerful diagnostic tool tested by Sanger sequencing method because of the well known high error for patients with genetic skin diseases rate of pyrosequencing-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) in such re- K. Reicherter1, A. C. Russ1, T. Scheurenbrand1, A. Sprecher1, F. Battke1, N. Günther1, P. gions, 2) all other amplicons were sequenced using NGS (Roche GS Junior), Itin2, K. Kernland-Lang3, K. Hoertnagel1, J. Lemke4, S. Biskup1; where coverage criterion was above 40x. Pathogenic mutations detected by 1CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Dermatology, University Hospital NGS method were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Department of Dermatology, University Hospital, Inselspital, Eleven families (15 patients) were tested with a mutation detection rate of Bern, Switzerland, 4Division of Human Genetics, University Children’s Hospital, 8/11 unrelated patients. 7 missense (6 of them affecting cystein residues) Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland. were found and one base pair deletion causing frameshift. 5 novel mutations Purpose: were detected. By combining NGS and Sanger sequencing methods reliable diagnostic Genetic skin diseases (genodermatoses) represent a broad and workflow could be established for Marfan syndrome. heterogeneous spectrum of mainly rare conditions. Overlapping pheno- 
P04 .35-S types additionally often hamper clear clinical diagnosis and straightforward Melorheostosis and LEMD3 related sclerosing bone diseases: clinical, genetic testing. As a precise genetic diagnosis is crucial for counseling of radiological and molecular characterization of an Italian series M. Gnoli1, E. Pedrini1, L. Campanacci2, M. F. Bedeschi3, A. Wischmeijer4, G. Tortora4, F. patients regarding the course of the disease, prognosis, recurrence risk, and Gurrieri5, A. Percesepe6, M. Tremosini1, L. Sangiorgi1; tMheetrhapoedu: tic approach, we have developed a diagnostic panel based on Next 1Department of Medical Genetics and Skeletal Rare Diseases, Rizzoli Orthopaedic Generation Sequencing (NGS). Institute, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Muscular-Skeletal Oncology, Rizzoli Orthopedic 241 genes were selected from the OMIM database and literature. Institute, Bologna, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit,Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale After customized target enrichment, NGS was performed using the HiSeq Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Policlinico 2500 platform (Illumina), followed by bioinformatics analysis. Variants Sant‘Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Institute, wReitshu lmtsi:n or allele frequencies < 5 % were selected for further investigati- Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Modena University, Modena, Italy. on. Validation of relevant variants was performed using Sanger sequencing. We subdivided the genodermatoses panel according to the most relevant phenotypes, e.g., ichthyosis, epidermolysis bullosa, ectodermal dys- plasia, connective tissue defects, dyskeratosis cAoLnOgXe1n2itBa, aTlPb6in3isPmL,O aDn1d skin Melorheostosis is an uncommon, relatively benign, sclerosing bone disea- dAiBsCoCrd6ers associated with malignancy. In a pilot study we have identified se, characterized by long bones hyperostosis, resembling flowing of cand- clear pathogenic mutations within the genes , , , and le wax. Skin and subcutaneous tissue can be involved. The disease may be . The preliminary data indicate high detection Craotnecsl: uinsi o2n2: % of the asyntomatic (incidental X-ray diagnosis, finding of the typical hyperostosis cases we identified clearly pathogenic mutations, in 33 % likely pathogenic pattern) or cause pain, joint stiffness or deformity. Melorheostosis is spora- variants were detected, and 44 % remained unsolved. We have dic and pathogenesis is largely unknown. Occasionally in the LsaEmMeD 3family developed a comprehensive panel based diagnostic NGS tool for diagnosing we observe individuals with melorheostosis and osteopoikilosis, disease genetic skin diseases. This highly reliable and very cost-efficient diagnostic characterized by multiple round foci of increased bone density. gene panel enables us to molecularly diagnose patients with clinically heteroge- mutations have been revealed in osteopoikilosis and BLuEsMchDk3e-Ollendorff neous and also very rare skin diseases. Furthermore, it contributes to a bet- Syndrome (BOS), an association of skin lesions, as connective tissue nae- v1i,0 a4nd osteopoikilosis or melorheostosis. SporadEicSalHly G 2014 m |u MtatIiLonAsN , tIeTrA uLnYde |r sWtanWdiWng. oEfS gHenGot.yOpeR-pGhenotype correlations.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .38-M TYR Neurofibromatosis type 1 and Legius syndrome: differential molecular diagnosis in children carried homozygous mutations and three were heterozygous. Among C. Santoro1, T. Giugliano2, S. Strianese1, C. Pisano2, M. D‘Arco1, F. Del Vecchio Blanco2, S. theT tYeRn prenatal diagnostic fetuses, th rCeoen fecltuusseiosn c:a rried compound hetero- Perrotta1, V. Nigro2, G. Piluso3; gTeYnReous mutations; seven carried no mutation or only one allele mutation 1Dipartimento della Donna, del Bambino e di Chirurgia Generale e Specialistica, in TYRand appeared normal at birth. We identified four novel Seconda Universita‘ degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biochimica, mutations and showed that molecular based prenatal screening to de- Biofisica e Patologia Generale, Seconda Universita‘ degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, tect mutation in a fetus at risk for OCA1 provided essential information 3Dipartimento di Biochimica Biofisica e Patologia Generale, Seconda Universita‘ degli for genetic counseling of at risk couples. Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy. 
P04 .41-S Oligodontia segregating with a 7p21.2p21.1 NF1 SPRED1 Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and Legius syndrome (LS) are autosomal E. Di Gregorio1,2, E. Grosso1, M. C. Amione1, G. D‘Alessand∼ro11 , MA.b C adrubponliec1a, Mtio. Cn. Pina raand iso1, dominant disorders caused by germline mutations in or gene TIt. aSlcioapna cfaamsa1i,l yP. wPaipthp it1,h Fr. eTea laafrfiecoc1t,e Ad. Bsriubslcino1g,2s, C. Bracco1,2; 1S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin, Italy, 2Department of respectively. The NF1 phenotype partially overlaps the most benign of LS Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. that can be just molecularly distinguished. Appearance of typical NF1-fea- tures, like neurofibromas and Lisch nodules, is age-related thus pigmentary manifestations (cafè-au-lait macules and/or freckling) can be the only clini- nd We report on a 60 yrs. patient with short stature (< 2 centile), sponta- cal sign of NF1 in early childhood, making difficult to distinguish NF1 and neous eruption of 7 teeth only, fusion of 
C1  to 
C4  vertebrae with partial LS. The occurrence of serious NF1-complications (i.e. MPNST, brain gliomas) occipito-atlantal fusion. Two of her seven siblings presented oligodontia. emphasizes the usefulness of an early differential diagnosis. To address a Standard chromosome analysis in the proband showed a mosaic karyoty- proper diagnosis, we applied a specific clinical workflow and a compre- pe 45,X[3]/46,XX[27], which may relate wISiPthD ,thSeO SshToDrCt1 staLtRuRrCe7. A2rrAaNy-KCMGYH hensive genetic test in a cohort of 149 children. Pigmentary manifestations (T6
S0 PKA,N A13gileAnGtR T2echnolAoGgRie3s) showed a ∼1 Mb duplication encompassing were considered as the main sign combined with presence of typical NF1 chromosome 7p spanning eight genes ( , , , features and/or affected first-degree, and with the age at medical examina- , and ): (arr[hg19] 7p21.2p21.1(15,926,980x2,15,99 tion. 128 (85.9%) had a clinical diagnosis of NF1. For 17 (11.4%) NF1 vs LS 4,233-17,074,396x3,17,222,770x2). Real-time PCR on available members was undistinguishable and 4 (2.7%) had a diagnosis of familiar occurrence showed the duplication segregSaOteSdT DinC t1he two siblings with oligodontia, but of pigmentary manifestatioNnFs.1 A causative mutation was foundS PinR 1
E2 D21/128 it was absent in one healthy sister. We hypothesize that oligodontia is asso- patients (95.3%) confirming NF1 clinical diagnosis. 11 patients wSiPthR EaDm1- ciated with the duplication of (OMIM* 609675), which is a mem- biguous diagnosiNs Fc1arried mutations (64.7%), 2 carried mu- ber of the sclerostSions ftadmc1i-l/y- . The protein acts as a bone morphogenetic pro- tations (11.8%). Among those thought to be LS, 3 had mutation in tein (BMP) antagonist. Mice overexpressing Sostdc1 have a reduced number (75.0%), one in (25.0%). Children with just NF1 pigmentary manife- of teeth, whereas show an increasedW nNuTm1b0eAr of teeth number and stations would be clinically followed for long time waiting the age-related anomalies in teeth morphology. The gene has been demonstrated to ant- appearance of most typical features. Thus an early molecular diagnosis agonize Wnt siSgOnSaTliDngC 1in mice. Interestingly, mutations have been might be very useful, considering that the milder LS phenotype require a associated with oligodontia in humans. In concSlOuSsTioDnC, 1we speculate that the less intensive follow-up. 
P04 .39-S duplication of at chromosome 7p21.2p21.1 may increase its pro- Clinical description of NF1 patients and motivations to perform the tein level leading to oligodontia in our family. could be a new can- genetic test didate gene to be screened in isolated oligodontia. 
P04 .42-M S. Miccoli, A. Wischmeijer, M. Gnoli, M. Seri, D. Turchetti; U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico Sant‘Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Identification of a novel regulatory variant in OPTN in familial cases of Paget’s disease of bone S. Wani, S. H. Ralston, O. M. E. Albagha; University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Diagnosis of Neurofibromatosis I (NF1) is typically based on clinical criteria, with genetic testing being performed only in a fraction of cases. We review- ed the records of NF1 patients referred to our clinic to explore what factors Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a common bone disease with stOroPnTgN gene- may have conditioned the choice to undertake genetic testing. tic compoente anlt, .N Parte Gvieonuest studiesO hPaTvNe identified a PDB-susceptibility locus Among 100 consultants attending for a family/personal history of NF1 in on chr10p13 tagged by rs1561570 which is located within the gene the period December 2002 to December 2013, clinical data were available (Albagha 2011). encodes a protein that plays a role in for 94 patients: 68 patients satisfied the criteria for the clinical diagnosis of multiple cellular processes including autophagy and NF-KB signalling but its NF1 and in 44 of these (65%) NF1 gene analysis were performed, leading to role in bone metabolism is yet unclear. Here we investigated the 10p13 locus mutation detection in 26 cases (60%). Tested patients differed from unte- by targeted DNA sequencing of a 650kb region surrounding the rs1561570 sted patients by median age at diagnosis (12 versus 23 years) and number which includes sevSeQnS TgeMn1es. A total of 260 samples were sequenced inclu- of criteria satisfied (≥3 in 75% of tested and 30% of untested), while the rate ding unrelated cases and controls, 60 familial cases and controls. All cases of familial cases did not differ between the two groups (27% among tested, were negative for mutations. Target capture was performed using 26% of non-tested). Moreover, the rate of patients tested has increased in Haloplex kit followed by DNA sequencing using the illumina Hiseq2000 the years, from the 33-50% in the period 2003-2005 to the 50-100% of pati- platform. Variants passing quality control measures were filtered to include ents tested in the period 2006-2013. In conclusion, genetic testing was more only rare coding (MAF<0.01 in 1000Genome) or regulatory vOaPrTiaNnts (as pre- likely to be undertaken in patients diagnosed in childhood and in those with dicted by ENCODE). No disease-specific missensOe PmTuNt ations were detected a more severe phenotype, especially in recent years. Indeed NF1 analysis is in any of the seven genes located in this region including . However, demanding but has been improved across the years, which makes genetic we identified a novel rare variant located in the promoter which was test now more accessible. 
P04 .40-M found to alter NF-KB transcription factor binding site. This novel variant had Tyrosinase gene mutations in Chinese Han population with OCA1 a high call quality (Q>4200, read depth >150) and was not present in the K. Xiang-dong, L. Ning, S. Hui-rong, W. Qing-hua; public databases including 1000 genomes and showed transmission from the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. an affected father to an affected daughter and the unaffected mother did Background/Aims: not carry this mutation. In conclusion our data suggest that rare regulatory variants within OPTN influence PDB susceptibility. 
P04 .43-S Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a heterogeneous Evaluating susceptibility loci for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or autosomal recessive genetic disorder which TaYffRects melanin synt hesis. OCA without cleft palate in the Arabic population: Analysis of 15 risk loci results in reduced or absence of pigmenTtaYtRion in the hair, skin, and eyes. in a new case-control sample recruited in Yemen Type 1 OCA (MOeCtAh1o)d rse:s ults from tyrosinase ( ) gene mutationand is a se- E. Mangold1, A. Böhmer1,2, K. Aldhorae3, A. Esmail4, N. Al-Hebshi5, B. Lippke1,2, L. Gölz6, M. vere disease type. This study investigated mutations in a Chinese cohort Nöthen1,2, N. Daratsianos6, M. Knapp7, A. Jäger6, K. Ludwig1,2; with TOYCRA1. This study included two parts: patient genetic study 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of and prenatal genetic diagnosis. Thirty OCA1 patients were subjected to ana- Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Orthodontic of lyze gene mutation. Ten pedigrees were included for prenatal genetic Department, College of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, Yemen, 4Cleft Lip and dTiYaRgnosis. One hundred unrelated healthy Chinese indRiveidsuualtlss: w ere charac- Palate Center, College of Dentistry, University of Aden, Aden, Yemen, 5Molecular Research terized for controls. The coding sequence and the intron/exon junctions of Laboratory, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Science and Technology, Sana‘a, were analyzed by bidirectiTonYRal DNA sequencing. Twenty mu- Yemen, 6Department of Orthodontics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Institute of tations were identified, four of which wereE nSoHveGl. I2n 0th1e4se |t hMirtIyL OACNA,1 IpTaAti-LY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 105 ents, twenty-five patients were compound heterozygosity; two patientsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. notype-phenotype correlation studies have been performed and there are Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P) has a genetical- no unambiguous and clear indications. ly complex etiology. In recent years, several genome-wide significant suscep- To evaluate whether the severity and specific clinical manifestations of tibility loci for nsCL/P were identified, most of them by genome wide asso- disease are linked with a specific genetic background we performed a ge- ciation studies. However, most studies have been performed in populations notype-phenotype correlation study analyzing an Italian case study of 300 from Europe and Asia, and few data are available concerning genetic sus- patients. All patients have a clinical and radiographic diagnosis of OI from ceptibility to nsCL/P in Arabic populations. The present study investigated a mild to lethal perinatal forms, according with Sillence clinical classification. newly recruited nsCL/P sample from Yemen. Twenty-four single nucleotide The presence of mutations in CO
L1 A1/CO
L1 A2 genes has been investigated polymorphisms (SNPs) representing all 15 currently known nsCL/P risk loci using a molecular screening protocol with High Resolution Melting (HRM) were genotyped in 242 nsCL/P cases and 420 healthy controls. Single mar- and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification to detect either point ker association analyPsis revealed significant associations for four loci (8q24, m 
P0 u 4ta .4ti 6o -n Ms and big deletions-insertions. 9q22, 10q25, 13q31). The strongest as-4sociation was for the European high Osteogenesis imperfecta - a dominant mutation of CO
L1 A2 gene risk locus at 8q24 ( corrected = 5.09x10 ; heterozygous odds ratio (ORhet) = c.964G>A causes in homozygote status more serious phenotype 1.74, 95% confidence interval (CI 95% CI) = 1.22-2.47, homozygous odds J. Behunova, F. Laccone, O. Brandau, H. Rehder; ratio (ORhom) = 2.47, CI 95% = 1.55 - 3.93). Five additional loci (1q32.2, 3q12, Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 8q21, 17q22, 20q12) showed nominal significance that did not witPh stand correction for multiple testing. Two loci (1p36, 2p21) failed to reach no- minal significance but displayed a trend towards association with < 0.1. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous group of connective tissue Although the four remaining loci (1p22, 3p11, 15q22, 17p13) failed to reach disorders characterized by a predisposition to fractures and variable extras- nominal significance, the risk alleles were in the same direction as in the dis- keletal symptoms. Original classification distinguishes OI regarding clinical covery studies. Our results suggest that four of the 15 analyzed nsCL/P risk and RTG findings to OI types I-IV. Clinical manifestation of OI can result from loci which were identified in European and Asian ethnicities significantly mutations of minimal 12 various genes and in the most of OI cases (~90%) confer risk for nsCL/P in Arab populations. the mutations are identified in CO
L1 A1- or CO
L1 A2-gene. The mutations of 
P04 .44-M these genes affect collagen type I synthesis (chains A1 and A2) and the vast Defective proteolytic processing of fibrillar procollagens and other majority of the mutations in these two genes follows AD pattern of inheri- extracellular matrix proteins due to mutations in BM
P1  results in a tance. severe form of Osteogenesis Imperfecta D. Syx1, S. Symoens1, A. Medeira2, A. B. Sousa2, T. Hermanns-Lê3, P. Coucke1, A. De Paepe1, We refer on a child from a consanguineous family (the parents are the first F. Malfait1; cousins) with clinical findings of OI type III-IV and molecular finding of ho- 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Serviço de Genética, Hospital de Santa mozygote pG322S mutation (c.964G>A). This mutation has been described Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Department of Dermatopathology, University Medical Center only in heterozygote form, causing a mild form of OI - type I. The clinical of Liège, Liège, Belgium. features of 4,5 year-old boy represented a very low stature (18 cm below 3.Percentile), history of both femurs and upper arm fractures in early in- fancy, slight skeletal deformities and disproportions, inability to stand or Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (BM
P1 ) is an astacin metalloprotease with walk without support, slightly blue scleras and dentinogenesis imperfecta. manifold roles in morphogenesis and diverse substrates. Besides its role as Mental status was age-appropriate. procollagen C-proteinase for the major fibrillar collagens (types I, II and III) Although the parents initially denied any health problems (both were 160 and its participation in N-propeptide removal of the minor fibrillar colla- cm tall and healthy), after repeated questioning they admitted a history of gens (types V and XI), BBMMP
P11  is involved in the proteolytic trimming of mul- possible femur and arm fractures in young age (the mother) and one fractu- tiple other substrates including a.o. small leucine-rich proteoglycans (e.g. re after fall (the father). The analysis confirmed heterozygosity for pG322S decorin). Mutations in have recently been identified in three families mutation in both parents. 
P04 .47-S with a severe, autosomal recessive form of osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). We A novel mutation in IFITM5, encoding BRIL, impairs osteoblast report novel, bi-allelic mutations in two unrelated adult patients with severe production of PEDF and causes atypical type VI osteogenesis OI, characterized by severe osteoporosis with numerous fractures, short sta- imperfecta ture with limb deformities and severe kyphoscoliosis. Biochemical analysis A. Reich1, C. R. Farber2, A. M. Barnes1, P. Becerra3, F. Rauch4, W. A. Cabral1, A. Bae1, F. H. of secreted (pro)collagens showed defective type I procollagen C-propepti- Glorieux4, T. L. Clemens5, J. C. Marini1; de processing. Immunofluorescent staining of type I and V collagen secreted 1Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, HIN, Bethesda, MD, United States, by the patients’ dermal fibroblast cultures showed a reduced and abnormal 2Center for Public Health Genomics, Depts Public Health Sciences, Biochemistry & collagen deposition in the extracellular matrix (ECM). In addition, the redu- Mol Genet, UVA, Charlottesville, VA, United States, 3Section on Protein Structure and ced BM
P1 -activity was shown to result in deficient proteolytic trimming of Function, LRCMB, NEI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Shriners Hosp for Children and decorin, an important regulator of collagen fibril organisation, leading to the McGill Univ, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Dept Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins Sch Med, Baltimore, MD, United States. retention of its propeptide. Ultrastructural analysis showed marked variabi- lity in collagen fibril diameter and uneven interfibrillar spaces. Overall, this indicates that BM
P1  defects result in disturbed collagen deposition in the IFITM5 Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type V is caused by a recurrent dominant mu- ECM. Besides the defective procollagen processing, it is likely that deficient tation (c.-14C>T) in ,S wERhPicIhN Fe1ncodes BRIL, a transmembrane ifitm- cleavage of other BM
P1  substrates contributes to abnormal ECM assembly like protein strongly expressed in osteoblasts, while type VI OI is caused by and signalling, and as such to the phenotypic severity. 
P04 .45-S recessive null mutations in , encoding pigment epithelium-deri- Genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with dominant SvEedR PfaINctFo1r (PEDF). We identified a 25-year-old woman with severe OI, with Osteogenesis Imperfecta normal serum PEDF but absent PEDF secretion by cultured osteoblasts. Her M. Maioli1, M. Gnoli1, M. Celli2, L. Sangiorgi1; sequences wered neo nromvaol IdFeITspMi5te bone histomorphometry typical 1Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 2Policlinico Umberto I, Roma, Italy. of type VI OI. Whole exome sequencing of the proband, parents andI aFnIT uMn5- affected sibling revealed a mutation in one allele of the pro- band, causing a p.
S40 L substitution in the BRIL intracellular domain. Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a rare genetic disorder of connective tissue expression was normal in proband fibroblastsS EanRdP IoNsFte1oblasts, as was BRIL that occurs in approximately one in 15000-20000 new born with mostly au- protein level in proband osteoblasts on western blot and in permeabilized tosomal dominant inheritance caused by mutations in the type I collagen ge- proband osteoblasts by microscopy. Notably, expression was de- nes, CO
L1 A1 and CO
L1 A2. The clinical spectrum is strongly heterogeneous creased in proband osteoblasts and PEDF was barely detectable in conditio- with a wide intrafamilial and interfamilial variability; a continuum ranging ned media of proband cells. Expression and secretion of type I collagen was from nearly asymptomatic individuals with occasional fractures, normal similarly decreased in proband osteoblasts, confirming this OI as collagen- stature and lifespan, to lethal phenotypes characterized by severe skeletal related. Osteoblasts with the 
S40 L mutation also ShEaRdP dINecFr1eased expression fragility, deformity and growth deficiency. Affected patients may also show of ALP and osteocalcin, as seen in primary PEDF defects. In contrast, osteo- blue sclerae, hearing deficit, dentinogenesis imperfecta, cardiac lesions and blasts from classical type V OI have increased expression and joint hyperlaxity. PEDF secretion during differentiation. These data suggest (1) that the type Actually more than 1100 CO
L1 A1/A2 distinct variants associated with V OI and p.
S40 L BRIL are gain- and loss-of-function mutations, respectively, dominant OI have been identified without hot spot regions; most of the and (2) that BRIL and PEDF have a relationship that connects the genes for mutations are glycine substitutions followed by splice site alterations and types V and VI OI and their roles in bone mineralization. n1o0n6sense mutations. Despite the identification of mESanHy Gm u2ta0t1io4ns |, fMewI LgAe-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P04 .48-M A novel deletion mutation involving TMEM38B associated with autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta. racterized by abnormal resorption associated with inadequate remodeling, E. Rubinato1, A. Morgan1, A. D‘Eustacchio2, M. La Bianca2, V. Pecile2, G. Gortani2, P. that leads to deformity of the bone. It’s the second most common metabolic Gasparini1,2, F. Faletra2; bone disease after osteoporosis and affects approximately 3% of the popu- 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS lation over 40 years old and approximately 10% of those over the age of 85 “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy. years. Missense and truncating mutations have been reported within the SQSTM1 gene (25–50% of familial and 5–10% of sporadic PDB patients) encoding Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is and hereditary bone disease characterized the p62 protein. This protein has a crucial role as an assembly factor for by decreased bone density and multiple fractures, usually inherited in an autophagy, important for cell survival. Recent investigations showed that autosomal dominant mannCeRr.T RAePc, eLnEtPlyR Ese1v, ePrPaIlB g, eFnKeBsP e6n5c, oSEdiRnPgI NpFro1t, eBinMsP r1e)- Microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 (L
C3 ) directly interacts lated to collageTnM mEeMt3ab8oBlism have been described in some cases of autoso- with p62 via a newly identified L
C3 -interacting region (LIR), located bet- mal recessive (AR) OI (like . ween its ZZ and ubiquitin-associated UBA domains. More recently, , a gene involved in releasing of calcTiuMmE Mfr3o8mB intra- We studied the potential association of the two variants of autophagy-re- cellular stores and in cell differentiation, has been associated with AR OI. We lated gene (ATG), ATG2B (rs3759601) and ATG16
L1  (®rs2241880), in 292 describe the second new deletion-mutation involving the gene patients with PDB and 192 controls, using the TaqMan Pre-designed SNP- in a 11 year-old AlbanianC OfeLm1Aal1e, bornC OoLf 1aAp2parently non consanguineous Genotyping Assay(Applied Biosystems). parents from the same small village, showing an OI clinical phenotype. Sin- We detected a significant association between genotype GG and PDB in ce molecular analysis of and genes were negative for the the ATG2B polymorphism rs3759601 (p=0.004, OR=0.434; 95% CI=0.246- presence of causative mutations, a SNP array analysis was performed using 0.769). Moreover, we found a statistical significance between the T allele the Illumina Infinium SNP genotyping platform (HumanOmniExpress - 12 variant in ATG16
L1  polymorphism rs2241880 (TT: p=0.000 OR=5,102 chips and BeadStation Scanner) in order to detect regions of homozygosity CI=2.853-9.123; CT: P=0.030 OR=2.821 CI=1.850-4.300) encompassing genes kTnMoEwMn3 t8oB be involved in AR OI. The analysis revealed In conclusion, these findings suggest that allele G of ATG2B polymorphism one homozygous region larger than 2 Mb (chr9:107,793,426 - 109,935,841) might contribute to increase risk in Paget’s disease development and allele overlapping with the TMEM38B locus and characterized by a 35 Kb homo- T of ATG16LB1 polymorphism may play a protective role in Paget’s disea- zygous deletion spanning from marker rs1567368 to rs9408800 and invol- se of bone in Spanish patients. 
P04 .51-S ving exons 1 and 2 of gene. A long PCR amplification confirmed Common variants at 20q11 influence skin color in Europeans this finding. Eventually, we postulated that the deletion was proTmMoEtMed3 8bBy F. Liu1, M. Visser1, D. Duffy2, P. G. Hysi3, L. Jacobs4, O. Lao1, K. Zhong1, S. Walsh1, V. L. C. the presence of repeated sequences in the segments before and after the Subramanyam Reddy1, A. F. Ralf1, G. Zhu2, A. Hofman5, A. G. Uitterlinden6, R. T. S. Palstra1, breaking points. Our finding contributes to expand the role of , T. D. Spector3, N. G. Martin2, T. E. C. Nijsten4, M. Kayser1; t Ph 0u 4s . 4su 9p -Sporting the role of deletions in generating this type of AR OI. 1Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Queensland Institute of Medical Research, High spontaneous osteoclastogenesis in pediatric osteogenesis Brisbane, Australia, 3Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King’s imperfecta patients receiving and not receiving intravenous College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Dermatology, Erasmus neridronate University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of M. F. Faienza1, R. Fischetto1, A. Tummolo1, L. Piacente1, A. Ventura2, L. Cavallo3, F. Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Papadia4, G. Brunetti5; 6Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, 1A.O.U.Policlinico Consorziale P.O.Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Rotterdam, Netherlands. mediche di Base, Neuroscienze ed organi di senso, Sezione di Anatomia ed Istologia, Università di Bari, Bari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Pediatria; Ospedale Pediatrico Giovanni XXIII-Policlinico; Università di Bari, Bari, Italy, 4U.O. Malattie Metaboliche e Genetica Medica; A.O.U.Policlinico Consorziale , Bari, Bari, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche We carried out a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on skin color in di Base, Neuroscienze ed organi di senso, Sezione di Anatomia ed Istologia, Università di 6,000 Dutch Europeans followed by successful replications in thousands of Bari, Bari, Italy. Europeans from Australia and UK. We identified a total of five distinct geno- Background. mic regions showing genome-wide significant association with continuous or categorical skin color phenotypes - all including known pigmentation Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disease of connec- genes: 5p13.2 SL
C45 A2; 6p25.3 IRF4; 15q13.1 OCA2 and HER
C2 ; 16q24.3 tive tissue characterized by abnormal bone mineralization and skeletal de- M
C1 R; and 20q11.22 ASIP. The role of 20q11.22 in skin coloration has been formities. Objective. This study investigate the osteoclastogenic potential of much less clear than other genes/regions. In this large region (spanning unfractioned peripheral blood mononuclear cells ( PBMCs)M freotmho OdIs p.atients ~ 1.5Mb), the top-associated DNA variant was rs6059655 (P=4.2e-13) in ( mean age 10,44+/- 3,48) who received cyclical neridronate infusions for RALY. All other associated SNPs in this region were all in linkage disequi- at least 1 year, untreated OI patients and control subjects. PBMCs librium with rs6059655 (r2>0.4). Among these are rs1885120 in MYH7B from 6 patients and 6 controls were cultured in presence/absence of M-CSF and rs910873 in PIGU that have been previously associated with risk of me- and RANKL. At the end of the culture period, mature multinucleated osteo- lanoma. Additional transcriptional analysis of 20 genes from 20q11.2 in 29 clasts (Ocs) were identified as TRAP+ cells. By real time PCR we studied human skin epidermis samples highlighted RALY as well as other regional genRe eesxuplrtess.sion in freshly isolated PBMC. By flow cytometry we characte- genes such as EIF2
S2 , ITCH and GSS with significant (P<0.01) expression rized the presence of OC precursors ( CD14+/CD16+) and TNF-α expressi- differences between light and dark pigmented skin samples. A multivari- on. Spontaneous OC formation, without adding M-CSF and RANKL, ate analysis highlighted 9 pigmentation genes (i.e. OCA2-HER
C2 , IRF4, SL- occurred in PBMC cultures from treated and untreated OI patients. In these 
C45 A2, M
C1 R, RALY/ASIP, TYR, BN
C2 , SL
C24 A4, and SL
C24 A5 in a descen- patients, the percentage of circulating OC precursors, increased respect to ding order) jointly explaining 16.3% phenotypic variance of perceived skin the controls ( 12,5% vs 0,1%, p< 0,01). By real time PCR, we found high darkness in Europeans. The weighted allele sums showed a spatial pattern levels of RANKL, TNF-α and MSCF receptor, as well Caos ndcelcurseiaosne.d OPG levels, that is clearly correlated with latitude in Europe, but much less so in the rest thus leading to the increase of RANKL/OPG ratio. High TNF-α levels were of the world, suggesting that variants responsible for skin color variation also found on monocytes through flow citometry. We showed b Pe 0t 4w .5e 2en -M Asians and Africans are not included here. for the first time the high osteoclastogenic potential of PBMCs from OI pati- A spectrum of disorders are associated with somatic mutations in ents, treated and untreated with biphosphonate, which could be due to the PIK3CA, encoding the p110α catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol- high percentage of circulating OC precursors, to the elevated TNF-α levels as 4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase well as to the increased RANKL/OPG ratio. This condition could contribute V. E. R. Parker1, A. Luchetti1, H. Martin1, I. Isaac1, M. J. Lindhurst2, J. Sapp2, K. Keppler- t Po 0 b 4o .5n 0e -d Misease affecting these patients. Noreuil2, L. G. Biesecker2, E. R. Maher1, R. K. Semple1; 1Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2National Study of ATG2B and ATG16
L1  polymorphisms in Spanish patients with Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States. Paget’s disease of bone V. Rivero1,2, R. Usategui3,2, J. Del Pino4, R. González2,1; Aim: PIK3CA, 1Centro de investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedicine Research (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Facultad de Somatic activating mutations in encoded by the p110α cata- Medicina, Salamanca, Spain, 4Department of Reumatology, Virgen Vega Hospital, lytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), have been identified Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. in several different disorders of segmental overgrPoIwKt3hC. AP I3K is a critical mediator of cellular growth, survival and metabolism, and is frequently mutated in cancers. We assessed the prevalence of mutations in 40 Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) it’s a chronEiSc HskGel e2ta0l 1di4so |r dMerI,L tAhaNt i,s I TchAa-LY |p WatiWentWs w.EitSh HvaGri.aOblRe fGorms of mosaic overgrowth. 107ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Methods: Screening of DNA derived from affected tissue was undertaken We describe a 40 years old man from Albania with clinically evident hema- using a PCR-based target enrichment with the Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer Hotspot turia and proteinuria; renal function was normal. The peculiar renal CT fin- PRaenseull tvs2: ™, and sequenced on an Ion PGM platform. Exons 2,5,7,8,10,14,19 dings were: small multiple calcifications at the cortical junction bilaterally. and 2
P1 I wK3eCreA screened, and the detection level was 5% at 1500x depth. The pedigree analysis revealed two sisters affected by an unspecified skin We identified 20 patients with somatic variants in exons 8, 10 and disease; no consanguinity was reported in the family. The clinical genetic 21 of exhibiting a range of clinical phenotypes. There were no repor- examination showed yellowish papules of the skin on the neck. The asso- tDeids ccuassesiso onf: cancer or metabolic d iPstIuKr3bCaAnce, and 1/3 of adult patients had ciation of renal calcifications in a young patient with skin lesions and the minimally progressive disease from the third decade. recurrence of a skin disease in the family led us to take into account Pseu- Somatic activation of causes a diverse spectrum of di- doxanthoma elasticum (PXE). Therefore an ocular examination looking for sease, ranging from isolated digit enlargement to more extensive overgrow- signs of the disease was performed and angioid streaks radiating from the th of the limbs, abdomen, brain or blood vessels. The rate of malignancy peripapillary area without subretinal neovascularization signs were detec- appears to be low, although this will need to be substantiated in larger ted. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), is a rare multisystem disease cha- studies. In the future, identification of biomarkers to predict disease pro- racterized by degeneration and calcification of elastic fibres and blood ves- gression will provide critical prognostic information, whilst the possibility sels. The causative gene is ABC
C6 , mapped on chromosome 16p13.1, which of therapy with inhibitors of the PI3K-AKT pathway warrants evaluation in encodes an ABC transporter protein (ABC
C6 ) expressed primarily in liver clinical trials. and the kidneys. Patients typically develop cutaneous, ocular, cardiovascular Number and gastrointestinal manifestations. The molecular analysis of the ABC
C6  of cases p.His1047Argp.His1047Leup.Glu542Lysp.Glu545Lysp.Cys420Argp.Gly1049Arg screened gene detected a homozygous deletion of exons 23-29 (del23_29); this is the Macrodactyly 14 4 1 1 0 0 1 most common deletion described in literature associated to PXE, resulting Fibroadipose 9 4 2 0 0 1 0 in a premature stop codon with loss of 505 amino acids of MR
P6  protein. hyperplasia Although this renal pattern cannot be considered specific for the diagnosis CLOVES 6 1 0 0 3 0 0 MCAP 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 of PXE, we recommend to test PXE when both renal and skin abnormalities Klippel- are present in a patient. 
P04 .56-M Trenaunay 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 syndrome KIF3A is associated to arthopaty envolvement in psoriatic patients Hemihyper- R. Cascella1, M. Ragazzo1, S. Zampatti1, F. Diano1, E. Galli2, C. Strafella1, C. Germani1, F. 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 plasia Sangiuolo1, G. Novelli1, E. Giardina1,3; Proteus 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, School of Medicine, University of Rome Complex “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 2S. Pietro Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy, epidermal 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 3Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare UILDM, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. naevus syndrome TOTAL 40 10 4 1 3 1 1 Congenital Lipomatous Overgrowth, Vascular Malformations, Epidermal Naevi, Scoliosis/ Psoriatic arthritis (PsA, OMIM #607507) is a chronic inflammatory disorder Skeletal and Spinal (CLOVES) syndrome), Megalencephaly-Capillary Malformation (MCAP) presenting a highly heterogeneous phenotype and clinical course. PsA is a syndrome. Tissue screened included FFPE, fresh tissue and dermal fibroblast cell lines. multifactorial disease associated with psoriasis, affecting the 30% of pati- 
P04 .54-M ents with psoriasis vulgaris (PsV). PRINS, the psoriasis susceptibility related non-coding RNA Some genetic risk factors are specific for the arthropaty, other are shared contributes to various aspects of cellular stress response with PsV (HLA-Cw*06:02, LCE, TNFα and TRAF3I
P2 ). On this subject, dif- M. Széll1, A. Göblös2, S. Bacsa2, K. Szegedi2, M. Antal3, J. Danis2, A. Dobozy2, Z. Bata- Csörgő2, L. Kemény2; ferent European studies have recently found several susceptibility genes, 1University of Szeged, Dept of Medical Genetics, Szeged, Hungary, 2University of Szeged, which are involved in the inflammatory and immunologic pathways of the Dept of Dermatology and Allergology, Szeged, Hungary, 3Institute of Plant Biology, disease. Biological Research Center of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Hungary, Szeged, To date, no associations between PsA and genes involved in bone metabo- Hungary. lism have been observed. Thus we decided to screen a list of genes involved in bone metabolism and/or osteogenesis. We have carried out this screening in 429 PsA patients and 417 health, 380 PsV cases and 389 controls. A single We identified PRINS (Psoriasis susceptibility Related non-coding RNA Indu- nucleotide polymorphism rs2897442 (A/G) showed a significant associati- ced by Stress) and showed that it is highest expressed in the psoriatic un- on in PsA cases (p = 0.006; OR = 0.73, 95% CI 0.59-0.92). Interestingly , it is involved epidermis. According to the results of in vitro experiments PRINS not associated to PsV but only in PsA. The rs2897442 is located in the 8th expression is induced by various stessors such as UVB, translation inhibiti- intron of KIF3A gene (5q21), which encodes for a kinesin II complex subunit on and microbial agents. It has been previously demonstarted by us and by required for the assembly of primary ciclia and involved in bone formation others that keratinocytes of the psoriatic uninvolved epidermis possess an and in keratinocyte differentiation. Full resequencing of coding and regula- abnormal response to various stressors and respond with hyperproliferati- tory regions failed to reveal evidence of further association. LD pattern does on. Therefore we aimed to understand how the altered expression of PRINS not reveal significant haplotypes associated to PsA. Immunohistochemistry in the uninvolved epidermis contributes to the aberrant stress response of analyses, as well as replication in an independent data set of patients, are the keratinocytes thus to disease susceptibility. To this end we identified a expected to clarify the functional role of KIF3A in the pathogenesis and de- chaperon protein, nucleophosmin (NPM) as a direct interacting partner of velopment of PsA. 
P04 .57-S PRINS. We could demonstrate that UV-B irradiation induced the shuttling of Spectrum of phenotypic anomalies in four families with deletion of NPM from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm and silencing of the PRINS non- the SHOX enhancer region coding RNA in the UV-B-irradiated keratinocytes resulted in the retention C. Palka1, V. Gatta2,3, V. Chiavaroli1, S. Franchi2, S. Sperduti2,4, L. D‘Onofrio2,4, M. of NPM in the nucleolus. These results suggest that PRINS is physically and D‘Aurora2,4, F. Chiarelli1, A. Mohn1, G. Palka1,5, L. Stuppia2,3; functionally linked to NPM, thus it plays a role in the NPM-mediated cellu- 1Department of Paediatrics, “G. d‘Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy, 2Functional Genetics lar stress response. In an other set of experiments we have demonstrated Unit, Center of Excellence on Aging, (Ce.S.I.), Chieti, Italy, 3Department of Psychological, that PRINS signals independently from the NF-kappaB signal trasduction Humanities and Territorial Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, “G. pathway, however its expression was induced when the keratinocytes were d‘Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy, 4Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, “G. treated with the inflammasome-activating poly(dA:dT). d‘Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy, 5Department of Oral Health and Biotechnological Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, “G. d‘Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy. Our results indicate that the PRINS non-coding RNA is part of a ribonucleo- complex. Its altered expression in psoriatic uninvolved epidermis could con- tribute to the well-established aberrant stress response of psoriatic kerati- nocytes and as a consequence to psoriasis susceptibility. SHOX alterations have been reported in 67% of patients affected by Léri- 
P04 .55-S Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), with a larger prevalence of gene deletions Association of Pseudoxantoma Elasticum with renal nefrocalcinosis: a than point mutations. It has been recently demonstrated that these deleti- rare manifestation of the disease ons can involve the SHOX enhancer region, rather that the coding region, G. Parmeggiani1, M. Neri1, E. Italyankina1, A. Storari2, D. Quaglino3, S. Bigoni1, A. with variable phenotype of the affected patients. Ferlini1; Here, we report a SHOX gene analysis carried out by MLPA in LWD pati- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ferrara University, Ferrara, Italy, 2Nephrology Department, Ferrara University Hospital, Ferrara, Italy, Ferrara, Italy, 3Department of ents from 4 families with variable phenotype. All patients presented a SHOX Life Science, Modena and Reggio Emilia University, Modena, Italy, Modena, Italy. enhancer deletion. In particular, a patient with a severe bilateral Madelung deformity without short stature showed a homozygous alteration identical 108 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, tIoT AthLeY r e|c WentWly Wde.sEcrSibHeGd .4O7.R5 Gkb PAR1 deletion. Moreover, we identified,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index for the first time, in three related patients with a severe bilateral Madelung symptoms appeared (asthenia, severe anemia, 
C3  and 
C4  decrease; urticari- deformity, a smaller deletion than the 47.5 kb PAR1 deletion encompassing al dermatitis; microscopic hematuria, petechiae; glomerulonephritis; sple- the same enhancer region (ECR1/CN
E7 ). nic strokes; interstitial pneumopathy, pulmonary hypertension; mesenteric Data reported in this study provide new information about the spectrum of ischemia). Interestingly, we also observed joint hyperlaxity with a peculiar phenotypic alterations showed by LWD patients with different deletions of apparent contractions of interphalangeal joints (manually extendable wit- t Ph 0e S .5H 8O -X enhancer region. hout difficulties). Familial hiDstNoAryS Er1evLe3a led parents’ consanguinity; moreo- 4 M ver, two other siblings were reported to show signs of an autoimmune dis- Sjögren-Larsson syndrome: molecular characterization of the first order. Molecular analysis of revealed the homozygous mutation reported Cypriot families G. Tanteles1, M. Nicolaou1, N. Patsia1, E. Leonidou2, E. Spanou1, T. Delikurt1, T. c.289_290delAC (Thr97Ilefs*2), previously reported in three sisters, born Kyriakides2, V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou1,3; from consanguineous parents and affected with HUVS (HDyNpAoScEo1mLp3lemente- 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics; Clinical Genetics Clinic, Nicosia, Cyprus, mic Urticarial Vasculitis Syndrome). This is the first italian reported case of 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics; Neurology Clinics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3MMC, autosomic recessive SLE/HUVS caused by a mutation in gene. 
P04 .61-S Nicosia, Cyprus. Spondyloenchondrodysplasia in Brazilian patients with intrafamilial variability and a pattern of pseudo-dominance D. P. Cavalcanti1, C. A. Moreno1, T. Y. Kanazawa1, C. O. Barbosa-Buck1, C. Silveira1, A. Sjögren-Larsson syndrome (SLS; MIM #270200) is a rare autosomal recessi- Superti-Furga2, E. Lausch3, S. Unger2; ve disorder caused by deficient fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH) acti- 1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Freiburg vity. This reduction in enzymatic activity is secondary to bi-allelic mutations University, Freiburg, Germany. in the ALDH3A2 gene and results in impaired fatty alcohol oxidation and accumulation of fatty alcohols and related lipid products. SLS is typically characterized by pruritic ichthyosis, spasticity, intellectual disability and Spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD) is an AR spondylometaphyseal seizures. In the present study we report, for the first time in the Cypriot dysplasia characterized by radiolucent spondylar and metaphyseal lesions, population, three apparently unrelated SLS patients. All three were homo- whose patients can also present neurological and immunological changes. zygous for a CCC deletion at nucleotide 941 to 943 coupled with a 21 nu- It is caused by mutations in AC
P5 , a gene encoding the tartrate-resistant cleotide 5’-GGGCTAAAAGTACTGTTGGGG-3’ insertion (c.941-942delins21- acid phophatase. Considering that just 24 individuals with mutations on bp). This genetic alteration, identified previously in two Caucasian patients, this gene were described so far, and the great clinical heterogeneity of this leads to the substitution of Ala314 and Pro315 to Gly and Ala, respectively, condition, the unusual pattern of a new family prompted us to present the- accompanied by the addition of six amino acids, Ala-Lys-Ser-Thr-Val-Gly se Brazilian patients. The proband is the third child of non-consanguineous ( Pp 0.P 4r .5o 931 -
S5 AsnfsX7). parents. At birth he presented mild hydrocephalus, esophageal atresia wi- Next step in collagenopathies and osteodysplasies diagnosis: NGS thout fistula, and absence of right kidney. None radiological evidence of Targeted re-sequencing skeletal dysplasia was present. At the age of 6 it was observed short stature D. M. Valero-Hervás, A. Romera-López, C. Camprubí, D. Cantalapiedra, L. Pérez- (-3SD), mental retardation and skeletal changes compatible with SPENCD. Cabornero, V. Felipe, G. Hernández, D. Diego, C. Buades, C. Collado, R. Rodríguez de Complementary investigations showed normal CGHa and sequencing of the Pablos, M. García-Ruíz, Ó. Rodríguez, S. Zúñiga-Trejos, J. Triviño, S. Santillán; TRPV4, no calcification in the CNS, and autoimmune hypothyroidism. The Sistemas Genómicos S.L., Paterna, Valencia, Spain. radiological evaluation of his sister (19 yo) and his maternal uncle (34 yo) due to mild disproportionate short stature showed similar aspect of the spi- ne without, however, other skeletal involvement. The proband´s mother has Collagenopathies and osteodysplasies constitute a genetically heteroge- vitiligo without skeletal changes. By direct sequencing of the AC
P5  a homo- neous group of diseases with low incidence, representing however an im- zygous mutation (c.791T>A) was identified in the proband, his sister and portant health problem because patients require continuous specialized his maternal uncle. The parents were heterozygous. We conclude that the care, due to their deteriorating quality of life. The molecular diagnosis is proband has a pattern of malformation not associated with the SPENCD dia- essential to confirm clinical suspicion, but is not straightforward due to the gnosis; unlike the metaphyseal, spine involvement seem to be permanent; high number of candidate genes. NGS targeted re-sequencing is a fast and the homozygosity strongly suggest a high inbreeding in this family, and the cost-effective alternative to Sanger sequencing, as it can sequence all the mother´s vitiligo could suggest a heterozygous manifestation. 
P04 .62-M genes involved in disease development. Identification of copy-number variations (CNVs) in patients affected We designed a NGS targeted re-sequencing panel for 229 genes associated by split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) with skeletal dysplasias, which spans 1.5Mb comprising coding exons, splice A. Sowińska-Seidler1, A. Jamsheer1,2, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; sites and 5’ and 3‘ untranslated regions. Once panel was validated for dia- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Center gnostic use testing HapMap cell lines, these regions were sequenced in 40 for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland. patients with clinical suspicion of these pathologies. Target regions were en- riched and captured using the Enrichment SureSelect system (Agilent) and sequenced either with a SOLiD 5500 (Life Technologies) or MiSeq (Illumina) Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) refers to the group of congenital limb platform. Results were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. malformations characterized by the absence or hypoplasia of the central The analysis identified 47 variants in 24 patients, of which 8 were classi- rays of the autopod, especially the digits but also the metacarpals and/or fied as disease-causing and 4 as probably pathogenic. Both types of variants metatarsals. The malformation is clinically and etiologically heterogeneous. were either truncating mutations or glycine substitutions in collagen genes It often shows reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. SHFM occurs (essential for collagen structure). The identification of these mutations al- either as an isolated trait or part of a multiple congenital anomaly syndro- lowed the molecular diagnosis and an appropriate genetic counseling in me. The genetic origin of approximately 50% cases is still unknown. The affected families. Targeted re-sequencing is especially suited to highly hete- main objective of this study was to identify submicroscopic genomic rear- rogeneous diseases such as skeletal dysplasias, because it allows the identi- rangements in a group of 30 probands affected by isolated or syndromic fication of mutations in genes whose study by traditional sequencing would SHFM with use of high-resolution array based comparative genomic hybri- b Pe 0 4d .i 6ff 0ic -u Mlt and expensive, increasing diagnostic time. dization (aCGH). All probands were previously screened for the most com- Mutations in DNAS
E1 L3
 and familial SLE/Hypocomplementemic mon SHFM-related genetic lesions (i.e. 10q24.32 and 17p13.3 duplications, Urticarial Vasculitis Syndrome: the first italian case T P63
 mutations). Results of aCGH in one family with isolated SHFM showed G. Mancàno1, A. Carbonella2, E. Gremese2, G. Ferraccioli2, F. S. Alkuraya3, N. Patel3, F. a pathogenic deletion in SHFM1 (7q21.3) locus, much smaller than typical Gurrieri1; causative changes identified in this region. In another proband with syndro- 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Istituto di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, mic SHFM, we identified a novel duplication likely being responsible for the 2Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, U.O. Reumatologia, Rome, Italy, 3King Faisal patient’s phenotype. In four other probands we detected previously unre- Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Developmental Genetics Unit, Riyadh, Saudi ported copy number variations of unclear clinical significance. Arabia.  P04
.63-S The impairment of MAGMAS function in human is responsible for a severe skeletal dysplasia Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease C. Mehawej; that causes substantial morbidity. Much of the heritability of SLE remains Medical Genetics Unit- USJ, Beirut, Lebanon. unknown. Here we present the case of a patient who showed typical sign of an autoimmune disorder (recurrent febrile episodes, arthritis, skin lesi- ons) at age 17. The clinical phenotype has wES orH seG ne 2 d 0 w1 it4 h a| g M e aI sL mA aN ny, oIT thA erL Y |I mWpWairWme.nEtS oHf tGhe. OtigRhGtly regulated ossification process leads to a wide1 r0an9-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ge of skeletal dysplasias and deciphering their molecular bases has contri- perkeratosis, pachyonychia, bone alterations, craniofacial dysmorphisms buted to the understanding of this complex MprAoGcMesAsS. Here, we report a ho- and non-cyclic neutropenia, which accounts for recurrent infections in in- mozygous mutation in the mitochondria-associated granulocyte macropha- fancy and susceptibility to myelodysplastic syndrome and solid tumours. ge colony stimulating factor-signaling gene ( ) in a novel and severe  C16
orf57, disclosed in 2010 as the causative gene of PN, has been recently spondylodysplastic dysplasia. MAGMAS, also referred to as PAM16 (pre- renamed USB1 (U six biogenesis 1) as its protein is a RNA exonuclease in- sMeAqGuMenAcSe translocase-associated motor 16), is a mitochondria-associated volved in the 3’ end processing and stability of U6 snRNA, a core component protein involved in preprotein translocation into the matrix. We show that of the active spliceosome. However, no evidence for splicing defects could is specifically expressed in trabecular bone and cartilage at early be achieved in PN patients cells unlike in Usb1 defective yeast. As no multi- developmental stages and that the mutation leads to an instability of the cellular organism has been modeled for PN, we enrolled zebrafish, a verte- protein. We further demonstrate that the mutation described here confers brate model increasingly important for the study of human genetic diseases to yeast sMtrAaGinMs AaS t emperature-sensitive phenotype, impairs the import of and haematological malignancies, to gain insights into the consequences of mitochondrial matrix pre-proteins and induces cell death. The finding of de- USB1 disruption during early embryogenesis. leterious mutations in an early lethal skeletal dysplasia supports a The zebrafish genome harbours only one copy of the USB1 orthologue key role for this mitochondrial protein in the ossification process. (NM_001003460.1) ubiquitously expressed and with a high degree of con-  P04
.64-M servation in genomic structure and aminoacid sequence (73% similarity A novel missense mutation in ST14 in a patient with ichthyosis, and 46% identity). follicular atrophoderma and hypotrichosis S. Baldassari1, G. Tortora1, R. Balestri2, I. Neri2, M. Seri1; Loss-of-function experiments, performed injecting three different specific 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Dipartimento Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università di antisense, morpholinos in embryos at one cell stage, allowed to obtain em- Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2U.O. Dermatologia, Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Università bryos with an overall phenotype that recapitulates the major traits of PN. di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Usb1 depletion causes the development of embryos with decreased skin pig- mentation, small head with defects in early cartilages of pharyngeal arches, oedema in the pericardial area, defects in blood circulation with a reduction ConSgTe1n4ital ichthyoses are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of myeloid and erythroid cells as highlighted by in-situ hybridization and of genodermatoses characterized by disorders of cornification. Mutations real-time experiments.  P04
.67-S in are causative of two syndromes: Ichthyosis, Follicular Atropho- Whole-exome sequencing identifies polymorphic variants in a large derma and Hypotrichosis (IFAH, OMIM 602400) and Autosomal Recessive Arab family with split-hand/foot malformation with long-bone Ichthyosis and Hypotrichosis (ARIH, OMIM 610765). These two syndromes deficiency are caused by different types of mutations in the gene: loss of function mu- U. Radhakrishna1, U. Ratnamala1, M. Naveed2, M. T. Al-Ali2, S. K. Nath3; tations (splice site or deletion) have been found in 2 IFAH familiSeTs1, 4w hile 1Green Cross Pathology & Molecular Laboratory, Paldi, Ahmedabad, India, Ahmedabad, missense mutations have been found in 2 ARIH probands. We report on the India, 2Center for Arab Genomic Studies (CAGS), Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 3Arthritis identification of a new homozygous disease-causing mutationS iTn1 4 in a and Clinical Immunology, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, girl with diffuse ichthyosiform scaling of the trunk and arms, follicular atro- United States. phoderma of both forearms and sparse hair. The screening of by San- ger sequencing revealed a homozygous missense mutation, p.Glu519Gln, . inherited by healthy parents, both carriers of the variation described. The Split-hand/foot malformation with long-bone deficiency (SHFLD) is a rare, mutation SisT 1n4ot present in 1000Genomes nor in ESP databases, involves a severe limb deformity This is characterized by tibia aplasia with or without highly conserved aminoacid and is predicted to be pathogenic by Polyphen2 split-hand/split-foot deformity. Using DNA microarray analysis and employ- and SIFT. encodes the matriptase, a type II transmembrane serine pro- ing various statistical methods, we have mapped the SHFLD1 and SHFLD2 tease, expressed predominantly in the epithelial cells of the surface-lining phenotypes to chromosomes 1q42.2-q43 and 6q14.1 regions respectively. epithelium. Our result supports the role of matriptase alterations in IFAH, Additionally, we have identified six suggestive loci with evidence of linkage but the finding of a missense mutation points out the need of other experi- on chromosomes 1p36.13, 1q31.1, 1q42.3, 4q34.3, and 6q14.1 and 17p13.1 ments to better define the functional role of different mutations in the pa- regions in a large multigenerational Arab family (Am. J. Hum. Genet.2007; thogenesis of IFAH and ARIH. 80:105-111). Subsequently, we have reported microduplications on chro-  P04
.65-S mosome 17p13.3, suggesting the association of BHLHA9 gene within the De Novo Mutation of the Latency-Associated Peptide Domain of TGFB3 duplic ation in the pathogenesis of SHFLD development (J Med Genet.2012 in a Patient with Clinical Features of Loeys-Dietz Syndrome FebT;4M9:119-25). Our recently performed exome sequencing using the SO- G. Matyas1, P. Naef1, K. Oexle2; 1Zentrum fuer Kardiovaskuläre Genetik und Gendiagnostik, Schlieren-Zürich, LiD system at x200 coverage followed by prioritized mutation search Switzerland, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Technische Universität München, München, within the linkage region between FSINLPIP m1arkers rs1124110/rs535043, and Germany. rs623155/rs1547251 in selected SHFLD subjects showed polymorphic va- riants within the coding regions of gene on 6q14.1 regions. A hetero- zygous nucleotide substitution G>A (c.3476G>A) resulting in a change from We report the first case of a patient with a disease-causing mutation in arginine and histidine Arg1159His (R/H) was observed in heterozygous the LAP domain of TGFB3 [c.899G>A, p.Arg300Gln; no mutation detected condition in selected affecteds. However the data on chromosome 1q31.1 in FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2, and SMAD3]. Previously, TGFB mutati- region is yet to be analyzed. Our present analysis provides the understan- on has been described in one patient only (Rienhoff et al. 2013, Am J Med ding the pathophysiology of the SHFLD disease and also provides ultimate Genet A 161A:2040-6). That mutation was hypomorphic while we cannot genetic diagnosis of the condition. Additionally, the data can also help us in exclude that mutations of the LAP domain result in constitutive activation of developing non-invasive methods of screening fo/r the disorder in at-risk fa- TGFB3 as in case of LAP mutations of TGFB1 [Saito et al., 2001, J Biol Chem mily members, in order to reassure those are not carrying the mutation and 276:11469-72]. There were phenotypic similarities between our patient t Po 0 p 4l .a 6n 8 p -Mrophylactic measures for those who are will be affected. and the patient reported by Rienhoff et al. (2013) such as low muscle mass, Biomarkers and early stage drug development in ectodermal hypertelorism, cleft soft palate, pectus excavatum, and arachnodactyly, but dysplasias also considerable differences such as overgrowth and generalized hyper- K. M. Huttner1, O. F. Gaide2, S. Chang1, P. Schneider3; extensibility of joints instead of growth retardation and digital contractu- 1Edimer Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States, 2Service de Dermatologie, res, respectively. Both the previous case and our present case emphasize CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Dept of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, the inclusion of TGFB3 in the comprehensive genetic testing of (Marfanoid) Switzerland. patients with LDS clinical features, such as bifid uvula and hypertelorism. Further studies are needed to clarify the phenotypic spectrum of TGFB3 mu- tations including the risk for vascular disease. EDI200 is a recombinant ectodysplasin currently in clinical trials for the cor-  P04
.66-M rection of abnormal ectoderm development in neonates affected by X-linked Modelling Poikiloderma with Neutropenia in zebrafish: a start point hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED). For early drug trials, there is a to elucidate disease pathogenesis premium placed on identifying molecular markers of drug response likely to E. A. Colombo, S. Carra, L. Fontana, E. Bresciani, F. Cotelli, L. Larizza; Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. predict long-term clinical benefit, especially when endpoints in XLHED such as teeth, hair and sweat function may take months to years to ascertain. The ectodysplasin-deficient Tabby mouse model for XLHED demonstrates a con- sistent and sustained phenotype response to EDI200. Through a combined Poikiloderma with Neutropenia (PN; OMIM#604173) is a rare autosomal approach of qPCR and RNA-seq we have begun to map the Tabby ectodys- r1e1ce0ssive genodermatosis characterized by early EonSsHetG p o2ik0il1o4de |r mMaI, LhAy-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG plasin-responsive biological pathways. EDI200 at 2 mg/kg (or vehicle alone)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index was administered by intraperitoneal injection to newborn Tabby mice, with been reported. Being a rare disorder with few reports in the medical litera- tail, back and footpad tissues harvested at time points ranging from two ture, consultation with an experienced clinical geneticist may be required hours to one month post-injection. Isolated RNA was subjected to analysis before a diagnosis is made. An early diagnosis is beneficial for early referral by qPCR for eight genes known to contribute to the development/structure of the patients to the appropriate follow-up. These patients are best ma- of ectodermal placodes and appendages. Levels of expression for the ecto- naged by a multidisciplinary team.  P04
.71-S dysplasin receptor EDAR and the downstream regulator sonic hedgehog A review of Molecular Genetic diagnosis of Epidermolysis bullosa (Shh) were upregulated specifically at 24 hrs post-injection in all tissues. cases from Southwest Iran RNA-seq analysis with DAVID bioinformatics software confirmed these re- G. Shariati1,2, H. Galehdari3, A. Saberi1, M. Hamid4; sults for EDAR and Shh and extended the gene set analysis to identify novel 1Genetics Department, Medical School of Sciences, Ahvaz Jundishapur University, Ahvaz, and unexpected response pathways including those for fat metabolism and Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Narges Genetic diagnosis & PND Lab, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic solute transporters. This combined approach for biomarker validation and of Iran, 3Department of Genetics, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of delineation of system response biology will provide an invaluable tool set in Iran, 4Department of Biotechnology, Pasteur Institue, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. identifying pathways for drug targeting as well as in optimizing drug dosing in ectodermal dysplasias.  P04
.69-S Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a skin disorder that is divided regarding in- A new col5a1 genomic variant identified in an italian patient with volved skin area into three main forms: Junctional epidermolysis bullosa ehlers danlos syndrome classic type (JEB), dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB), and epidermolysis bullosa F. Cortini1,2, L. Costantino1, M. Seia1, A. Biffignandi1, L. Porcaro1, B. Marinelli2, P. A. Bertazzi2, A. Bassotti3; simplex (EBS). EB ranges from mild to very severe forms with the age of 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore onset form infancy to childhood. The landscape of EB is extensive blistering Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Center of Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Department of and scarring. Other signs include fused fingers and toes, joint deformities Environmental and Occupational Health, Università di Milano, Fondazione Cà Granda, and alopecia. EB is a rare disorder with autosomal recessive and dominant IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Ehlers-Danlos disease regional genetic pattern. This disease is very rare in southwest Iran. From last decade center, Department of Enviromental and Occupational Health, Università di Milano, to date, 12 individuals were diagnosed for DEB. But, more clinical differen- Fondazione Cà Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. tial diagnosis was not possible for patients. Mutations in 4 genes CO L17
A1, LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAM C2
 cause the JEB disease, whereby the LAMB3 gene mutations are responsible for more than 70% of all JEB cases. In con- Ehlers Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of heterogeneous connective tis- tract, mutation in the CO L7
A1 gene causes all three forms of DEB including sue disorders. The clinical classification recognizes six subtypes and the autosomal recessive HS -RDEB, non HS-RDEB, and autosomal dominant Classic type is the most frequent. Classic EDS is an autosomal dominant DDEB. Mutations within exons 70-75 of the CO L7
A1 gene very frequent in disorder, characterized by skin hyperextensibility, abnormal wound healing the DEB patients. However, three patients from southwest Iran with DEB and joint hypermobility. It is estimated that approximately 50% of pati- as preliminary diagnosis showed frame shift mutations within exons 73-74, ents with classic EDS phenotype harbor mutations in CO L5
A1 and CO L5
A2 and another individual was positive for a novel nonsense mutation in the gene. We report a case of 43 Italian patient, presented to Ospedale Maggio- LAMB3 gene. He was also affected by JEB, and not DEB. We were not able to re Policlinico (Milan) for clinical and genetic counselling. He showed: soft detect any mutation in other 8 individuals with EB. Exom sequencing or next and hyperextensibility skin specially at the neck, face and hands, atrophic generation sequencing might be helpful to resolve their puzzle. scars and joint hypermobility. The cDNA sequencing revealed a new single  P04
.72-M base variation in CO L5
A1 gene. The mutation was a change of C for T in Perturbation of Specific Pro-mineralizing Signalling Pathways in exon63 and established an amminoacid substitution Leucine by Valine at Human and Murine Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum the c.1656. This mutation was located on higly conservated domain of the O. M. Vanakker1, M. J. Hosen1, P. J. Coucke1, O. LeSaux2, A. De Paepe1; 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department protein. Sequencing of CO L5
A2 gene and study of the null allele of CO L5
A1 of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI, United gene didn’t showed any differences. CGH-Array platform, characterized by States. a higher density of probes in those chromosomal regions that are thought to be related to EDS, didn’t revealed any variations. Bioinformatics analysis identified that this nucleotide sequence is extremely conserved in different Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is characterized by skin, ocular and car- species, indeed, up to date, no mutation or polymorphism have been descri- diovascular manifestations, due to calcification and fragmentation of elastic bed for this region. The identification of new genomic variant represent the fibres. Caused by mutations in the ABC C6
 gene, the mechanisms underlying first step towards the understanding of symptom causes. Moreover, further this disease remain unknown. The knowledge on the molecular background studies on protein structure could be necessary to understand the real pro- of soft tissue mineralization largely comes from insights in vascular calci- perties of this mutation.  P04
.70-M fication, with involvement of the osteo-inductive Transforming Growth Fac- Further phenotypic delineation of metatropic dysplasia tor beta (TGFβ) family (TGFβ1-3 and Bone Morphogenetic Proteins [BMP]), M. Lopes-de-Almeida1, C. Reis1, P. Cardoso2, J. Sá1, J. M. Saraiva1,3, A. Beleza-Meireles1; together with ectonucleotides (ENP P1
), Wnt signalling and a variety of local 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Centro Hospitalar e and systemic calcification inhibitors. In this study, we have investigated the Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Orthopedics Unit, Centro Hospitalar relevance of these signalling pathways as well as apoptosis and ER stress e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of using immunohistochemistry and mRNA expression profiling in dermal Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. tissues and fibroblasts of PXE patients, and the eyes and whiskers of the TRPV4 PXE knock-out mouse. Apoptosis was evaluated by TUNEL staining. We de- monstrate upregulation of the BM P2
-SMADs-RUNX2 and TGFβ-2-SMAD2/3 Dominant mutations in are responsible for a family of rare skeletal pathway, co-localizing with the mineralization sites, and the involvement of dysplasias that encompasses, in decreasing severity, metatropic dysplasia MSX2-canonical Wnt signalling. Further, involvement of apoptosis is shown (MD), parastremmatic dysplasia, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Maroteaux with activation of Caspases and BCL-2. In contrast to vascular calcification, type, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia Kozlowski type, autosomal dominant neither the other BMPs and TGFβs nor endoplasmic reticulum stress pa- brachyolmia, and familial digital arthropathy with brachydactyly. Here, thways were perturbed in PXE. Our study shows that we cannot extrapola- we present the case of two monozygotic twins, daughters of healthy, non te knowledge on cell signalling in vascular calcification to a multisystemic consanguineous parents. They were referred to our clinic at age 5 months mineralization disease as PXE. Contrary, we demonstrate a specific set of because of suspected skeletal dysplasia. They presented unspecific cranio- perturbed signalling pathways in PXE patients and the mouse model, and facial dysmorphism, including congenital torcicolis associated to a  C1
- C2
 propose a preliminary cell model of ECM calcification in PXE. subluxation, long narrow trunk and short extremities. Radiologically they  P04
.73-S presented marked platyspondyly, flared metaphyses, a halberd shapeTdR PpVel4- Neonatal case of thumb duplication: case report and review vis and no carpal ossification. Now, aged 24 months, they show an inversdie- I. Caliendo1, I. Franzese2, V. Franzese3, S. Amoroso4, C. Fabbricatore1, M. Ergoli1, C. Di Stefano2; nonov oof the proportions due to progressive and sTeRvPerVe4 kyphoscoliosis. 1U.O.C. Oncoematologia, P.O. „A.Tortora“, Pagani (Salerno), Italy, 2Terapia Intensiva sequencing analysis revealed a c.2396C>T (p.Pro799Leu) heterozygous Neonatale, P.O.“Umberto I“, Nocera Inferiore (Salerno), Italy, 3U.O.C. Ortopedia Università mutation, conforming the diagnosis. This mutations, that affects „Federico II“, NAPOLI, Italy, 4Dip. Tutela Salute Donna, Bambino, Adolescente, Università the cytoplasmic domain of the protein is one of the most common MTD mu- Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. tation and usually associated with a moderate phenotype. In conclusion, MD is diagnosed by its characteristic clinical and radiographic features. Genetic testing can help confirm a diagnosis and to provide specific molecular pre- Introduction. The preaxial polydactyly represents a complete or partial natal genetic testing to couples at risk, asE gSeHrmGli n2e0 m1u4ta |t iMonsIL hAasN a,l rIeTaAdyL Y | d W upW licaW tio.E n S oH f tG he. O thR uG mb, usually is unilateral. The thumb duplicati1on1 1isABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index de novoTGFBR2 the most common anomaly of the hand. This congenital anomaly may be and 48 VUS were observed in 26 (46%) TpGaFtiBeRn2ts . In sporadic AAA one isolated and sporadic or expressed with a syndrome’s phenotype. Within MYH 11 mutation and 11 VMUYSH w1e1re observed in 8 (50%) patientsM. FYoLuKr the Oberg, Manske, Tonkin (OMT) classification thumb duplications are a VUS (11%) were possibly pathogenic; c.1234G>A (Val412Met), failure of formation and/or differentiation affecting the radial/ulnar axis of c.760C>T (Arg254Cys), c.i5n6 c9is7G>C (Glu1899Asp), and the hand plate. The primary signal centre involved is the zone of polarising c.3403G>A (Gly1135Arg). Fifteen patients (13 familial and 2 two sporadic) activity (ZPA) in the posterior part of the developing limb bud. Sonic Hedge- had complex genotypes, including seven variants. Altogether 3% of the hog protein, which is expressed in the ZPA, plays a major role in determi- AAA patients haTdG aF BpRat2hogenCiOc Lm3uAt1ation and 24 (47%) one or more VUS. ning radial-ulnar characteristics. Other morphogens are involved in the de- The results endorse the genetic heterogeneity of AAA, showing a modest velopment of thumb duplications. Instead for an approach of management contribution of and in AAA. In addition a high prevalence of the Wassel description is used. Case report. We describe a case of a female rare VUS suggests involvement of other aneurysm genes in AAA.  P05
.03-S newborn with a isolated hand left preaxial polydactyly. The weight at birth Longer GT repeats and rs2071746T allele in the heme oxygenase-1 was 2050g, 45 cm of lenght and head circumference 33 cm, physical exami- gene promoter are associated with abdominal aortic aneurysm nation revealed preaxial hexadactyly with thumb duplication. Extra digit E. Strauss1, K. Waliszewski2, A. Miklaszewska3, R. Staniszewski2, G. Oszkinis2, R. was mild hypoplasic and the patient was unable to move it independently. Słomski1,3; Radiographs showed extra thumb containing two proximal phalanges (type 1Institute of Human Genetics of the Polish Academy of Sciences in Poznan, Poznan, IV polydactyly, according to the Wassel‘s Classification). Conclusion. In this Poland, 2Department of General and Vascular Surgery of the Poznan University of condition are recommended to value radiographs of the affected limb to Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology of the Poznan University of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland. show whether the rudimentary digit contains skeletal elements, and any as- sociated non-hand anomalies. Surgical reconstruction of the radial polydac- tyly is indicated, not only for the obvious cosmetic improvement, but also to obtain a stable, mobile thumb of adequate size and appropriate shape. Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is multi-factorial disease with life-th-  P05
.01-S reatening complications due to mainly asymptomatic course of develop- The gene variants in 3‘ end of prothrombin gene in patients with ment. Vascular inflammation induced by oxidative stress contribute to pa- idiopathic thrombophilia in Serbian population thogenesis. Inter-individual differences in response to oxidative stress are M. Aradjanski1, V. Djordjevic1, I. Pruner1, B. Tomic1, M. Gvozdenov1, M. Kovac2,3, D. partially under genetic control. In this study the associations between the Radojkovic1; 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, functional SNPs and (GT)n repeat length polymorphisms in genes involved Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Blood in the vascular response to hypoxia/ischemia: HIF1A (hypoxia inducible Transfusion Institute of Serbia, Hemostasis Department, Belgrade, Serbia. factor-1α) and HMOX1 (heme oxygenase-1) and the development of AAA were examined. The study encompassed a series of 518 AAA patients, 345 patients with Background: Thrombophilia is a multifactorial disorder which arises from atherosclerotic aortoiliac occlusive disease (AOID) and 498 controls. The the interaction of acquired and genetic risk factors. Despite the significant HIF1A rs11549465C>T, rs11549467G>A and HMOX1 rs2071746A>T SNP effort made to understand the etiology of this disease, there are still a cer- genotyping was performed by using predesigned TaqMan SNP-genotyping tain number of patients suffering from idiopathic thrombophilia. assays. For simultaneous assessment of the HIF1A and HMOX1 (GT)n poly- Objectives: The aim of this study was to screen 3’ end of prothrombin gene, morphisms, the method based on multiplex-PCR with fluorescent-labeled which is susceptible for gain-of-function mutations due to its non-canonical sense primers and fragment size analysis using DNA sequencer has been sequence elements, in patients with idiopathic thrombophilia and to deter- developed. mine its eventual role in the pathogenesis of thrombophilia. We found, that carriers of the HMOX1 (GT)n repeat long allele (n>27) had Material and Methods: This study was carried out in100 patients with idio- increased risk of developing AAA (OR=1.46 for dominant model, P=.034). pathic thrombophilia and 100 healthy controls DNA variants in the 715bp The frequency of carriers of both HMOX1 risk alleles: rs2071746T and/or long region of the 3’end of the prothrombin gene were identified by sequen- long (GT)n repeat in AAAs (58,5%) was higher as compared to AIOD (49,0%, cing. P=.007). On the other hand, the frequency of noncarriers in AAAs was 0.0%, Results: In our study, we detected two variants: A19911G and  C20068
T. The as compared to 1.3% in controls (P=.010) and 0.9% in AIOD (P=.066). frequency of A19911G gene variant was slightly increased in the group of In conclusion, HMOX1 gene promoter long (GT)n repeat allele and patients compared to controls. Heterozygous carriers of FII  C20068
T were rs2071746T, allele related to decreased anti-inflammatory and antioxidant four times more frequent in the patients (4%) than in controls (1%), but this capacity of heme oxygenase-1, are associated with abdominal aortic aneu- difference did not reach statistical significance. r Py 0s 5m .0. S 4u -Mpported by Polish Ministry of Sciences grant NN403_250440. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that variant A19911G is not a significant Age- and sex-specific causal effects of adiposity on cardiovascular risk risk factor (OR=1.05; 95%CI 0.57-1.93), while  C20068
T may represent a po- factors tential risk factor for idiopathic thrombophilia (OR=4.12; 95%CI 0.57-1.93). T. Fall1, S. Hägg1,2, A. Ploner2, R. Mägi3,4, K. Fischer3, I. Prokopenko4,5, N. L. Pedersen2, M. To confirm our results, further studies should be conducted in a larger co- McCarthy4,6, E. Ingelsson1; hort of patients. 1Uppsala University, UPPSALA, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,  P05
.02-M 3Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4University of Oxford, Molecular analysis of aneurysm genes in familial and sporadic Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 6Oxford abdominal aortic aneurysm National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, Sweden. K. M. van de Luitgaarden1,2, H. T. Bruggenwirth3, A. Maugeri4, J. M. Weiss5, D. F. Majoor- Krakauer3; 1Department of Vascular Surgery, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Anesthesiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Observational studies have reported different effects of adiposity on car- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical diovascular risk factors between men and women and among different age Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, VU Medical Center, groups, but these aspects have not been investigated with regards to cau- Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, VU Medical Center, sality. Amsterdam, Netherlands. We estimated the causal effect of adiposity on blood pressure, lipid concen- trations, glycemic indices, and markers of inflammation and liver disease in TGFBR1 up to 67,553 individuals using a non-weighted genetic score constituting of TTGheF BrRol2e oSfM aAoDrt3ic FaBnNeu1,ryEsFmEM syPn2d, romes genes in abdominal aMorYtHa1 a1neMuYryLsK- 32 genetic variants associated with body mass index (BMI) within a Mende- ms (AACATAA)2 was investigated by analysing the TGFC-βO Lp3aAth1w ay genes , lian randomization framework. All analyses were stratified by age (cut-off, , , smooth muscle cells genes , 55 years) and sex. and and the vascular Ehlers-Danlos gene in a large group of We found similar effects of the genetic insPtrument on BMI in different strata. familial and sporadic AAA patients. Each additional allele of the genetic score was as-1s0o7ciated with an increase Sanger sequencing was performed of all coding exons and exon-intron in BMI of 0.03 SD (95% CI, 0.028-0.033; =3x10 ). We found evidence of boundaries of the aneurysm geInne ssi liinc oAAA patients diagnosed. Patients with a causal effect of adiposity in non-stratified analysis on blood pressure (sy- at least one affected first-degree relative with an aortic aneurysm were clas- stolic and diastolic), circulating lipids (high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol, sified as familial AAA (fAAA). analysis was used for assessment of triglycerides), glucose homeostasis (HbA1c, fasting insulPin), and markers of the clinical significance of the variants. inflammation (C-reactive protein, interleukin-6), and liver damage (alanine We found 38 different variants of unknown clinical significance (VUSC) OinL 3thAi1s aminotransferase and gamma-glutamyl transferase) (all <0.05P). We obser- study population of 72 AAA patients including 56 fAAA patients (78%) and ved significantly larger causal estimates in younger individuals tdhifafn in older 1161 p2atients (22%) with sporadic AAA. In fAAA one EnuSlHl mGu t2at0io1n4 in | MILAN , fIoTrA loLwY- d| eWnsWityW-lip.EopSrHotGein.O chRoGlesterol and total cholesterol ( =0.04 andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index P FTO 0.02 respectively). For fasting insulin, in secondardyif fanalysis, we found a lar- Statistically significant differences in age at onset of the first MI were obser- ger effect of adiposity in males than in females ( =0.01 using variant ved among the genotypes of investigated polymorphism, the homozygote as a genetic instrument). genotypes preseting with MI at younger age (AA/CC vs. AC; 58.3±9.7 years We provide evidence for a causal effect of adiposity on many cardiovascular vs. 59.91±9.62 years, p = 0.04). Furthermore, statistically significant asso- risk factors, and observe differential estimates across age and sex for insulin ciation was found between the occurrence of restenosis and AGT genotypes and circulating lipids. (p = 0.008). The logistic regression model revealed that the CC and AA ho-  P05
.05-S mozygotes were at the higher risk of restenosis before 45 years of age com- Genetics in acquired Long QT Syndrome (aLQTS) M. Pedrazzini1, H. Itoh2, L. Crotti3,4,5, T. Aiba6, I. Denjoy7, V. Fressart8,9,10, K. Hayashi11, T. pared to AC heterozygotes. Nakajima12, S. Ohno2, T. Makiyama13, J. Wu2, K. Hasegawa2, E. Mastantuono5, F. Dagradi4, Conclusion: M. Yamagishi11, M. Berthet8,9,10, W. Shimizu6,14, P. Guicheney8,9,10, P. J. Schwartz4, M. Horie2; Our study shows that rs7079 homozygotes present with MI at younger age 1IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Italy, 2Department of and that the risk of restenosis is higher in these patients. This may be par- Cardiovascular and Respiratory Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta tially explained by altered miR-30 and miR-584 binding to 3´UTR region of Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Japan, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, AGT, as shown previously. Pavia, Italy, 4IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of  P05
.07-S Genetic Origin and Laboratory of Cardiovascular Genetics, Milan, Italy, 5Institute of Targeted next generation sequencing in heritable aortopathies Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 6Department uncovers unexpected findings of Cardiovascular Medicine, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Osaka, K. Mayer, I. Vogl, T. Slupova, S. Datter, H. Klein; Japan, 7AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, Service de Cardiologie, Centre de Référence des Maladies Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics, Martinsried, Germany. Cardiaques Héréditaires, Université Denis Diderot, Paris 7, Paris, France, 8Inserm, UMR_  S1166
, Paris, France, 9Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_ S1166
, Institut de recherche sur les maladies cardiovasculaires, du métabolisme et de la nutrition, Paris, France, 10ICAN Institute of Cardiometabolism And Nutrition, Pierre et Marie Curie, Univ Aortopathies are characterized by aneurysms, dissections, dilation, and tor- Paris 06, Paris, France, 11Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kanazawa University tuosity of predominantly the thoracic aorta (TAA) but also the abdominal Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan, 12Department of Medicine and aorta. Inherited forms comprising both syndromic and non-syndromic enti- Biological Science, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan, ties are genetically heterogeneous and phenotypically overlapping. Current- 13The Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of ly, mutations in at least 15 genes are known to cause familial thoracic aor- Medicine, Kyoto, Japan, 14Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Nippon Medical tic aneurysms (AAT3-AAT8), as well as dominant and recessive syndromic School, Tokyo, Japan. aortopathies. Molecular testing is impeded by similar phenotypes caused by mutations in different genes and mutations in the same gene leading to a wide clinical variability. In this setting NGS of an aortopathy gene panel Background: Long QT Syndrome (LQTS) is an inherited arrhytmogenic disea- offers an efficient alternative to conventional gene-by-gene Sanger sequen- se characterized by a prolonged QT interval in association with life-threate- cing. ning arrhythmias. The LQTS can be congenital (cLQTS) or acquired (aLQTS) We developed a NGS aortopathy multigene panel encompassing 15 genes as an adverse response to drugs, hypokalemia or bradycardia. Mutations in (ACTA2, CO L3
A1, EFEM P2
, ELN, FBN1, FLNA, MYH11, MYLK, NOTCH1, 13 genes have been associated with cLQTS, while the genetic background PRKG1, SL C2
A10, SMAD3, TGFB2, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2). Coding and adja- of aLQTS remains unclear. The aim was therefore to evaluate if a genetic cent intronic regions were analyzed using Nextera Rapid Capture Custom substrate may contribute to aLQTS. Methods: Through a multicentre study, Enrichment and 2x150 bp paired-end sequencing on a MiSeq instrument 211 aLQTS probands were collected from Japan, Italy and France. They were (Illumina). So far, the analysis of 20 patients with both syndromic and non- clinically evaluated and divided into 3 groups according to the baseline QTc syndromic aortic disease identified eight disease causing mutations in seven interval: “true-aLQTS” (females QTc<460ms, males QTc<450ms, n=112), patients in the genes CO L3
A1, EFEM P2
 (compound heterozygous), FBN1 “unmasked-LQTS” (females QTc ≥ 460ms, males QTc ≥ 450ms, n=74), and (2x), SMAD3, TGFB2 and TGFBR2, representing a diagnostic sensitivity of “unclassified-LQTS” (without ECG, n=25). Genetic screening of the 5 major 35%. Additionally, two rare variants of unknown clinical significance were cLQTS genes was performed and mutations were compared to those of 875 identified in the MYH11 and TGFB2 gene. Surprisingly, two patients with genotyped cLQTS families. Results: Genetic analysis led to the identificati- FBN1 and TGFB2 mutations were clinically diagnosed with vascular Ehlers- on of mutations in LQTS-susceptibility genes in 27% of aLQTS probands Danlos syndrome supported by ultrastructural findings of a skin biopsy. In (57/211). In the “true-aLQTS” and “unmasked-LQTS”, a mutation was de- conclusion, patients with aortopathies will benefit from a parallel testing tected in 23% and 38% of cases, respectively (p=0.04). Interestingly, KCNH2 approach enabling efficient and appropriate surveillance and intervention was the most mutated gene (62% vs 15% of KCNQ1), while the frequency measures. of mutations in the cLQTS population were 39% and 48%, respectively. Con-  P05
.08-M clusions: Genes implicated in cLQTS play an important role also in aLQTS. Association of Apolipoprotein E polymorphism with coronary heart The likely underlying mechanism would be a critical loss in repolarizati- disease in Bulgarian population on reserve even in the presence of just a modest QT interval prolongation. R. Tzveova1,2, G. Naydenova3, D. Pendicheva4, S. Vandeva5, P. Atanasov6, G. Nachev7, V. Mitev1,2, R. Kaneva1,2; KCNH2 mutations seem to have a prominent role.  P05
.06-M 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, +11525 C/A Polymorphism in MicroRNA Binding Site of 2Molecular Medicine Centre, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Second Department Angiotensinogen is Associated with Occurrence of Restenosis in of Cardiology, UMBAL, Pleven, Bulgaria, 4Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharamcology, Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria, 5Clinical center of endocrinology Patients After Myocardial Infarction and gerontology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6National Sport Academy, Sofia, J. Novak1, R. Hezova2, F. Zlamal1, J. Machal1, J. Vinklarek1, I. Necesanek1, O. Hlinomaz3, L. Bulgaria, 7University Hospital of Cardiovascular Surgery and Cardiology “St. Ekaterina”, Groch3, J. Vitovec3, O. Slaby2, J. Bienertova-Vasku1; Sofia, Bulgaria. 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Molecular Oncology II, Central-European Technological Institute (CEITEC), Brno, Czech Republic, 3International Clinical Research Center – Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, St. Anne‘s University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) plays a role in the regulation of lipid metabolism in humans. The objective of this work was to examine the association between ApoE gene polymorphisms and the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) in Introduction: Bulgarians. The case-control study was carried out on a total of 725 samp- Angiotensinogen (AGT) is a key component of the renin-angiotensin-aldo- les including 104 patients with angiographically verified coronary artery sterone system that plays a crucial role in blood pressure (BP) regulation. disease,151 patients with myocardial infarction and 470 population controls Increased BP is a well-known risc factor for various cardiovascular diseases. without data for cardiovascular complications. ApoE gene polymorphis- With the discovery of microRNAs, polymorphisms in 3´-untranslated regi- ms were genotyped by High Resolution Melting Analysis. The differences ons (3´-UTR) of known genes became of interest. The aim of our study was in allele frequency between the CHD patients and controls were evaluated to investigate the possible association of rs7079 in 3´-UTR of AGT gene with with chi-square test. The frequencies of ApoE alleles in the CHD subjects the outcomes in patients after myocardial infarction (MI). were 0.81 for  E3
, 0.14 for  E4
 and 0.06 for  E2
, and in the control group were Methods: 0.84 for  E3
, 0.09 for  E4
 and 0.07 for  E2
. The Apo E4
 allele frequency was Total of 652 patients (men) presenting at the emergency room with chest significantly higher in the CHD patients than in the control group (OR=1.68, pain with suspicious MI underwent selective coronarography. Diagnosis of p=0.002). The carriers of  E4
 containing genotypes ( E2
/ E4
,  E3
/ E4
 and  E4
/ MI was confirmed in 571 patients. Peripheral blood for DNA isolation was  E4
) had a higher risk to develop CHD than carriers of  E2
 and  E3
 contai- sampled during hospitalization and the genotypes were determined using ning genotypes (OR=1.72, p=0.004). There were no significant differences TaqMan Genotyping Assay. in patients between the mean of total cholesterol, triglycerides, low density Results: ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | l iW poW proW te. inE sS aH ndG h.O ighR dG ensity lipoproteins levels among different Apo1 E1
 g3e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.11-S Added Diagnostic Value of Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe notypes. The current study data suggest that Apo E4
 allele is a significant Amplification of plakophilin-2 in Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy risk factor for CHD in Bulgarian population. Acknowledgements: This work E. Lazzarini1, I. Rigato1, J. Jongbloed2, M. Cason1, R. Celeghin1, E. Carturan1, G. Thiene1, C. was supported by Infrastructural Grant: DUNK01/2/28.12.2009 “National Basso1, K. Pilichou1, P. van Tintelen2; Complex in Biomedical and Translational Research”, funded by National Sci- 1University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2University of Gronigen, University Medical Center ence Fund, Ministry of Education and Science, Bulgaria Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.  P05
.09-S Background: Targeted next generation sequencing of 51 genes involved in primary electrical disease Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (ACM) is an inherited car- D. Proost1, G. Vandeweyer1, A. Rotthier2, J. Saenen3, G. Mortier1, C. Vrints3, J. Del-Favero2, diomyopathy characterized pathologically by fibro-fatty infiltration and cli- B. Loeys1, L. Van Laer1; 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, University nically by ventricular arrhythmias and an increased risk of sudden death. of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Multiplicom, Niel, Belgium, Antwerp, Belgium, AGeimne:tic testing is limited to genes encoding desmosomal components resul- 3Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, University of ting in a diagnostic yieldP oKfP a2bout 50%. Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. The aim of this study is to search copy number variations (CNVs) in tMheet phloadkosp:hilin-2 gene ( ) in order to increase the mutational detection in ACM. Primary electrical disease (PED) encompasses a diversity of syndromes Genetic screening for all 5 desmosomal-encoding genes was car- including the Short QT Syndrome, Long QT Syndrome, Brugada Syndrome, ried out in 60 unrelated patients with a clinical diagnosis of ACM by Sanger Early Repolarization Syndrome, and Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ven- sequencing on a ABI-PRISM 3730 (Life Technologies). Genotype-negative tricular Tachycardia. Each of these disorders predisposes to ventricular probands underwent Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification arrhythmias (i.e. polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, Torsade de Pointes, (MLPA) using SALSA MLPA kit  P168
 ARVC-PPKKP P22
 (.MRC-Holland) and quanti- bidirectional ventricular tachycardia) that can degenerate into ventricular tRaetisvuel tRse:al-Time PCR (qPCR) on a Light Cycler 480 (Roche Applied Science) fibrillation which often results in sudden cardiac death. These disorders in search of large deletions/duplications in are all genetically heterogeneous and a significant phenotypic and genetic 60% of ACM patients (n=36) resulted positive on direct sequen- overlap exists. This overlap might be a source of misdiagnosis resulting in cing, showing 5 mutations in Desmoglein-2 gene (8%), 14 in Desmoplakin negative genetic testing. Therefore we suggest to test these patients for all (23%), 7 in PK P2
 (12%), 2 in Desmocollin-2 (3%), 2 in Plakoglobin (3%) genes involved in these disorders. and 6 patients (10%)P cKaPr2ri ed multiple mutations. Additional screening by We developed and optimized a MASTR (Multiplex Amplification of Specific MPKLP P2
A in patients without mutations in ACM-genes successfully identified Target for Resequencing) assay comprising 51 genes involved in PED. The aC olanrcgleu shieotnerso:zygous deletion, further confirmed by qPCR showing a MASTR protocol consists of a multiplex PCR whereby a first PCR is perfor- copy number reduction when compared to control samples. med to amplify all target regions followed by a secondary PCR in which pa- This study improved the diagnostic genetic yield in our popu- tient specific barcodes and sequencing adaptors are incorporated. The PED lation by nearly 2% for one gene, highlighting the usefulness of performing assay consists of 951 amplicons distributed over 11 multiplexes. Following additional analysis for CNVs in ACM patients.  P05
.12-M the MASTR assay, 2x250bp sequencing is performed on MiSeq v2. Next, da- Molecular and clinical analysis of digenic inheritance in a family with ta-analysis and -interpretation is performed using our local Galaxy-instance left dominant Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy and our in-house developed variant database. For validation purposes, 20 K. Pilichou1, P. Sarto2, E. Carturan1, M. Cason1, E. Lazzarini1, R. Celeghin1, M. Perazzolo CEPH samples (variants present in 1000G) and 20 positive controls were Marra1, C. Furioso2, D. Corrado1, G. Thiene1, C. Basso1; analysed, and we have achieved 100% sensitivity. Currently, we are in the 1Dept. of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, process of screening 100 PED patients with unknown genetic defect. The 2Sports Medicine Unit, Noale Hospital, Noale-Venice, Italy. results of this analysis will be presented. Subsequently, this panel will be implemented in a genetic diagnostic setting.  P05
.10-M Homozygous founder mutation in desmocollin-2 gene causes Background. Compound/digenic heterozygosity has been identified as one arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy of the most important determinants of malignant arrhythmic outcome in A. Lorenzon1, B. Bauce2, I. Rigato2, K. Pilichou2, M. De Bortoli1, M. Calore1, G. Poloni1, E. arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC). The impact of two single nucleoti- Lazzarini2, E. Mazzotti2, C. Basso2, L. Daliento2, D. Corrado2, G. Thiene2, A. Rampazzo1; de variations (SNV) in the AC phenotype expression in a small family was 1Department of Biology, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular assessed. Sciences, Padua, Italy. Methods. Autopsy identified a concealed left dominant AC in a 40- years old competitive athlete. Conventional genetic screening for all desmosomal-re- lated AC genes and parallel exome sequencing was carried out. SNV segrega- Dominant mutations in genes encoding desmosomal proteins are reported tion and disease penetrance was further assessed in the family members. to cause arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC), an inherited heart muscle Results. By exome and conventional sequencing two SNVs in different desmo- disease characterized by lethal ventricular arrhythmias and heart failure, somal genes were identified in the proband: one in exon 14 of DSG2, c.2137 accounting for 15 to 25% of cases of sudden cardiac death in patients <35 G>A (rs79241126,  E713
K), previously reported in AC cases as an ‘uncertain’ years. Recessive mutations are infrequent and most of them cause cardio- variant with minor allele frequency (MAF) equals to 0.037; and the other cutaneous syndromes. SNV in exon 16 of DS C2
, c.2603 C>T (rs141873745,  S868
F), considered a We report here the identification of the first founder homozygous desmocol- variant ‘likely to be pathogenic’ since can alter the functional properties of lin-2 (DS C2
) mutation in the Italian population, segregating in 4 AC families the protein, has no available reported MAF and in silico analysis predicted a showing a cardiac-restricted phenotype. malignant outcome (Polyphen-2: malignant, SIFT: probably deleterious). We performed an exon-by-exon analysis of the DS C2
 gene on 80 unrelated Cascade genetic screening showed that all relatives were carriers for only Italian index patients diagnosed affected with AC according to revised 2010 one of the two SNVs. The brother and the sister, SNV carriers, showed a less Task Force criteria. We identified the p.D179G homozygous mutation in severe AC phenotype with septal and LV late-enhancement at cardiac ma- DS C2
 gene in 4 (5%) of them, all originating from the same north-eastern gnetic resonance. Italian region. One of them resulted to carry an additional plakophilin-2 Conclusions. The data herein reported confirm that digenic heterozygosity frameshift mutation. Haplotype analysis revealed a conserved haplotype predicts a more severe phenotype and arrhythmic outcome in AC. However, among the DS C2
 mutation carriers, strongly indicating a common founder. A the risk conferred by SNV in family members needs to be evaluated further severe form of biventricular cardiomyopathy with typical electrical features by follow-up studies.  P05
.13-S of AC was diagnosed in all homozygous mutation carriers, whereas hete- Desmoglein-2 propeptide cleavage-site mutations in Arrhythmogenic rozygous family members were clinically asymptomatic. In vitro functional Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy studies on HL-1 cells showed that mutated DS C2
 protein correctly localizes E. Gandjbakhch1, A. Vite2, T. Hery2, V. Fressart3, F. Gary2, G. Dilanian2, F. Hidden-Lucet1, P. at the intercalated discs. Charron4, E. Villard2; In conclusion, this is the first founder homozygous mutation in DS C2
 gene 1APHP, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié Salpêtrière, Institut de Cardiologie, Paris, France, invariably associated with a severe AC phenotype in the Italian population. 2ICAN, INSERM UMRS 1166, Paris, France, 3APHP, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié Salpêtrière, This finding could have important implications for mutation screening stra- Département de Biochimie Métabolique, Paris, France, 4APHP, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié tegy and risk stratification. Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France. Purpose 114 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, MIT uA taL tY io n| sW inW DeW sm.E oS glH einG -2.O (DR SG G2), a heart specific cadherin, are commonABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index causes of Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC). A hot Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are a major source of morbidity and morta- spot of DSG2 missense mutations targets the consensus cleavage-site of lity worldwide, including the Azores archipelago where CVD have a higher DSG2 pro-peptide (Arg-X-Arg/Lys-Arg) by Kex2-like proprotein-converta- mortality rate when compared to mainland Portugal. In order to investigate ses. These mutations are responsible for severe phenotype associating fre- this question, we characterized 15 SNPs in 4 genes and 1 genomic region quent severe right ventricular dysfunction and left ventricular involvement. associated with CVD risk: 4 in PCSK9 (rs11591147, rs11206510, rs562556, In the present work, we aim to explore the pathophysiological mechanisms rs505151), 4 in APOE (rs405509, rs429358, rs7412, rs439401), 4 in LDLR of these mutations. (rs2228671, rs5927, rs1433099, rs2738466), 1 in USF1 (rs10908821) Methods and Results and 2 in 9p21 (rs10757274, rs1333049). Genotyping was performed by We performed ex vivo analysis on heart samples from two mutation car- real time PCR using TaqMan Assays in a sample of 170 Azorean and 108 riers, and in vitro analysis by expressing wild-type (WT) or mutants pro- mainland Portuguese healthy individuals. Results demonstrate that allele DSG2-GFP fusion proteins in cellular models. First, we demonstrated that all frequencies were similar in both populations; however, there were statisti- mutations prevented N-terminal propeptide cleavage. Using Biacore tech- cally significant differences for two SNPs: rs10757274 (9p21) and rs405509 nology, we demonstrated that the presence of propeptide led to the loss of (APOE; χ2, p<0.05). Genotype evaluation of rs1333049 (9p21), the most re- interactions between E C1
 domains of cadherins, known to interact to struc- plicated risk SNP for CVD, showed that 19.4% and 18.5% of Azoreans and ture desmosomes. Uncleaved pro-DSG2 mutants were correctly addressed mainland Portuguese, respectively, present homozygosity for this risk allele. to the intercellular junctions (cellular models) or at the intercalated disks Moreover, it is possible to observe that, although there is no statistical signi- (human tissue). However, we observed at low calcium concentration a mis- ficance, Azoreans (9.1%) carry a higher frequency of APO E4
 allele compa- incorporation of pro-DSG2 mutants into desmosomes associated with an red to mainland (8.8%). Overall, the results are suggestive of an increased EGFR-dependant internalization of pro-DSG2 mutants and of desmosomal risk for CVDs in Azoreans compared to mainland; however, the joint analysis partners (Plakophillin-2 and Plakoglobin) suggesting increased turn-over of of all variants is being carried out. Finally, the results validate the need to the unprocessed pro-DSG2. Mutants mis-incorporation in desmosomes was study regional differences in Portugal, information that should integrate the further confirmed by western-blot in cells submitted to cyclic mechanical Portuguese National Health Plan, in order to achieve a more direct and accu- stress showing an increase in mutant pro-DSG2 in the desmosome-indepen- rate strategy in terms of prevention and community health.  P05
.16-M dent soluble fraction as compared to DSG2-WT. A comprehensive multidisciplinary approach for the validation of the Conclusion 2013 diagnostic criteria in Brugada Syndrome Our results strongly suggest a loss in desmosomal adhesiveness due to mis- M. Torchio1,2, S. Savastano3, R. Rordorf3, A. Vicentini3, B. Petracci3, E. Taravelli3,2, S. incorporation of uncleaved pro-DSG2 mutant into desmosomes that might Castelletti3,2, A. D‘Errico3, C. Dossena3,2, P. Novara3,2, F. Dagradi4, M. Landolina3, C. play a central role in ARVC pathophysiology. Spazzolini4, L. Crotti2,5,6, P. Schwartz6;  P05
.14-M 1IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Laboratory of Cardiovascular Genetics, Cusano Human Genetic Evidence that Common Variants near PIK3CG are Milanino, Italy, 2Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, Associated with Atherosclerotic Plaque Hemorrhage and Vessel 3Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Department of Cardiology, Pavia, Italy, 4IRCCS Density Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milano, S. W. van der Laan1, L. Folkersen2, J. van Setten1, A. H. Schoneveld1, S. M. van de Weg1, Italy, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, F. W. Asselbergs1, D. P. V. de Kleijn3,4, R. Malik5, M. Dichgans5, A. Gabrielsen2, P. I. W. de 6IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin Bakker1,6, G. Pasterkamp1; and Laboratory of Cardiovascular Genetics, Milano, Italy. 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Interuniversity Cardiology Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 5Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, München, Germany, 6Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Background: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a cardiac channelopathy characte- Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. rized by a coved-type ST-segment elevation in the right precordial leads. The controversy about the value of high intercostal spaces (ICSs) and the num- ber of diagnostic leads has been settled by a recent consensus statement. Aim: Atherosclerotic plaques may vary among individuals, in part due to he- We have tested the validity of the new ECG diagnostic criteria through a ritable factors. However, the genetic architecture of plaque phenotypes is multidisciplinary approach, including the molecular one. Methods: We ana- largely unknown. A common variant near PIK3CG on 7q22.3 has previously lyzed 114 BrS patients with a spontaneous or drug-induced type 1 pattern been associated with carotid plaque presence. Animal models suggest that recorded in one or more right precordial leads in 4th, 3rd and 2nd ICSs. The PIK3CG may play a role in plaque formation through neovascularization. We right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) was localized by echocardiography. hypothesized that the PIK3CG variant is associated with intraplaque hemor- Molecular screening of SCN5A was performed through DHPLC and direct rhage (IPH) and vessel density in human plaques. Secondarily we focused sequencing. Results: In total, 23 patients (21%) were carriers of a disease- on characterizing the functional role of genetic variants near PIK3CG in ad- causing mutation. The percentage of mutation carriers (MCs) and the car- vanced human atherosclerosis. diac event rate were similar irrespective of the diagnostic ICS (4th vs high Methods: We collected 571 Athero-Express Biobank Study patients, and ICSs: MCs,23% vs 19%; cardiac event rate 22% vs 28%) and the number of genotyped them using Affymetrix SNP 5.0. After quality control we tested diagnostic leads (1 vs ≥ 2: MCs 20% vs 22%; cardiac event rate 22% vs 27%) rs17398575 for association to immunohistochemically scored IPH and used. The concordance between RVOT anatomical location and the diagno- vessel density, correcting for age, gender and 10 principal components. We stic ICSs was 86%. Conclusion: The percentage of SCN5A-MCs and the car- used the BiKE cohort to assess the effect of PIK3CG variants on PIK3CG ex- diac event rate are similar regardless of the diagnostic criteria used. The site pression in circulating monocytes (n=95) and in carotid plaques (n=126). where the diagnostic pattern is recorded is mainly due to the anatomical Results: The reported PIK3CG variant, rs17398575 (risk allele A, location of the RVOT. This study supports the robustness of BrS diagnosis as frequency=0.72), was associated with IPH (OR=1.40 [1.10-1.69 95% CI], a Pc 0h 5ie .1v 7ed -S through the new diagnostic criteria. p=0.0271) and vessel density (β=0.095 [0.0415 s.e.m.], p=0.0221). Mutational analysis of mitochondrial DNA in Brugada Syndrome The SNP dependent PIK3CG expression demonstrated a differential effect patients in the vascular wall (p=0.783 for rs17398575) compared to monocytes L. Stocchi1,2, E. Polidori3, L. Potenza3, M. Rocchi3, C. Calcabrini3, P. Busacca4, M. Capalbo5, (p=0.0261 for rs17398575). D. Potenza6, F. Amati2, R. Mango7, F. Romeo7,8, V. Stocchi9; Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the first report involving the associati- 1Department of Clinical Sciences, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Ancona, Italy, 2Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, on of genetic variants to histological plaque phenotypes in humans. Further Italy, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Biomolecular Science, University of Urbino “Carlo research should focus on replicating these results and elucidating the etiolo- Bo”, Urbino, Italy, 4Complex Operative Unit of Cardiology (UOC),Santa Maria della gy of plaque vessel formation and intraplaque hemorrhage, as epidemiologi- Misericordia Hospital, Urbino, Italy, Urbino, Italy, 5ASUR Marche-Area Vasta 1, Italy, c Pa 0l 5s .t 1u 5d -i Ses demonstrated these associate with cardiovascular disease. Urbino, Italy, 6IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 7Complex Operative Unit of Cardiology (UOC), Polyclinic Tor Assessment of genetic risk for cardiovascular disease in Azores and Vergata, Rome, Italy, Roma, Italy, 8Department of System Medicine, University of Tor mainland Portugal: a healthy population-based study Vergata, Rome, Italy, Rome, Austria, 9Department of Biomolecular Science, University of C. C. Branco1,2,3, A. Capocci1, J. González1, J. Duarte1, A. M. Vicente4,2,3, L. Mota-Vieira1,2,3; Urbino “Carlo Bo”, Italy, Urbino, Italy. 1Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of Ponta Delgada, EPE, Ponta Delgada, São Miguel Island, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Center for Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics (BioFIG), Lisbon, Portugal, 4Departamento Promoção da Saúde e Doenças Crónicas, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a cardiac disorder characterized by typical ECG Ricardo Jorge (INSA), Lisbon, Portugal. alterations and a high risk for sudden death due to ventricular fibrillation. This pathology has nuclear heterogeneous genetic basis and at present ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |m WolWecuWlar.E dSiaHgnGo.sOticR tGests on nuclear DNA cover only 25-30% of Br1S 1p5a-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tients. The aim of this study was to assess a possible involvement of mi- of each gene to that observed in repeated random sampling of healthy con- tochondrial (mt) DNA variants in Brugada syndrome since their etiological trols from 1000 genomes project data. Besides confirming an important role role has been already described in several cardiomyopathies. for sodium, potassium and calcium ion channels, our results identified new To reach this goal, mitochondrial genome of BrS patients was sequenced candidate BrS genes previously associated with other forms of inherited and analyzed. A specific mtDNA mutation responsible for Brugada syn- cardiopathies, such as ANK2, RYR2, DSG2, LMNA, suggesting an overlap bet- drome can be excluded. However the most severe spontaneous ECG type 1 ween different disorders; however, many patients still remained genetically symptomatic patients show a high substitution rate in their mitochondrial uncharacterized, prompting more extensive studies and suggesting a pos- genome. These patients also share a combination of four mt single nucleoti- sible multigenic aetiology.  P05
.20-S de polymorphisms (SNPs: T4216C, A11251G,  C15452
A and T16126C), not A protein network of common susceptibility genes provides a link found in asymptomatic subjects (either spontaneous ECG type 1 or induced) between inflammation and cardiovascular disease with a low number on mtDNA SNPs. M. Riemenschneider1, S. K. Fassl2, J. Austermann2, J. Roth2, M. Stoll1; Our evidences suggest that the detected mtDNA allelic combination and a 1Genetic Epidemiology, LIFA at the University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 2Institute high number of mtDNA SNPs could represent an important cofactor in ma- of Immunology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. nifestation of BrS phenotype and seem to be associated to a higher risk for a more severe clinical state of Brugada syndrome.  P05
.18-M SCN5A mutation analysis in 147 Brugada syndrome probands Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified hundreds of sus- S. J. Van Dooren1,2,3, U. Peeters2, D. Daneels2, P. Brugada4, G. Pappaert4, M. Meuwissen1, ceptibility loci for chronic and inflammatory disease phenotypes in humans. S. Van Malderen4, L. Peirsman1, I. Timmermans1, M. Biervliet1, D. Raimundi3, M. There is increasing evidence that chronic inflammation is a crucial driver in Bonduelle1,2; the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases (CVD), which may be genetical- 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel ly determined. To understand the genetic architecture underlying chronic (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Research Group Reproduction inflammation and CVD we performed a systematic analysis of (1) common and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3Interuniversity risk alleles coming from published GWAS, (2) of protein-protein interac- Institute of Bioinformatics in Brussels, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB)- Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium, 4Heart Rhythm Management Center, tion (PPI) networks informed by (3) gene expression data with a defined Cardiovascular Division, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel molecular target involved in the inflammatory processes promoting CVD, (VUB), Brussels, Belgium. myeloid-related protein (MRP) 8. (4) Through analysis of integrated haplo- type scores (iHS) and FST values in HapMap phase 2 data, we investigated whether recent selection pressure acting upon inflammatory genes affected CVD susceptibility loci. Our findings provide significant evidence for a PPI SCN5A mutation analysis in 147 Brugada syndrome (BrS) probands iden- network (P = 0.033), which connects inflammatory and cardiovascular sus- tified 27 variants possibly associated with cardiac channelopathies, which ceptibility genes, and establish a genetic framework of inflammatory CVD. resulted in a genetic diagnostic yield of 17,4%. 18 (66,7%) SCN5A variants 41.59% of PPI genes are associateCdD wKNit2hB immunCeE fLuSnRc2tioPnSsR.  C218
.M3%YB oPfH iLn- have already been associated with BrS, 4 (14,8%) with other cardiac ar- SteOgRrTat1ed genes can be linked to both, an inflammatory and cardiovascular rhythmias and 5 (18,5%) are novel undescribed variants. When only taking disease phenotype. Interestingly, , and / / / into account the patients with a baseline BrS type I ECG (8,2%) the genetic , unequivocally replicated CVD loci, are integrated within this network diagnostic yield increased to 41.6%. Interestingly, this was not observed in as are several SNPs located in transcription factor recognition sequences, i.e. patients with a BrS type II ECG (11,6%), in which SCN5A NFKB1, STAT3, which are key factors in inflammation. Finally, we observed variants seem to be either novel or associated with other arrhythmias. We a significant enrichment of inflammatory variants within CVD loci that are also identified a substantial number of described SCN5A mutations (> 9%) targets of selection (P=2.001e-11 in CEU population), suggesting that recent in BrS patients clinically diagnosed by ajmaline positive testing and a family selective sweeps may have affected the genomic architecture underlying history of BrS and/or sudden cardiac death (80,2%), demonstrating the ad- C PV 0D 5.. 21-S ded value of sodium channel blocker-induced ECG testing. Systematic screening of rare coding variants in genes involved in Segregation analysis was performed in available families of the identified cardiac arrhythmias SCN5A positive BrS probands to determine genotype-phenotype correlati- S. Le Scouarnec1, M. Karakachoff1, P. Lindenbaum1, S. Bonnaud1, L. Duboscq-Bidot1, ons. In more than 66% of tested families there was an incomplete segregati- R. Teusan1, X. Daumy1, V. Portero1, F. Simonet1, L. Bellanger2, J. Gourraud3, J. Barc4, on of the discovered variant. Revision of all ECG data revealed that some aj- S. Chatel1, F. Sacher5, M. Haissaguerre5, C. Bezzina4, C. Dina1, F. Kyndt6, S. Bézieau6, J. maline or baseline ECG negative BrS patients with SCN5A mutations did not Schott1, V. Probst3, R. Redon1; 1L‘institut du thorax, INSERM UMR1087, Nantes, France, 2Département de meet the stringent diagnostic criteria but demonstrated conduction disease. Mathématiques, Laboratoire Jean Leray UMR CNRS 6629, Nantes, France, 3L‘institut These results also urge for the need to revise the clinical diagnostic criteria du thorax, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France, 4Department of Clinical and for BrS, in order to stratify BrS patient groups based on more detailed phe- Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Bordeaux n Po 0t 5y .p 1i 9c -d Sata necessary to discover novel major disease associated genes. University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 6Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France. Identification of candidate genes for Brugada Syndrome by targeted next generation sequencing S. Benedetti1, C. Di Resta2, A. Pietrelli3, S. Sala4, P. Della Bella4, G. De Bellis3, M. Ferrari2,5, The development of new strategies based on next-generation sequencing R. Bordoni3; enables the large-scale screening of genes involved in rare diseases. We 1Laboratory of Clinica Molecular Biology, Diagnostica e Ricerca San Raffaele, Milano, have developed a custom design based on the HaloPlex™ technology (Agi- Italy, 2Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milano, Italy, 3Institute of biomedical lent Technologies) to sequence the coding regions of 163 candidate genes, technologies, National Council of Resarch (ITB-CNR), Milano, Italy, 4Department of including all genes previously linked to cardiac arrhythmias. Arrhythmology, San Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy, 5Genomic Unit for the Diagnosis of In total, 570 individuals were included in this study. To validate our design, Human Pathologies, Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy. we first analysed 42 patients with inherited cardiac arrhythmias. Among the 69 genetic variants previously identified in these patients, 68 were detected automatically after HaloPlex library preparation and Illumina se- Recent developments of next generation sequencing (NGS) represent a great quencing. The undetected variant is a substitution located in a low-coverage opportunity to identify new candidate genes in genetically heterogeneous region. Subsequently, 361 additional patients were analysed (178 patients pathologies such as Brugada Syndrome (BrS), an inherited cardiac arrhyth- with Brugada syndrome; 89 patients with early repolarization syndrome; mogenic disorder with a prevalence of 1:5000 in Western countries leading 94 cases of progressive cardiac conduction defects). We also analysed 167 to sudden cardiac arrest in young asymptomatic adults. Until now BrS ge- controls, over 65 years of age and showing no signs of cardiac rhythm or netic background remained elusive, since mutations in known genes cover conduction abnormalities. The mean coverage was 577X and we found 5 approximately 30% of patients. We thus aimed at identifying new candidate rare functional variants per patient on average. Then, burden tests were genes performing targeted NGS in a cohort of 91 BrS patients. The coding performed to detect genes significantly associated to cardiac arrhythmias. regions of 158 genes were sequenced using the Illumina GAIIx platform, This approach also identified potential new disease genes, and replication yielding a mean target coverage of 99.16% and a mean sequencing depth in an independent cohort is in progress. of 327.22x among the samples. Excluding all common polymorphisms and Our study will lead to a catalogue of mutations in genes linked to hereditary considering only protein-coding variations, we overall identified 98 novel cases of sudden cardiac death. The systematic screening of our cohorts will variants in 71 subjects in a total of 70 genes, including missense, nonsense, also guide our future molecular investigations for these diseases and contri- splice-site and INDELs, and 33 clinical rs annotated in dbSN P137
. To select bute towards improving the prevention of sudden cardiac death. 116 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG more promising BS candidate genes, we then compared the mutational rateABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.22-M Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Pediatric Neurology, Helsinki University Targeted oligonucleotide-selective sequencing of 101 genes from 150 Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Neurology, Helsinki University patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in Finland. Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. T. Alastalo1, O. Akinrinade1, L. Ollila1, T. H. Ojala1, H. Koillinen1, M. Kaartinen2, J. W. Koskenvuo3, S. Myllykangas1, J. Tallila4, M. Gentile4, T. Heliö2; 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University Hospital Helsinki, Cardiology, Introduction: Cardiomyopathies (CMPs) are a group of severe, genetically Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 4Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, heterogeneous heart disorders with more than 100 disease-causing genes Finland. reported to date. By enabling comprehensive genetic screening, Next Gene- ration Sequencing (NGS) is an appealing diagnostic approach for CMPs. In this study, we apply NGS to a cohort of genetically undiagnosed patients in The genetic basis of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is recognized order to identify the disease-causing mutations and characterize the mole- but still not widely utilized in diagnostics. Hundreds of mutations in >50 cular background of early-onset CMP in Finland. By detecting robust geno- genes have been reported to associate with DCM. Comprehensive genetic te- type-phenotype correlations, genetic data can be informative in prioritizing sting not only improves diagnostics, prognostics and treatment optimizati- cases to cardiac transplantation. on, but also allows effective screening of asymptomatic family members. We Materials and methods: Our cohort consists of 57 Finnish early-onset CMP adopted the novel oligonucleotide-selective sequencing (OS-Seq) and deve- patients. The clinical presentation is diverse, ranging from heart-speci- loped a custom data analysis pipeline to identify pathogenic variants in 101 fic muscle diseases to multiorgan syndromes. Nine of the patients were genes associated with cardiomyopathies. Our sequencing panels covered screened for mutations by whole-exome sequencing (WES) and 48 by tar- >99% of the targeted regions with >15x coverage. Validation with reference geted sequencing using a custom-designed panel (HaloPlex) of 117 cardiac samples showed >99% sensitivity and >99.9% specificity. The accuracy to genes. Variants were prioritized in respect to frequency and pathogenicity detect short INDELs was 100%. We sequenced well-documented 150 DCM prediction. The candidate mutations were further verified to match the di- patient and identified pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in >50% of sease segregation in the family and to be absent in Finndies hn ocvoontrols. cases. Truncating titin gene mutations were identified in >20% of patients Results: Mutations were confirmed in four of the WES-investigated patients. with familial form of DCM. Other major findings were in genes of the nuclear Among these, screening of family members revealed mutations in lamina, desmosomal genes and sarcomeric genes. We performed statistical three sporadic severe cases. For the patients investigated with targeted se- analyses to identify genotype-phenotype correlations and performed family quencing, strong candidate mutations were identified in 14 cases. segregation analysis for selected kindreds. This study represents one of the Conclusions: In the current stage oDf et hneo svtoudy, WES has led to a genetic dia- largest multi gene analyses of patients with DCM, to date. The utilized no- gnosis success rate of approximately 45%, while for targeted sequencing a vel technology allows significant cost reduction and rapid turn-around-time success rate of 30% is expected. mutations were found to cause from sample to clinical interpretation. These results demonstrate that the CMPs in the early-onset cohort under study.  P05
.25-S high-throughput targeted OS-Seq platform for cardiomyopathies meets the Application of the next generation sequencing technology in technical criteria of clinical diagnostics and is a cost-efficient tool in clinical identification of mitochondrial mutations in patients with congenital research.  P05
.23-S heart defects Application of (targeted) next generation sequencing (NGS) in clinical N. Abaci1, M. Arikan1, E. Gok2, A. Cakiris1, S. Sirma Ekmekci1, T. Tansel2, D. Ustek1; genetic diagnostics of cardiomyopathies 1Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Cardiovascular J. D. H. Jongbloed1, R. C. Niessen1, A. Pósafalvi1, Y. M. Hoedemaekers1, P. A. van der Surgery, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey. Zwaag1, I. M. Mulder1, J. Dijkhuis1, D. Q. C. M. Barge-Schaapveld2, S. R. D. Piers3, J. J. van Introduction: der Smagt4, F. W. Asselbergs5, R. A. de Boer6, M. P. van den Berg6, R. Almomani1, J. P. van Tintelen1, R. J. Sinke1; Inherited type of cardiomyopathy is caused by mutations 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical not only in nuclear genes, but also in mitochondrial genes. Mitochondrial Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical DNA mutations are involved in development of cardiomyopathy through di- Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical sturbing oxidative energy metabolism. It has been shown that various types Center Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Cardiology, of cardiomyopathy can be attributed to disturbed mitochondrial oxidative University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of Cardiology, energy metabolism. The goal of our study was to apply next generation se- University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. qMueetnhcoindgs :(NGS) technology as a method to detect mtDNA mutations in pati- ents with cardiomyopathy. 18 patients were included in this study. The entire mitochondri- The strength of next generation sequencing (NGS) in both research and dia- al DNA was amplified in two overlapping polymerase chain reaction (PCR) gnostics is becoming increasingly evident. It can be successfully applied to fRreasgumletsn:t s from the Cardiac tissue of the patients undergoing cardiac surge- find causal mutations and confirm the clinical diagnosis in genetic cardio- ry. mtDNA was deep sequenced by NGS technology. myopathies. However, exome sequencing (ES) show incomplete representa- Six newborns and 12 infant patients with cardiomyopathy were tion and coverage of several exons, leading to clinically relevant mutations studied using NGS technology and bioinformatics analysis of the sequence being missed. Therefore ES will, at least for now, coexist in clinical genetic data allowed determination of new and reported variation for each indi- diagnostics with other NGS-based strategies, such as targeted resequencing. vidual. Both known and unknown mutations were determined from 18 of To this end, using an enrichment kit targeting 48 genes associated with he- patients. Eleven novel mtDNA mutations were identified at seven patients. reditary cardiomyopathies and analysing 90+ patient samples, we demon- Three of the patients have novel mutations together with reported cardio- strated that the sensitivity, specificity and robustness of targeted NGS are myopathy mutations. LHON, Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome with Migraine, Mul- equal to those of Sanger Sequencing (SS). Subsequently, we constructed tDipislec uSscsleiorons: is, and Breast cancer risk associated mutations also observed an improved kit targeting 55 genes and implemented this into routine dia- at three patients. gnostics. Using this kit, 700+ patients have been analysed, and additional In this report, we provide the results of mtDNA analysis for 18 haplotype and cosegregation analyses were performed to further support patients with cardiomyopathy. All patients displayed at least one mtDNA pathogenicity of potentially causal mutations. Our results show that: (1) our mutation. Sixty mutations were found, and 13 of them were unreported. approach results in significant increase in diagnostic yield, as in up to 50% This study represents the most comprehensive mtDNA mutational analysis of patients (potentially) pathogenic mutations were identified; (2) critical in congenital cardiac infant patients.  P05
.26-M evaluatiToTnN o f the clinical diagnoses showed that higher diagnostic yields are Copy number variants in the 22q11.2 region of congenital heart achieved for patients fulfilling the respective cardiomyopathy subtype crite- disease patients from São Miguel Island, Azores, Portugal ria; (3) mutations account for a significant part of the yield; (4) in >10% R. Pires1,2, L. M. Pires3, S. Vaz4, P. Maciel4, R. Anjos5, R. Moniz1, C. C. Branco1,2,6, R. Cabral1, of cases two or more (potentially) pathogenic mutations were identified; I. M. Carreira3, L. Mota-Vieira1,2,6; (5) further haplotype and cosegregation analyses support the pathogenicity 1Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espírito Santo of Ponta of a significant number of potentially causal mutations. Taken together, our Delgada, EPE (HDESPD,EPE), Ponta Delgada, São Miguel Island, Azores, Portugal, gene-panel based approach largely improved genetic diagnostics in cardio- 2Center for Biodiversity, Functional and Integrative Genomics (BioFIG), Faculty of myopathies. Sciences, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Laboratory of Cytogenetics and  P05
.24-M Genomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Department The genetic basis of early-onset cardiomyopathies in Finland of Paedriatics, HDESPD,EPE, Ponta Delgada, São Miguel Island, Azores, Portugal, C. Vasilescu1, C. J. Carroll1, V. Brilhante1, A. Hiippala2, E. Jokinen2, T. A. Tyni3, T. H. Ojala2, 5Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Hospital of Santa Cruz, Carnaxide, Portugal, A. Suomalainen1,4; 6Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal. 1Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Helsinki University Central ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |C WhroWmWoso.EmSaHl reGa.rOraRngGements of the 22q11.2 region, including the 22q11117.2ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Conclusions: deletion and microduplication syndromes, are frequently associated with pNaKtXie2n-6ts from both families. The mutation segregated with the disease in congenital heart diseases (CHDs). The present work aimed to study copy the families and was absent from large cohorts of controls. number variants (CNVs) in the 22q11.2 region of 87 CHD patients from São encodes a homeobox-containing protein which is expressed in Miguel Island, Azores. mouse caudal pharyngeal arches and outflow tract at  E8
.0- E9
.5. NKX2-6 The CNVs were searched in all patients using MLPA, according to MRC- was previously shown to be regulated by TBX1. The clear phenotype asso- Holland protocol. Results showed that four (4.6%) out of 87 CHD patients ciated with a homozygous deleterious mutation in our patients, falls well presented CNVs, which were confirmed by aCGH in patients 1 and 2, and by within the spectrumN oKfX t2h-e6 cardiac defects seen in DiGeorge syndrome, is FISH in patients 3 and 4. Patients 1 and 3, both affected with a ventricular in agreement with NKX2-6 downstream location in the TBX1 signaling pa- septal defect, carried a de novo 2.5 Mb deletion of the 22q11.2 region, whe- thway and confirms role in human cardiogenesis..  P05
.29-S reas patient 2, with an atrial septal defect, carried a de novo 2.5 Mb micro- Is Type 2 diabetes gene ABC C8
 coding a subunit of KATP channel duplication (2:1). Finally, patient 4 showed a 2.5 Mb triplication (3:1) and associated with coronary artery disease in Turkish people? presented dysmorphic facial features, cognitive deficit, and aortic stenosis, H. Arikoglu1, D. Erkoc Kaya1, E. Avci1, S. Zeybek1, F. Iscioglu2; a clinical feature not reported in the first case described in the literature. In- 1Selcuk University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Konya, Turkey, terestingly, the evaluation of this patient’s parents revealed that her non-af- 2Ege University, Science Faculty, Department of Statistics, Izmir, Turkey. fected father had a 2.5 Mb microduplication (2:1). Now we are investigating by microsatellite analysis the mechanisms responsible for microduplication and triplication. Coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the most common cardiovascular In summary, the present study allowed the identification of very rare dele- diseases and is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Clas- tion and microduplication syndromes in Azorean CHD patients. Moreover, sical risk factors for atherosclerosis, such as central obesity, arterial hyper- we report the second patient with a 22q11.2 triplication, whose clinical fea- tension, and dyslipidemia, frequently coexist with type 2 diabetes and con- tures increase the symptoms that could be present. This work emphasizes tribute to the increased prevalence of CAD. ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) the relevance of biomedical research, since it can help paediatricians and channels of pancreatic β-cells, which is assembled from two different subu- o Pt 0h 5e .r 2 p 7r -o Sfessionals to better assess health care needs. nits; a Kir6.2 and a sulfonylurea receptor 1(SUR1), play a key role in glucose- Congenital heart malformations in patients with 22q11.2 deletion stimulated insulin secretion mechanism. ABC C8
 gene which is located on syndrome chromosome 11p15.1 contains 39 exons and encodes SUR1. We performed D. D. Drakulic1, G. Cuturilo2,3, I. Jovanovic2,4, M. Milivojevic1, M. Djukic2,4, V. Pareznovic2,4, a study to scan ABC C8
 gene variants which we found significantly associated T. Ilisic4, I. Stefanovic4, J. Popovic1, J. Ruml3, M. Mijovic2, A. Miletic3, N. Borlja3, N. Vunjak5, with type 2 diabetes previously, in patients with CAD. 125 individuals with S. Rsovac5, J. Kalanj5, B. Medjo2,5, V. Vusurovic6, M. Jesic2,6, T. Krstajic6, M. Bijelic4, M. CAD and 123 healthy individuals were included in the study. Genotyping Topalovic4, S. Djordjevic4, M. Stevanovic1; was performed by PCR-RFLP technique for R1273R and exon 16/-3t→c 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, substitutions using BslI and PstI, respectively. Statistical analysis was per- Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, formed using SPS S18
.0 program. p<0.05 was considered significant. Exon 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Department of Cardiology, University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Intensive 16/-3t→c substitution showed association with disease (OR:17.13 [95% Care Unit, University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 6Department of Neonatology, CI:4.84-60.62] p<0.001, under dominant model, while silent substitution University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia. R1273R in exon 31 had no effect on disease. According to our results, exon 16/-3t→c substitution accepted as having important role in type 2 diabetes genetic background has also associated with CAD in our population. Becau- Congenital heart malformations represent one of the most common birth se relatively small sample size of our population is a limitation for the study, defects, affecting about 0.7 or 0.8% of all live births. The association of wide r Pe 0p 5li .c 3a 0t -iv Me studies in larger populations are needed. range of conotruncal heart malformations with 22q11.2 microdeletion is Genetic evaluation of plakophilin-2 and desmoplakin gene variants in well recognized. 22q11.2 microdeletion is the most common deletion in ethnically different populations with dilated cardiomyopathy human genome and more than 80 dysmorphism/malformations have been E. Zuccolo1, R. Insolia1,2, S. Ghio3, L. Scelsi3, C. Raineri3, M. Mbele4, M. Fish4, G. described in patients with 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome. In this study Shaboodien4, K. Sliwa4, G. Castelli3, S. Schirinzi3, S. Lucibello3, L. Crotti2,5,6, B. M. Mayosi4, we investigated the frequency of 22q11 microdeletion among patients with P. J. Schwartz4,5; congenital heart defect and clinical features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. 1Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department The study population was 57 individuals who underwent detailed clinical of Cardiology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Hatter Institute for evaluation including assessment of cardiac morphology, facial appearance, Cardiovascular Research in Africa, Department of Medicine, Groote Schuur Hospital and lymphocyte immunophenotyping, presence of cleft palate and hypocalce- University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 5IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, mia/hypoparathyroidism screening. All tested patients have had congeni- Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin and Laboratory of Cardiovascular tal heart defect. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and multiplex ligation- Genetics, Milan, Italy, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, dependent probe amplification analysis revealed 22q11.2 microdeletion in Neuherberg, Germany. 42.1% of studied patients. Cardiac malformations observed in patients with 22q11.2 deletion were tetralogy of Fallot, pulmonary artery atresia, com- mon arterial trunk, interrupted aortic arch, ventricular septal defect and mi- Background tral stenosis. Echocardiography accompanied by contrast computed tomo- Cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of diseases with various etio- graphy scan and magnetic resonance angiography revealed malposition of logies. The potential involvement of genes encoding desmosomal proteins, branch pulmonary arteries in two patients with 22q11.2 microdeletion. In usually associated with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy conclusion, with this study we stress the need for multidisciplinary assess- (ARCV), was preliminarily evidenced in Caucasian patients with dilated ment of patients with congenital heart malformations which should include cardiomyopathy (DCM). Accordingly, we investigated this potential genetic testing for 22q11.2 microdeletion. overlap in a large cohort of patients with clear diagnosis of DCM and belon-  P05
.28-M ging to different ethnicities. Conotruncal malformations and absent thymus due to a deleterious Methods NKX2-6 mutation DNA from 455 DCM patients, referred to our tertiary centres in Pavia and A. Ta-Shma, N. El-lahham, S. Edvardson, P. Stepensky, A. Nir, Z. Perles, S. Gavri, J. Golender, N. Yaakobi-Simhayoff, A. Shaag, A. Rein, O. Elpeleg; Cape Town, was collected following complete clinical evaluation. 290 samp- Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. les (184 Caucasians; 84 black Africans; 5 Indians; 17 mixed ancestries) were screened for the two main ARVC genes: plakophilin-2 (PK P2
) and desmopla- Background: kin (DSP). Truncus arteriosus (TA) accounts for ~1% of all congeni- Results tal heart defects (CHD) in live birth. The etiology of isolated TA is largely Of the 290 patients tested, 9 (3.1%) were found to carry a most likely pa- unknown; syndromic TA is mostly associated with chromosome 22q11 de- thogenic variant, being absent in the publicly available databases (nearly letion. Hadassah Cardiogenetic Project includes a detailed registry and bio- 20.000 controls) and functionally relevant through 6 bioinformatic tools. bMaentkh. oWdist hainnd t hRee fsrualmtse: of this Project we now report the results of a study of Respectively, 3 (3.6%) black Africans (1 in PK P2
, 2 in DSP), 5 (2.7%) Cau- patients with multiple conotruncal malformations accompanied by athymia. casians (2 in PK P2
, 3 in DSP), and 1 African patient of mixed-ancestry (1 in The subjects were patients originating from two un- DSP) were positive. Variants of unknown significance (VUS) were found in related families. Following the exclusion of 2N2KqX121- 6deletion, exome analysis 15 patients; interestingly, one Caucasian carried two VUS in DSP, suggesting was performed in one patient from each family. A homozygous mutation in a potential compound effect. c1h1r88: 23560417InsA, p.Lys152fs*0, in the E SgeHneG w 2a0s 1id4en |t iMfieIdL AinN , CIToAncLluYs i|o Wn WW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Our data confirm the presence of potentially damaging mutations in desmo- is known on genetic basis of infantile forms, since the etiology of HCM in somal protein genes in patients with DCM. The prevalence of these mutati- this population is heterogeneous and includes inborn errors of metabolism, ons is similar in black Africans and in Caucasians. neuromuscular disorders, and malformation syndromes. Timely diagnosis  P05
.31-S is important for patients’ management but it could be difficult at first clini- eNOS as hypertension susceptibility gene: example from genome- cal presentation, since the phenotype may not yet be clearly defined. Here wide association study to functional and clinical evidences E. Salvi1, T. Kuznetsova2, S. Lupoli1, L. Thijs2, F. D‘Avila1, M. Barcella1, P. Benaglio3, F. Frau1, we present the analysis of 8 patients presenting severe HCM at less than 1 D. Velayutham1, D. Braga1, F. Rizzi1, Hypergenes Consortium, FLEMENGHO study, EPOGH month of age and their healthy parents by a panel of 2761 known disease study, J. Staessen2, C. Barlassina1, D. Cusi1; genes (TruSight exome). We obtained 27,457,869 reads/sample, the mean 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3University of coverage was 265X and 98% of target regions were covered at >20X. In one Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. patient we identified a de novo mutation in a classical HCM-associated sar- comere gene (MYH7). Two infants were diagnosed with glycogen storage diseases, one cytoplasmic and one lysosomal, respectively caused by a de Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) usually point to genomic regions novo PRKAG2 heterozygous mutation and a GAA homozygous mutation, for of interest in relation to a trait, but seldom directly identify the causal or which a specific enzyme replacement therapy exists. One patient carried a functional variant. homozygous SL C22
A5 mutation associated to carnitine deficiency. In the In a two-stage GWAS [Salvi et al, Hypertension 2012, PMID: 22184326], we remaining 4 patients we identified 3 PTPN11 heterozygous missense muta- revealed the association between rs3918226 polymorphism in the ipnr-osimlicoo- tions and one de novo heterozygous RAF1 deletion, suggesting the diagnosis ter of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene and hypertension of Noonan syndrome. Our results demonstrate the utility of exome sequen- (T allele, odds ratio 1.54; combined p = 2.58·10^-13). We identified cing in clinical practice, especially in infants who may benefit of prompt dif- a putative binding site for transcription factors of the ETS (E-twenty six) ferential diagnosis for therapeutic management and follow-up planning.  P05
.34-M family only one nucleotide away from rs3918226. Early recognition of Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 with We then confirmed our preliminary findings by target sequencing, in-vitro identification of common p.Arg3527Glu mutation experiments, and a population study [Salvi et al, Hypertension 2013, PMID: G. Klancar1, P. Malovrh2, U. Groselj1, N. Bratina1, N. Bratanic1, M. Bozic-Mijovski2, M. 24019403]. Target sequencing and imputing of the eNOS region validated Cevc2, T. Battelino1,3, K. Trebusak Podkrajsek4; rs3918226 as the polymorphism most closely associated with hypertension. 1UMC Ljubljana, University Children‘s Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes HeLa and HEK293T cells transfected with the eNOS promoter carrying the and Metabolic Diseases, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC Ljubljana, Division of Internal risk T allele had 20% to 40% (P<0.01) lower transcriptional activity than Medicine, Department of Vascular Diseases, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University of those carrying the C allele (luciferase reporter assays). In a general popula- Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4UMC Ljubljana, University tion of 2722 randomly recruited Europeans, TT homozygosity enhanced the Children‘s Hospital, Unit for Special Laboratory Diagnostics, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. age-related increase in blood pressure and risk of hypertension. The preva- lence of TT homozygosity is low but the attributable risk is 51.0%. Combined with other genetic markers, the rs3918226 polymorphism might, Background: Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB) is a dominant therefore, contribute to the stratification of cardiovascular risk. Further cli- inherited disorder most commonly caused by the substitution of glutamine nical research should establish whether eNOS might be a target for preven- to arginine at position 3527 in the ApoB-100 gene. The mutant p.Arg3527Glu tive or therapeutic intervention. causes a marked reduction in the affinity of low-density lipoproteins (LDL)  P05
.32-M for the LDL receptor, which leads to hypercholesterolemia and increased The analysis of cytokine network gene expression profiles in risk for cardiovascular diseases (CVD). The p.Arg3527Glu mutation among peripheral blood leukocytes of patients with essential hypertension Caucasian patients have a wide geographic and population distribution. Its Y. Timasheva, I. A. Tuktarova, V. A. Matveeva, O. E. Mustafina; prevalence varies among various European populations ranging from 0.08 Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Science Centre Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. % to 1.4 %. To our knowledge, this mutation has not yet been studied in the Slovenian population. Materials and Methods: Following clinical evaluation, p.Arg3527Glu mutati- on was analysed in a cohort of 102 paediatric patients recruited through na- Essential hypertension (EH) is a multifactorial disease with obscure etiolo- tion-wide hypercholesterolemia screening, and 44 adult patients referred to gy and pathogenesis. Transcriptome of patients with EH is virtually unex- specialised outpatient clinic due to hypercholesterolemia resulting in CVD. plored. We performed the analysis of gene expression in peripheral blood Results: p.Arg3527Glu mutation gene was identified in 14 out of 102 paed- leukocytes of patients with EH and healthy individuals using microarray iatric and in 6 out of 44 adult patients. technology (RT2ProfilerTM PCR Array, SABiosciences Corporation, Qiagen) Conclusions: Studied population represents two clinical extremes of the with subsequent validation of the obtained results by quantitative real-time FDB, one with and one without manifestations of CVD. Similar frequencies RT-PCR. We discovered a group of genes with altered transcriptional activity of the mutation were detected in both studied groups, namely 13.7 % in in hypertensive patients: CC L16
, CC L17
, CC L18
, CC L19
, CC L23
, CC L8
, CCR6, paediatric and 13.6 % in adult patients. Early definitive identification of FDB CCR8, CX3CR1, CXC L1
, CXC L13
, ICEBERG, I L17
C, I L1
F10, I L1
F6, I L1
F9, through paediatric hypercholesterolemia screening and genetic testing is SP P1
, CD40LG, XCR1, CC L2
. Further quantitative analysis of genes with crucial for CVD prevention. altered transcriptional activity was performed using cDNA samples of 32  P05
.35-S EH patients and 31 control subjects. The results have confirmed significant Insight into genetic determinants of resting heart rate differences of CC L18
, CX3CR1, CXC L1
, CXC L13
, I L10
, I L13
, and CCR2 expres- S. Ulivi1, M. Mezzavilla1, P. Gasparini1, A. Iorio2, G. Sinagra2; sion level between cases and controls (р=0.001). Relative expression level 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS „Burlo Garofolo“, Trieste, Italy, changes in EH patients were more pronounced for CX3CR1 gene (29.2-fold), 2Cardiovascular Department, Ospedali Riuniti and University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. CXC L13
 (13.8-fold), I L1
F6 (12.9-fold), CD40LG (8-fold), CXC L1
 (7.2-fold). Functional analysis of differentially expressed genes was performed using Gene Ontology Biological Process and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Ge- Recent studies suggested that resting heart rate (RHR) might be an indepen- nomes databases. The genes with altered transcriptional activity in EH pa- dent predictor of cardiovascular mortality and morbidity. Nonetheless, the tients were found to encode for cytokines and cytokine receptors involved interrelation between RHR and cardiovascular diseases is not clear. In order in immune response and inflammation, and their action was mediated via to resolve this puzzle, the importance of genetic determinants of RHR has cytokine signaling pathway. These findings confirm both the hypothesis of been recently suggested, but it needs to be further investigated. implication of blood cells trancriptome in the pathogenesis of EH and the The aim of this study was to estimate the contribution of common genetic hypothesis of inflammatory basis of the development of EH. The study was variations on RHR using Genome Wide Association Study. supported by the RFBR grants 13-04-01561_a, 14-04-01169_a. We performed a Genome Wide Association Study in an isolated population  P05
.33-S cohort of 1737 individuals, the Italian Network on Genetic Isolates - Friuli Application of exome sequencing in differential diagnosis of pediatric Venezia Giulia (INGI-FVG). Moreover, a haplotype analysis was performed. hypertrophic cardiomyopathy A regression tree analysis was run to highlight the effect of each haplotype L. Pezzoli1, C. Lodrini1, M. Sana1, C. Marrone2, D. Marchetti1, A. Lincesso1, K. Migliorati1, combination on the phenotype. A significant level of association (p<5x10-8) M. Iascone1; 1Laboratorio Genetica Medica, AO Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, 2Cardiologia was detected for Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in two genes ex- Pediatrica, AO Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. pressed in the heart: MAM L1
 and CANX. Founding that the three different va- riants of the haplotype, which encompass both genes, yielded a phenotypic correlation. Indeed, a haplotype in homozigosity is significantly associated Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) isE tShHe Gm o2s0t 1co4m |m MonIL mAoNn,o gITenAicL Y |w With W th We l .o Ew Se Hr q Gu .a Ort Rile G of RHR (RHR≤58 bpm). Moreover no significan 1t 1 a 9s- cardiac disorder, usually caused by mutations in sarcomere genes. Little sociation was found between cardiovascular risk factors and the differentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.38-M Novel mutations in the ZI C3
 gene cause X-linked heterotaxy haplotype combinations. Mastermind-like 1 and Calnexin were found to be A. D. Paulussen1, A. Steyls1, F. van Tienen1, R. Lutgens1, I. Krapels1, S. Chocron2, L. associated with RHR. We demonstrated a relation between a haplotype and Boersma1, C. Velter1, Referring clinicians from Europe, B. Smeets1, J. Bakkers2, A. van den the lower quartile of RHR in our populations. Our findings highlight that ge- Wijngaard1; netic determinants of RHR may be implicated in determining cardiovascular 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Utrecht, Netherlands. diseases and could allow a better risk stratification.  P05
.36-M Different genetic background in the clinical onset of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy analyzed by Next-Generation Sequencing Congenital heart defects (CHD) is one of the most common congenital ab- C. Bozzao, S. D. Rubattu, B. M. Musumeci, M. Piane, C. Savio, M. Rapazzotti Onelli, F. Libi, normalities in newborns, affecting almost 1% of the general population and P. Lulli, E. Pennacchini, E. Pagannone, M. Volpe, C. Autore, L. Chessa; is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. A small subset (3%) Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy. of this patient population fails to correctly establish left-right patterning du- ring embryogenesis, resulting in abnormal lateralization of the abdominal and thoracic organs, a clinical phenotype called heterotaxy. As the heart is More than 20 genes have been correlated with Hypertrophic Cardiomyo- the first organ to develop asymmetricZaIlCly3, disturbances in the left-right axis pathy (HCM), making the molecular diagnostic process time consuming, lead to a variety of serious cardiac malformations inZ IhCe3terotaxy. One of the complex and often inconclusive. To better understand the molecular bases first genes linked to heterotaxy was , a zinc transcription factor of the of HCM and to assess the utility of next-generation sequencing (NGS) into GLI superfamily, located on the X-chromosome. The gene is a transcrip- clinical laboratory practice we designed a panel to analyze 17 HCM related tional regulator, based on the ability to activate transcription of target genes genes on PGM Ion Torrent. We selected 70 HCM patients, 35 early onset and to bind DNA. (≤35 years) and 35 late onset (≥65 years), with a well-defined hypertrophic Over the last 10 years we collected aZnICd3 diagnostically tested over 300 pati- phenotype. ents referred to our clinical genetics center with heterotaxy and/or a variety All samples had on average 98% of target regions with coverage higher of heart defects for mutations in the gene. We identified five potentially than 20X, with a mean coverage of 600X. Common variants (MAF>5%) pathogenic mutations, as well as variations in the N-terminal polyalanine- were removed from the analysis, while potential splice variants and novel repeat. The mutations were detected in families with a clear X-linked clinical single nucleotide variManYtBs PwCe3re analysed withM bYiHoi7nformatics pathoTgNenNiTci2- profile. To support pathogenicity ofi nd evitveoc ted mutations we performed seve- ty prediction pCroAgVr3ams. We identified G4 L0
A diMffeYrHe6n,t TpNaNthIo3geMnYeLti2c mutaMtiYoLn3s ral functional assays. We used confocal imaging to detect subcellular locali- (9 novel) in 9 genes: (16/40=40%); (14/40=35%); zation of mutated proteins and the zebra fish model to investigate the (3/40=7.5%); (2/40=5%); and , , and potential laterality and/or cardiac defects of these mutated proteins. (1/40=2.5% each). The mutation detection rate was 9/35 (26%) in the late  P05
.39-S onset and 29/35 (83%) in the early onset group (p<0.0001). Considering Copy Number Polymorphism study in Essential Hypertension only early onset patients with positive family history the detection rate was D. Velayutham, D. Braga, D. Cusi, C. Barlassina, on behalf of HYPERGENES Consortium; >90%. Department of Health Science, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. Our results showed a strong difference in genetic background of HCM pati- ents for age at onset, family history and clinical features of the disease. Ge- netic testing with NGS was reliable and allowed the molecular diagnosis es- Essential Hypertension is a complex trait influenced by multiple suscepti- pecially for cases with early onset and positive family history. These results bility genes interacting with environmental factors. We used 2044 hyper- also demonstrated that an appropriate selection is required for molecular tensive cases and 1872 normotensive controls recruited over many years testing in patients with HCM. across European regions within Hypergenes project and genotyped with  P05
.37-S Illumina-1M arrays. HDA C9
 gene is overexpressed in stroke patients Cases and controls were genotyped together to avoid the batch effect for S. Ferronato1, S. Olivato2, A. Scuro3, C. Patuzzo1, S. Mazzucco2, M. Gomez Lira1; chips and time periods. The Log R ratio of the samples for each SNP was ob- 1Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Neurological, Neuropsychological, tained from Genome Studio and the Copy Number (CN) call was performed Morphological and Movement Sciences, Section of Neurology, University of Verona, in Golden Helix after quality controls. CN was estimated in each sample as Verona, Italy, 3Department of Vascular Surgery, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. a mere signal intensity interval measured at a particular locus. Thorough quality control to refine the signal intensity was essential before CN call. Approximately 9% of the samples uniformly distributed between cases and Aim: HDA C9
 is a class IIa histone deacetylase family member and it regula- controls were removed for signal to noise ratio and waviness. The PCA ana- tes the epigenetic status of histones and therefore gene expression by ca- lysis on wave corrected data doesn’t show demarcation on sex/phenotype, talyzing deacetylation. Risk variant rs11984041 of HDA C9
 gene has been whereas the distinguishable genotyping batches were corrected. Among the demonstrated to be associated with large vessels stroke. HDA C9
 expression 824 segments identified and discretized into 3 state CN, 13 segments were has been correlated with common carotid intima-media thickness, sugge- significantly associated with the phenotype. sting an association of HDA C9
 gene with the atherosclerotic process, by Odds ratio for these segmentsst were calculated and we identified a top com- accelerating atherosclerosis or promoting plaque instability. In this study mon variant around 1kb in 1 intron of LEPRE L1
 gene w-i1t2h an odds ratio of we investigated the expression of HDA C9
 in peripheral blood (PB) of stroke 1.7 for hypertension (95% CI 1.3-1.9, p-value = 3.01 x10 ). This result sug- patients (large vessel and cardioembolic) and healthy controls. Aiming to gested that carriers of that CNP had a 1.7 times higher risk for hypertension understand the mechanism by which the risk allele is associated with large than non-carriers. Further studies are needed to confirm the association of vessel stroke, we also evaluate the effect of rs11984041 polymorphism on this CNP with hypertension in other dataset.  P05
.40-M gene expression. Whole exome sequencing concentrating on the metabolome Methods: HDA C9
 gene expression analysis was performed on 26 athe- in familiar hypertrophic- and dilated cardiomyopathy: a pilot rothrombotic stroke patients, 26 cardioembolic stroke patients, and collaborative Czech study 20 healthy controls by Real Time PCR using Sybr Green. Polymorphism N. Ptákova1, V. Stránecký2,1, M. Kubánek3, A. Krebsová3, L. Piherová2, H. Hartmannová2,1, rs11984041 was genotyped by PCR-RFLP method. K. Hodaňová2,1, J. Kautzner3, M. Macek Jr1, M. Macek Sr1; Results: A significant increase of HDA C9
 gene expression was observed in 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University in Prague-2nd Faculty atherothrombotic and cardioembolic stroke patients compared to healthy of Medicine and University Hospital in Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of controls (1.39±0.68 vs 0.61±0.36; p<0.001; 1.58±1.19 vs 0.60±0.36; Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University Prague -1st Faculty of Medicine and General Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Cardiology, Institute for p<0.001, respectively). Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. The genotyping of 70 individuals showed no gene expression differences between patients carrying CC and CT genotypes. Conclusions: The gene HDA C9
 is overexpressed in stroke patients compa- Hypertrophic- (HCM) or dilated (DCM) cardiomyopathies are associated red to controls. This result indicated that this gene, that can regulate other with the risk of heart failure and sudden cardiac death. Molecular genetic genes implicated in the peripheral inflammatory reaction after stroke can diagnosis contributes to risk stratification in relatives and may allow for represent a new target for the development of therapeutic agents against personalized therapy. Altogether, 35 Czech cases from 13 families (7 HCM ischemic stroke injury. / 6 DCM) with three or more affected individuals were analyzed by whole exome next generation sequencing (NGS) concentrated on the metabolome and utilizing TruSight Exome Gen Set on HiSeq1500 (Illumina). Potential- ly pathogenic gene variants were found in 11/13 families and comprised 120 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, 1IT 7A gL enY e s| W thaW t hW av. eE bS eH enG a. sO soR cG iated with all forms of CM, familiar arryth-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mogenic disease or myopathies (TTN, RYR2, CALR3, MYH 7, TPM1, JPH2, sis. Here, we describe an individual affected with HCM who carries a deleti- DSP, ACT C1
, KCNH2, FLNC, SYN E2
, CASQ2, VCL, PK P2
). Three variants were on of the entire MYBP C3
 gene. detected in MYO1C, JAG1, SYN E1
 that have not been associated with CM, The patient was diagnosed with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyo- thus far. Only 12/17 identified genes are included in the currently available pathy in his mid forties when undergoing assessment for palpitations and targeted TruSight assay. In 3/11 families the potential causative variant was hypertension. Echocardiogram revealed moderately dilated left and right found only in one gene. The combination of two to three pathogenic variants atria with mild mitral regurgitation. There was severe asymmetric left ven- in CM-associated genes were found in 8/11 families. Pathogenic potenti- tricular hypertrophy with interventricular septal hypertrophy. The left ven- al of the identified variants must be substantiated by segregation and/or tricular systolic function was normal with an ejection fraction of 65-70%. RNA/protein analyses. The failure to detect variants in two large families MLPA analysis showed a deletion of all exons of the MYBP C3
 gene. Subse- underscores the limitations of NGS. Nevertheless, our preliminary data sug- quent microarray analysis confirmed this deletion and showed that it ex- gest, that the use of metabolome NGS in complex families may have higher tended both 5’ and 3’ of MYBP C3
 and included 3 additional known OMIM diagnostic yield than targeted approaches in CM.Supported by conceptual morbid genes (DDB2, SL C39
A13 and RAPSN). Unlike MYBP C3
, these addi- research of FNM 64203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and IGA NT13770. tional genes are implicated in autosomal recessive disorders and therefore  P05
.41-S deletions of these genes are not expected to have clinical significance in this Identification of Mexican-specific lipid variants using a novel cross- patient. population GWAS approach A. Ko1,2, R. M. Cantor1, D. Weissglas-Volkov1, E. Nikkola1, P. M. V. L. Reddy1, J. S. Our results suggest that although large copy number variation of HCM-rela- Sinsheimer1, B. Pasaniuc1,3,4, R. Brown4, M. Alvarez1, A. Rodriguez1, R. Rodriguez-Guillen5,6, ted genes would still be considered rare, patients highly suspected of HCM I. C. Bautista5, O. Arellano-Campos5, L. L. Muñoz-Hernández5, V. Salomaa7, J. Kaprio7,8,9, A. may benefit from MLPA analysis if other deleterious variants have not been Jula7, M. Jauhiainen7, M. Heliövaara7, O. Raitakari10,11, T. Lehtimäki12, J. G. Eriksson7,13,14, identified.  P05
.43-S M. Perola7,9,15, K. E. Lohmueller16, M. Rodriguez-Torres5, L. Riba5,6, T. Tusie-Luna5,6, C. A. Aguilar-Salinas5, P. Pajukanta1,2; The c.912_913delTT mutation in MYBP C3
 gene is a founder 1Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, mutation accounting for one-fifth of the Italian patients affected with CA, United States, 2Molecular Biology Institute at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United hypertrophic cardiomyopathy States, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of M. De Bortoli1, C. Calore2, C. Romualdi1, A. Lorenzon1, M. Calore1, G. Poloni1, G. Rizzon2, Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Bioinformatics Interdepartmental A. Ortile2, G. Thiene2, S. Iliceto2, P. Melacini2, A. Rampazzo1; Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas 1Department of Biology, Padua, Italy, 2Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular y Nutrición, Salvador Zubiran, Mexico City, Mexico, 6Instituto de Investigaciones Sciences, Padua, Italy. Biomédicas de la UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico, 7National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 8Department of Public Health, Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 9Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki, Background - Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is considered the most Helsinki, Finland, 10Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 11Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear common cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young people. Over 18 ge- Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 12Department of Clinical chemistry, nes have been associated with the disease. The aim of this study was to eva- Fimlab Laboratories and University of Tampere School of Medicine, Tampere, Finland, luate the clinical characteristics, penetrance and prognosis of HCM patients 13Folkhälsan Research Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 14Department carrying a founder mutation in myosin binding protein C (MYBP C3
) gene. of General Practice and Primary Health Care, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Methods and Results - Ninety seven HCM probands were screened for MYB- 15University of Tartu, Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia, 16Department of Ecology P C3
 mutations. The frameshift mutation c.912_913delTT (p.F305PfsX27) and Evolutionary Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States. was found in 19 (19.5%) patients (14 males and 5 females). Among 81 re- latives belonging to 14 apparently unrelated families, 45 (20 males and 25 females) resulted to be mutation carriers and 29 had HCM (17 males and Mexicans have a higher prevalence of dyslipidemia than Europeans which 12 females). The family haplotype analysis confirmed a common founder causes a serious health problem due to the increased risk for cardiovascular ancestor. disease. However, complex population substructure in this admixed popula- Disease penetrance was incomplete (64.4%) and greater in males than fe- tion leads to a decrease in statistical power hindering genetic research. Con- males (85% versus 48%, p=0.009). Eleven (38%) affected mutation carriers sequently, Mexicans are substantially underrepresented in genomic studies were diagnosed between 30 and 40 years old. Probands carrying this foun- despite their high susceptibility to dyslipidemias. We hypothesized that part der mutation showed a worse prognosis for SCD or aborted SCD (p=0.01) of the increased predisposition is explained by population-specific variants. compared with patients negative for MYBP C3
 mutations. To test our hypothesis, we performed a two-stage cross-population genome- Conclusions - The founder MYBP C3
 mutation carriers have a high probabili- wide association study (GWAS) of hypertriglyceridemia using 19,273 sub- ty to develop the disease between 30 and 40 years of age, with an increased jects of European and Mexican origin to screen for Mexican-specific vari- risk if they are men. They show a significantly reduced survival after the ants. First, we compared the Mexican population with its European ancestry fourth decade of life when compared to patients without MYBP C3
 mutati- population represented by Finns, utilizing Mexican low triglyceride (TG) ons. These findings are of relevant importance for the genetic counseling controls and Finnish low TG controls to screen for variants that differ in fre- and therapy, considering the high frequency and poor prognosis associated quency between the two populations. Subsequently, we included only these with this founder mutation. variants in a Mexican TG case-control GWAS to identify Mexican-specific va-  P05
.44-M riants. Four Mexican-specific variants were discovered and replicated in an MYH7 and MYBP C3
 genetic characterization in Hypertrophic independent Mexican cohort (n=6,159), including signals near the lipoprote- Cardiomyopathy (HCM) in lipase (LPL) and apolipoprotein A5 (APOA5) genes, suggesting that regu- E. Manfredini1, F. Turazza2, M. Frigerio2, G. P. Gesu1, S. Penco1, P. Primignani1; 1S.S. Genetica Medica, Dip. di Medicina di Laboratorio A.O. Niguarda Ca‘ Granda, Milan, lation of the two key TG genes, APOA5 and LPL, play a crucial role in elevated Italy, 2S.C. di Cardiologia 2-Insufficienza Cardiaca e Trapianto, A. De Gasperis, A.O. TGs in Mexicans. We validated the cross-population GWAS results with local Niguarda Ca‘ Granda, Milan, Italy. ancestry analysis, and all replicated variants reside in highly Amerindian- ancestry enriched regions in Mexicans with high TGs, indicating that cross- population GWAS can effectively screen for population-specific variants. In Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common disorder of the heart summary, we present a novel approach, cross-population GWAS, which can characterized by cardiac hypertrophy of variable degree, myocyte disar- be adapted for other admixed populations and different diseases.  P05
.42-M ray and fibrosis and can cause severe disorders as angina, arrhythmias and Whole gene deletion of MYBP C3
 in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy heart failure. HCM affects approximately 1/500 subjects and is an autosomal N. Carson1, J. McGowan-Jordan1, S. Goobie2, S. Conacher2, D. McCarty3, O. Jarinova1; dominant hereditary disease associated with mutations in genes encoding 1Eastern Ontario Regional Genetics Program, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2Medical Genetics proteinMs YoHf 7the coMntYraBcPtCil3e apparatus. As other inherited cardiomMyYoHp7athies, Program of Southwestern Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 3Department of Cardiology, HCM shows marked phenotypic variability, even within families. Mutati- London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada. ons of and genes cover about 50% of cases. The gene (14q11.2), encoding the heavy chain of β-myosin protein, was the first gene whose mMutYaBtiPoCn3s have been associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by left ventricular and is responsible for about 25% of all currently known pathogenic variati- hypertrophy in the absence of a predisposing cardiovascular condition. Pa- ons. The gene (11p11.2) consists of 35 exons encoding the myosin thogenic variants in 12 genes that encode proteins of the sarcomere have binding protein-CM, wYBhPoCse3 cardiac isoform consists of 1274 amino acids. been implicated in HCM. Most of the pathogenic variants act in a dominant Here we report the data collected by our Unit since 2012. We tested 52 pa- negative fashion. However loss of function (haploinsufficiency) is the most tients and foMuYnHd 7 causative mutations in 11 affected subjects (21% common disease mechanism for pathogenic variants in MYBP C3
 suggesting mE aS H plaG a2 r0 o1 le4 | M CMIL pA atN ho, gI eT nA e-LY |o Wf caWseWs);. EsiSx HmuGta.OtioRnGs are already described in literature while five r 1e 2su 1lt that large deletions of the MYBP C3
 gene y y in H novel ones. genetic testing led to the identification of seven differentABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Center for Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University mutations in 7/34 patients (20,6%), 3 are novel mutations. Search for cau- Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Radboud sative mutations is an integral part of the HCM diagnosis. The finding of a University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5Department of Clinical causative mutation in a patient, permits the identification of family mem- Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. bers who may have the disease in an asymptomatic way or who may deve- lop disorders in the future and may in turn transmit the mutation to their offspring.  P05
.45-S Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a multi-systemic autosomal dominant connec- Semiconductor (Ion Torrent) massive parallel sequencing of the main tive tissue disorder caused by mutations in the FBN1 (fibrillin-1) gene, but Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy genes based on two tubes multiplex approximately 10% of MFS cases remain genetically unsolved. Here, we re- amplification of DNA pools port a new FBN1 mutation in an MFS family that had remained negative J. Gómez, J. Rodríguez-Reguero, C. Morís, E. Coto; after extensive molecular genomic DNA FBN1 testing, including denaturing Hospital Universitario Central De Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC), Sanger sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and micro-array analysis for copy number variation. In addition, four other aneurysm-linked At least 30 different genes have been linked to Hypertrophic Cardiomyopa- genes were screened for mutations by Sanger sequencing, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, thy (HCM), with MYBP C3
 and MYH7 accounting for most of the mutations. SMAD3 and ACTA2, without any result. Linkage analysis in the family re- Due to the large size of these genes, Sanger-sequencing of single amplicons vealed a large linked region on chromosome 15 which was confirmed by is labor-intensive and expensive. Next generation sequencing (NGS) could microsatellite analysis. Cultured proband fibroblasts and subsequent cDNA facilitate the genetic screening of thMe HYH C7
M-MgeYnBePsC i3n lTaNrgNeT c2ohToNrtNsI. 3OuArC pTuCr1- sequencing revealed a double peak pattern at the junction of exon 56 and TpoNsNeC w1aMs YtoL 2deMsiYgLn3ate andT PvMal1idate a procedure for sequencing the 9 most 57. Sanger sequencing of intron 56 revealed a deep intronic point mutation commonly mutateAd mgepnliesesq i;n HCM ( , , , , , generating a new splice donor site (c.6872-961A>G; ENST00000316623). , , , and ), based on two-tubes multiplex amplificati- Together with an existing cryptic splice acceptor site, this mutation results on of DNAIo-pno Toolsrr (ent 176 primer-pairs covering 15,690 bp, 98,62% in the integration of a 90 bp pseudo-exon between exons 56 and 57 contai- of the target coding sequence) followed by semiconductor array sequencing ning a stop codon and causing nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Although with the Personal Genome Machine (PGM; Life Technologies). more than 90% of FBN1 mutations can be identified with regular molecular We created a pool with DNA from 13 patients previously Sanger-sequenced testing at the genomic level, deep intronic mutations will be missed and re- for the coding exons plus at least 5 intronic flanking nucleotides of the nine quire cDNA sequencing or whole genome sequencing. genes. Each patient was heterozygous for a unique rare variant (including a  P05
.48-M small deletion); each unique allele (control variant) was thus diluted 1/26 Compound-heterozygous Marfan syndrome? iTnosrirdeen tt hSeu pitoeol. We sequenced the DNA-pool in a medium capacity Ion chip D. Haziri, L. Risom, M. Dunø, B. Rode Diness; Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, 316 (semiconductor 100 Mb) array, and the data was analyzed with the Denmark. software optimized to detect insertion/deletion nucleotide changes. We successfully identified all the 13 control variants (including the indels). In conclusion, we developed a NGS protocol for the main HCM genes. Introduction FBN1 The multiplex amplification of DNA pools would reduce the time and cost of Marfan syndrome is an autosomal-dominant condition oftFeBn Nca1used by mu- screening these genes at a population scale.  P05
.46-M tations in the fibrilllin-1 ( ) gene. Here we report a family where the Role of genetic testing in diagnosis and management of idiopathic proband is compound-heterozygous for two mutations in . ventricular fibrillation cases Case E. Mastantuono1, B. Beckmann2, R. Insolia3, F. Dagradi4, P. Lichtner1, T. Wieland1, A. The proband (II:1) was on suspicion of Marfan syndrome at 21 years of age. Ghidoni3,4, T. Strom1, S. Kääb2,5, P. Schwartz4, T. Meitinger1,5,6, L. Crotti1,4,3; An aortic dilation was found at age 17, during clinical investigation for rheu- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, matoid arthritis. Family history was ambiguous: His father was operated for 2University Hospital Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Department of Medicine I, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, an aortic aneurism at age 30, aFllBegNe1d;ly caused by endocarditis. Sequencing Pavia, Italy, 4IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of using an NGS panel for Marfan and Marfan-like syndromes was undertaken. Genetic Origin and Laboratory of Cardiovascular Genetics, Milan, Italy, 5Munich Heart Two mutations were found in one previously reported as causative Alliance, Munich, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universitat for Marfan syndrome, the other novel. Results of family investigation and Munchen, Munich, Germany. clinical findings are reported in table 1. Interpretation Compound heterozygousity has previously been reported in Marfan syndro- Introduction: In approximately 5%-10% of the survivors of sudden cardiac me. Neither of the two mutations found are present in ESP, nor found among death no underlying cardiac disease is identified and consequently the event 2000 Danish exomes. In the present case we find it more likely that the pre- is classified as idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF). The genetic etiology viously reported supposed pathogenic mutation found in I:2 is of no/little of IVF remains mostly obscure and current consensus statements recom- phenotypical consequence. It was originally found in an isolated case of aor- mend the genetic screening only in presence of clear clinical indications. tic dissection where no further details were given. The involvedin a msiliincoo acid Methods: Using whole-exome sequencing (Illumina HiSeq 2000) we mole- is not evolutionary conserved. Individual I:2 is without clinical symptoms of cularly investigated 2 Italian unrelated infants with IVF together with the Marfan syndrome at age 55. The novel c.7694G>A mutation is pre- unaffected parents and 3 affected members of a German family with history dicted to be likely pathogeFnBiNc 1and segregates with the clinical phenotype. of sudden unexpected deaths below age 40. Results: In one infant (2 yo) we Medical Individual Number Mutation Clinical features Diagnosis identified a de novo missense variant in RYR2, the main gene responsible for history Aortic cathecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT). The avai- dissection at Marfan lable clinical data were not sufficient to make the diagnosis, as the stress Marfanoid face, c.7694G>A; age 36 syndrome test, the leading clinical tool in CPVT diagnostic process, is not feasible in Father I:1 p.Cys2565Tyr wrist sign, arm-span Childhood according to infancy. In the second infant (4 months), we detected a de novo missense (novel) to height ratio surgery revised Ghent 1,05 variant in the PARN gene and the biological plausibility of this result is cur- for pectus criteria rently under investigation. In the German family we detected in all affected carinatium. c.4727T>C; members a novel frameshift mutation in the desmoplakin gene, associated p.Met1576Thr with ARVC with LV involvement (left-dominant arrhythmogenic cardiomyo- Mother I:2 Normal Healthy (previously pathy, LDAC). As a matter of fact this finding allowed a better management reported) and follow-up of affected members. Conclusion: Our approach suggests that Marfanoid face, a target screening for channelopathy and cardiomyopathy genes could be c.7694G>A; wrist sign, Marfan indicated in those IVF cases in which a complete clinical and familial eva- p.Cys2565Tyr asymmetric chest, syndrome Proband II:1 pes planus, myopia Aortic dilation according to luation is not feasible. c.4727T>C;  P05
.47-S (-7,5 bilaterally), revised Ghent p.Met1576Thr FBN1 deep intronic mutations: Can they explain the molecularly striae criteria unresolved Marfan cases? Height 200 cm E. Gillis1, M. Kempers2, S. Salemink2, J. Timmermans3, E. C. Cheriex4, S. C. A. M. Bekkers4, E. Fransen1, C. E. M. De Die-Smulders5, B. L. Loeys1,2, L. Van Laer1;  P05
.49-S 122 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Several loci enriched in lower frequency variants are associated Belgium, 12Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital San Pedro de Alcántara, Cáceres, Spain, to risk factor for metabolism and cardiovascular diseases in 4,000 13Center for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, Italian isolated individuals 14Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), Brussels, Belgium. M. Traglia1, M. Cocca2, J. Huang3, Y. Memari3, C. F. Sala1, C. Masciullo1, C. Barbieri1, P. D‘Adamo2, P. Gasparini2, N. Soranzo3, D. Toniolo1; 1Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Research Institute, Milano, Italy, Microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or mental 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health–IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Wellcome retardation syndrome (MCLMR, OMIM 152950) is a rare autosomal domi- Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom. nant disorder with variable expressivity. It is characterized by mild-to-seve- re microcephaly, often associated with developmental delay, ocular defects and lymphedema, usually on the dorsum of the feet. It can be sporadic or The main strength of genetic isolated populations is the enrichment in inherited. So far, 25 families (46 patients) have been described to carry a low frequency variants in respect to the general population. To date they mutation in KIF11. This gene encodes a homotetrameric motor kinesin, EG5. have been used in large meta-analyses to highlight genetic association of Members of this protein family are involved in the establishment of a bipo- common variants with several complex traits. Thanks to next-generation lar spindle during cell mitosis, in chromosome positioning and in centro- sequencing approaches we are now able to map population-specific low- some separation. EG5 inhibition impairs endothelial cell proliferation and frequency variants. migration, and angiogenesis. We tested a series of 23 unreported MCLMR The Italian Network of Genetics Isolates (INGI) collects > 4,000 genotyped index patients for KIF11 and found 14 mutations, 12 of which are novel. individuals from several isolated populations along Italy sampled for a large We detected a mutation in all 7 familial cases and 7 of the 16 sporadic pati- set of obesity and cardiovascular related traits. The whole Italian cohort has ents. The inherited mutations were found in an additional 12 family mem- been imputed to UK10k sequenced reference set to highlight rare variants bers. We subsequently reviewed the clinical phenotypes of all the patients associations for ~ 30 traits in common that affect metabolism: several popu- with a KIF11 mutation, including those already published (n=46+26=72). lation-specific associated LOCI were enriched in rare variants, 33 suggestive Microcephaly in frequency was present in at least 94%, eye anomalies in LOCI were shared in 2 or more cohorts and most of UK10k outcomes were 69%, mental retardation in 68% and lymphedema in 53% of patients. Three replicated by Italian cohorts. mutation carriers are unaffected. We observed 14 de novo cases within 39 A first random subset of 110 Italian isolated individuals was sequenced by index patients (36%). As the remaining sporadic patients may be mosaic, a low-coverage approach: 39% were rare variants, 22% were private SNPs KIF11 mutations likely cause the majority, if not all, of MCLMR.  P05
.52-M and 14% were population-specific variants. Most of lower-frequency SNPs Next-generation sequencing as a diagnostic tool in sudden match with 1000GP and UK10k called variants but many are population spe- unexplained death victims and patients with a cardiac disease cific. To further enrich in lower frequency variants and design a Southern C. L. Hertz1, S. L. Christiansen1, L. Ferrero-Miliani1, S. L. Fordyce1, A. G. Holst2, R. Frank- Europe reference panel with, ~ 1,000 samples were randomly selected from Hansen1, H. Bundgaard2, N. Morling1; each isolated cohort and are being typed by low-coverage whole-genome 1Section of Forensic Genetics, Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Health and sequencing and high-coverage exome-sequencing. The preliminary results Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2The Unit for w  P0
il 5l .b 5e 0 p -Mresented. Inherited Cardiac Diseases, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. Differentially expressed miRNAs in the hepatic acute phase response S. W. Lukowski, R. J. Fish, M. Neerman-Arbez; Objective University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is responsible for a large proportion of deaths Understanding gene regulation in the cardiovascular system provides a in young individuals. After routine post-mortem investigations, many cases source of potential cardiovascular disease (CVD) mediators and therapeutic are still unexplained. Implementation of genetic investigations in forensic targets. It may also give functional evidence for associations between gene- medicine may increase the diagnostic rate – not least in sudden unexplained tic variants and CVD. The link between inflammation and CVD is well esta- death (SUD). With next generation sequencing (NGS), genetic analysis has blished and Acute Phase Proteins (APPs) of the innate immune system are become faster and more efficient, enhancing the outcome. The purpose of recognized CVD markers. Changes in the expression of APPs are primarily the study was to explore the yield of genetic analysis using NGS in forensic due to altered hepatic expression in response to circulating inflammatory pMaetthhoolodgsy a anndd r teos ucoltmspare the genetic findings to routinely diagnosed pa- cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6). Whereas cytokines are rapidly cle- tients. ared following induction of the Acute Phase Response (APR), the expressi- on of APPs is maintained for several days and is diagnostically useful. Mi- Genetic investigation was performed in 44 unrelated individuals; 15 foren- croRNAs (miRNAs) also show potential as CVD biomarkers since many are sic SUD cases and 29 unrelated patients diagnosed with channelopathies. stable in the circulation and their expression is altered in acute myocardial In-solution targeted sequencing capture probes were custom designed by infarction and cancer. Roche NimbleGen, including all exons of 31 genes, and sequenced on the To determine whether miRNAs are involved in modulating the expression Illumina MiSeq. Larger deletions and insertions in five genes were investi- of specific APPs in the APR, we performed RNAseq on small RNAs in HepG2 gated with multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Of the SUD cells, and human and mouse primary hepatocytes stimulated with IL-6 for cases, 21% were found to have a probably pathogenic variant. The corre- 0, 6 and 24h. Our data revealed 21 differentially expressed miRNAs upon sCpoonncdluinsgio hnit-ratio in the patient cohort was 37%. Two patients (7%) had IL-6 stimulation across all samples (10 up-regulated, 11 down-regulated), large deletions. 13 of which are known circulating miRNAs. Interestingly, although no dif- ferentially expressed miRNAs were shared between the three hepatic cell By NGS, it was possible to detect a probably pathogenic single nucleotide types, groups of functionally related target genes (SOCS, ADAMTS, MMP, in- variant in one fifth of the SUD cases, disposing to a cardiac disease. In con- terleukins) are common to all three and are involved in cytokine signaling, trast, almost half of the patients were found to carry a probably pathogenic coagulation, hypoxia and angiogenesis. Identifying new APR markers may variant or larger deletion. Genetic investigation with NGS can be used as a provide important diagnostic tools and enhance our understanding of this d Pi 0a 5g .n 5o 3s -t Sic tool in both a forensic and clinical setting. c Po 0m 5.p 5l 1ex -S system. PRDM16 and MIB1 mutations are rarely identified in nonsyndromic No locus heterogeneity in familial microcephaly with or without left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or mental retardation syndrome Y. M. Hoedemaekers, L. G. Boven, M. P. van den Berg, R. A. de Boer, J. D. H. Jongbloed, P. M. J. Schlögel1, A. Mendola1, E. Fastré1, K. Devriendt2, T. J. L. de Ravel2, H. Van Esch2, F. J. van Tintelen; Cristofoli2, I. Casteels3, P. Vasudevan4, M. Soller5, M. Villanueva6, A. Singer7, K. Fieggen8, M. UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. Lipson9, K. Claes10, F. Meire11, I. A. Carrera12, L. Boon1,13, P. Brouillard1, M. Vikkula1,14; Background 1de Duve Institute (Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy (LVNC) is a Ophthalmology, St Rafael University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical subtype of cardiomyopathy characterised by an excessively thickened endo- Genetics, University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 5Department of cardial layer with deep intertrabecular recesses. It is familial in the majority Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 6Hospital General de Niños of cases, with involvement of mainly sarcomeric genes. Recently mutations „Pedro de Elizalde“, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Barzilai Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel, 8Division of Human Genetics, University of Cape Town, in MIB1 were associated with LVNC while the LVNC in 1p36 deletion syn- Cape Town, South Africa, 9Medical Genetics, Kaiser Permanente, Sacramento, CA, drome was attributed to the PRDM16 gene. The MIB1 gene is involved in United States, 10Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, the NOTCH pathway, regulating endocytosis of Notch ligands. PRDM16 regu- 11Department of Ophthalmology, Queen Fabiola Children’s University Hospital, Brussels, lates leMuektahmoodgse nanesdi sr, epsaulalttsogenesis, neurogenesis and brown fat develop- ment and is expressed in both embryonic and adult left ventricular myocar- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 123 dium. To establish the contribution of PRDM16 andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MIB1 mutations to nonsyndromic LVNC we analysed the coding regions of variants using direct sequencing. The utilized novel technology allows si- PRDM16 and MIB1 in a cohort of 41 nonsyndromic LVNC patients (39 adults gnificant cost reduction and rapid turnaround time from sample to clinical and 2 children). In PRDM16, we identified 5 synonymous variants, and five interpretation. Conclusion: These results demonstrate that the developed missense variants. Two of these missense variants were found in 40 and 14 high-throughput targeted OS-Seq platform for PAH meets the technical cri- patients respectively and are considered single nucleotide polymorphisms teria of clinical diagnostics and is a cost-efficient tool in clinical research.  P05
.56-M (SNPs). Two variants are considered likely pathogenic (c.89C>T; p.A30V and Clinical and molecular characterization of Chilean patients with c.1882G>A; pC.oDn6c2l8uNsi)o annsd one was classified as a variant of unknown signi- Noonan Syndrome- multiple lentigines ficance (VOUS: c.2290G>A; p.V764M). We did not find any mutations in the M. I. Aracena1,2, C. Mellado1,3, M. Lagos4, X. Barraza5, N. Unanue6, E. Selman7, L. Vega7, T. MIB1 gene. We identified two likely pathogenic variants and Aravena3, E. Romeo4; one VOUS in the PRDM16 gene, supporting previous evidence of mutations 1División Pediatría Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2Unidad in the PRDM16 gene as a rare cause for LVNC. The MIB1 gene did not contri- Genética- Hospital Dr. Luis Calvo Mackenna, Santiago, Chile, 3Hospital Dr. Sótero de Río, bute to LVNC in our cohort. Santiago, Chile, 4Laboratorio de Biología Molecular y citogenética, Departamento de  P05
.54-M Laboratorios Clínicos, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 5Hospital Cardiovascular malformations caused by NOTCH1 mutations do not de Valdivia, Valdivia, Chile, 6Hospital Paula Jaraquemada, Santiago, Chile, 7Hospital Dr. keep left: data on 52 mutation carriers Guillermo Grant Benavente, Concepción, Chile. I. M. B. H. van de Laar1, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse2, Y. J. Vos2, R. M. F. Berger2, K. D. Lichtenbelt3, J. S. Klein Wassink-Ruiter2, P. A. van der Zwaag2, G. J. Du Marchie Sarvaas2, J. M. A. Verhagen1, K. Bergman2, K. M. Bilardo2, I. M. E. Frohn-Mulder1, J. H. P. Janssen4, J. Introduction: Noonan Syndrome-Multiple Lentigines ( NS-ML) is a rare au- W. Roos- Hesselink1, K. Y. van Spaendonck-Zwarts5, J. P. van Melle2, R. M. W. Hofstra1, M. W. Wessels1; tosomal dominant disorder, and one of the conditions known as RASopa- 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2University of Groningen, Groningen, thies. PTPN11, RAF1, and BRAF are the genes known to be associated with Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Sint Anna NS-ML. Sequence analysis of coding exons 7, 12, and 13 of PTPN11 detects Hospital, Geldrop, Netherlands, 5Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. missense mutations in about 90% of individuals tested. Background: Objective: The aim of this study was to characterize the clinical and molecu- lar features of Chilean patients with NS-ML. Methods: collaborative and de- Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV), congenital aortic valve stenosis scriptive study. Results: thirteen patients have been confirmed molecularly. (AVS), coarctation of the aorta (COA) and hypoplastic left heart syndrome This includes two familial cases. The age at diagnosis ranged from 20 days to (HLHS) are part oNf OthTeC Hsp1e ctrum of left-sided ventricular outflow tract ob- 33 years old. In six patients including one of the family cases, the recurrent structions (LVOTO) and aNreO ThCigHh1ly heritable congenital heart malformati- mutation p.Tyr279Cys in exon 7 was identified. They showed interfamilial ons. Mutations in Paartei eansstos caiantde dm weitthho LdVsO:TO, but since its discove- and intrafamiliar variable expressivity. Four patients have mutations in exon ry in 2006 only eight new mutations havNeO bTeCeHn1 id entified, mostly in 12, three with the recurrent mutation p.Thr468Met and one with an infre- sporadic LVOTO patients. In 42N7 OLTVCOHT1O probands cuently reported one, p.Ala461Thr. Two different mutations were identified (204 BAV/AVS, 135 COA, 75 HLHS, 13 other) mutation analysis in exon 13, in three patients. The uncommon mutation p.Gln510Glu, was was performed. Also faNmOiTlyC Hm1embers of probandsR weistuh lts mutations found in two patients, both with prenatal cardiac manifestations, and a Hy- were sNcOreTeCnHe1d for the mutation. We report on the clinical characteristics pertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) rapidly progressive. The other mutation and natural history of mutation carriers. NO: TTChHir1teen patho- at codon 510 is a Gln510Pro. Discussion: The diagnosis of this condition genic mutations were detected in 427 (3%) LVOTO probands (8% may be challenging because clinical features overlap with other RASopa- of familial cases and 1% of sporadic cases). In total 52 (obligate) thies. Although NS-ML seems to be rare, we have diagnosed a considerable mutation carriers were identified. The phenotype included not only LVO- number of patients. We developed a high index of suspicion particularly in TO, but a wide variety of cardiovascular malformations (CVM) including patients with HCM. Eventually specific mutations could be predictor of ad- cCoonnoctlruusniocanl hNeOaTrtC mH1a lformations (12%), septal defects (8%), and thoracic verse cardiac events. aortic aneurysms (8%). The disease seems highly penetrant at adult age. Grant sponsor: Pediatric Division , Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile  P05
.57-S : mutations are present in 8% of familial LVOTO. The The SMAD-binding domain of SKI: a hotspot for de novo mutations phenotypic spectrum is expanded and includes a wide variety of heart mal- causing Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome formations, indicating an effect of these mutationNs OoTnC nHe1u ral crest derived D. Schepers1, A. J. Doyle2,3, G. Oswald2, E. Sparks2, L. Myers2, P. J. Willems4, S. Mansour5, cells and epithelial to mesenchymal transition. The high penetrance at adult M. A. Simpson6, H. Frysira7, A. Maat-Kievit8, R. Van Minkelen8, J. M. Hoogeboom8, G. R. age highlights the importance of genetic testing of for early diagno- Mortier1, H. Titheradge9, L. Brueton9, L. Starr10, Z. Stark11, C. Ockeloen12, C. Marques sis, not only in LVOTO families but in a variety of familial congenital CVM. Lourenco13, E. Blair14, E. Hobson15, J. Hurst16, I. Maystadt17, A. Destrée17, K. M. Girisha18, M.  P05
.55-S Miller19, H. C. Dietz2,3, B. Loeys1, L. Van Laer1; Targeted oligonucleotide-selective sequencing for diagnostics of 1Center for Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of pulmonary arterial hypertension Antwerp and Antwerp Univerity Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2McKusick-Nathans S. Vattulainen1, J. Aho2, J. Tallila3, M. Gentile3, M. Sankelo4, T. Laitinen5, S. Myllykangas6,3, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, T. Alastalo1,3, J. Koskenvuo2,3; MD, United States, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 1Children’s Hospital Helsinki, Pediatric Cardiology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki 4GENDIA, GENetic DIAgnostic Network, Antwerp, Belgium, 5SW Thames Regional University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Research Centre of Applied and Genetics Service, St George’s, University of London, London, United Kingdom, Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 3Blueprint 6Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Division of Genetics and Molecular Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Medicine, King’s College London School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom, Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Division of Medicine, Department of Pulmonary diseases 7Department of Medical Genetics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens and allergology, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Turku, Finland, Medical School, Athens, Greece, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, 6Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 10Clinical Genetics, Munroe-Meyer Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, Nebraska Medical Center, Rationale: The genetic basis of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertensi- Omaha, NE, United States, 11Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 12Department of Human Genetics, on (iPAH) is well recognized but still rarely utilized in diagnostic setting. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 13Department Hundreds of mutations in coding exons and introns of, at least, seven genes of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, University of Sao Paulo, Sao have been reported to associate with idiopathic and familial forms of PAH. Paulo, Brazil, 14Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Comprehensive genetic testing can improve diagnostics, prognostics and Kingdom, 15Department of Clinical Genetics, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United treatment optimization of the index patient but it also allows effective scree- Kingdom, 16Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, ning of asymptomatic family members, which is a basis for well-informed United Kingdom, 17Center for Human Genetics, Institute for Pathology and Genetics genetic counseling. Methods: We adopted the novel oligonucleotide-selecti- (IPG), Gosselies, Belgium, 18Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India, 19Department of Cardiology, All Childrens ve sequencing (OS-Seq) and developed a custom data analysis and interpre- Hospital, Florida, FL, United States. tation pipeline to identify pathogenic base substitutions and insertions and deletions in seven genes associated with PAH: BMPR2, BMPR1B, ACVR L1
, ENG, SMAD9, CAV1 and KCNK3. Our sequencing panels covered >99% of Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is a rare, systemic connective tissue the targeted regions with >15x coverage. We validated our diagnostic pa- disorder characterized by craniofacial, skeletal and cardiovascular mani- nels using reference HapMap samples with known genomes and mutations. festations that show significant overlap with the features observed in the Results: The sensitivity of OS-Seq to detect base substitutions was >99% Marfan (MFS) and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS). A distinguishing observa- and specificity was >99.9%. The accuracy to detect short INDELs was 100%. tion in SGS patients is the presence of intellectual disability, although not We then analyzed 22 iPAH patient samples to identify known and novel va- 124 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, aITllA pLatYie n| tWs iWn tWhis. EseSrHiesG p.OresReGnt this finding. Recently, SGS was shown to riants potentially associating with the disease. We confirmed all candidateABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P05
.60-M be due to mutations in the SKI gene, encoding the oncoprotein SKI, a re- Are ALOX5AP SNPs a risk or protective factor for Stroke? pressor of TGFβ activity. Here we report eight recurrent and three novel SKI A. Papapostolou, K. Spengos, E. Fylaktou, M. Poulou, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, E. Kanavakis, M. mutations in eleven SGS patients. All were heterozygous missense mutati- Tzetis; ons located in the R-SMAD binding domain, except for one novel in-frame Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece. deletion affecting the DHD domain. Adding our new findings to the existing ALOX5AP data clearly reveals a mutational hotspot, with 74% (23 out of 31) of the hitherto described unrelated patients having mutations in a stretch of five (5-lipoxygenase)A hLaOsX b5AeePn recognized as a susceptibility gene for SKI-residues (from p.(Ser31) to p.(Pro35)). This implicates that the initial stroke. Using a case-control design, we sequenced the whole coding and ad- molecular testing could be focused on mutation analysis of the first half of joining intronic regions of to study the role of SNPs and their inter- exon 1 of SKI. As the majority of the known mutations are located in the R- play with other risk factors in Greek patients with stroke. 277 patients were SMAD binding domain of SKI, our study further emphasizes the importance included and classified by the Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment o Pf 0 T 5G .5F 8β - Msignaling in the pathogenesis of SGS. (TOAST): large vessel disease (63), intracerebral hemorrhage (33), car- Mutations in the TSPY L1
 gene are not associated with sudden infant dioembolic origin (14), undetermined (38), other causes (12) and lacunes death syndrome in a Swiss cohort of deceased infants (117). The mean age of patients was 58.9±14.64, comprising 191 males. A S. Schubert1, C. Haas2, C. Bartsch2, M. Mirshekarnejad1, S. Kohrs1, I. Röttinger1, M. control group of 210 subjects, ethnicity, sex and age matched, with no stro- Stuhrmann1, C. Scholz1, J. Schmidtke1; ke history were also genotyped. Risk factors (hyperlipidemia, hypertension, 1Institute for Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute atrial fibrillation, migraine, CAD, diabetes, smoking and alcohol consumpti- of Legal Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. on) were assessed as confounding factors. SNPs rs4769055, rs3803277 and rs202068154 showed significantly different (p<0.01) frequencies between patients and controls. More specifically the genotype frequencies of AA (mi- Background: Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is currently the major nor allele) of rs4769055, of genotype CA (A minor allele) of rs3803277 and cause of an unexpected and unexplained death of infants in the first year of of AC genotype (C minor allele) of rs20i2n0 s6il8ic1o54 were significantly higher lifetime in industrialized countries. Besides TeSnPvYirLo1nmental factors also ge- (p<0.01) in controls than in patients. AAllL tOhXe 5aAbPove SNPs are located in intro- netic factors are supposed as risk factors for SIDS. Notably, a frameshift mu- nic regions of the gene and according to programs EX_SKIP and HSF tation (c.457dupG, p.Glu153Glyfs*17) in the gene has been reported they affect splicing of exons 1 and 2 of . The results were indicative as disease causing for an autosomal recessive sudden infant death with dys- of a protective role of the three SNPs either in homozygosity or heterozy- genesis of the testes syndrome (SIDDT) in an Old Order Amish community gosity for MAF. However, confounding factors as mentioned above have a in Pennsylvania. Because the Amish commuTnSiPtyY Lw1as originally founded in strong impact on stroke occurrence and outweighed the protective role of the German speaking part of Switzerland, including people from Alsace and the above SNPs.  P05
.61-S Palatinate, a mutation analysis of the entire gene was performed in Postmortem genetic testing in a series of 36 young patients after a cohort of 166 SIDS cases originating from the Swiss population around sudden cardiac death Zurich in comparison to 163 controls. I. Marey1, V. Fressart1, C. Rambaud2, E. Gandjbakhch1, A. Mallet1, E. Le Boette1, C. Bordet1, Eight known SNP variants (rs61746509, rs3828743, rs3749895, G. Lorin de la Grandmaison2, P. Richard1, P. Charron1; rs61746508, rs56100880, rs3749894, rs45490498 and rs9400897) were 1Centre de référence pour les maladies cardiaques héréditaires, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié detected in the analyzed SIDS cohort, none of which was significantly as- Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2Service d’anatomie pathologique, CHU Raymond Poincaré, sociated with SIDS. In this context TwSeP YalLs1o found two potentially disease Garches, France. causing amino acid substitutions in three deceased girls. One STIDSPSY aLf1fected girl was heterozygous for the novel variant cI.n1 0s6ilCic>oG (p.Leu36Val) and two affected girls were heterozygous for the rare known sub- The incidence of sudden cardiac death (SCD) increases with age in parallel stitution rs140756663 (c.1098C>A, p.Phe366Leu). analyses pre- with coronary’s diseases’ prevalence. In young persons and athletes, SCD dicted rather non-pathogenic effects for pPhe366Leu and p.Leu36Val, alt- occurs in half of the cases, in the setting of genetically transmitted disorders hough protein features might be affected. The founder nonsense mutation such as cardiomyopathies. Molecular testing performed after necropsy may c.457dupG (p.Glu153Glyfs*17)T wSPaYsL n1ot detected in our analyzed SIDS co- help management of families but experience in this area appears very limi- hort of Swiss origin. ted. The aim is to report our experience of post mortem molecular testing Conclusions: Mutations in the gene are not associated with SIDS in after SCD and necropsy. We studied 36 patients <40 years who died sud- Swiss infants. denly with a suspected diagnosis of cardiomyopathy, established either after  P05
.59-S autopsy or known before death , with 6 dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 12 SMAD3-related aortic aneurysms & dissections: A new physical hypertrophic (HCM), 2 HCM/DCM , 1 restrictive (CMR), 14 arrhythmogenic finding in a large affected family W. S. Meschino1,2, L. Collins3, K. L. Boycott4, C. F. Morel5, J. So5,6; right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), 1 HMC and left ventricular non- 1North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, compaction. Fifteen mutations have been identified in sarcomeric or desmo- ON, Canada, 3Porcupine Health Unit, Timmins, ON, Canada, 4Childrens Hospital of somal or lamin genes. The identification of these mutations had significant Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 5University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, impact: assessing right diagnosis in a doubtful case (HCM without LVH), 6Lakeridge Health, Oshawa, ON, Canada. modifying the appropriate diagnosis in another case (HCM and not DCM), Objective SMAD3 providing guidance for genetic counselling and predictive genetic testing in Methods relatives in all situations. Technical, ethical and legal issues may however SMAD3: To expand the phenotype of -related aortic aneurysm be encountered and will be discussed. This study is one of the first series and dissections by investigation of a large family. : Genetic testing of post-mortem molecular testing after SCD which suggests the feasibility, of was undertaken. Physical features of two male first cousins pre- efficiency and the benefit of the approach to improve the management of sentingR teos au lGtesnetics Clinic with thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection were families. Postmortem molecular testing must take its place in the strategy compared followed by testing and clinical characterization of tShMeA eDx3tended of family care after SCD, even if a cardiomyopathy is suspected at necropsy, family. : Molecular testing confirmed that the proband and his cou- since genetic findings provide additional information.  P05
.62-M sin were heterozygous carriers of a deletion of exons 4-12 in . Each Mutation detection rate and -characteristics in thoracic aortic had several features typically seen in Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz syn- aneurysm (TAA) related disorders: results from next generation drome (marfanoid habitus, ocular hypertelorism in one case and mild mar- sequencing (NGS) panel testing fanoid craniofacial features and excessive striae in the other). One feature L. Campens1, L. Muino Mosquera1, B. Callewaert1, M. Baetens1, M. Renard1, A. De Paepe1, J. not reported in either condition was the presence of multiple small, punc- De Backer1,2, P. J. Coucke1, F. Malfait3; tate, palmar keratoses. Additional members of the kindred were examined 1Center for Medical Genetics Gent, Gent, Belgium, 2Cardiology Department, University and tested. Eight more mutation carriers were identified. Of the adults 39 Hospital Gent, Gent, Belgium, 3University Hospital Gent, Gent, Belgium. years or older who carried the mutation, all 5 had multiple punctate palmar Background: keratoses. For the 5 carriers aged 13-22 years, one had definite palmar kera- toses. None of the mutation-negative patients had palmar keratoses. There Targeted gene testing for Heritable Thoracic Aneurysms and wCoans cclounssioidnesrable variability in age at onset for aneurysm/dissection and Dissections (H-TAD) is compromised due to overlapping clinical features presence of non-vascular features. A summary of feSaMtuArDe3s will be presented. and the identification of mutations in non-syndromic patients. Therefore : We conclude that punctate palmar keratoses may be a pre- panel testiMnge othf omdusl:t iple genes has now emerged as the preferred approach. viously unreported feature of some families with -related aortic an- So far, no data on mutation detection rate with this technique have been eurysms and dissections, and a useful sign E in S d His Gti n 2g 0ui 1sh 4in |g M SM ILA AD3 N-r ,e Ila Tt Aed L Y |r eWpoWrteWd.. ESHG.ORWGe implemented NGS based screening after targ 1e 2te 5d cases from other genes associated with aortic aneurysm/dissection.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index FBN1 TGFBR1/2,SMAD3 TGFβ2 ACTA2 CO L3
A1) PCR enrichment of the 7 most common H-TAD-associated genes ( , 24 variations (22%). To estimate their pathogenicity, each variation was , , and . Between November 2012 looked up in dbSNPi1n3 s7il, icitos frequency was compared using data from the and December 2013, 141 samples from unrelated probands presenting eit- Exome Variant Server, the effect of amino acid substitution on the protein her TAD (N=119), arterial aneurysm/dissecRtieosnu lotus:t side the aorta (N=10) was evaluated using analysis, and where possible, it was investigated or syndromic features with a positive family history for TAD (N=12), were in the family. Our results confirm the utility and efficacy of genetic testing, sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer. The median age of the even in sporadic cases. Identification of causative genes will be decisive for: cohort was 41.7 years (IQR 29.3 - 52.7y). We found a causal mutation in 22 determining genotype-phenotype relationships; determining transmission patients (16%). Clinical and genetic findings are risk; organizing personalized follow-ups; characterizing new drug targets summarized in the table below. for experimental gene-specific therapies.  P05
.65-S FBN1 TGFBR1 TGFBR2 TGFB2 SMAD3 CO L3
A1 ACTA2 Association of VAV2 and VAV3 polymorphisms with cardiovascular Total 10 1 2 3 2 3 1 9MFS 1LDS 2S-HTAD 1S-HTAD 1vEDS risk factors in hypertensive and diabetic patients Clinic 1LDS 1NS-HTAD MFS: 1MNaSr-fHaTnA DSyndrome; 1LNDS-SH:T ALDoeys1-MDFieStz Sy1nMdFrSome2;N (SN- H)ST-AHDTAD: (Non) N. Perretta-Tejedor1,2,3, J. Fernández Mateos3,2,4, L. García-Ortiz2,5, M. Gómez-Marcos2,5, J. Syndromic HTAD; vEDS: vascular Ehlers Danlos Syndrome. Recio-Rodriguez2,5, R. González-Sarmiento2,6,4, J. López-Novoa1,2, C. Martínez-Salgado1,2,3; Conclusion: NGS based gene panel testing in patients with H-TAD efficiently 1Unidad de Fisiopatología Renal y Cardiovascular, Instituto Reina Sofía de Investigación Nefrológica, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2IBSAL, Hospital reveals a Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3IESCYL, Unidad de investigación, mutation in 16% of patients. Causal mutations in patients not presenting Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación del clinical manifestations of syndromal H-TAD, as well as mutations in genes -other Cáncer,Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Unidad de Investigación,Centro than FBN1- in patients meeting the diagnostic criteria for de Salud La Alamedilla, Salamanca, Spain, 6Unidad de Medicina Molecular, specific syndromes including Marfan syndrome are identified, justifying a wi- Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. despread application of this technique.  P05
.63-S Hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia are risk factors for the A new CO L3
A1 transgenic mouse model recapitulates the clinical development of cardiovascular disease, one of the leading causes of death features of vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in the world. There are few data on the influence of genetic polymorphisms S. D‘hondt1, B. Guillemyn1, M. Bertrand2, S. Janssens2, W. Toussaint2, L. Vanhoutte2, R. De in these diseases. The guanine nucleotide exchange factors VAV2 and VAV3 Rijcke2, B. Lambrecht2, P. Coucke1, S. Symoens1, P. Seghers3, F. Malfait1, A. De Paepe1; play an important role in vascular homeostasis in vivo. Therefore, we evalu- 1Center for Medical Genetics - UGent, Ghent, Belgium, 2Inflammation Research Center - ated the association of VAV2 (rs 602990) and VAV3 (rs7528153) polymor- VIB, UGent, Ghent, Belgium, 3bioMMeda - UGent, Ghent, Belgium. phisms with susceptibility to hypertension and diabetes-induced cardiova- scular risk and cardiovascular damage. We extracted DNA from peripheral blood of 384 patients (152 hypertensive, 66 diabetic and 166 non-diabeti®c Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (vEDS) is a severe, life-threatening he- non-hypertensive). Polymorphisms were detected by qPCR with TaqMan ritable connective tissue disorder, characterized by translucent skin, easy probes. We analyzed systolic, diastolic and pulse blood pressure, basal gly- bruising, and propensity to rupture of arteries and hollow organs. The mole- caemia, endothelial dysfunction (by measurement of pulse wave velocity), cular basis of vEDS has been well-studied, showing a wide range of muta- retinopathy, left ventricular hypertrophy and cardiovascular risk. VAV2 tions in CO L3
A1, encoding type III procollagen. Most mutations result in a Val584Met polymorphism is associated with family history of hyperchole- glycine substitutions, pivotal for correct folding of the triple helical domain. sterolemia in non hypertensive patients carrying the TT genotype (p=0.034, The mechanisms by which mutant type III collagen cause vascular fragili- OR=2.706, 1.205-6.321) and the CT genotype (p=0.034, OR=2.194, 1.059- ty are not well understood, but factors, other than mechanical failure, are 4.545), with elevated pulse pressure in smoker patients carriers of the TT believed to contribute to the phenotype. A Col3a1 knock-out mouse model allele (p=0.016, OR=5.538, 1.022-30.019) and with reduced risk of develo- shows early lethality and is therefore not suitable for functional studies. ping metabolic syndrome in non-smokers patients carriers of the TT allele We generated a transgenic vEDS mouse model with a Col3a1 missense mu- (p=0.05, OR=0,408, 0.180-0.927). VAV3 Sher298Thr heterozygous polymor- tation. With a BAC transgenic approach, the Col3a1 c.547G>A (p.Gly183Ser) phism is associated with patients with lower incidence of family history of mutation, a typical helical glycine substitution, was introduced into the diabetes (p=0.018, OR=0.470, 0.279-0.793) and with increased fasting glu-  C57
BL/6 mouse genome. Spontaneous development of open skin wounds cose in non-smoking non-diabetic patients carrying the TT allele (p=0.043, was observed in all transgenic males, but not in females. Expression analysis OR=3.700, 1.266-10.815). Our results suggest that polymorphic variants of on dermal fibroblasts revealed substantial higher expression of type III col- VAV2 and VAV3 genes may be involved as risk factors associated with cardio- lagen in transgenic males compared to transgenic females. Biomechanical vascular disease in hypertensive and diabetic patients.  P05
.66-M testing of both transgenic males and females showed significantly reduced Association of Cytochrome  P450
 2 C9
 (CY P2
C9 ) and VKOR
C1  tensile strength of the skin, aorta and colon. Transmission electron micro- polymorphisms and warfarin dosage in Iranian patients refer to scopy of skin and aortic tissues showed severely abnormal collagen fibrils, Shahid Rajaie Heart Center intracellular spaces between smooth muscle cells and dilation of the endo- R. Kameli1,2, M. Babanejad1, M. Imeni1,3, M. Soveizi1, M. Afshari4, S. H. Jamaldini1; plasmic reticulum (ER) , indicating excessive protein load and ER-stress. 1Cardiogenetics Research Center , Shahid Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical & Research This novel animal model provides new opportunities for in-depth analyses Center, Tehran Un, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Biology Department of Islamic o Pf 0 t 5h .e 6 4pa -Mthogenic basis of vEDS and for possible therapeutic interventions. Azad University of pharmaceutical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biology Department of Islamic Azad University of pharmaceutical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Genetic tests in the diagnosis of congenital vascular malformations Republic of Iran, 4Zabol university of medical science, Zabol, Islamic Republic of Iran. A. Bruson1, R. E. Mattassi2, A. Porcella3, S. Benedetti1, S. Cecchin1, M. Bertelli1; 1MAGI Human Genetics Institute, Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Director, Center for Vascular Background: Malformations „Stefan Belov“; Clinical Institute Humanitas „Mater Domini“, Castellanza (Va), Italy, 3Director, Laboratory of clinical Analysis; Clinical Institute Humanitas, Warfarin is a commonly prescribed oral anticoagulant for the Castellanza (Va), Italy. treatment and prevention of thrombotic diseases. Warfarin dose has a large interindividual variation. An insufficient dose may fail to prevent thrombo- embolism, while an overdose increases the risk of bleeding. Patients with Vascular anomalies are a heterogeneous group of congenital malformations CY
P2 C9
*2 and/or CY P2
C9 *3 polymorphisms need lower dose than wild- of the circulatory system characterized by morpho-structural and/or func- type patients. VKOR
C1  (vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1) is another tional defects of various nature, severity and extent in any type of vessel (ar- gene affecting warfarin metabolism. VKOR
C1  variants have been reported to teries, capillaries, veins and lymphatic vessels) and in any part of the body. bOeb ajescstoicvieated with a need for lower doses of warfarin compared with wild- Although most vascular malformations are sporadic (simple or combined), type variants during long-term therapy. syndromic and familial forms also exist. Diagnosis may be complicated even : This study was conducted to identify the associations between for experienced specialists, because there is substantial clinical overlap bet- demographic characteristics (sex, height, weight, age, ethnicity), and gene- ween lesions and each can mimic the others. To our knowledge, there are tMica pteorlyiamlso rapnhdi sMmest ohfo CdYsP:2
C9  and VKOR
C1  (-1639G>A) with warfarin dose currently 15 known genetic forms of Mendelian vascular malformation and among Iranian patients. mutations with autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant or paradominant Our study concluded 200 patients that reached to inheritance have been identified in 25 genes. Sporadic cases with de novo aR esstaubltles adnosde Coof nwcalurfsairoinn:. By PCR-RFLP method CY
P2 C9
*2 and CY P2
C9 *3 mutations in causative genes of familial forms have also been described. In polymorphisms of CY
P2 C9
 gene and VKOR C1
 (-1639G>A) was genotyped. this study, we investigated all 25 known genes in 108 patients with sporadic Our study showed that CY P2
C9  polymorphisms c 1o 2ng 6enital vascular anomalies by next-generation sEeqSuHenGci n2g0. W1e4 i d| eMntIifLieAdN , hITaAd LsiYgn |i fWicaWnt Win.flEuSenHceG o.On RIrGanian daily warfarin dose(P=). Our resultsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .02-M Intrafamilial gene rearrangements in Barth syndrome leading to suggested that patients with AA genotype in VKOR
C1  (-1639G>A) require different TAZ mutations in siblings lower doses of warfarin than those with AG or GG genotype. Height and L. Ferri1,2, M. A. Donati3, S. Funghini2, L. Spaccini4, F. Natacci5, S. Gasperini6, D. N. Cooper7, weight did not have a significant correlation with the warfarin maintenance R. Guerrini1,2, A. Morrone1,2; dose. In addition there was no significant relationship between sex and eth- 1Dept. of NEUROFARBA, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Paediatric Neurology nicity with the maintenance dose of warfarin (p< 0.05). Unit and Laboratories, Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Metabolic and 
P05 .67-S Muscular Unit, Meyer Childrens’ Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Ambulatorio Genetica Analysis of c.1166A>C polymorphism in 3´UTR region of AGTR1 gene Medica, Ospedale „ Vittore Buzzi „, Milan, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Ca’ Granda in patients with Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension IRCCS Foundation, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 6Metabolic Unit, San G. Pousada1,2, A. Baloira3, D. Valverde1,2; Gerardo Hospital, Milan, Italy, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff 1Dep. Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology. Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. 2Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Vigo (IBIV), Vigo, Spain, 3Servicio de Neumología del Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain. TAZ The X-linked infantile-onset Barth syndrome (BTHS; OMIM #302060) is caused by mutations in the gene and generally manifests in hemizygous Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH; OMIM 178600) is a progressive va- males. The major clinical manifestations are cardiomyopathy with or wit- scular disorder characterized by pulmonary vascular resistance increase, hout left ventriTcuAlZar noncompaction, skeletal myopathy, hypotonia, grow- vascular remodelling and right heart failure. Angiotensin II is both a potent th delay and neutropenia. Confirmatory tests are provided by mutational vasopressor hormone and a primary regulator of aldosterone secretion. It is analysis of the gene and/or the biochemical dosage of the monolyso- an important factor that controls blood pressure and volume in the cardio- cardiolipin/ tetralinoleoyl cardiolipin ratio. Heterozygous females do not vascular system. AGTR1 gene plays an integral role in blood pressure con- normally manifest clinically but may undergo molecular prenatal diagnosis trol, and is involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension. In this study, we during pregnancy. TAZ demonstrated the association between c.1166A>C polymorphism and PAH. Here we report the unusual case of a family in whom the male proband and We included 55 PAH patients and 52 controls. Using specifically designed his mother carry differenTt AZ mutations. The ten year-old proband harbou- primers we amplified and sequenced the 3´-untraslated region of AGTR1. red a novel g.4552364_4562302del9937ins705 complex rearrangement We analyzed the c.1166A>C polymorphism located on 3´UTR of AGTR1 gene. which serves to remove TeAxoZns 1-5. However, during a subsequent ma- By comparing genotype frequencies of controls and patients with PAH, we ternal pregnancy, molecular prenatal diagnosis of the male fetus revealed obtained statistically significant differences for this SNP between the two that he carried a different gene lesion, g.4558047_4558278del2T3A2Z. groups (p>0.001). The RR of developing PAH in patients with this SNP is The mother was subsequently confirmed to be heterozygous for this 20.3; IC 95%; p<0.001. The statistical analysis of clinical and hemodyna- novel g.4558047_4558278del232 deletion (which removes only mics parameters between patients with or without this SNP showed signi- exond e 1n)o vbout negative for the g.4552364_4562302del9937ins705. The ficant differences in systolic pulmonary pressure (p=0.037), cardiac index g.4552364d_e4 n5o6v2o302del9937ins705 mutation must therefore have occur- (p=0.012) and PAH subtypes (IPAH vs APAH) (p=0.028). This SNP is present red in the male proband. The g.4558047_4558278del232 must have in 72.4% of IPAH patients and in 67.8% of APAH patients, producing a more occurred in the mother since it was not detected in either her mo- severe phenotype. This SNP only appears in 25% of control cohort. ther or grandmother. Sequencing of the breakpoint junctions revealed mi- In conclusion, this polymorphism in AGTR1 gene is more frequent in IPAH crohomologies which could have promptedT AbZoth rearrangements by serial than in APAH patients and predispose individuals to an increased risk of replication slippage. d Pe 0v 6e .l 0o 1p -i Sng PAH associated with a more severe phenotype. In conclusion, a mother carrying a gross gene deletion can undergo 10 novel HGD mutations identified in “black bone disease” patients further germline gene rearrangement and generate children with a different A. Zatkova1, M. Nemethova1, J. Radvanszky1, R. Aquaron2, B. Porfirio3, A. Santucci4,5, mutation. Such a situation can complicate the pre- and post-natal molecular S. Sestini4, G. Biolcati6, F. Sorge6, C. Aurizi6, C. Marques Lourenço7, K. Ramadevi8, L. diagnosis of BTHS. 
P06 .03-S Ranganath9, J. Rovensky10, R. Imrich10, L. Kadasi1,11; Diagnosis of GM1-gangliosidosis or galactosialidosis by enzymology 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Faculté deMédecine, and molecular genetic testing from a single dried blood spot Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Dept. D. Cregeen, E. Davidson, O. Chiu, E. P. Green, M. Jackson; Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences University of Florence, Florence, Italy, GSTS Pathology, London, United Kingdom. 4Dipartimento di Biotecnologie, Universita` degli Studi di Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Centro Interdipartimentale per lo Studio Biochimico delle Patologie Osteoarticolari, Universita` degli Studi di Siena, Siena, Italy, 6Porphyria Centre, San Gallicano Institute IRCCS IFO, GM1-gangliosidosis and galactosialidosis are rare aβutosomal recessive ly- Roma, Italy, 7Neurogenetics Unit. Department of Neurology School of Medicine of sosomal disorders associated with defects in the same prβotein complex. Ribeirao Preto, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 8Madras Medical College, GM1α gangliosidosis is caused by a deficiency of -galactosidase, whilst Chennai, India, 9Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 10National Institute of Rheumatic Diseases, Piestany, Slovakia, 11Department of Molecular galactosialidosis is associated with deficiencies of both -galactosidase Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. aβnd -neuraminidase activity secondary to a defectα in the protective pro- tein cathepsin A. We have developed a dried blood spot enzyme assay for -galactosidase and have added a reference enzyme ( -galactosidase) which HGD Alkaptonuria (AKU, “black bone disease”) is caused by mutations in homo- is measured simultaneously as a measure of sample integrity. A panel of 300 gentisate-1,2-dioxygenase ( ) gene leading to deficiency of HGD enzyme unaffeαcted individuals were tested to establish a normal reference range; all activity. Clinically it leads mainly to homogentisic aciduria, ochronosis and 5 affected GM1-gangliosidosis patients tested showed clear enzyme defici- painful and disabling ochronotic arthritis. AKU was described by Sir Archi- ency. -neuraminidase is an unstable enzyme which is therefore unsuitable bald Garrod as the first inborn HeGrrDor of metabolism in 1902, and now, more for dried blood spot analysis and difficult to inαterpret in leucocyte samples. than 110 years later, we test nitisinone as the first possible treatment of Differential diagnosis of GM1-gangliosidosis and galactosialidosis has tradi- this disorder. We analysed for mutations 40 AKU patients enrolled for tionally been carried out by measurement of -neuraminidase in cultured the first part of this 7FP-supported project DevelopAKUre run in two stu- fibroblasts; however skin biopsy and cell culture can take many weeks. Ne- dy centres in Piestany (Slovakia) and Liverpool (UK). In this cohort we ob- sted PCR and Sanger sequencing analysis of the GLB1 and CTSA genes can be served 20 different pathogenic variants, two of which were novel. The first carried out at this centre from the same dried blood spot sample as enzyme mutation (R53Q c.158G>A) was present in homozygous state in one patient t Pe 0s 6ti .n 0g 4, -p Mroviding a rapid diagnosis from a single convenient sample. of Indian origin. The second one (T167I,c.500C>T) was identified in one Unraveling Boucher-Neuhauser syndrome: the multifaceted copy in Slovak AKU patient, further confirming the geneticH hGeDt erogeneity consequences of PNPLA6 gene mutations of AKU in this small country with increased incidence of AKU, where now C. M. Lourenco1, M. Gonzalez2, F. Speziani2, W. Marques Junior1, S. Zuchner2; already 13 mutations are reported. Eight additional novel mutations 1University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2John P. Hussman Institute for Human were found in AKU patients sent to our laboratory for a routine molecu- Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States. lar diagnostics within a frame of different collaborations. The novel R53Q mutation identified in DevelopAKUre was found also in one Italian patient. One mutation was identified in a patient from Brasil (M186K, c.557T>A), in Boucher-Neuhauser syndrome (BNS) is a rare genetic entity belonging to patient from India (ivs7+6T>C,c.469+6T>C), from France (F147S,c.440T>C the group of hereditary cerebellar ataxias with hypogonadism. The com- ), and five in cases from Italy (K248E,c.742A>G// G205HDG,cD.614G>A// bination of chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and K353Q,c.1056A>G// G251D,c.752G>A// Y40S,c.119A>C)). The total num- progressive spinocerebellar ataxia are the hallmarks of the disease. Here ber of different AKU-causing mutations as published in our mutation we report a new phospholipid disorder in a Brazilian BNS family caused database is now 126. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | b W y mW utW ati. oE nS s H inG th.O e PR NG PLA6 gene (Patatin-like phospholipase domain1 c2on7-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index taining 6) and its role in the metabolism of lysophospholipids. Biochemical culties and typical physical features. At 6 months she developed progressi- and molecular investigations were undertook in a Brazilian kindred affected ve hepatosplenomegaly, liver cirrhosis, and ascites. After a life-threatening by a complex neurological disorder, presenting mainly as a spinocerebellar deterioration, she responded to aggressive management with diuretics, al- ataxia with hypogonadism and early vision loss. After molecular analysis bumin infusions, and repeated paracentesis. She was noted to have pancyto- of genes associated with spinocerebellar ataxia and exclusion of other in- penia with marked throm9bocytopenia at 2 years of age, with platelet counts born errors of metabolism (IEMs) associated with cerebellar disease, whole in the range of 10-20x10/liter. She did not improve with IVIG or steroids. exome sequencing (WES) was performed. Mutations in the PNPLA6 gene She had a normocellular marrow with mild decrease of megakaryocytes and were identified in all affected patients. They presented with very early on- granulocytes, which suggested a primary consumptive thrombocytopenia, set visual loss (chorioretinal dystrophy) accompanied by progressive ce- with some component of reduced megakaryopoesis. As she had become re- rebellar ataxia and primary hypogonadism. Brain MRI showed cerebellar fractory to transfusion, splenectomy was performed in this medically fra- and pons atrophy. Peripheral neuropathy (motor axonal neuropathy) was gile child and resulted in a moderate recovery of platelet levels. This is the identified in all of them. Mutant mice with mutations in PNPLA6 gene have second reported case of severe thrombocytopenia in CDG1a, and the only shown a relentless neurological disease. PNPLA6 codifies a neuropathy tar- reported case of splenectomy with this disorder. 
P06 .07-S get esterase (NTE) hydrolase, an integral membrane protein located on the Citrin deficiency caused by a novel mutation in the SL
C25 A13 gene - endoplasmic reticulum. It shows phospholipase activity, being involved in clinical, biochemical and genetic characterization of new Caucasian the hydrolysis of lysophosphatidylcholine to yield glycerophosphocholine. case Boucher-Neuhauser syndrome is a clear example of the profound biological M. B. Ivanova1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, T. Todorov3, A. Todorova3, E. Panteleeva4, E. consequences of mutations in such gene in the central and peripheral ner- Lazarova5, H. Kathom2, P. Yaneva4, R. Tincheva2; vous system. 1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, 
P06 .05-S Bulgaria, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric Hospital, Medical Dissecting the genetic architecture of loci with established effects on University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical multiple cardiometabolic phenotypes University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University L. Marullo1, T. O. Kilpeläinen2, B. K. Cornes3, J. Dupuis4, C. Scapoli1, R. J. F. Loos5, J. B. Pediatric Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Department of Pediatrics, Meigs3, A. P. Morris6, I. Prokopenko7, on behalf of the XC-Pleiotropy Group; Tokuda Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1The Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3General Medicine Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Citrin deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation in 4Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, the SL
C25 A13 gene and has three different age-dependent clinical pheno- United States, 5The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United types: neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD) States, 6Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, in newborn, failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency 7Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, London, United (FTTDCD) in older children, and recurrent hyperammonemia with neuro- Kingdom. psychiatric symptoms in citrullinemia type II (CTLN2) in adults. To date almost all reported patients were from East Asia and only few cases from Caucasian origin have been described. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified hundreds of loci We report the first Bulgarian case of NICCD - a male infant with a mild neo- aIRsSso1ciated with cardiometabolic phenotypes, many of which overlap or lie natal jaundice which resolved spontaneously. The patient became jaundice in close proximity. Variants associated with multiple phenotypes, such as at again at 40 days old. , can provide insight into biology of correlated cardiometabolic traits. Initial investigations revealed conjugated hyperbilirubinemia and evidence However, the genetic architecture of these loci is frequently complex and of liver dysfunction, hypoproteinemia, mild hypoglycemia and mild anemia. needs further investigation. To disentangle association patterns of 630 as- Metabolic evaluation showed lactate acidemia, galactosemia and significant sociated SNPs (Dec 2012) from GWAS meta-analyses in Europeans for 19 elevation of citrulline, methionine and arginine. quantitative phenotypes and two cardiometabolic diseases, we defined sets Mutation study of the SL
C25 A13 gene showed the compound heterozygo- of adjacent variants located less than 500kb apart and harboring 446 asso- te, c.1081C>T (p.R361X) and c.74C>A (p. A25E), which confirmed the dia- ciated SNPs within 151 genomic regions (range=2-8 SNPs/region). We ex- gnosis of NICCD. c.1081C>T (p.R361X) is previously unreported nonsense amined, whether associations with multiple phenotypes within each region mutation. could be explained by LD through approximate conditional analysis (ApCA) After galactose restriction and supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins using the GCTA tool. liver functions were normalized and cath-up growth was achieved before 8 Across the 151 regions, we observed 14 (10%) loci in which the same SNP months of age. was associated with multiple phenotypes. Associations in 11 of these 14 In conclusion, we presented a new genetically confirmed case of NICCD pati- loci were with epidemiologically highly correlated traits. Through ApCA, we ent from non-Asian origin. We detected a previously undescribed nonsense identified 41 (27%) regions with multiple associated variants that under- mutation in SL
C25 A13 which further expanded the genotypic spectrum and lie the same association signals, thus suggesting multi-phenotype effects. genotype-phenotype correlations of citrin deficiency. Within 45 (30%) regions, multiple signals were explained by independent NICCD has been underdiagnosed and should be considered in infants with variants. Thirty-two (21%) regions showed complex architecture, and for intrahepatic cholestasis, especially when associated with elevated plasma the remaining 19 (13%), the association with one phenotype partially ex- galactose and citrulline, regardless of ethnicity. plained the effect on another. 
P06 .08-M Overall, a substantial number (87 or 57.62%) of cardiometabolic loci shows Mmachc is required for pre-implantation in the mouse potential pleiotropic effects on multiple phenotypes, which might contribute M. A. Moreno-Garcia, M. Pupavac, D. S. Rosenblatt, M. Tremblay, L. A. Jerome-Majewska; McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. to their shared biology. Within other regions, distinct genetic effects or more complex architecture could underlie independent regulatory mechanisms. MMACHC 
P06 .06-M cblC. Severe thrombocytopenia in CDG1a Mutations in cause the most common inborn error of vitamin B12 S. Goobie1,2, P. Atkison1,2, S. Zelcer1,2, C. Prasad1,2; (cobalamin) metabolism - Patients with this disease are unable to con- 1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 2Western University, London, ON, vert cobalamin into the two active forms,c mbleCthylcobalamin and adenosyl- Canada. cobalamin; consequently, they have elevated homocysteine and meMthmylamchac- lonic acid levels in blood and urine. Some patients also have structural abneot ramlaMlitoile sG, einnectl uMdeintagb co1n0g3enital heart defects. In the mouse, Congenital disorders of glycosylation type 1a (CGD1a), caused by mutations has tissue and stage-specific expressionM mduarcihncg orga, noMgmenaecshics (Pupavac, in the PMM2 gene, is a multi-systemic disorder characterized by the abnor- M. . . , 401-405 (2011)). We generatedG tm(AZi0c3e48 )wWtistih mal glycosylation of serum glycoproteins. There is a variable disease course, a gene-trap insertion in intron 1 of the gene ( ). with the mildest form being virtually asymptomatic, to the most severe form MiceM hmetaecrhoczGytg ous for this gene-trap allele were viable and fertile, but sho- presenting as lethal hydrops fetalis. The classical presentation is that of fai- wed a 50% reduction in Mmachc prMotmeianc hcocGmtpared to wild-type littermates. lure to thrive, abnormal fat distribution, and inverted nipples, with deve- The allele was inherited with a transmisMsmioanc hractio distortion in lopmental delay, seizures and ataxia. Other systemic features can include a subset of matings. Homozygous embryos were not found after protein-losing enteropathy, hepatomegaly, cardiomyopathy, renal cysts, and embryonic day 3.5. These studies indicate that the gene product is coagulopathy. Aside from coagulopathy, there are few case reports of hema- essential for early mouse development. tologic abnormalities in CDG1a. We report a three and a half year old girl w1i2th8 CDG1a diagnosed at 4 months of age. She presEeSntHedG w 2it0h 1fe4ed |i nMg dILiffAi-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .09-S POLG mutations in Polish patients with mitochondrial disease of unknown etiology - preliminary data ted a type 1 glycosylation defect, thus this disorder was classified as CDG1q. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, J. Trubicka1, M. Kaliszewska2, K. Tońska2, P. Kowalski1, We present here a 4 month old male with coarse face, hypertrichosis and S. Łuczak1, E. Ciara1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, M. Pelc1, J. Taybert1, E. developmental delay. The baby was the fourth child of first-cousin parents. Bartnik2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1; He had narrow forehead, depressed nasal bridge, proptotic eyes, large fon- 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Genetics and tanelle (6x8cm), long philtrum, thin lips, loose skin, hepatosplenomegaly Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw,, Warsaw, Poland. and bilateral inguinal hernia. He also had iris coloboma, glaucoma, nystag- POLG mus, corneal clouding and elevated serum transaminases. He was followed up until 27 months of age. He had severe hypotonia and no head control at mutations are considered as a major cause of mitochondrial diseases this age. Dark pigmentation of dorsum of feet was developed. His cranial MR (MD) including AHS, MCHC, MEMSA, MIRAS, SCAE, SANDO, PEO, LS, MN- imaging revealed cerebellar hypoplasia, enlargement of lateral ventricules GIE, MERRF, MELAS, and SMA-like phenotypes. Epidemiological data point and frontal atrophy. Serum transferring IEF showed a type 1 pattern. Se- the widespread occurrence of recurrent c.1399G>A (p.A467T), c.2243G>C rum IGF1 and antithrombin level also were decreased. Using homozygosity (p.W748S), and c.2542G>A (p.G848S) mutations in European populations mapping followed by whole-exome genotyping, we described a homozygous and emphasize significant differences depending on carriers’ ethnicity. missense mutation (c.320G>A; p.Trp107X) in the SRD5A3 gene in the pati- A large group of 210 PoSlUisRhF p1atientSsC wOi2th clinical suspicion of MD, and ePxOclLuG- ent. This mutation was reported previously in a Turkish patient with hypo- ded common point mtDNA mutations, large-scale mtDNA rearrangements, tonia and similar eye and cranial findings. 
P06 .12-M and nuclear encoded and mutations, was recruited for Congenital Hyperinsulinism of Infancy (CHI): hunt for new genes screening. DNA samples isolated from blood, saliva, urine, muscle and liver C. Battaglia1,2, C. Cosentino1, M. C. Proverbio3, E. Mangano2, A. Pietrelli2, R. Bordoni2, C. biopsies were genotyped for the presence of three common mutations by Perego4, E. S. Di Cairano4, A. Magi5, T. Lorenzo5, G. De Bellis2; Real-time PCR with specific TaqMan allele discrimination assays (Light Cyc- 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale (BIOMETRA), ler 480 II , Roche), and were then verified using ABI PRISM dye terminator Dottorato di Medicina Molecolare e traslazionale, Università degli Studi di Milano, cycle sequencing kits (Applied Biosystems). Segrate, Italy, 2Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council (ITB- The onlymutation identified in the studied group was p.W748S; one case CNR), Segrate, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, - in homozygous, and seven cases in heterozygous form. Six patients presen- Università degli Studi di Milano, Segrate, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche ted with AHS, one adult demonstrated sensory motor neuropathy, and one e Biomolecolari, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 5Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. child psychomotor retardation and stroke-like episodes. In three children despite sequencing the whole gene we did not confirm the presence of the second mutation. Significant predominance of p.W748S mutation indicates Congenital Hyperinsulinism of Infancy (CHI) is a rare disorder, characteri- similarity to the genotype identified in Nordic patiePnOtsL, Gthat is not frequent zed by heterogeneity in clinical and genetic features. An inappropriate in- in another parts of the world. sulin secretion is responsible of hypoglycaemia, which can result in serious Evaluation of the carrier frequency of the common mutations among neurological damage and life-long handicap. The genetic causes of CHI have MD patients are being continued. been found in genes regulating insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells The study was financed by NCN projects 2012/05/B/NZ2/01627 and but in about 50 % of CHI patients the molecular defect remain unknown. 2857/B/
P01 /2010/39, CMHI projects 
S126 /12 and 
S217 /12. 
P06 .10-M Hunting for novel CHI-causing genes we performed whole-exome sequen- A targeted resequencing approach for diagnostics of Congenital cing (WES) on 10 CHI patients [Proverbio MC et al, 2013; doi:10.1371/jour- Disorders of Glycosylation nal.pone.0068740]. To pinpoint the causal mutation in a small number of E. Souche1, L. Keldermans1, D. Rymen1,2, G. Matthijs1, V. Race1; samples and to select the most promising candidate genes, we implemented 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Metabolic Diseases, University a computational strategy including: 1) a bionformatics pipeline to identify Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. a high quality single nucleotide variants (SNV); 2) an exome homozygo- sity mapping using a novel algorithm H3M2 [Pippucci T el al, 2011; doi: 10.1159/000330164] and 3) a prioritization analysis using the list of rare Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) are a genetically heteroge- and novel coding variants by mean of web tools such as ToppGene suite, neous group of disorders caused by the alteration in synthesis and structure Endeavour and Gene Distiller. Our approach resulted in a selection of small of protein and lipid glycosylation. To date, more than 60 different causes of number of genes that significantly correlate with human phenotype and CDG have been defined genetically. CDG is also characterised by extremely molecular pathways associated to congenital hyperinsulinism and insulin variable phenotypes with manifestations ranging from severe developmen- signalling. Among them we selected missense mutations affecting CDKA
L1  tal delay and hypotonia beginning in infancy, to hypoglycemia and protein- and PIK3R1 for further investigations either at the level of protein structure losing enteropathy with normal development. Till recently, finding the cau- (in silico protein modelling) and in respect to their role in beta cell using sative mutation of CDG patients has been impaired by this extreme genetic IN
S1 -E cellular model and human pancreatic islets. heterogeneity: it was virtually impossible to Sanger sequence all candidate 
P06 .13-S genes. Instead, one or few genes were tentatively selected based on a com- Whole-exome sequencing for genetic diagnosis in congenital bination of biochemical, cell biological and glycobiological investigations. In hypothyroidism order to obtain a better diagnostic yield, we designed a capture assay for E. G. Serra1,2, N. Schoenmakers3, K. Chatterjee3, C. A. Anderson1; a panel of 79 genes associated with CDG type I, CDG type II and congeni- 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, tal muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy. To evaluate the assay, targeted Cambridge, United Kingdom. sequencing was performed for 16 CDG type I and 15 CDG type II patients. The mean coverage in the target region was about 600x and a genotype was called for more than 97% of the targeted bases. A diagnosis was confirmed Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the most common endocrine disorder in 8 cases. Interestingly, mutations could also be detected (and confirmed) among newborns but its genetic aetiology is still largely unknown, with ge- in the gene ALG1 that could not be assayed by genomic Sanger sequencing netic defects identified in less than 20% of the cases. Mutations in genes for due to the abundance of pseudogenes. After our targeted assay enabled an thyroid hormone synthesis (TG, TPO, DUOX2, IYD, SL
C5 A5, SL
C26 A4) have increased diagnostic yield, the the most interesting, unsolved cases will be been implicated in dyshormonogenesis, while defects in thyroid transcripti- subjected to exome sequencing for gene discovery. on factors (PAX8, Nkx2.1, Nkx2.5 and FOX
E1 ) and in the TSH receptor have 
P06 .11-S been linked to thyroid dysgenesis. To identify novel mutations in CH, 42 pati- A patient with congenital disorders of glycosylation type 1q due to ents and 21 unaffected relatives (25 families) were whole-exome sequenced mutation in SRD5A3 (WES) as part of the UK10K project. A further 29 patients and 10 unaffected B. Tüysüz1, D. Pehlivan2, J. Lupski2, J. Jaeken3; relatives (24 families) were sequenced across a customized panel of genes. 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Department of We searched for functional de novo or inherited variants that were rare in Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, affected individuals, using 1000 Genomes, NHLBI ESP and UK10K as control 3Centre for Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium. datasets. A total of 15 mutations in known causative genes were identified in 10 dyshormonogenesis families. Ten of these variants were novel and pre- dicted to be damaging (TG: 509X, 
C707 Y, W1031L, 
C1474 Y, W2666L, 140X, Congenital disorders of glycosylation type I (CDG1) are inherited metabolic Q1625E, T1397RfsX30, G638+5; DUOX2: Q570L) and the remaining five diseases with an extremely broad spectrum of clinical presentations caused were previously reported in CH cases (TG: R277X; DUOX2: Q686X, R354W; by defective glycosylation of glycoproteins and glycolipids. Recently, muta- TPO: R665Q, R491H). tions in the SRD5A3 gene was found in patients with cerebellar ataxia, and ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |O WurW iniWtia.lE fSinHdiGng.sO hRigGhlight the potential of WES as a diagnostic tool1: 2fiv9e eye malformations. Serum transferrin isoelectric focusing (IEF) demonstra-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index families harbouring known TG/TPO/DUOX2 mutations have a conclusive dactyly, which is typically postaxial and rarely interdigital and can involve genetic diagnosis and novel recessive nonsense mutations here identified all four limbs, and syndactyly of the toes. Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) are also likely causative. Wider pedigree-genotype correlation is needed to is specifically associated with a subgroup of DCB (Greenberg dysplasia, confirm the pathogenicity of the remaining recessive missense mutations CHILD syndrome, X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata, male EBP here identified. deficiency); the possible occurrence of epiphyseal stippling in SLOS, initi- 
P06 .14-M ally reported, does not appear to be confirmed. CDP is also associated with Efficiency of the integrated Danon disease diagnostic protocol can other congenital disorders such as chromosomal abnormalities, brachytele- be demonstrated in families affected by LAM
P2  exon-copy number phalangic CDP (X-linked recessive CDP, disruption of vitamin K metabolism, variations H. Vlaskova1, F. Majer1, T. Kalina2, O. Pelak2, L. Dvorakova1, L. Stolnaya1, T. Honzik3, T. maternal autoimmune diseases), peroxisomal disorders (rhizomelic CDP) Palecek4, V. Stara5, J. Zeman3, J. Sikora1; and lysosomal storage disorders. In the differential diagnosis of epiphyseal 1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General University Hospital and First Faculty stippling, a moth-eaten appearance of bones, asymmetry or the presence of Medicine, Charles University in Prague (support MH CZ-DRO VFN64165, PRVOUK- of the common pattern of limb abnormalities are further indicators of DCB. 
P24 /LF1/3, IGA MZ CR NT 14015), Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Department of Paediatric In conclusion, the specific differentiating radiological features of DCB are Haematology and Oncology, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Second Faculty highlighted. of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol (support 
P06 .16-M MH CR-DRO 00064203 and OPPK CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022), Prague 5, Czech Republic, Regional reference range lysosomal storage diseases in the 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, General University Hospital and Kazakhstan First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, M. Bayanova, B. Kamaliyeva, D. Samatkyzy, G. Abildinova; 4Second Department of Medicine - Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, General National Research Center Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague (support PRVOUK-
P35 /LF1/5), Prague 2, Czech Republic, 5Pediatric Clinic of the 2nd Faculty of Medicine of Charles University and the University Hospital Motol, Prague, Prague 5, Objective of the study was investigating the criteria’s of enzyme activity of Czech Republic. alpha-L-iduronidase, iduronate-2-sulfatase, N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfa- tase, β-galactosidase, arylsulfatase B and providing diagnostics of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis from Kazakhstan. Danon disease (DD) is a X-chromosome-linked disorder that manifests by The materials used for the study were dry blood spots of 2500 healthy ne- cognitive deficit, myopathy and cardiomyopathy in males. The phenotype in wborns to study the enzyme activity of lysosomal storage diseases (LSD) by females is variable and mitigated as a likely cLoAnMsePq2uence of tissue-specific tandem mass spectrometry and fluorimetry. Reference ranges of enzymes X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) ratios. DD is caused by mutations in the activity were the following: alpha-L-iduronidase was 450-2614 nmol / spot* lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2 ( ) gene. Majority of the 20 h., iduronate-2-sulfatase was 0.02-0. 25 nmol / spot* 21 h., arylsulfatase mutations abolish the protein expression due to truncationL oAfM LPA2M
P2  open B was 0.14-0.7 nmol / spot* 21 h., β-galactosidase was 35-126 nmol/h/ml., reading frame. 10-15% of the mutations are exon-copy number variations N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase was 5.7-33 nmol/24h/ml. (eCNV) stemming primarily from recombination LevAeMnPts2 in intron 3. 13 out of 2500 patients had lysosomal enzyme below the reference range. DD laboratory testing relies on identification of the absence of the protein Two patients were defined with alpha-L-iduronidase activity which were and characterization of the mutation within the gene. Importantly, below the reference range and constituted 33.06-187. 26 nmol / spot* 20 h. theL dAiMagPn2ostic protocol must reflect tLhAeM foPll2owing: (i) gender of the proband/ Activity iduronate-2-sulfatase was determined in 6 patients with suspected patient, (ii) expression patterns of LAM
P2  protein, (iii) alternative splicing MPS type II. Decrease in enzyme activity was observed in all cases and was 0 of pre-mRNA, (iii) mosaic expression determined by XCI nmol / spot* 21 h. In 2 cases, a decrease activity of to β-galactosidase 25-30 in female patients, (iv) germinal/somatic mosaicism phenomena. LAM
P2  nmol/h/ml, the 1 patient had a decreased activity of N-acetylgalactosamine- protein testing should be performed by flow cytometry in peripheral white 6-sulfatase to 2.2 nmol/24h/ml. Arylsulfatase B activity was determined in blood cells as this approach offers both minimal invasiveness and detection 3 patients, a decrease of enzyme activity was observed 5-20 times, and was sensitivity down to 0.008% of deficient granulocytes. The latter is of criti- 0.03-0.07 nmol / spot* 21 h. The reference ranges of enzyme activity of LSD cal importance in samples from suspect XCI mosaic femaLleA MpaPt2ients and/or were calculated. family members who are potentially germinal/somatic mosaics. Molecular 
P06 .17-S genetics methods should universally assess full-length mRNA iso- Massive parallel sequencing in suspected familial forms (2B, A and C) and consequently compare the abnormal findings to hypercholesterolemia patients of Latvia gDNA changes. This integrative approach has major advantages in genetic I. Radovica, R. Berzins, D. Silava, D. Fridmanis, J. Klovins; sLeAtMupPs2 when qualitative PCR based methods failed to identify the mutation. Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia. Model examples of such situations will be provided in families affected by eCNVs. 
P06 .15-S Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common single gene Radiographic features of the skeleton in disorders of postsqualene disorder mostly inherited as autosomal dominant trait. The physical sign of cholesterol biosynthesis FH is elevated low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), elevated total M. Rossi1,2, C. M. Hall3, R. Bouvier4, S. Collardeau-Frachon4, F. Le Breton4, M. Bucourt5, M. Cordier1, C. Vianey-Saban6, G. Parenti7, G. Andria7, M. Le Merrer8, P. Edery1,2, A. Offiah9; cholesterol (TC) levels and tendon xantomas. Identification and early treat- 1Service de Génétique, Centre de Référence des Anomalies du Développement, Hospices ment of affected individuals is desirable and in lack of physical symptoms Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 2INSERM U1028 UMR CNRS 5292, UCBL, CRNL TIGER Team, DNA based diagnosis provides confirmations of diagnosis and enables early Lyon, France, 3Retired from Department of Radiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, patient management. London, United Kingdom, 4Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Majority of FH cases are caused by mutations in four genes (APOB, LAD- Bron, France, 5Unité Fonctionnelle de Fœtopathologie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, AP-HP, LR, PCSK9 and LDLRA
P1 ). There are commercial kits available for testing of Bondy, France, 6Service des Maladies héréditaires du métabolisme et dépistage néonatal, most common FH causing mutations, but the spectrum of disease causing Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 7Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche Traslazionali, Sezione di Pediatria, Università Federico II, Naples, Italy, 8Centre de Référence Maladies mutations is quite diverse in various populations. Osseuses Constitutionnelles, Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, AP- Here we report mutations found in 64 patients with suspected FH in a samp- HP, Paris, France, 9Radiology Department, Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom. le from the Genome Database of Latvian population. We used targeted next generation sequencing approach in order to determine the full spectrum of mutations in coding regions of LDLR, APOB, PCSK9 and LDLRA
P1 . In total Disorders of postsqualene cholesterol biosynthesis (DCB) are a group of we found 28 missense one nucleotide mutations from which two rs5742904 inborn errors of metabolism characterized by multiple congenital abnor- (Arg3527Gln) in APOB gene and rs147509697 (Gly20Arg) in LDLR gene has malities, including significant skeletal involvement. The most frequent and been previously described as FH causing mutation confirming the FH in best characterized example is the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS). Nine three patients (4.6 %). Possible FH causing mutations however were identi- other disorders are known to date, namely autosomal recessive Antley-Bix- fied in majority of patients. ler syndrome, Greenberg dysplasia, X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia Conclusion: most commonly employed commercial mutation panel is not punctata, X-linked recessive male emopamil-binding protein (EBP) defici- sufficient for diagnosis of FH patients and NGS can help to identify FH cau- ency, congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb sing mutations in Latvian population. Our results also provide an example defects (CHILD) syndrome, CK syndrome, S
C4 MOL deficiency and the SLOS- that DNA testing can identify FH patients before they develop serious phy- like desmosterolosis and lathosterolosis. This study provides an overview sical symptoms. of the skeletal radiology of DCB: we report the radiological features of 14 previously unreported patients and review the literature. Our study shows t1h3at0 the DCB have a common pattern of limb abnoE rmS aH litG ie s2 i0 nc1 lu4 d i| n M g pI oL lA y-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .18-M Development of a cell-based reporter assay suited for small-molecule drug discovery in FGF23-inducible HEK293 cells stably expressing ces the accumulation of glucosylceramide in cells of the reticuloentothelial Klotho system and causes multisystemic manifestations. The limited efficacy of the S. Diener1, K. Schorpp2, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, K. Hadian2, T. M. Strom1,3; current treatments has led to the development of new strategies, including 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental the use of pharmacological chaperones. These are small molecules, gene- Health,Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum rally competitive inhibitors of the target enzyme, which at sub-inhibitory München, German Research Center for Environmental Health,Institute of Molecular concentrations may induce the proper folding and trafficking of the mutated Toxicology and Pharmacology, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Klinikum Rechts der Isar der enzyme resulting in a concomitant increase in the residual activity. The aim Technischen Universität München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. of this work is to report on the ability of seven compounds to increase the residual GBA1 activity on fibroblasts from six Gauche1rC p9aDtiIeXnts bearing dif- ferent genotypes. This series of compounds, named DIX, has been designed Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is a key regulator of phosphate homeo- by combination of the iDmIiXnoxylitol scaffold of parent with triazolyl- stasis. It is of crucial importance in hereditary and acquired hypo- and hy- alkyl side chains as GBA1 enhancers as potential pharmacological chapero- perphosphatemic disorders. Moreover, FGF23 has emerged as a promising nes in GD. Most of the compounds showed a preferential GBA1 enhan- biomarker for the prediction of adverse clinical outcomes in patients with cement towards genotypes bearing the G202R mutation, responsible for a chronic kidney disease (CKD), as it might be related to mortality, cardio- neuronopathic phenotype of the disease. In particular, DIX-28 was the one vascular abnormalities and disease progression. FGF23 is a bone-derived with the best activity enhancement, reaching a 4-5 fold increase at100 nM. endocrine factor, which inhibits renal tubular phosphate reabsorption by Moreover this compound showed also a remarkable effect, around 2-fold activating receptor complexes composed of FGF receptor (FGFR) 1c and the increase, on the DNI3X7208S/N370S genotype at the same concentration. Finally, co-receptor Klotho. As a major signalling pathway mitogen-activated pro- immunofluorescence staining and confocal microscopy imaging were used tein kinase (MAPK) pathway is employed. For the investigation of FGF23 in to confirm that increases the trafficking of the G202R mutant enzy- an in vitro model we established FGF23-inducible HEK293 cells that stably me to the lysosome. express Klotho (HEK293-KL). The induction of HEK293-KL cells by FGF23 
P06 .21-S was shown by detecting the activation of MAPK pathway, which could be re- Two New Cases of Myopathy with Cataracts and Combined duced by the use of two known small-molecule inhibitors of MAPK pathway: Respiratory Chain Deficiency caused by Mutations in GFER gene SU5402 and U0126. To identify novel small-molecule compounds that mo- D. Gavrilov, A. Studinski; Departments of Medical Genetics, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Biochemical dulate FGF23/FGFR1c/Klotho signalling, we developed a cell-based repor- Genetics Laboratory, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, MN, United States. ter assay that is suited for high-throughput screening (HTS). The assay is based on the AlphaScreen SureFire platform of Perkin Elmer to monitor the phosphorylation of endogenous extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and Myopathy with cataracts and combined respiratory chain deficiency 2 (ERK1/2) in cellular lysates of HEK293-KL after the induction with FGF23 (MPMCHD, OMIM#613076) is caused by mutations in GFER gene and has in the presence of small-molecule compounds. Since increased plasma con- been described in a single consanguineous family (Di Fonzo et al, AJHG centrations of FGF23 are the main cause of many phosphatemic disorders, a 2009, 84:594). We report two additional cases of MPMCHD in a non-con- modulation of its effect could be a potential strategy for drug discovery and sanguineous Caucasian family: one patient presented at 6 months with ca- new therapeutic approaches in disorders affecting phosphate homeostasis. 
P06 .19-S taracts, mild developmental delays (DD) and hypotonia and at 16 months Gaucher disease and Langerhans cell histiocytosis suffered severe episodes of hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis. Despite inter- M. Sabbadini1, A. Alhariri1, C. Lee1, E. Muller2, D. Oglesbee3, S. Segal1, S. Packman1; mittent periods of relative metabolic stability, the condition is progressing. 1UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco, At 13 years he is wheel-chair bound, has failure to thrive (requiring tube California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. feeding), global DD, autistic features, central hypotonia, and dystonia. Urine organic acid analyses reveal persistent 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Muscle GBA biopsy showed ragged red fibers and decreased staining for cytochrom C Gaucher disease [GD] is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease, oxidase. Muscle analysis demonstrated reduced respiratory chain complex with deficient glucocerebrosidase activity caused by mutations in the IV activity and increased mtDNA content in the absence of mutations or de- gene. Patients are often categorized as manifesting three distinct pheno- letions. This patient’s sister has clinical presentation characterized by later types: non-neuronopathic [type 1]; severe, infantile neurologic [type 2]; onset and milder, but similar clinical course which includes congenital ca- and chronic, progressive neurologic [type 3]. We describe a male infant with taracts, global DD and autistic features. Bouts of lethargy associated with neurologic GD as well as concomitant Langerhans cell histiocytosis [LCH]. lactic acidosis are frequent and require hospital admissions. Whole exome The child presented at age 9 months with weight loss, hematochezia, pallor, sequencing [done at Baylor College of Medicine] revealed two mutations and irritability. He had hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, as in GFER gene: c.581G>A (p.R194H, previously reported) and c.215delG well as a right upper lobe nodule. Excisional biopsy of the nodule led to a (p.A73Pfs*73). histologic diagnosis of LCH. Bone marrow and rectal biopsies did not reve- These cases further describe the phenotype associated with GFER gene mu- al findings of LCH, but the presence of macrophages concerGnBinAg, for a sto- tations. Although both patients have features similar to the other 3 reported rage disease. Enzyme assay confirmed a diagnosis of GD and gene testing patients with MPMCHD, the clinical course in our patients is more severe revealed apparent homozygosity for a novel mutation in c.488C>T and includes prominent lactic acidosis and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria but [p.A163V]. His presentation was intermediate between ‘classical’ type 2 and not deafness. type 3 GD. Upon physical examination, he demonstrated opisthotonic postu- 
P06 .22-M ring, hypotonia, horizontal oculomotor apraxia, and swallowing difficulties Digenic Glycogen Storage Disease type I? but was also able to sit with support, was attentive to environmental stimuli, E. L. Mendes, M. B. Baptista, D. Z. Scherrer, C. E. Steiner; State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. and had not lost previously gained developmental skills. To our knowledge, this is the first GD patient reported with cGoBnAcomitant LCH. Even though the simultaneous occurrence of GD and LCH could be coincidental, it is also pos- We report a patient referred to our service due to a clinical diagnosis of Gly- sible that LCH is secondary to the specific mutation identified in the pa- cogen Storage Disease type 1. She is the only child of a healthy and non con- tient and thus LCH should be added to the list of lymphoreticular neoplasms sanguineous couple, seen at the age of six months when hepatomegaly was associated with GD. 
P06 .20-M detected during a routine pediatric evaluation. Laboratorial investigation Glucocerebrosidase enhancement in selected Gaucher disease revealed glycemia after 4-hour fasting ranging from 33 to 60 mg/dl, hyper- fibroblasts by a series of DIX compounds triglyceridemia (252 mg/dl), and abnormal values of aspartate aminotrans- J. Serra-Vinardell1, L. Díaz2, J. Casas2, L. Vilageliu1, H. Michelakakis3, I. Mavridou3, J. M. F. ferase (132 mg/dl) and alanine transaminase (98 mg/dl). Gamma-GT, urea, G. Aerts4, C. Decroocq5, P. Compain5, A. Delgado2, D. Grinberg1; creatinine, uric acid, total cholesterol, coagulation tests, blood gases, and 1Dept. Genetics, Universitat de Barcelona, CIEBER, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 2RUBAM, Dept. Quimica Biomèdica, IQAC-CSIC, Barcelona, Spain, 3Dept. Enzymology and CBC resulted normal. After starting treatment with frequent meals, cornst- Cellular Function, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece, 4Department of Medicinal arch, and dietary restriction of lipids and sugars, she normalized neuromo- Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef, Amsterdam, Netherlands, tor and somatic development but still presents with hepatomegaly. Genomic 5Laboratorie de Synthèse Organique te Melécules Bioactives, Univetsité de Strasbourg, DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of the patient and both Strasbourg, France. parents by using the standard phenol/chloroform method. Exons of G6PC and SL
C37 A4 genes and their flanking intron/exon junctions were amplified by PCR using previously described primers. The fragments were directly se- Gaucher disease (GD) is a lysosomal storage disorder due to an inherited quenced using a MegaBAC
E1000 ® DYEnamic ET (Amersham Biosciences) deficiency of the lysososmal enzyme glucoEcSerHebGro 2si0da1s4e (|G MBAI1L)A. INt p, rIoTdAu-LY |a WppaWraWtus.E, tSwHiceG o.nO bRoGth strands, and the obtained sequences were co1m3p1a-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, Kasugai Municipal Hospital, Kasugai, Japan, 4Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate red with the sequences available in the Ensembl genome browser. Mutation School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan, 5Department of analysis revealed that the patient is a double heterozygote for the previously developmental disability medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. known nonsense mutation p.Arg415Ter (rs121908979; c.1243C>T) in SL- 
C37 A4, inherited from the mother, and an undescribed missense mutation p.Gly222Glu (c.665G>A) in G6PC, inherited from the father. The molecular analysis of the two genes suggests that the clinical picture of this patient 3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase (HIBCH) is an enzyme specific for re- could be caused by digenic inheritance of GSDI. moHvIiBngC HCoA in the catabolic pathway for valine. So far, only 4 cases of HIB- 
P06 .23-S CH deficiency have been reported. In 1 case, a homozygous null mutation High frequency of the c. 3980 G>A (p.W1327X) mutation in AGL gene in caused congenital anomalies including a characteristic facial ap- of Tunisian patients with hepatic presentation of glycogen storage pearance, congenital heart disease, and multiple vertebral anomalies and disease type III syndrome led to death in infancy. The 3 other cases, which harbored missense or splice A. Mili1, W. Manoubi1, A. Ayadi2, A. Saad1, M. Gribaa1; mutations, presented with hypotonia, neurological regression, developmen- 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et de Biologie de la Reproduction Humaines, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service of Pediatry, hopital Tahar Sfar tal delay in infancy, episodes of ketoacidosis, and abnormal MRI findings in Mahdia- Tunisia, Mahdia, Tunisia. the basal ganglia. Here, we describe a case of Leigh-like disease in Japanese siblings with HIBCH deficiency who presented with developmental delay in infancy, abnormal MRI findings in the globus pallidus, and remarkable keto- BACKGROUND: Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD-III) is an inborn er- acidosis without highly increased levels of pyruvate and lactate in the CNS ror of glycogen metabolism caused by a deficiency of the glycogen debran- during infections. The patients died before the age of 5. A new homozygous ching enzyme (AGL) .Some of the mutations appear to be population speci- missense mutation was identified at the substrate binging site in these pa- fic, whereas others are found in probands from a variety of different ethnic tients, and their parents were found to be heterozygous for this mutation. backgrounds. The recurrent mutation W1327X in exon 31 was identified in The levels of HIBCH activity in patient lymphoblastoid cells and HEK293 the Tunisian population, suggesting a founder effect. In this present study, cells transiently expressing a mutant HIBCH confirmed that the patients had we report a phenotype-genotype correlation of this frequent mutation. ME- HIBCH deficiency. HIBCH deficiency leads to the accumulation of the HIB- THODS: Seven unrelated Tunisian families (from MAHDIA); including 10GSD CH substrate 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA and subsequently an increase in the type III patients were presented with hepatomegaly, progressive severe amount of methacrylyl-CoA in the mitochondrial matrix. The methacrylyl- myopathy and cardiomyopathy. The routine laboratory findings showed CoA then strongly binds to thiol compounds (cysteamine, cysteine, gluta- an elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, thione) and reduces the activity of mitochondrial enzymes by binding to creatine kinase and triglyceride levels. The blood lactate and uric acid levels their SH residues, thus leading to a dramatically decreased reduction state were within normal limits. RESULTS: The biochemical results of ten pati- a Pn 0d 6 .r 2e 6d -u Mced ATP production. ents indicated a striking elevation of glycogen content in the erythrocytes Deleterious mutations in mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase after several hours fasting favours type III GSD and completely decrease of subunit 4 and ATPase subunit 6 in two siblings of Leigh Syndrome debranching enzyme activity was measured in leucocytes. Mutational ana- with progressive motor retardation and loss of visual function lysis of the AGL gene showed a homozygous p.W1327X mutation. Study of M. Urfali, O. Ozdemir, D. Kankaya, A. Uludag, S. Yalcintepe, F. Silan; genotyping method, in 30 families, using four polymorphic microsatellite Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart markers on chromosome arm 1p21, we identified a common haplotype for University, Canakkale, Turkey. all patients originated from MAHDIA. CONCLUSIONS: p.W1327X is the most characteristic mutation for Tunisian patients with GSD IIIa. A common haplotype which shows the existence of a We report a mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase subunit 4 and ATPase sub- specific effect founder of this population confirmation of GSD-IIIa in Tunisi- unit 6 mutations in two siblings from first degree relative couple with Leigh san (from MAHDIA) patients by clinical and genetic findings. Syndrome. Peripheral blood-EDTA samples were used for DNA isolation and 
P06 .24-M target mitochondrial genes were analysed by MLPA technique (MRC-Hol- A yeast model to evaluate the pathogenicity of missense mutations land). A girl of 16 years old presented with a episode of progressive mental causing HHH Syndrome and motor reardation. Until seven year she had normal apperance but at the M. Doimo1,2, F. M. Santorelli3, L. Salviati1,2; 1Department of Woman and Child Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2I.R.P.- age of 7 year, she had developed neurological and imaging features such as; Pediatric Research Institute „Città della Speranza“, Padova, Italy, 3Molecular Medicine loss of visual function, walking and speech impairment and epilepsy com- and Neurodegenerative Diseases, IRCCS Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy. plaints that compatible with Leigh syndrome. We also present a 12-year-old boy with muscle weakness, severe neurological problems, hyperactivity, de- velopmental retardation and complete visual loss. Screening of both siblings, Hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome based on their clinical phenotype revealed the homoplasmic deleterious is an autosomal recessive multisystemic disorder characterized by mental mutation in the mitochondrial DNA MT-AT
P6 (ligation site of probe 12068- retardation and myoclonic seizures. It is caused by mutations in ORNT1 12069) and heteroplasmic deletion in NADH subunit 4(ligation site of probe encoding the mitochondrial ornithine transporter. In placentate mammals 8993-8992R). The maternal mtDNA screening for target deletorious genes there is a second gene, ORNT2, that originated from a retro-transposition is still going on. These findings are consistent with infantile Leigh syndrome event, whose precise function has not been clarified. In yeast the major func- f Po 0r 6 th .2e 7 p -Sresented siblings. tion of this transporter (encoded by ARG11) is to shuttle ornithine from the Lysosomal Storage Disorders (LSDs): Clinical and Genetic Spectrum: mitochondrial matrix to the cytosol. Local Experience at The Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia We employed a yeast model to study the function of human ORNT2 and to N. A. Al-Sanna‘a1, H. Y. Al-Abdulwahed1, P. M. Mathew2, P. M. Mathew2; test the pathogenicity of mutations found in HHH patients. The two human 1Johns Hopkins Aramco Healthcare, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2Vanderbilt Children‘s Ornithine transporters were expressed into the ΔARG11 strain. We found Hospital, Nashville, TN, United States. that ORNT1 but not ORNT2 complements the deletion of the yeast gene. Three ORNT1 residues, conserved from yeast to humans, are not conserved in ORNT2. We could recover ORNT2 activity by replacing these three resi- dues with those found in ORNT1. This result suggests that, despite the high Lysosomal Storage Disorders (LSDs) are clinically and genetically heteroge- level of homology between the two transporters, their function is not over- neous a group of more than 50 inherited disorders, each one is caused by a lapping. We used our yeast model to test the effect of missense mutations deficiency of a particular lysosomal enzyme resulting in a progressive accu- carried by patients with HHH syndrome. All missense mutations tested have mulation of specific macromolecules within the lysosomes. This eventual- a detrimental effect on the function of the human gene indicating that yeast ly leads to an irreversible cell damage, and multi-organs dysfunction. The is a simple and effective system to validate missense mutations occurring in majority of LSDs are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, with the patients with HHH. exception of Fabry disease and Mucopolysaccharidosis type II which follow 
P06 .25-S the X-Linked mode of inheritance. The majority of LSDs are pan-ethnic, but A case of siblings with Leigh-like disease caused by some are more prevalent in specific ethnic groups. 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase deficiency K. Yamada1, M. Naiki2, S. Hoshino3, Y. Kitaura4, Y. Kondo4, N. Nomura1, R. Kimura1, D. Here, we report our local experience of LSDs at Johns Hopkins Healthcare Fukushi1, Y. Yamada1, Y. Shimomura4, K. Miura5, N. Wakamatsu1; Mainst Hospital, Dhahran, Thes tEastern Province of Saudi Arabia from Janua- 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service ry, 1 , 1984 to December, 31 , 2013. A total of 86 patients were diagnosed Center, Kasugai, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate with different LSDs within this time period. ucopolysaccharidosis type VI 132 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, wITaAs LfoYu n| dW toW bWe t.hEeS mHoGst. OcoRmGmon disorder (18 %), followed by juvenile Neuronal Lipfuscinosis (13 %). The patients are distributed according toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .30-M DNA diagnostics of MIDD and MELAS syndromes in Slovakia the geographic location or their tribe origin where particular disorders and D. Gasperikova1, M. Skopkova1, I. Masindova1, L. Valentinova1, J. Stanik1,2, L. Varga1,3, M. specific genotypes were identified. This information had been utilized for Huckova1, D. Danis1, Slovak group for MIDD/MELAS study, M. Profant3, I. Klimes1; asymptomatic carrier testing for those selective disorders among the high 1Diabgene & Diabetes Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology SAS, risk population. However, this valued data could be further utilized for esta- Bratislava, Slovakia, 2First Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3First Department of Otorhinolaryngology, School of blishing the newborn screening of LSDs in Saudi Arabia. 
P06 .28-M Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. Changes of metabolome and lipidome in lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) J. Kurko1, M. Tringham1, L. Tanner2, K. Näntö-Salonen2, M. Vähä-Mäkilä2, T. The two syndromes, MIDD (Maternally Inherited Diabetes and Deafness) Hyötyläinen3, M. Oresic3, O. Simell2, H. Niinikoski2, J. Mykkänen2; and MELAS (Mitochondrial Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Stroke-like 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, episodes) arise on a common genetic cause - a mutation in mtDNA, most 2Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 3VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Espoo, Finland. often m.3243A>G in the gene for tRNALeu. This mutation leads to different clinical symptoms according to heteroplasmy levels in different tissues. Usually, the first presentation of the MIDD syndrome is a progressive bilate- Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI; MIM222700) is a rare autosomal re- ral sensorineural hearing loss emerging in adolescence. Diabetes develops cessive disorder caused by a defeàct of cationic amino acid transport in the mostly in 30 - 40 years of life with clinical picture resembling type 2 dia- small intestine and kidney tubules. All the Finnish patients share the same betes. The MELAS syndrome has a more severe progression with further homozygous mutation c.1181-2A T in the SL
C7 A7 gene which encodes the neurological and metabolic symptoms. y+LAT1 amino acid transporter. LPI can be considered a multisystem disea- We tested 317 patients from 257 families with suspected MIDD or MELAS se which can be life-threatening. The main symptoms of LPI include protein syndromes fulfilling criteria of matrilineal inheritance, conjoint diabe- aversion, failure to thrive, osteoporosis and hepatosplenomegaly. However, tes and hearing impairment, diabetes development after 25th year of life, despite the homogenous mutation in the Finnish LPI patients, symptoms or progressive hearing loss. Patients´ DNA was extracted from peripheral may vary markedly even within one family and may include severe compli- blood and/or buccal mucosa and analysed for presence of m.3243A>G vari- cations, such as alveolar proteinosis and end-stage renal disease. Some LPI ant using RFLP and/or Real-Time PCR. patients also suffer from combined hyperlipidemia. The m.3243A>G mutation was found in 18 patients from 8 families. The Our recent microarray study revealed that also other amino acid transporter heteroplasmy was higher in DNA samples from buccal swabs compared to genes than SL
C7 A7, including non-cationic amino acid transporters, have blood DNA samples. In one case, the heteroplasmy was detected in the buc- changes in their expression levels in LPI patients compared to the controls. cal DNA only, while the DNA sample gave negative results repeatedly. Pati- Therefore, LPI patients seem to have wide and persistent changes in their ents´ phenotypes varied from diabetes as the sole symptom to a complex amino acid balance. This finding together with the fact that patients have picture of the MELAS syndrome. combined hyperlipidemia let us hypothesize that there may be hitherto un- DNA testing helped to determine the diagnosis, thus permiting correct pa- characterized systemic metabolic and lipid alterations in LPI. We studied tient management and intensified surveillance of yet healthy mutation ca- these alterations in the whole blood plasma samples of 26 Finnish LPI pati- riers. ents and 19 gender and age-matched controls. Global metabolomic and lipi- S Pu 0p 6p .3o 1rt -e Sd by APVV 0148-10, ,,Transendogen“ (ITMS 26240220051) domic analyses were performed with GCxGC-TOF and Q-TOF mass spectro- Hostspot mutation regions in a consanguineous population - Leptin, metry, respectively, combined with ultra-performance liquid chromatogra- Leptin receptor and Melanocortin 4 receptor genes phy (UPLC). Taken together, this study will reveal the nature of system-wide S. Saeed1, A. Bonnefond2,3, J. Philippe2,3, E. Durand2,3, O. Sand2,3, J. Manzoor4, M. Falchi1, M. dysregulation of metabolites and lipids associated with the Finnish founder Arslan5,6, P. Froguel1,2,3; mutation of LPI. 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2CNRS UMR8199, Pasteur Institute 
P06 .29-S of Lille, Lille, France, 3European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID), Lille, France, Establishment of Zbtb16 role in metabolic syndrome by means of 4Department of Paediatric Endocrinology Children’s Hospital Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan, single-gene congenic rat strain derivation 5Centre for Research in Molecular Medicine, University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan, B. Chylikova1, M. Krupkova1, F. Liska1, L. Sedova1, D. Krenova1, L. Kazdova2, V. Kren1,3, O. 6Department of Biological Sciences, Forman Christian College, Lahore, Pakistan. Seda1; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Institute The monogenic forms of obesity have so far been demonstrated in only of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Praha, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Physiology, about 3-5% of the severely obese subjects. No systematic study has been Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Praha, Czech Republic. carried out to assess the genetic spectrum of early onset extreme obesity in a single population. The present on-going study was undertaken to iden- tify genetic variants in a cohort of 46 unrelated children with early onset In the process of positional cloning of apparently pleiotropic locus on rat severe obesity. All subjects were first screened for mutations in the leptin chromosome 8 affecting major features of metabolic syndrome we have de- (LEP) and melanocortin 4 receptor (M
C4 R) genes by direct sequencing. Sub- rived the congenic SHR.PD-(D8Rat42-D8Arb23)/Cub (SHR-Lx) strain car- jects found negative for these two genes, were subsequently screened using rying only 7 genes of polydactylous rat strain (PD) origin on spontaneously microdroplet PCR-enrichment (RainDance) combined with NGS. Of the 46 hZbytpbe1r6te nsive rat (SHR) genetic background. In this study, we have derived 2 severely obese subjects, we identified 14 subjects carrying loss of function new minimal congenic subZlibntebs1 i6n order to deteHrmtri3ne the role of candidate homozygous mutations in three genes that are directly involved in leptin- gene of PD/Cub origin carrying 2.9kbp deletion in intron 2. melancortin signaling. Of these, 9 subjects carried mutations in LEP, 3 in Adult male rats of SHR.PD( ) and SHR.PD( ) strains were fed stan- LEPR and 2 in M
C4 R. The genetic variants identified here included a novel dard diet (STD) and subsequently treated with dexamethasone in drinking LEP and LEPR mutation. All mutants had a BMI SDS for age > 3 and were water (0.026 mg/ml) for 3 days. We Zcbotnbt1ra6sted morphometric and mZebttabb1o6- extremely hyperphagic. However, the phenotypic features of M
C4 R mutants lic profiles between the two strains. were less severe compared to those carrying LEP and LEPR mutations. The- The differential segmenHtt ro3f aSHHRt.r
P3 Db(Usp28)Z swub1l0inTem copnrstas5ining oDnrlyd 2 se results together with the findings reported by us previously for the same geneZ bstpba1n6s 254kb, while the one in SHR.PD(Htr3) subline spans 563kb consanguineous population, add up to 28 (25%) of a total of 110 severely and contains 6 genes: , , , , , and . SHR. obese children, with known or novel homozygous mutations in the 3 genes. PD( ) were slightly heavier and showed significantly higher faHsttri3ng Novel genetic findings leading to severe obesity in the remaining probands levels of glucose and triacylglycerides, increased area under the glycemic through screening by whole exome sequencing, is to be anticipated. curve during oral glucose tolerance test in comparison to SHR.PD( ). 
P06 .32-M The insulin sensitivity of visceralZ batdbi1p6ose tissue was comparable in the Did lightning strike twice? two straHintsr,3 however, both basal and insulin-stimulated glycogenesis was S. Seneca1,2, E. Fosselle3, J. De Bleecker4, K. Vancampenhout2, W. Lissens1,2, K. Stouffs1,2, A. substantially impaired in SHR.PD( ) skeletal muscle in comparison to Jonckheere5, R. Van Coster6, J. Smet6, B. De Paepe6, A. Van Lander6, L. De Meirleir5,2; 1UZ Brussel, CMG, Brussels, Belgium, 2REGE (Reproduction & Genetics), Vrije Universiteit SHR.PD( ). Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Algemeen Stedelijk The metabolic disturbances including dyslipidemia, impaired glucZobsteb 1t6o- Ziekenhuis Aalst (ASZ), Aalst, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, AZ Sint Lucas lerance and insulin resiZsbtatbn1c6e of skeletal muscle observed in the original Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 5UZ Brussel, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Brussels, SHR-Lx strain are present in the single-gene congenic SHR.PD( ) Belgium, 6Mitochondrial Investigations Laboratory, University Hospital, Universiteit strain, establishing the as a pleiotropic hub of metabolic syndrome Gent, Ghent, Belgium. features. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | M W itoW chW on. dE rS iaH l (G m. tO ) DR NG A disorders are a large group of multisystem1 c3on3-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .36-M Combined deletions of GALNS and PIEZO1 genes in two patients ditions with a very heterogeneous clinical presentation, initiated by a ma- affected by MorquioA syndrome ternally inherited pathogenic aberration residing in the mtDNA. Over 400 A. Caciotti1, R. Tonin2,1, L. Ferri2,1, S. Catarzi2,1, C. Cavicchi1,2, R. Parini3, M. Rigoldi3, M. mtDNA alterations (including point mutations and deletions) implicated in Scarpa4, I. Giovannini4, S. D. Mooney5, M. Pantaleo6, S. Giglio6, E. Procopio7, M. A. Donati7, a deleterious OXPHOS are already identified, with tRNA leucine and lythsine R. Guerrini1,2, A. Morrone2,1; genes being hot spot mutation regions (www.mitomap.org, updated 15 No- 1Laboratory for Molecular and Cell Biology, Paed Neur Unit and Labs, Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Dept of NEUROFARBA, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, vember 2013). A UK study for the occurrence of 10 frequent point mutations Florence, Italy, 3Metabolic Unit, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 4Department of in cordial blood of newborns, revealed an unexpected carrier frequency of Pediatrics, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 5Buck Institute for Research on Aging, 1 in 200. Usually, mtDNA aberrations are heteroplasmic, a term referring to Novato, CA, United States, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Florence, the co-existence of both wild type and variant mtDNA molecules within the Italy, 7Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Neuroscience Dept, Meyer Children’s Hospital, same cell of an individual and opposite to homoplasmy. We present here the Florence, Italy. case of a young male patient with a cerebral-vascular accident, but also suf- fering from migraine, epilepsy and transient lactic acidosis and renal insuf- ficiency. This clinical picture was compatible with a respiratory chain disea- Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA (Morquio A syndrome) is an autosomal reces- se caused by a mtDNA mutation. First line analysis of his tRNA leucine and sive lysosomal storage disorder, caused by the deficiency of the enzyme N- lysine genes identified both the common MELAS (Mitochondrial Encephalo- Acetylgalactosamine-6 sulfate sulfatase (GALNS). The disease, albeit multi- myopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Stroke like episodes) and MERRF (Myoclonic systemic, is characterized by prevalent skeletal involvement, short stature, Epilepsy with Ragged Red Fibers) mutations, in our patient’s blood. This and cardiorespiratory complications. Here we report two new large genetic is a rather unique and unusual situation. To our knowledge, the presence rearrangements detected at the heterozygous level in two patients (Pt1 and of both pathogenic mtDNA mutations, at clinical relevant levels, within the Pt2) affected by Morquio A. The deletions include part of the PIEZO1 gene same patient has never been reported before. Further molecular investigati- (piezo-type mechanosensitive ion channel component 1) whose mutations on with sequencing technologies of the leukocytes, urine epithelial cells and were found in the dehydrated hereditary stomatocitosis, a dominant auto- o Pt 0h 6e .r 3 t 3is -Ssues of the patient and maternal relatives is in progress. somal recessive syndrome. This syndrome is typically associated with si- A unique combination of mitochondrial ribosomal RNA variants lent to mild hemolysis, perinatal edema, splenomegaly, elevated bilirubin responsible for a form of mitochondriopathy with respiratory levels and iron overload. Pt1 was found to be seemingly homozygous for the complex I deficit and hypoacusia c.1485C>G (p.Asn495Lys) missense mutation in the exon 14 of the GALNS I. Kurelac1, M. A. Calvaruso2, R. Zuntini1, F. G. Specchia3, M. Seri1, A. Pession3, S. Ferrari1, gene. Parents’ genetic analysis, haplotyping some loci in exon 14 of the A. M. Porcelli2, G. Gasparre1; GALNS gene (in the context of a prenatal diagnosis of a patient’s relative), 1UO Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2FABIT, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, and CGH-array revealed that Pt1 has a large deletion encompassing exons 3DIMEC, Bologna, Italy. 10-14 of the GALNS gene and three upstream genes, including a part of the PIEZO1 gene. In Pt2, heterozygous for the c.346G>A (p.Gly116Ser) missen- se mutation, a large deletion ablating exons 9-14 of the GALNS gene and Mitochondrial DNA mutations are known to cause highly heterogeneous exon 1 of the PIEZO1 gene was also identified. The breakpoint regions were phenotypes and their functional effects are often difficult to assess. Here we characterised in both patients and the eventual contribution of the partial present a novel pathogenicity mechanism for two mtDNA variants found in deletion of the PIEZO1 gene on such patients’ phenotype was considered at ribosomal RNA genes. The whole mtDNA was screened in a patient who dis- a biochemical and clinical point of view. 
P06 .37-S played clinical indications of mitochondriopathy, including hypoacusia and Mucopolysaccharidosis type II: molecular analysis in a cohort of male 37% deficit of mitochondrial complex I activity in muscle. No protein-coding patients and in a manifesting female carrier mutations were identified, albeit two rare variants in ribosomal RNA genes, G. Storkanova1, H. Vlaskova1, L. Stolnaya1, M. Hnizdova-Bouckova1, H. Poupetova1, E. namely m.1452T>C/RNR1 and m.2397C>T/RNR2, both homoplasmic and Hruba1, M. Hrebicek1, J. Bartl1, J. Vcelak2, M. Reboun1, L. Dvorakova1; present in the proband mother, who also displayed hypoacusia. Low popula- 1Inst IEM, General University Hospital in Prague and 1stF of Medicine, Charles University tion frequency was revealed for both variants by using the HmtDB database, in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Endocrinology, Prague 1, Czech which collects nearly 16,000 human mitochondrial genomes. Although the Republic. two variants were present in tips of the haplogroups tree, they were never found to co-occur in the same individual, implicating a potential mutual ex- clusivity. Therefore, it was hypothesized that their co-existence might lead Mucopolysaccharidosis II (Hunter syndrome, MPS II) is a rare X-linked re- to perturbations in mitochondrial ribosomal assembly. To this aim, since cessive disorder caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme idurona- the patient’s fibroblasts displayed a normal basal respiration and complex te-2- sulfatase. Major clinical manifestations of the severe form of MPSII I function, mitochondrial proteins translation kinetics was analyzed in cy- include coarse facial features, short stature with joint stiffness, hepatosple- brids derived from patient and control fibroblasts. Patient-derived cybrids nomegaly, cardiomyopathy and mental retardation. showed reduced synthesis of mitochondrial proteins and less efficient re- The diagnosis of MPSII based on clinical symptoms and increased excretion covery of complex I activity after treatment with mitochondrial translati- of glycosaminoglycans in urine is confirmed by enzymatic assay and mutati- on inhibitors. These results imply that the combination of the two variants on analysis. We performed mutation analysis in 24 unrelated male patients might lead to mitochondrial translation defects, mainly affecting complex I and found 21 different mutations: two large and IfoDuSr small deletions, three f Pu 0n 6c .t 3io 4n -M, especially in cells with a high energy demand. sIDmSa2ll insertions, two splicing defects, two nonsense mutations, seven mis- sense mutations and a recombination between gene and pseudogene A new heterozygous compound mutation of the Galns Gene as a cause . Eleven of the found mutations are novel. of mucopolysaccharidosis type IV in two brothers of the south-west of Even though the MPSII is expected to be found in males, few symptomatic Colombia females have been reported. We present a case of four-year-old girl with H. Pachajoa, F. Ruíz, M. F. Hernandez-Amaris; Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia. severe phenotype of MPSII. Molecular analysis of gDNA revealed a missense mutation c.1403G>A (p.R468Q) in heterozygous state, but only the mutant allele was detected at the cDNA level. X-inactivation was nonrandom and Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA), or Morquio syndrome type A is silencing preferentially the mdea tneorvnoal X-chromosome. The mutation was not an autosomal recessive disease caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzy- found in periferal blood samples of both parents. These findings support me N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase (GALNS). the assumption of either a mutation in affected girl or a germinal clinical, biochemical and molecular two brothers with MPS IVA was charac- mozaicism in the girl’s father. terized. In spite of extremely rare manifestation of MPSII in females, an unrelated Decreased enzymatic activity was found to GALNS, and molecular study, female patient with skewed X-inactivation and p.R468Q inherited from her we found a mutation in exon 3 (c.280C> T p.R94C) and not reported a new mother was reported in the literature. mutation in exon 9 (c.998G> A p. G333D). Pending outcome of parents and Support: IGA MZ ČR NT 14015, RVO-VFN64165/2012, MZ ČR-RVO brother. ( PE 0Ú 6,0 .30 80 -2 M3761) Was analyzed with Polyphen-2 (2.2.2) software and this variant is predicted Rare mutation in a patient with MPSII (Hunter disease) as probably harmful. M. Kocova1, E. Sukarova-angelovska1, A. Rolfs2; Two different heterozygous mutations were found to cause the MPS IVA pa- 1Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Center for tient presented a new mutation was found and another had been previously Mental Health, Rostock, Germany. described by Ogawa in 1995. 134 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II) is an X-linked recessive multisystem is now unable to raise arms in horizontal position (61 years old). The second disorder characterized by glycosaminoglycans (GAG) accumulation. Diffe- brother, since 44 years of age, had exercise intolerance, cramps and pain in rent severity of the disease has been described depending on the mutation lower limbs. He currently has a distal amyotrophy. Genetic analysis revealed in the iduronat sulphatase gene (IDS). Here we present a case, with severe that also one of the two sisters presents the p
L56 R and pI193F mutations, MPS II detected early with an unusual duplication of the exon 7. but she is still barely symptomatic. Using a functional in vitro assay, we have The child presented with a delay in reaching milestones of the first year and observed that these mutations caused the production of ATGL proteins with recurrent febrile episodes. At 11 months he had most of the major features diminish lipase activity, but able to bind to LDs. This is a very interesting of the MPSII: hoarse and hairy face, significant thoracic kyphosis, large scull, family since it shows heterogeneity of clinical presentation from relatively hepatomegaly and neurodevelopmental delay. X rays of the spine were ty- asymptomatic phenotype to full expression of a severe myopathy. 
P06 .41-S pical for MPSII. Urinary mucopolysacharides were increased as well as the Producing hiPS cells for disease modeling of NLSD-M iduronatsulphatase in the urine ( 80nmol/h/ml). S. Missaglia1, M. Castagnetta2, D. Tavian1,3, E. M. Pennisi4, D. Coviello2; Genetic analysis confirmed duplication of the exon 7 of the IDS gene in the 1Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, CRIBENS,Catholic child and his mother who does not have any signs of the disease. University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of Human Genetics, Galliera The patient has been followed for 5 years. His growth during this period Hospital, Genoa, Italy, 3Psychology Department , Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, was unusual, he had height 4 SDS above the average for the age, head cir- Milan, Italy, 4UOC Neurologia, A.C.O.San Filippo Neri, Roma, Italy. cumpherence was 3SD above the average. Values of growth hormone were normal, as well as the MRI of the pituitary region. Therapy with Elaprase (Idursulphatase) improved the joint mobility, howe- NLSD-M (Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with Myopathy) is a rare autosomal ver, the boy has severe neuro-developmental delay. recessive disorder characterized by an abnormal intracellular accumulation Although no significant genotype/phenotype relation has been shown in of triacylglycerol into cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs). In most tissues the children with MPSII, it seems that this rare gene change is associated with a lipid droplets (LDs) are cellular organelles for the triacylglycerol storage. severe form of the disease. LDs metabolic functions are mediated by proteins bound to their surface. In Prenatal diagnosis in the mother is planned for the second pregnancy. particular, the lipase that catalyzes the removal of the first acyl chain from 
P06 .39-S triacylglycerol is the patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein Exome sequencing identifies mutations in coenzyme A synthase 2 (PNPLA2). This protein is coded by the PNPLA2 gene whose mutations causing neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation cause the onset of Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with Myopathy. NLSD-M P. Venco1, S. Dusi1, T. Haack2, L. Valletta1, Y. Tsuchiya3, H. Prokish2, P. Goffrini4, B. Garavaglia1, M. Kurian5, N. Nardocci1, S. Susan Hayflick6, I. Gout5, V. Tiranti1; patients are affected by progressive myopathy, cardiomyopathy and hepa- 1IRCCS Foundation Neurological Institute C. Besta, Milano, Italy, 2Institute of Human tomegaly. Other clinical symptoms may include diabetes, chronic pancrea- Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munchen, Germany, 3Institute of Structural and titis and short stature. NLSD-M has, at present, no specific therapy. We have Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 4University of previously reported clinical and genetic findings of some NLSD-M patients Parma, Parma, Italy, 5Neurosciences Unit, UCL-Institute of Child Health, London, United obtaining dermal biopsies from them. Here we report the development Kingdom, 6Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, MI, United States. of hiPSc (human induced pluripotent stem cell) from patients’ fibroblasts harboring different PNPLA2 mutations. Initial hiPSc colony selection was based on morphologic evaluation and on detection of pluripotency surface The common feature of a group of genetic disorders collectively identified markers (SSEA-4 and TRA-1-81). HiPSc also expressed undifferentiated ES as Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) is brain iron cell markers (NANOG, SOX2 and OCT4). Karyotypic analysis of hiPSc lines overload visualized by radiological and histopathological examinations. The indicated a normal complement of chromosomes. Immunohystochemical clinical spectrum of NBIA is wide and includes early-onset neurodegene- evaluations of LDs on hiPSc revealed that they recapitulate pathological ration, with a fatal outcome, and adult-onset parkinsonisms-dystonia. Pan- hallmark of the disease. We propose use of differentiated cells derived from tothenate Kinase Associated Neurodegeneration and Infantile Neuroaxo- hiPSc to study the pathogenetic mechanisms leading to NLSD-M and as a nal Dystrophy are the most frequent forms of the disease due to recessi- cellular model for therapeutic evaluation. 
P06 .42-M ve mutations in PANK2 and PLA2G6. Recently it was shown that NBIA is Niemann Pick type C genetically verified in three Bulgarian patients also caused by mutations in FA2H, AT
P13 A2 and 
C19 orf12 genes, but still A. V. Kirov1,2, T. Chamova3, T. Todorov1, V. Guergueltcheva3, A. Todorova2,1, I. Tournev3,4; in a large proportion of patients, no genetic alteration can be found. Using 1Genetic Medico-DIagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of exome-sequencing strategy we identified, in a NBIA patient, a homozygous Medical Chemistry and Biochemitry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic missense mutation in the gene coding for Coenzyme A Synthase (CoASy). of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of By performing traditional Sanger sequencing in a cohort of NBIA cases, we Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. found another mutant patient. CoASy is a mitochondrial enzyme involved in the last step of Coenzyme A biosynthesis, a important molecule for seve- ral metabolic pathways. The missense mutation affects a highly conserved Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a neurodegenerative lysosomal lipid aminoacid residue in the catalytic site of the enzyme, a region conserved storage disease, with autosomal recessive transmission, characterized by ly- from yeast to human. Western-blot analysis showed that CoASy protein was sosomal/late-endosomal accumulation of endocytosed unesterified chole- absent in patient fibroblasts, whereas RT-PCR revealed that mRNA was re- sterol. The clinical manifestations of NPC are heterogeneous. Most patients duced only in the patient carrying the non-sense mutation. HPLC analysis have a progressive neurologic disease, but both age at onset, which ranges demonstrated reduced CoA concentration in mitochondria isolated from from early infancy to adulthood, and subsequent course vary. mutant yeast and patient fibroblasts. Together with mutations in PANK2, We present the first three Bulgarian female patients with genetically veri- coding for the first enzyme in CoA biosynthesis, mutations in CoA synthase fied NPC disease. Two of the patients are sisters. All three patients presen- i Pm 0p 6i .n 4g 0e - Mon the same biosynthetic pathway causing NBIA. ted neurovisceral involvement with juvenile onset with a mean age of onset Novel mutations in the PNLPA2 gene causing late one-set of neutral varying between 11 and 19 years. Vertical gaze palsy, ataxia, involvement lipid storage disease with myopathy in an Italian family of the upper motor neuron and cognitive decline were prominent features D. Tavian1, S. Missaglia1, E. Tasca2, C. Angelini2; of the whole group, while cataplexy was present in both sibs. Clinical and 1Catholic University, Milan, Italy, 2IRCSS. S CAMILLO, Venice, Italy. echographic examinations revealed hepatomegaly in one of them and sple- nomegaly in all of the affected. Neuroimaging changes encompass cerebellar atrophy and white matter changes. In two of them chitotriozidase was mo- Neutral Lipid Storage Disease with Myopathy (NLSDM), is a rare autosomal derately elevated, while in the third patient it had a borderline value. The recessive disorder characterized by an abnormal accumulation of triacylgly- molecular genetic testing detected missense mutation in the NP
C1  gene. The cerol into cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs). Mutations in the PNPLA2 gene sisters are compound heterozygous carriers of the mutations c.3019C>G, cause the onset of NLSDM. PNPLA2 codes for adipose triglyceride lipase p.Pro1007Ala and c.3718G>A, pGly1240Arg. The third patient is a com- (ATGL), an enzyme that hydrolyses fatty acids from triacylglycerol. NLSDM pound heterozygous carrier of the mutations c.1421C>T, p.(Pro474Leu) and patients are mainly affected by progressive myopathy, cardiomyopathy and c.2974G>A, p.(Gly992Arg). hepatomegaly. Other clinical symptoms may include diabetes, chronic pan- In conclusion, the detected mutations in our patients are already known in creatitis and short stature. To our best knowledge, twenty six different PN- the literature. All detected mutations were missense and caused the same PLA2 mutations have been described in thirty two NLSDM patients. Here classical phenotype in Bulgarian patients. These cases are the first geneti- we report the clinical and genetic findings of a NLSDM Italian family with cally confirmed NPC cases in Bulgaria. different affected members. In our patients we identified two novel PNPLA2 missense mutations (p
L56 R and pI193F). Since age of 38 years, the oldest ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 135 brother had weakness and hypotrophy of right upper arm and kyphosis. HeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .43-S An exome-wide study for obesity in Singaporean East-Asian samples R. Dorajoo1, S. Ooi2, J. Bei1, Y. Li1, J. Foo1, H. Liany1, X. Zheng1, K. Sim1, K. Loke2, T. Aung3, C. high-resolution melting curve analysis. DireScHt 2sBe1quencing was performed Cheng3,4,5, Y. Teo1,5,6, T. Wong3,4,7, E. Tai5,8,9, C. Khor1, Y. Lee2,10, J. Liu1; for samples with melting patterns deviating from wild-type. Screening of all 1Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Department of Pediatrics, Yong coding exons and intron-exon boundaries in identified thirteen diffe- Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, National University Hospital rent non-synonymous heterozygous variants in our populations. Several of System, Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore these were found both in lean and obese subjects, suggesting these are com- National Eye Centre, Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Department of Ophthalmology, mon polymorphisms. However, five private, heterozygous, non-synonymous Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, National University Hospital System, Singapore, Singapore, 5Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, variations were present in obeseS Hch2iBld1ren only. Furthermore, we also iden- National University of Singapore, National University Hospital System, Singapore, tified five variants solely in lean individuals. Our mutation analysis has de- Singapore, 6National University of Singapore Graduate School for Integrative Science and monstrated that variation in the gene is frequent in both groups, with Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 7Office of Clinical distinctive variatioSnHs 2bBe1ing present on either side of the weight spectrum. Sciences, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, 8Department of We therefore speculate that both weight-increasing and weight-decreasing Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, National variations exist in for which different functional effects can be reco- University Hospital System, Singapore, Singapore, 9Duke–National University of Singapore gnized. Further functional testing of the variants identified here will thus be Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, 10Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore. necessary to fully understand the impact of these variants on SH2B1 and the leptin signaling pathway. 
P06 .45-S Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and a novel OTC mutation in Aims:Previous genome wide-association studies(GWAS) have identified over two Bulgarian families 40 obesity-associated variants; however, these are primarily non-coding A. Todorova1,2, S. Tincheva1,2, D. Avdjieva3, H. Kathom3, R. Tincheva3, T. Todorova2, V. common variants and account for &lt3% obesity heritability. We performed Mitev1; an exome-wide association study(EWAS) to identify obesity-associated co- 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department ding variants using the Illumina HumanExome array. of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Methods:192 East-Asian(Singaporean Chinese and Malay) early-onset obe- se cases(body weight &gt150% of ideal weight for height and onset &lt10 years of age) and normal BMI adult controls (18.5kg/m2 ≤BMI&lt23.0kg/ Disorders caused by affected urea cycle enzymes are characterized by hy- m2) from the Singapore Chinese Eye Study (SCES) were genotyped. Samples- perammonemia, encephalopathy, and respiratory alkalosis. Ornithine trans- QC procedures were performed(Table 1). SNP-QC excluded SNPs with call- carbamylase (OTC) deficiency is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism of rate below 95%, rare(MAF&lt0.05%) and/or monomorphic SNPs in total the urea cycle which causes hyperammonemia. The disorder is treatable samples/cases and SNPs with significant deviations from Hardy-Weinberg with supplemental dietary arginine and low protein diet. Here we report equilibrium(p-value&lt0.0001). 47,605 SNPs remained for statistical analy- two unrelated Bulgarian families with OTC deficiency, subjected for genetic sis. Fisher’s exact test was performed for rare SNPs(3%&ltMAF≤0.05%) and testing. The first patient is a 3 years old female with persisting hyperam- logistic regression adjusting for population stratification(first 5 principle monemia, elevated transaminase activity and elevated orotic acid excretion components) and sex was carried out for common SNPs(MAF≥3%) using in urine. The girl demonstrated behavioral and sleep disturbances. The ge- PLINK(v1.07). 58 hits with study-wide p-value&lt1.05x10-6 were followed- netic test revealed a novel frameshift mutation c.695dupT in exon 7 of the up using samples at extremes of BMI distribution (cases= BMI&gt27.5kg/ OTC gene. The mutation is de novo, both parents are not carriers. After the m2 and controls= BMI&lt18.5kg/m2) from 2 adult Singaporean Chinese genetic verification of the disease, the patient was subjected to low protein datasets[SCES (321 cases/140 controls)and Singapore Prospective Study diet and ammonaps with a very good outcome. The second patient is a 1 Program(S
P2 , 89cases/94controls)]. year old boy with abnormal profile of organic acids (organic aciduria), un- Results:A coding SNP (exm1271824) at FANCA showed strong associations detectable citruline level and hyperammonemia. The genetic test revealed in the discovery EWAS [OR=4.69(2.67-8.2895%CI),p-value=4.95x10-7) and a missense mutation c.622G>A, p.(Ala208Thr) in exon 6 of the OTC gene. was validated in the adult datasets(metap-value=0.0327). The risk allele(G) The mutation is available in the literature and inherited from the mother. was enriched in Chinese and Malay early-onset cases(MAF=3.904% and The carrier mother does not demonstrate any clinical symptoms of the di- 10.004%) as well as adult cases(mean MAF=2.232%) and was rare among sease. The presented data enlarges the spectrum of OTC gene mutations in controls(MAF=0.717%). patients with persisting hyperammonemia. The genetic testing provides the Conclusion:We identified an obesity-associated coding variant at FANCA in possibility for adequate genetic counseling and prenatal diagnostics in af- East-Asians. fected families. Table1 
P06 .46-M Sample SCES Early-onset extreme obese Biochemical diagnosis of Peroxisomal disorders by GC/MS: Egyptian children patients with X-linked adrinoleukodystrophy Total samples 2576 192 Sample with call-rate &lt 0.99 67 0 M. M. Ibrahim, E. M. Fateen, A. S. A. Gouda; Samples with extreme heterozygozity (&gt National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. 5 1 3 SD) 1st degree relatedness 38 8 PCA outliers 50 5 Samples remaining 2416 178 Introduction: Peroxisomes are organelles responsible mainly for metabo- Samples with BMI data 2403 NA lism of lipids and peroxides. Lack of peroxisomes or dysfunction in any of Controls (BMI between 18.5kg/m2 and 23.0kg/m2) 1083 NA their normal functions is the cellular basis for human peroxisomal disorders 
P06 .44-M (PDs). Identification of new missense variations in the SH2B1 gene in obese Aim of the Work: diagnosis of peroxisomal disorders among a high risk and lean individuals group of Egyptian patients using gas chromatography mass spectrometry. E. Aerts1, D. Zegers1, J. K. Van Camp1, K. Van Hoorenbeeck2, G. Massa3, A. Verrijken4, I. L. Subjects and Methods: Forty six patients suspected to have peroxisomal dis- Mertens5, J. Cassauw1, K. Van Ackeren1, R. R. Rooman2, K. N. Desager2, L. F. Van Gaal5, W. orders were included in this study. Their ages ranged from 2 to 20 years. Van Hul1, S. Beckers1; They were referred to The Biochemical Genetics Department, National Re- 1Centre of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of search Centre from all over Egypt. Forty one (89%) were males while five Pediatrics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Pediatrics, were females (11%). Parental consanguinity was positive in 28 cases (61% Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium, 4Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology Diseases, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Department of Endocrinology, out of 46). Very long chain fatty acids were quantified after extraction from Diabetology and Metabolic Diseases, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. plasma of all cases using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) technique. Results: The present study included 46 cases suspected clinically to have one SH2B1 Genetic evidence coming from animal studies, genome-wide association of the peroxisomal disorders; four of them (8.7%) proved to have X-linked studies and studies looking for structural variation, has identified the adrenoleukodystrophy by quantitative determination of the very long chain gene as a novel candidate gSeHn2eB f1or obesity. Moreover, the SH2B1 protein fatty acids after extraction from their plasma. The other 42 cases showed has been shown to act as a positive regulator of leptin signaling. As such, normal profile for very long chain fatty acids. it seems plausible that rare variants might exist that influeSnHc2eB fo1od Conclusion: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is the only type diagnosed intake and weight regulation. Therefore, we have designed an extensive mu- among the study group of the suspected Egyptian cases. This study showed tation analysis investigating the prevalence of genetic variation in in that GC/MS analysis for VLCFA discriminates patients from controls, repre- both Belgian obese and lean individuals. We have screened500 obese child- senting a non-invasive, reliable, specific and sensitive method for the dia- r1e3n 6and adolescents and 500 healthy, lean individEuSalHs fGor 2m0u1ta4ti o| nMs wILiAthN , gITnAosLisY o f| pWerWoxiWso.mEaSl HdiGso.rOdeRrsG.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P06 .47-S X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy from Iran, reporting 8 cases and a novel mutation In the background of mitochondrial disorders both mtDNA and nuclear DNA Y. -. Shafeghati1,2, Z. Hadipour1, F. Hadipour1, S. Shafeghati1; mutations can be detected. POLG1 is one of the most important gene re- 1Med. Genet. Dept., Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics sponsible for the intergenomial communication of the two genomes. POLG1 Research Center, University of Social Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic gene mutations may cause a wide range of clinical symptoms. However Republic of Iran. many POLG1 mutations have been published the phenotypic spectrum is increasing. Aims: The frequency of the POLG1 mutations in patients with intergenomial X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a rare peroxisomal disorder communication disturbance and their phenotype-genotype correlation was resulting in progressive cerebral demyelination, axonal dysfunction, and analyzed. adrenal insufficiency. It is the most common peroxisomal disorder with an Patients and methods: 100 Hungarian patients with mitochondrial diseases estimated birth incidence of about 1 out of every 20,000. There is no ethnic were investigated. Most of them had mitochondrial abnormalities and mul- predominance. tiple mtDNA deletion in the muscle tissue. The mtDNA deletion was investi- X-ALD most severely affects male hemizygotes. The age of onset and morbi- gated by long PCR, the POLG1 gene was sequenced. dity are highly variable and progression is unpredictable. Male hemizygotes Results: In the POLG1 gene of our cohort 7 pathogenic mutation was detec- may initially present with neurological symptoms in two different forms: ted in 6 families. Segregation analysis detected 9 further family members (X-ALD) with childhood presentations, and Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) harbouring the pathogenic mutations. In our cohort 3 SNPs showed asso- that presents in adulthood. ciation with valproate toxicity, 1 SNP was a genetic modifying factor. The X-ALD, affects 4 to 8 year old boys. Primary manifestations of X-ALD are mo- most common clinical symptoms were myopathy (50%), neuropathy (34%), derate cognitive deficits followed by diminished visual acuity, central deaf- ataxia (34%), depression (34%), PEO (17%), epilepsy (17%), ptosis (17%), ness, cerebellar ataxia, hemiplegia, convulsions and dementia leading to a lipomas (17%), hypoacusis (17%). In 1 case with Alper’s syndrome valproa- neurovegetatiAvBe CsDta1te or death within several years. te toxicity resulted in fatal outcome. X-dAeL nDo viso inherited in an X-linked manner. About 93% of index cases have Conclusion POLG1 mutation is a common genetic cause of the mitochon- inherited the mutation from one parent; and 7% of individuals have drial disorders. It is recommended to investigate at first in patient with a mutation. mitochondrial disease having mendelien inherited PEO, ataxia, myopathy, The diagnosis of X-ALD is based on clinical findings. MRI is always abnormal epilepsy and psychiatric disorders. In cases with epilepsy the predisposing in males with neurologic symptomABs CaDn1d often provides the first diagnostic SNPs to valproate toxicity in the POLG1 gene shall be screened to avoid the lead. Plasma concentration of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) is abnor- serious side effects. 
P06 .50-M mal in 99% of males with X-ALD. is the only gene known to be asso- Very high prevalence of infantile Pompe disease in the Bushinengue ciated with X-ALD. population of French Guyana as a result of founder effect and Here we report 8 affected boy with X-ALD from Iran. VLCFA was increased endogamy strongly, and MRI images were typical in all of them. Molecular analysis of A. Verloes1, N. Elenga2, Y. Poulain3, S. Zedong3, F. Kugbe3, S. Buende3, I. Amoune3, N. ABCD1 gene confirmed the diagnosis in 4 of the patients and we detected 1 Parez3, G. Carles4, R. Boukhari5, C. Hermine6, C. Bazurko6, C. Caillaud7, R. Froissart8, H. n Po 0v 6e .4l m 8-u Mtation in one. Ogier de Baulny9, M. Nacher6, J. Benoist10; Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata due to a novel mutation in the 1Department of Genetics, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France, 2Dept of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital, Cayenne, France, 3Dept of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital, PEX5 Saint Laurent-du-Maroni, France, 4Dept of Obstetrics, Regional Hospital, Saint Laurent- T. Barøy1, D. Misceo1, M. S. Ebberink2, S. Ferdinandusse2, A. Holmgren1, B. Woldseth3, du-Maroni, France, 5Dept of Biochestry, Regional Hospital, Saint Laurent-du-Maroni, T. Hughes1, K. Stadskleiv4, B. Tvedt4, E. Ormerod1, R. J. A. Wanders2, H. R. Waterham2, E. France, 6Centre d‘Investigation Clinique Antilles Guyane, Cayenne, France, 7Department Frengen1, P. Strømme4,5; of biochemistry, Necker-Enfants-Malades Hospital, PARIS, France, 8Department 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, of biochemistry, Lyon University Hospital - GH Est, PARIS, France, 9Department of Norway, 2Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Depts. of Pediatrics and Clinical Metabolic Disorders, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France, 10Department of Chemistry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Biochemistry, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France. 3Department of Medical Biochemestry, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Clinical Neurosciences for Children, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Pompe disease (Glycogen storage disease type II or acid maltase deficiency) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by an accumulation Peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD) are caused by mutations in one of glycogen in the lysosome due to deficiency of the lysosomal acid alpha- of 13 PEX genes. Based on the clinical and biochemical presentation the glucosidase enzyme. The infantile form of Pompe disease is a rare lysosomal patients are divided into: 1) Zellweger spectrum disorders (ZSD) and 2) storage disorder usually symptomatic before age 1, with universally fatal Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1 (RCD
P1 ). ZSD is charPacEtXe7ri- outcome before age 4 in absence of enzyme replacement therapy. Incidence zed by multiple organ defects and elevated levels of very long chain fatty of neonatal Pompe disase is usually 1/150000 birth in most country, except acids (VLCFA). The patients have mutations in one of 12 genes (not ). Taiwan, where its incidence is evaluated around 1/15000. We have identi- 2) RCD
P1  is characterized by congenital cataraPcEtsX, 7multiple skeletal abnor- fied 17 newborns with infantile Pompe disease born in 10 years in the same malities, normal VLCFA, reduced plasmalogens and elevated phytanic acid maternity to parents from the Bushinengue tribes living at the frontier bet- levels. Most RCD
P1  patients have mutations in , but a RCDP phenotype ween french Guyana, an overseas French department, and Suriname. This with slightly different biochemical profile is caused by deficiency of either population descends from African-onset slaves who escaped to the Amazo- of the two peroxisomal enzymes DHAPAT and ADHAPPSE iXn5volved in plasma- nian forest and settled along the lower Maroni River in the nineteen century, logen biosynthesis. where they grew as a geographical and cultural isolate population till re- We identified a homozygous frame shift mutation in in three siblings cently. Genetic investigation revealed that all patients were homozygous or with congenital cataracts, multiple skeletal abnormalities, moderate to compound heterozygous for 2 mutations: p. Arg854* that has already been severe intellectual disabilitPyE, Xe5pilepsy, demyelinating neuropathy, normal reported in the african-american population, and p.Gly648Ser, previously VLCFA and high phytanic acid levels. This clinical and biochemical profile is considered to be a mild variant. Despite probable incomplete detection, in agreement with RCD
P1 . encodes two isoforms, PEX5S and PEX5L, the raw incidence of infantile Pompe disease in the area is at least 1/2000 and the mutation in our patients is located in a sequence only present in births, corresponding to a heterozygote frequency of 1/22. Early detection PEX5L and required for interaction with PEX7, which is important for per- allowed us to put under enzyme replacement therapy the last 3 cases, which oxisomal import of three enzymes (ADHAPS, PHYH and thiolase 1), carrying where all CRIM positives. Implementation of systematic newborn screening a peroxisomal targeting signal 2 (PT
S2 ). We believe that disruption of the w 
P0 il 6l .b 5e 1 i -m Splemented in Guyana by mid 2014. interaction between PEX5L and PEX7 causes the RCPDEPX-5like phenotype in New insights into PPARG regulation mechanisms: the unexplored our patients. We currently study patient fibroblasts in order to further cha- impact of alternative splicing on its function Pra 0c 6te .4ri 9z -e S the peroxisomal defect caused by this novel mutation. M. Aprile1, M. R. Ambrosio1,2, V. D‘Esposito2, F. Beguinot2,3, P. Formisano2,3, V. Costa4, A. Ciccodicola1; The frequency of POLG1 gene mutations in Hungarian patients with 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Translational Medical mitochondrial disorders and the analysis of phenotype - genotype Sciences (DiSMeT), University of Naples “Federico II”, Italy, Naples, Italy, 3Institute of correlation Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology (IEOS), CNR Naples, Italy, Naples, Italy, A. Kekesi1, A. Gal1, V. Remenyi1, V. Harsfalvi1, K. Komlosi2, B. Melegh2, M. J. Molnar1; 4Institute of Genetics and Biophysics „Adriano Buzzati-Traverso“ (IGB), National 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Budapest, Hungary, 2Department of Research Council (CNR), Naples, Italy. Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pecs, Hungary. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 137ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The nuclear receptor PPARγ is a key regulator of cell proliferation and dif- tious episode. ferentiation, including adipogenesis. Defects in PPARγ signaling are impli- Literature does not propose systematic and consensual investigations for cated in metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular diseases and cancer. The wide bilateral congenital cataract. However, the wide range of aetiologies of number of ligands, coregulators and target genes, combined to different congenital cataracts implies various but specific and appropriate manage- protein isoforms and alternative transcripts, determines the complexity of ments. This case highlights the interest of cardiac ultrasounds in congenital PPARγ biological role. cataract investigation. 
P06 .54-M Notably, our group identified a new PPARG isoform (γORF4) with a domi- Cellular model of polyprenol reductase deficiency: useful tool for nant negative effect toward PPARγ, suggesting underestimated aspects of SRD5A3-CDG study its regulation. We also recently described the differential contribution of A. M. Buczkowska1, A. Dziembowski1, D. Lefeber2, E. Swiezewska1; PPARG canonical transcripts and ORF4 variants to adipocyte differentiation 1Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, of human mesenchymal stem cells. The analysis demonstrated that PPARG 2Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. transcription is regulated in a time-specific manner, through differential SRD5A3 usage of distinct promoters, also indicating that dominant negative isoforms are actively transcribed and regulated throughout the adipogenesis. Moreo- Polyprenol reductase encoded by gene plays crucial role in the ver, during this study we identified another PPARG transcript, named Δ5, dolichol cycle by catalyzing the conversion of polyprenol to dolichol. Phos- with features similar to ORF4. Through transfection experiments, the usa- phorylated derivatives of dolichol are SkReyD 5mAo3lecules in protein glycosylation ge of a PPARγ agonist and luciferase assay, we demonstrated its dominant and glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthesis. Decreased content negative activity and an altered ability to regulate cellular proliferation. In of dolichols due to the mutations in gene has catastrophic conse- order to understand, on a genome-wide scale, the effects of γΔ5 isoform on quences for the cell since it results in hypoglycosylation of proteins and in PPARγ target genes’ expression, we also performed a transcriptome analy- human manifests as Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation. SRD5A3-CDG pa- sis by RNA-Sequencing in HEK293 cells over-expressing Δ5, in presence of tients have shown a substantial phenotypic variability despite the presence a PPARγ agonist. Our results indicate that different dominant negative iso- of truncating mutations in all of them. Biochemical and molecular studies forms encoded by PPARG gene may have a relevant, and yet unexplored, role on the cellular model of SRD5A3 deficiency are necessary for bSeRtDte5rA u3nder- in the biological function of PPARγ, with a potential involvement in physio- standing of the biological consequences of decreased level of dolichols and l Po 0g 6ic . 5a 2n -d M pathologic conditions, of which PPARγ is a key player. identification of the correlation between mutations found in with Association of rs780094 in GCKR with Metabolic syndrome and clinical symptoms. SRD5A3 related traits were confirmed in Tehran lipid and glucose study To this end we established an in vitro system of HEK293 cells expSRreDs5siAn3g M. S. Daneshpour1, M. S. Fallah1,2, B. Sedaghatikhayat1, A. Ebrahimi1, K. Guity1, F. Azizi3; miRNA silencing endogenous in an inducible manner under a tetra- 1Cellular and molecular research center, Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for cycline regulated promoter complemented by mutated variants of . endocrine sciences Shaheed Beheshti University of Me, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Selected cell lines will be used for the analysis of various cellular effects 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, of dolichol deficiency: protein N-glycosylation, O-mannosylation and GPI- 3Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti biosynthesis, isoprenoid lipid homeostasis, expression of selected genes. University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Furthermore, the model might be useful for SRD5A3-CDG diagnostics and possible therapy development by maintaining the cellular dolichol/dolichyl phosphate pool at optimal level. Background: The minor T-allele of rs780094 in intronic region of glucoki- 
P06 .55-S nase regulator gene (GCKR) is reported to be associated with a number of A homozygous mutation in the transcription factor THA
P11  in a metabolic traits including higher triglyceride levels and lipid metabolite patient with methylmalonic aciduria and a severe neurological factors in GWA studies mostly European ancestry. Here we report replica- phenotype ting these finding in Iranian population using samples from the Tehran lipid A. Brebner1, H. Yu2, D. Watkins1, V. Adoue1,3, T. Pastinen1,3, F. Skovby4, T. H. Shaikh2, D. S. Rosenblatt1; and glucose study (TLGS), a large population-based cohort study. Methods: 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2University of Colorado School of Medicine, Among TLGS participant 1777 cases with metabolic syndrome according to Aurora, CO, United States, 3McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, ATPIII criteria, were selected and compared to 3909 control. In GCKR gene, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4The Juliane Marie Centre, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. rs780094 genotyped using the Centaurus (Nanogen) platform in DeCODE genetics. Association of T-allele with metabolic syndrome and lipid related variables (e.g. triglyceride, cholesterol, HDL and LDL) was tested using plink Inborn errors of bvliCtamin B12 (cobalamin) meMtaMboAlCisHmC result in homocystin- software after age and sex adjustment. Results: Replicating previous fin- uria and methylmalonic a.c iduria, either alone or in combination. The most dings TLGS participants showed that T-allele of rs780094 was associated common ercrbolrX, c caused by mutations in , results in the combi- with higher triglyceride levels (p <10−8), higher cholesterol levels (p < 0.05) ned metabolic phenotype We recently described a biochemicaMllMy sAiCmHiClar in- and metabolic syndrome prevalence (p < 0.0025). Conclusion: Our findings bcbolrXn error, ,caused by mutations in thecb gleCne for the X-linked transcrip- showed the association between the presence of T allele in rs780094 and tional coregulator HCF
C1 , which activates the transcription cobfl C . The metabolic syndrome and related traits among Iranian population and con- et al patients were originally diagnosed as ; howevecrb tlCh ey have a severe f Pir 0m 6.e 5d 3 p -Srevious result in other ethnicity. neurological and milder biochemical phenotyMpeM tAhCaHnC mostH CF
C1 patients (Yu Sengers syndrome: case report and review of literature . AJHG, 2013, 93:5). One patient, characterized as by complemen- L. Fenwarth1, J. Ghoumid1,2, E. Holinski-Feder3, S. Manouvrier1,2, C. Vincent-Delorme1; tation analysis, had no mutations in either or by Sanger 1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CLAD Nord de France, sequencing. Clinically, he had methylmalonic aciduria, encephalopathy, pro- CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 2Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France, 3Medizinisch found mental retardation, seizures and tetraplegia and dicebdl Ca t age 10. His Genetisches Zentrum, München, Germany. biochemical manifestations were mild, with higher cellular function of both cobalamin-dependent enzymes than normally sTeHenA Pfr1o1m patients and no homocysteine elevation. Sequencing of patient genomic DNA identified Sengers syndrome is a rare autosomal-recessive condition (prevalence < a homozygous mutation, c.240C>G (p.F80L) in , the gene encoding 1/1 000 000) associating congenital cataract, hypertrophic cardiomyopa- a zinc finger transcription factor that functions with HCF
C1 . The mutation thy, skeletal myopathy and exercise-related lactic acidosis. affects a residue located in a conserved zinc finger-containing domain, two We report on a non-consanguineous, full-term, eutrophic child with bila- residues away from 
P78 , responsible for interacting with the zinc ion, and is teral congenital cataract. Metabolic investigations were normal. Cataract predicted to be probably damaging by Polyphen-2. F80 is conservMeMd AtoC HzeC- surgery was early performed. At three weeks and three months of age, du- brafish and in 9/12c hbulXm an THATPH pAroPt1e1ins. Transcriptome profiling showed ring an infectious episode, the infant developed respiratory distress, and significant down-regulation of the same group of genes, including , deceased from cardiac insufficiency. X-ray revealed cardiomegaly, and seve- in fibroblasts from and the patient. 
P06 .56-M re lactic acidosis was found in blood sample. No genetic analysis could be Rogers syndrome (thiamine responsive megaloblastic anemia performed in the patient. Thus we decided to analyse acylglycerol kinase syndrome): the success of multidisciplinary approach (AGK) gene in both parents in this context. V. Mikstiene1, J. Songailiene1, J. Byckova2, G. Rutkauskiene3, E. Jasinskiene4, R. We identified heterozygous mutations in AGK gene in both parents allo- Verkauskiene4, E. Lesinskas2, A. Utkus1; wing retrospective diagnosis of Sengers syndrome in the child and clear 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,Vilnius University, genetic counselling for the family. Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre of Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases, Vilnius University Hospital The management of congenital cataract should be very early and exhau- Santariškių clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Pediatric Oncology and Haematology unit, stively performed, to exclude Sengers syndrome, considering the risk of 138 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG cardiac failure during cataract surgery or during any intercurrent infec-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Hospital of Lithuanian university of Health Sciences, Kaunas Clinics, Kaunas, Lithuania, 4Department of Endocrinology, Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas Clinics, Kaunas, Lithuania. Discussion: Neurologic manifestations, clearly related to age, were more common than expected. JOA and SSPROM scales discriminated asymptoma- tic from symptomatic heterozygotes. Both might be useful tools to follow Thiamine responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome is a rare autosomal disease progression, in future studies. 
P06 .59-S recessive metabolic disorder. Only ~80 cases have been described mainly Should persons with intronic variations of α galactosidase A and in consanguineous families. A gene SL
C19 A2 coding high affinity thiamine stroke be considered ‚manifesting carriers‘ of Fabry disease? transporter mediating vitamin B1 uptake through cell membrane has been G. Altarescu1, E. Hakam-Spector1, Y. Herskovitz1, R. Beeri1, D. Elstein2, D. A. Zeevi1; identified. Classic triad of features is characteristic to the disease - megalo- 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Shaare blastic anemia, deafness and non-type I diabetes. Zedek Medical Center, Gaucher Unit, Jerusalem, Israel. We report a 3y old boy born in nonconsanguineous family. From the early days the boy was easy irritable and suffered with common affecto-respirato- ry spasms. The psychomotor abilities developed according to age. The slow- Persons with unexplained early-onset stroke have been targeted for scree- down of speech development was noticed from the 7th month of life. Insulin ning surveys for Fabry disease, the most common of the three X-linked lyso- dependent non-type 1 diabetes was diagnosed at the age of 1y. At the age somal disorder, because Fabry patients with stroke are more likely to have of 1.5y the profound bilateral hearing loss was diagnosed and cochlear im- the life-threatening progressive cardiac and renal manifestations and would plantation performed with good auditory and speech outcomes. During 3rd therefore most benefit from early diagnosis and intervention with enzyme year of life severe megaloblastic anemia without folic acid or vitamine B12 replacement therapy (ERT). Among 173 Israeli patients with unexplained deficiency and bilateral maculopathy has developed. The coding sequence cryptogenic stroke screened for mutations in the Fabry α galactosidase A of GJB2 gene was analyzed and genotype c.[313_326delAAGTTCATCAAGG (GLA) gene, sequencing identified four with 2-4 GLA intronic variants, one G];[=] (p.[(Lys105Glyfs*5)];[=]) was identified. MtDNA 1555A>G mutation of whose father and three sisters had the same variants. Two variants, c.640- was not revealed. The patient had slightly elevated branched chain amino 16A>G (g.10115A>G) in intron 4 and c.1000-22C>T (g.10956C>T) in intron acids (Leu, Ile, Val) in plasma. The clinical diagnosis of TRMA syndrome was 6, were common to all patients; only one male with a deletion in intron 2 had suspected and daily supplementation with thiamine 100mg started. The low residual enzyme activity; both he and the father had decreased mRNA condition of the patient markedly improved several days after the initiation expression. X-chromosome inactivation was not highly skewed in the six fe- of treatment - therapy has positive effect on anemia and glycemia, also psy- males. Nonetheless, these cases differ largely from those in the literature of chological status of the child clearly improved. The results of SL
C19 A2 gene carriers of intronic variants with multi-system Fabry disease. These current m 
P0 o 6le .5cu 7l -a Sr testing will be achieved in the near future. patients may not benefit from ERT, raising the question whether intronic Tyrosinemia type II (Richner-Hanhart syndrome): a new mutation in variants alone are disease-causing or whether these patients should be con- the TAT gene s Pi 0d 6er .6e 0d -‚ Mmanifesting carriers‘ of an X-linked recessive disease. J. Pavelic1, R. C. Betz2, K. Fumić3, V. Čulić4; A pilot study on an expanded newborn screening program in 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Palestine Germany, 3University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 4University Hospital Split, Split, S. A. Khatib, A. Ayyad; Croatia. Alquds University Medical School, Jerusalem, Palestinian Territory. TAT In the present study we report the clinical features and the molecular ge- Objective: Until this day newborns in Palestine are being screened for phe- netic investigation of the tyrosine aminotransferase ( )gene in a young nylketonuria and congenital hypothyroidism only. However, a number of girl from Croatia with Richner-Hanhart sTyAnTdrome, mainly suffering from other metabolic diseases have been recognized amongst the population, photophobia, hyperkeratosis of the palmes and soles and slight neurological including amino acid and urea cycle disorders. The study was conducted abnormalities. Sequencing analysis of the gene revealed a novel homo- in an effort to investigate the possibility of finding such cases in newborns zygous missense mutation c.1250G>A (p.R417Q) in exon 12, and herewith throughout the West Bank of Palestine. In addition, reference ranges for a confirmed the clinical diagnosis. Showing the first symptoms in babyhood, number of amino acids and urea cycle intermediates will be established. at the age of 8 years it was for the first time clinically diagnosed that the Study Design: A cross-sectional observational study design was used and patient suffers from tyrosinemia type II and a therapy with tyrosine and the study was conducted in all 12 districts of the West Bank. Convenience phenylalanine reduced diet has been started successfully. All symptoms dis- sampling was used to recognize the study newly born participants. The appeared within 2-4 weeks. Since that time, we have been following the girl sample size was 4240 and an informed consent form was collected from until today for more than ten years. She is in a good condition, and attends all parents. The study blood collection cards were collected over a one year the normal high school program. 
P06 .58-M period by Ministry of Health staff. The study cards were shipped to the Uni- Neurological impairment is frequent among heterozygote women for versity of Liege Human Genetics Department in Belgium for analysis using X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy - A clinical, neurophysiological and tandem mass spectrometry. biochemical study Results: Statistical analysis showed a significant relationship between weight L. B. Jardim1, C. T. Habekost1, P. Schestatsky1, V. F. Torres2, V. F. Torres2, D. M. Coelho2, C. R. and some amino acid levels. A significant difference between some amino Vargas1, V. Torrez1, L. V. C. Portela1, F. S. Pereira1, U. Matte2; acid levels and the districts was also observed. The reference range for each 1Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Hospital de Clinicas de amino acid and urea cycle intermediates tested was calculated based on the Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil. non-parametric percentile method as indicated by CLSI 
C28 -A3. Conclusion: Based on our established reference ranges for each analyte the results showed that 22.5% of the tested samples (955) had at least one ami- Background: Neurologic impairments in female heterozygotes for X-linked no acid level in the upper 2.5% of the population. Adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) are poorly understood. Our aims were to 
P06 .61-S describe the neurological and neurophysiological manifestations of a cohort First experience of idursulfase enzyme replacement treatment in of X-ALD heterozygotes, and to correlate them with age, disease duration, patients with Hunter syndrome in Bashkortostan Republic (Russia) mutations, X-inactivation and serum concentrations of a marker of neuronal T. Nekrasova1, Y. Timasheva2; 1Centre of Children Psychoneurology and Epileptology, Ufa, Russian Federation, damage, NSE. Methods: All 45 heterozygotes of our institution, with pre- 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics USC RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. vious VLCFA and molecular diagnosis, were invited to be evaluated through myelopathy scales JOA and SSPROM, nerve conduction studies and somato- sensory evoked responses. X-inactivation pattern was tested by HUMARA Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II, Hunter syndrome, OMIM309900) is methylation assay. Serum NSE was measured by eletrochemiluminescense. a rare X-linked recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficiency of Results: Thirty-three heterozygotes were recruited: 29 (87%) were sympto- the enzyme iduronate-2-sulphatase, resulting in accumulation of glycosami- matic. Symptomatic and asymptomatic women presented different m±sd noglycans (heparin sulfate and dermatan sulfate), multisystem organ failure ages (43.9 ± 10.2 versus 24.3 ± 4.6), JOA (14.5 ± 1.7 versus 16.6 ± 0.2) and and early death. SSPROM (86.6 ± 7.9 versus 98.4 ± 1.1) scores (p<0.05). Both JOA (r = -0.68) In the Republic of Bashkortostan (Russia), enzyme replacement therapy and SSPROM (r = -0.65) correlated with age (p = 0.0001, Spearman). De- with idursulfase (recombinant iduronate-2-sulphatase) was established layed central ascending conduction studies on the lower limbs were pre- since 2011. Five patients with confirmed Hunter syndrome, aged between sent in 72% of all heterozygotes, and correlated with SSPROM (r = -0.47, p = 3.5 and 12 years, were registered for the program. Patients had been treated 0.018, Spearman). NSE values were higher in heterozygotes than in controls with weekly intravenous infusions of idursulfase for 24 months. At the begin- (12.9 ± 7 and 7.2 ± 7 ng/ml, p = 0.012, MEaSnnH-WGh 2itn0e1y4 U )|. .M MIuLtaAtiNon, sITevAe-LY |n WingW ofW th.eE tSreHatGm.eOntR, Gall patients showed moderate to severe neurolo1g3ic9al rity and inactivation patterns were not associated with neurologic status.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .03-S Role of the mutations identified in the 5’UTR of ANKRD26 responsible abnormalities, including hydrocephaly, ventriculomegaly, and white matter for an inherited form of thrombocytopenia lesions, as well as other symptoms, such as facial and thoracic deformities, C. Gnan1, L. Arnoldo2, M. Faleschini3, D. De Rocco3, R. Sgarra2, G. Manfioletti2, A. Savoia1; joint stiffness, exudative otitis media, hepatosplenomegaly and intellectual 1IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Department of Life Sciences, Trieste, Italy, disability. After at least 9 months of treatment, urinary glycosaminoglycans 3Department of Medical Sciences, Trieste, Italy. levels had decreased, and liver and spleen size were reduced. Idursulfase treatment was well tolerated (adverse reactions occurred in none of the pa- tients). However, cognitive development had shown clear tendency to de- The joint application of clinical and genetic investigations has greatly expan- cline over time, resulting in severe mental retardation by the end of second ded the knowledge of inherited thrombocytopenias, leading to characteri- year of treatment. Our experience of enzyme replacement therapy of Hunter zation of new forms, such as ANKRD26 related disease (ANKRD26-RD). AN- syndrome provides an evidence of the beneficial somatic effects and also KRD26-RD is characterized by thrombocytopenia and bleeding tendency, as suggests the importance of early diagnosis of the disease which might lead well as an increased risk of leukemia. Since the identification of ANKRD26, to more favorable impact on cognitive development of patients. as the gene responsible for the disease, 12 different mutations, all localized 
P07 .01-S in a short stretch of 22 nucleotides in the 5’UTR, have been identified. To ACTN1 : identification of novel mutations in a cohort of Italian IMTP further investigate their effect, we tested the activity of the basal promoter patients together with the wt or the mutant 5’UTR in a reporter assay. In a megaka- M. Faleschini1, C. Marconi2, R. Bottega3, T. Pipucci2, G. Baj4, P. Noris5, A. Pecci5, C. L. Balduini5, M. Seri2, A. Savoia3; ryocytic cell line, mutations generated a statistically significant increase of 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Medical Genetics the luciferase activity, suggesting that the 5’UTR plays a role in inhibiting Unit, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Institute the expression of ANKRD26 during megakaryopoiesis. Consistent with this for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 4Department hypothesis, ANKRD26 is expressed in human CD34+ and BFU-E but it is of Life Sciences, BRAIN Centre for Neuroscience, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, hardly detectable in megakaryocytes. Bioinformatic analysis revealed puta- 5Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Università di Pavia-IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo tive binding sites for transcription factors in the region hit by mutations. In Foundation, Pavia, Italy. order to identify these factors, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Among different complexes of the same size in both wt and mutant samples, we observed an additional band generated by two mutant Inherited macrothrombocytopenia (IMTP) is a highly heterogeneous group probes. Experiments of super-shift EMSA are in progress to characterize the of inherited disorders characterized by a low platelet count and abnormally pathogenetic factor(s) that could interfere with the physiological control of platelet size. Even though IMTP-causing mutations have been reported in the ANKRD26 expression. several genes, only 50% of patients have to date a molecular diagnosis. 
P07 .04-M In March 2013 Kunishima and colleagues identified alpha-actinin 1 (ACTN1) HBB gene mutation spectrum of beta-thalasemia patients from as a new gene responsible for IMTP which accounted for 5,5% of cases in Turkey Japanese population. To evaluate the frequency of ACTN1 mutations in the G. Toksoy1, Z. Karakaş2, H. Kayserili3, V. Karaman1, S. Başaran1, Z. Uyguner1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Italian population, we performed a screening in 160 probands in which all Turkey, 21Department of Pediatric Haemotology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul the known forms of IMTP were previously excluded. Ten, including 8 no- University, Istanbul, Turkey, 31Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, vel, different missense have been identified in 11 patients. All except one Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. (p.D666V) segregated with the macrotrombocytopenia within the fami- lies. In vivo transfection experiments in Hela cells were performed to de- monstrate the pathogenicity of the variants identified. Except for p.D666V, Beta-thalasemia is defined by the absence or decrease of beta globin via preliminary data indicate that the missense mutations are associated with mutations of the HBB gene and is one of the most common hereditary dis- disorganization of cytoskeleton, as determined different co-localization of orders existing in Turkey. With the mean carrier frequency of β-thalassemia mutant and wild type actinin-a with actin. Further studies will be needed to being 2.1% in the general population, and rates as high as 10% concentrated d Pe 0t 7e .r 0m 2i -n Me how these mutations may lead to the onset of disease. in certain regions of the country, hemoglobin electrophoresis of the indivi- Simultaneous silencing of Mcl-1 and survivin expression by small duals at premarital stage and molecular diagnosis of the carrier individu- interfering RNA and enhancement of chemosensitivity in human als for genetic counseling cannot be overstated. Targeted diagnosis of the acute myeloid leukemia cells HBB gene mutations can be readily obtained using commercially available E. Sakhinia1, H. Karami2, B. Baradaran3, M. Asghari Estiar4, A. Esfahani5, M. Sakhinia6; reverse dot blotting kits. A sequence analysis of the complete HBB gene co- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical vering UTR and near-gene regions provides a 99% mutation detection rate. Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of We report here a summary finding of HBB gene analysis for 163 Turkish Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, patients, along with their family members totaling 248 individuals, refer- 3Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic red with beta-thalassemia indications covering the period of 2010-2014. 39 Republic of Iran, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Hematology and Oncology Research Center, were found to have homozygous, 31 possessed compound heterozygous and Shahid Ghazi Hospital, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of 63 possessed heterozygous mutations. Overall, a total of 205 alleles were Iran, 6Faculty of Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. found to have mutations. The first 15 frequented mutations covered 88% of the entirety of all mutations. The summary range is as follows: c.93-21- G>A (IV
S1 +110G>A) 30.7%; c.135delC (p.ser45fs) 7.8%; c.92+1G>A (IVS- Anti-apoptotic genes such as Mcl-1 or survivin may be responsible for resi- I-1) 7.8%; c.25_26delAA (p.Lys9Valfs) 5.9%; c.20A>T (p.Glu7Val) 4.9%; stance to apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs. The aim of this stu- c.92+6T>C (IVS-I-6) 4.9%. We discuss that the commercial targeted kits dy was to investigate whether the knockdown of Mcl-1 or survivin expres- detect up to 80% of the HBB mutations for our patients. Sequence analysis sion by small interfering RNA (siRNA) would sensitize HL-60 acute myeloid of the HBB gene from 5’ promoter (-250bp) to 3’ promoter region (*250bp) leukemia cells to etoposide. Knockdown of Mcl-1 or survivin expression was contributes 15% to the mutation detection rate. 
P07 .05-S confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR and Western Blotting. The effects Identification of two novel mutations in NLR
P3  gene in Italian of Mcl-1 or survivin down-regulation on the chemosensitivity of the cells patients with Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) was assessed by the MTT assay. Cell viability and apoptosis were also deter- L. D‘Agruma1, M. Rendina1, A. Rella1, M. Miscio1, A. De Cata2, F. Molinaro2, L. Zelante1; mined using the trypan blue exclusion assay and the annexin V/PI double- 1Servizio di Genetica Medica, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni staining method, respectively. Transfection of siRNAs markedly decreased Rotondo, Italy, 2UOC Medicina Interna, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San the expression levels of both Mcl-1 and survivin genes in a time-dependent Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. manner. Down-regulation of Mcl-1 or survivin significantly inhibited the proliferation and enhanced the chemosensitivity of the cells. Furthermore, pretreatment with siRNAs clearly enhanced the etoposide-mediated apo- Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) is an autoinflammatory ptosis of the leukemic cells. Surprisingly, siRNA co-transfection had a more syndrome caused by mutations in NLR
P3  gene. Three clinical types exist: antileukemic effect relative to the single siRNA transfection. Our study de- familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS), Muckle-Wells Syndrome monstrates that a triple approach involving siRNA-mediated silencing of the (MWS) and chronic infantile neurological, cutaneous and articular (CINCA) Mcl-1 and survivin along with chemotherapeutic drugs could potentially be syndrome. More than 150 different diseases-causing mutations have been used to lower the effective doses of the chemotherapeutic drugs and reduce reported in NLR
P3  with more than 80% of them localized in exon 3. drug-related toxicities. We report here two cases of CAPS in Italian patients harbouring two de novo mutations. The first case is a 20 years old boy with CINCA. He has severe phenotype with clinical features mimicking those of juvenile rheumatoid ar- 140 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG thritis, including recurrent episodes of skin rash, fever, arthralgia, and cen-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tral nervous system involvement. In this patient was identified a c.913G>A Only the CD34+/CD71low population is significantly different between pati- (p.D305N) mutation in the exon 3 of the NRL
P3  gene. The analysis of the ents with DBA and controls (p< 0,05). This population that is always present parents did not show the same mutation. Mutations at the codon 305 of in healthy controls, is absent in patients with DBA. The absence of CD34+/ NRL
P3  gene have been described but not the Asp >Asn substitution. The CD71low population in DBA patients plasma is in agreement with the low second case is a 35 years old woman with FCAS. She showed recurrent epi- level of erythroid progenitors in the patients’ BM. The area under the ROC sodes of skin rash, fever, arthralgia and conjunctivitis after generalized ex- curve that compares patients with DBA and healthy controls is 0.92. Further posure to cold. In this patient the c.2113C>A (p.Q705K) mutation in exon 3 analyses are needed to ascertain whether this assay may be used in the cli- of the NRL
P3  gene has been identified. Also in this case the analysis of the nics. 
P07 .08-M parents did not show the same mutation. In conclusion, we report two de Analysis of rRNA maturation in patients with Diamond-Blackfan novo mutations in NLR
P3  gene in CAPS italian patients and we suggest the anemia molecular screening of NRL
P3  gene in patients with a strong suspicious of S. Parrella1, A. Aspesi1, E. Pavesi1, S. Macrì1, E. Garelli2, A. Carando2, P. Quarello3, U. a Pu 0t 7o .i 0n 6fl -a Mmmatory syndrome. Ramenghi2, S. R. Ellis4, I. Dianzani1; 1Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, IPEX-like syndrome: beyond FOX
P3  analysis 2Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, M. Vignoli1,2, S. Ciullini Mannurita1,2, K. Goudy3, L. Passerini3, A. Tommasini4, A. 3Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, İkincioğulları5, G. Guariso6, R. Bacchetta3, E. Gambineri1,2; 4University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States. 1Department of “NEUROFARBA”, section of Child‘s Health, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2“Anna Meyer“ Children‘s Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy, Division of Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cells and Gene Therapy, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 4IRCCS Burlo Garofalo, Paediatric Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA MIM # 105650 ) is an inherited erythro- Immunology Laboratory, Trieste, Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric id aplasia caused by mutations in 11 genes encoding ribosomal proteins of Immunology and Allergy, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 6Unit of the small (RPS) or the large ( RPL) subunit. The 28S, 5.8S and 18S rRNAs Paediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University are transcribed as a single precursor that is processed into mature rRNAs, Hospital of Padova, Padova, Italy. which form the ribosomal subunits with the RPs. Mutations in a RPS or a RPL alter the processing of 18S or 28S and 5.8S rRNAs, respectively. The analysis of pre-rRNA by Northern blot in cell models or lymphoblastoid cells IPEX-like patientsF OhXaPve3 clinical features resembling IPEX syndrome (Im- from patients shows different patterns of precursors depending on which mune-dysregulation, Polyendocrinopathy, Enteropathy, X-linked) without RP is mutated. mutations in the gene (Xp11.23), that encodes a t+ranscr+iptional re- Mutation analysis of 11 genes is needed to confirm the diagnosis. We have gulator critical for the development and function of CD4CD25 regulatory looked whether rRNA analysis of activated lymphocytes could improve the T cells. These cells are indispensable for the maintenance of immune self- DBA diagnostic approach. We extracted total RNA from activated lympho- tILo2leRraalnface andS ThAoTm5ebostasis by suppressing aberrant or excessive immune cytes of patients with DBA (4 mutated in RP
S19 , 1 in RP
S17 , 2 in RP
L11 , 4 responses. in RP
L5  and 5 with unknown mutations). Northern blot analysis was per- IL a2nRda lfa are two genes whose deficiency has been associated formed using appropriate probes. All the patients with a mutation in a RPL with IPEX-like syndrome and both encode proteins involved in FOX
P3  pa- showed the accumulation of a 32S precursor that is visible also by ethidium tFhOwXaPy3. cod.es for the alfa subunit (CD25) of the receptor complex bromide staining. Northern blot analysis allowed to discriminate patients for I
L2 , and the interaction between I
L2 -I
L2 Ralfa is the first step that trigger with mutations in RP
S19  from those with mutations in RP
S17 . We observed trascriIpLt2ioRn the rRNA maturation defect also in a patient with a mutation in RP
L5  after In this study we describe the identification of three different point mutati- stable remission from the disease. ons affecting alfa one of them was recently published by our group and This is the first demonstration of rRNA abnormalities in patient lymphocy- the other two were never reported in literature. tes. rRNA processing analysis is a useful approach to direct the subsequent All variations are missense mutations leading to a single aminoacid substi- mutational screening. tution that modify the protein structure. Two are located in exon 4 and alter 
P07 .09-S the “sushi” domain that seems to be fundamental for I
L2 -I
L2 Ralfa interac- A case of factor X (FX) deficiency caused by novel mutations Q56K, tion, the third mutation determines the substitution of a cysteine that may Q104X be involved in the formation of a disulfide bond, thus causing the alteration H. Koo; Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. of the tertiary structure of the receptor. Cytofluorimetric analysis revealed total absence of CD25 expression in all three patients, strengthening the hypothesis that these mutations cause the disruption of the receptor structure thus leading to its degradation. Further Background studies are ongoing to better characterize the consequence of these mutati- Inherited deficiency of coagulation factor X(FX) is a rare bleeding disorder ons from the molecular and cellular point of view. with prevalence of 1 per 500,000 in general population. Mostly, the conditi- 
P07 .07-S on is associated with missense mutation, which is a valuable clue. Immunophenotypic profile of erythroid extracellular vesicles Case and results obtained from peripheral blood of patients with Diamond-Blackfan A six month-old infant was hospitalized due to fever, lethargy and seizure Anemia with no significant medical history. Symptoms were attributable to brain S. Macrì1, R. Crescitelli1, E. Pavesi1, C. Botto2, P. Quarello3, C. Vizziello4, P. Notari4, U. abscess subsequently diagnosed. For operability evaluation, prothrombin Ramenghi2, S. R. Ellis5, I. Dianzani1; 1Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time tests were performed, 2Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, and the results were prolonged to 121.6 seconds and 109.1 seconds, respec- 3Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Turin, Italy, tively. Coagulation factor activities were also measured. Factor II, V, X activi- 4Chemical Clinical Analysis laboratory, SCDU, Azienda Universitaria Ospedaliera ties were 80%, 99% and 1%, respectively. Factor VII, VIII, IX, XI and XII acti- Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular vities were all in normal ranges. FX activity of the parents was not tested due Biology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States. to refusal of family study. FX of the patient was sequenced on coding regions and exon-intron boundaries. We found 1 missense mutation and 1 nonsense mutation of FX (c.
C343 A in exon 4, c.
C487 T in exon 5) that correspond to Diamond-Blackfan Anemia (DBA) is a rare inherited anemia. Heterozygous amino acid substitution Q56K and stop codon at Q104, respectively. Both mutations in one of 11 ribosomal protein genes cause defective ribosome amino acids are located in EGF-like-domain 1. biogenesis. Erythroid progenitors (BFU-E and CFU-E) in bone marrow (BM) The patient suffered hematochezia, hematuria, subdural hemorrhage and show a proapoptotic phenotype. Suspicion of DBA is reached after exclusion hemarthrosis which were all irrelevant to the operation. Bleeding was of other forms of BM failure syndromes and the diagnosis is confirmed by treated with tranexamic acid and fresh frozen plasma with monitoring of FX mutations analysis. To improve DBA diagnosis, we tested a new approach activity which increased from 1% to 22%. based on the study of extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs have been isolated Conclusion from plasma of patients with DBA and appropriate controls by differenti- The amino acid substitution of glutamine to lysine at EGF-like-domain 1 is al centrifugations and analyzed by flow cytometry. To study erythroid EVs probably related to functional inactivation of coagulation FX. Confirmation we evaluated three erythroid markers: CD34, CD71 and CD235a. EVs im- by expression study will be required. munophenotypic profiles of 8 patients with DBA, 20 healthy controls and 10 patients with other hematological diseases have been characterized. We were able to identify different clusters: CD71+/CD34-, CD34+/CD71low and ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 141 CD235a+. In all gates the absolute number of EVs/µl has been evaluated.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .10-M Study of IL-1β and IL-1RA gene polymorphisms in familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) A gluten free diet (GFD) is the most common diet worldwide. It is not only J. Ibrahim1,2, E. Chouery3, J. Lecron2, A. Mégarbané3, M. Medlej-Hashim1; an effective treatment for celiac disease, but also commonly followed by in- 1ER030-EDST, Faculty of Sciences II, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Laboratoire dividuals with gut complaints. How a GFD affects the human microbiome Inflammation, Tissus Epithéliaux et Cytokines, EA4331, Poitiers University, Poitiers, is largely unknown. We studied changes in the gut microbiome in healthy France, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Saint Joseph University, Beirut, individuals following a short-term GFD. Lebanon. 23 healthy volunteers followed a GFD for 4 weeks. Stool samples were coll- ected before the start of the diet, then at weekly intervals during the GFD and again at weekly intervals for 4 weeks on normal diet after a wash-out Objectives. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a recessively transmit- period. The samples were sequenced using 454 sequencing of the 16s rDNA ted autoinflammatory disease, caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. The (hyper variable region 3 to 4). We used closed reference picking to cluster pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β has been implicated in the pathogenesis reads into OTUs using the 2013 GreenGenes reference. Function imputation of FMF and the balance between IL-1β and its receptor antagonist IL-1RA of the OTUs, is performed used PiCRUSt and HUMAnN. plays an important role in the development of the disease. Since polymor- We observed a limited difference ofV tehilelo GnFelDla icnetaeerventioCnl, owstirtihd itahe intra- phisms in the IL-1 gene cluster have been suggested to have an effect on IL- subject variation being larger than the effect from a short-term diet change. 1β and IL-1RA production, our aim was to determine a possible association However, we did observe that family (class ) was si- of specific polymorphisms in IL-1β and IL-1RA genes with susceptibility to gnificantly less present in the GFD samples (p=6.58e−05, q=0.0132). Based and/or severity of FMF. on richness of the samples we were able to define two groups which show Subjects and Methods. Forty-two genetically confirmed FMF patients and a difference in response to a GFD period. The lower richness group showed 42 controls were genotyped for IL-1β(-511C/T), IL-1β(-31T/C) and I
L1 - more bacterial variation in composition during the diet change. Furthermo- 1β(+3954T/C) polymorphisms by PCR- digestion. The IL-1RA VNTR was re, sixteen gene pathways showed significant association to the change in identified by fragment-size analysis. IL-1β and IL-1RA levels were evaluated diet. In conclusion, in this we observed changes in microbiome and gene by Luminex in supernatants of PBMC cultures of 30 FMF patients with and composition associated to a GFD. 
P07 .13-S without 24h stimulation of monocytes by LPS. A dominant-negative GFI1B mutation causes autosomal dominant Results. The CC genotype and C allele at positions -31 and +3954 of IL-1β gray platelet syndrome gene were observed more frequently in FMF patients than in controls. No L. Van Laer1, D. Monteferrario2, N. Bolar1, K. Hebeda3, S. Bergevoet2, H. Veenstra2, B. significant difference was observed in the genotypic and allelic frequencies Laros2, M. MacKenzie2, E. Fransen1,4, G. Van Camp1, F. Preijers2, S. Salemink5, W. van of the IL-1β(-511) polymorphism and IL-1RA VNTR. FMF patients carriers Heerde2, G. Huls2, J. Jansen2, M. Kempers5, B. van der Reijden2, B. Loeys1; of IL-1β(-31) CC genotype were associated with a 2 fold increase in LPS- 1University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp (Edegem), Belgium, induced IL-1β secretion, compared to patients carrying other genotypes. 2Laboratory of Hematology Nijmegen Centre of Molecular Life sciences, Radboud Conclusion. These results indicate that IL-1β gene polymorphisms at positi- University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, Radboud ons -31 and +3954 may be associated with susceptibility to FMF. IL-1β(-31) University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4StatUa Center for Statistics, may also contribute to the severity of the disease, probably by modulating University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. IL-1β secretion. 
P07 .11-S Host genotype-pathogen interactions in the PBMC cells of healthy individuals identify critical immune regulators Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) is a hereditary, usually autosomal recessive U. Võsa1,2, Y. Li3, S. Withoff3, M. Netea4, C. Wijmenga3, V. Kumar3; bleeding disorder caused by defective production of α-granules in platelets. 1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of The α-granule deficiency may be attributed to the failure of megakaryocytes Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, to efficiently route proteins into α-granules, thereby hampering their matu- Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of Medicine, Nijmegen Institute for Infection, ration. We describe a large family with an autosomal dominant type of GPS Inflammation & Immunity (N4i), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, characterized by mild to severe bleeding complications. In addition to gray Netherlands. platelets lacking α-granules, affected individuals had other GPS-associated phenomena like thrombocytopenia, emperipolesis, myelofibrosis and de- creased expression of platelet factor 4. To determine the disease causing Immune response to infection or vaccination is significantly influenced mutation we performed linkage analysis and identified a candidate locus by host genetic components and autoimmune disease associated genetic on chromosome 9q34 (LOD score 3.9). We considered GFI1B (Growth factor variants may have stronger influence on such a response. One way to in- independence 1B), located within this region, an excellent candidate gene vestigate the role of genetics in differential susceptibility to infection is to because of its function as a transcriptional repressor essential in erythroid correlate the gene expression levels response to stimulation with autoim- and megakaryocyte lineages. We identified a nonsense mutation in exon 6 mune disease associated SNPs. We performed a pilot experiment by stimu- (c.859C>T, p.Gln287*) that co-segregated with the GPS. The mutated tran- lating peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of 46 volunteers with script was not targeted for nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, resulting in a four different pathogenes for 4 and 24 hours. Gene expression profile was protein truncated within its 5th zinc finger, a domain essential for DNA bin- determined with Illumina arrays and genotype of 366 autoimmune disease- ding. Using luciferase reporter assays we demonstrated that the truncated associated SNPs were genotyped using Immunochip. Linear model with sti- GFI1B protein was unable to repress gene expression and that it inhibited mulation status, genotype and stimulation-genotype interaction term was wild type GFI1B in a dominant-negative manner. Subsequently, we perfor- fitted for each probe and SNP. Due to the small sample size, we were not med an immunophenotypical analysis of affected family members. Myeloid able to identify globally significant pathogen-genotype interactions after and erythroid lineages were unaffected, but we observed aberrant platelets multiple testing correction, so possibly relevant interactions were prioriti- and dysplastic abnormalities and disturbed lineage marker expression in zed based on uncorrected p-values, allelic trends and effect size differences GFI1B-mutated megakaryocytes. These studies define GFI1B to be key to between unstimulated and stimulated conditions. 133 SNPs showed inter- megakaryocyte development, platelet production and α-granule biogenesis. 
P07 .15-S action effect for at least one probe. The most significant interaction was bet- Deletion between HLA-A and HLA-G genes is associated ween rs6087990 and a gene encoding macrophage receptor (uncorrected to HLA-A*23~HLA*G01:04~UTR-3~HLA*
E01 :01 and HLA- P=3.72×10-5). We were also able to identify SNP-gene pairs showing similar A*24~HLA*G01:04~UTR-3~HLA*
E01 :03:01 haplotypes stimulation-genotype interaction in case of several different stimulations. A. Mihidjai1, K. Barton1, V. Ferreira1, F. Carlini1, C. Picard1,2, J. Di Cristofaro1; These genes may play role in the disease susceptibility and serve as possib- 1UMR7268 ADES, Marseille, France, 2Immuno-genetics laboratory, Etablissement le candidates for functional studies. The methods and preliminary results Français du Sang Alpes Méditerranée, Marseille, France. from this study reveal novel insights into the role of autoimmune SNPs and underscore the importance of large scale genotype-environment interaction s Pt 0u 7d .i 1e 2s -i Mn future. The genetic region between HLA-A and HLA-G covers 300 kb and is highly The influence of a short-term gluten free diet on the human polymorphic. A large-scale deletion of 50 kb between these loci associated microbiome to HLA-A*23 and HLA-A*24 has been described. This deletion includes many M. J. Bonder1, X. Cai2, E. F. Tigchelaar1, M. C. Laguna1, B. Hrdlickova1, G. Trynka3, J. A. M. genes and pseudogene, as HLA-H. Dekens1, H. Zhong2, D. Gevers3, C. Wijmenga1, Y. Wang2, A. Zhernakova1; We showed in a study conducted in a Malian population that HLA-A al- 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2BGI, Shenzhen, China, leles display LD with HLA-G alleles and UTR; HLA-A*23:01:01~HLA- 3Broad institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States. G*01:04~UTR3 haplotype displaying the highest frequency. This strong LD could be emphasized by a deletion occurring between those two loci, thus 142 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, rITedAuLcYin g| tWheW recWom.EbSinHatGio.nO raRteG between HLA-A and HLA-G. This haplotypeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index I
L22  conservation might also be the result of a specific biological effect, as HLA- compared to children with a low-risk genotype. These data indicate that ge- G*01:04 has been associated with high sHLA-G production and that HLA- notypes in the promoter enhancing IL-22 production is preferentially A*23:01~HLA-G*01:04 haplotype may constitute a risk factor for allograft enriched in psoriasis with onset before puberty and may predispose to de- rejection in renal transplantation. Interaction with other immune effectors velopment of psoriasis at an early age. 
P07 .18-M as HLA-E could also be incriminated. We showed that 2 haplotypes in Tswa Whole exome sequencing as a tool for detection of the genetic basis of Pygmies, HLA-G*01:04~E*01:03:01 and G*01:04~E*01:01 exhibited LD va- inherited thrombocytopenias lues. B. D. Johnson, G. C. Lowe, S. Drake, S. J. Fletcher, J. Fütterer, D. J. MacDonald, S. P. The aim of our study is to explore the region between HLA-A and -E. We Watson, N. V. Morgan, UK GAPP Study Group; genotyped HLA-A, -G, -H and -E alleles in 71 french samples and explore University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. their association. We found that 11 haplotypes represent 75% of all the haplotypes. HLA-H deletion was exclusevely associated with A*23~HLA*G01:04~UTR-3- Thrombocytopenia is a common aspect of platelet function disorders (PFDs) ~HLA*
E01 :01 and HLA-A*24~HLA*G01:04~UTR-3~HLA*
E01 :03:01 ha- which account for a significant proportion of bleeding diatheses. Identifica- plotypes. A new HLA-H*02:04(:02) allele was descibed and associated with tion of the genetic basis of congenital thrombocytopenias is often a difficult A*11~HLA*G01:01~UTR-7~HLA*
E01 :01. task due to the variability in clinical presentation and the relative redundan- This study suggests that the HLA region between HLA-A and -E loci displays cy of known platelet receptors and signalling pathways. DNA-based analysis a haplotype conservation that might be the results of biological function. has therefore previously played a confirmatory role dependant on platelet This haplotype conservation has to be further studied to understand their function testing to validate candidate mutations. Using a novel approach c Pl 0in 7i .c 1a 6l -im Mplication. underpinned through the Genotyping and Phenotyping of Platelets (GAPP) HLA-DRB1 genotyping in romanian patients with early rheumatoid study we have extended the DNA-based analysis, especially in cases where arthritis a qualitative defect is observed, to unravel the underlying genetic defects A. Martinescu, L. Hanzu-Pazara, M. Suta; in patients diagnosed with inherited thrombocytopenia. The combination Ovidius University, Faculty of Medicine, Constanta, Romania. of platelet function testing, including flow cytometry, with whole exome sequencing provides a complete and complementary platform for efficient and cost effective investigation. Additional integration of a database of 338 As being the most debated polygenic disease, rheumatoid arthritis elicits platelet-related genes into our analysis improves detection and allows for great interest in the study of association with genetic factors in various eth- the identification of variants in novel genes for further functional studies. nic and racial groups. Some of the HLA-DRB1 alleles are encoding shared To date our unique workflow has confirmed 14 mutations in 21 index ca- epitope amino acids that are not conferring the same risk in various popu- ses, including two in novel genes with previously unreported mechanisms lations. within platelet formation or function. Whole exome sequencing is therefore Our study focuses on the evaluation of the distribution of HLA-DRB1 alleles an effective tool to study the molecular genetics of inherited thrombocyto- in Romanian patients with early rheumatoid arthritis, along with controls penias with excellent applicability for patient investigation when coupled by using PCR- SSP method. w 
P0 it 7h . 1p 9la -t Selet function testing. HLA-DRB1 allele genotyping showed statistically significant differences Mutation spectra of the ITGB2 gene in Iranian families with Leukocyte given by a higher allele frequency for *04, *01 and *14. Also, in our study Adhesion Deficiency type 1 was observed a lower frequency for *03,*11,*13 and *15 alleles in patients V. R. Yassaee1,2, S. Boosaliki2, F. Hashemi-Gorji1, P. Dashti2, N. Parvaneh3, M. Piryaei2; group compared with controls. Using a high resolution kit for HLA-DRB1 1Genomic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, *04 group we found a high frequency for *0404 and *0408 alleles, in con- Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti trast with *0401 and *0402 which were significantly lower in patients than University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research Group for Immunodeficiencies, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Children’s Medical Center, Tehran in controls. *0403, *0405 were not associated with early rheumatoid arthri- University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. tis in our group diagnosed according with new classification criteria ACR/ EULAR 2010. Results of our study are demonstrating the need of a continuous work of Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) type 1 is a rare, autosomal recessive allele tracing and associating with rheumatoid arthritis, especially in cases disorder characterized by the triad of symptoms including recurrent bac- early diagnosed in order to create sufficient premises for instituting a cor- terial infections, impaired wound healing, primarily localized to skin and rect and possibly long term remissive treatment. mucosal surfaces. Beta-2 integrin subunit (ITGB2) gene located on 21q22.3 Keywords: early rheumatoid arthritis; HLA-DRB1; allele distribution 
P07 .17-S responsible for neutrophil dysfunction and impaired leukocyte cell adhe- Genetic association of childhood psoriasis to the I
L22  promoter is sion. A total of 19 consanguineous families with typical LAD1 were inve- linked to higher promoter activity and increased IL-22 production in stigated. Blood samples were collected after informed and written consent T cells was obtained. Isolated DNA derived from subjects was amplified using in- P. Nikamo1, S. Cheuk1, J. Lysell1, C. Enerbäck2, K. Bergh1, N. Xu Landén1, L. Eidsmo1, M. tronic primers. The entire sequence of the ITGB2 gene, including regulatory Ståhle1; region, coding regions and exon-intron boundaries were analyzed for any 1Karolinska Institutet, Dermatology Department, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Ingrid Asp alteration by PCR and Sanger sequencing. A total of 10 mutations scattered Psoriasis Research Center, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. throughout the ITGB2 gene were ascertained in the 15 subjects. Six different types of mutations previously reported, including IV
S4 -6 C>A, c.382G>T (As- p128Tyr), c.715 G>A (Ala239Thr), IV
S7 +1G>A, c.843DelC (Asn282fsX41), Psoriasis is a common, immune-mediated and genetically complex skin c.1907DelA (Lys636fsX22) and four novel mutations consist of IV
S5 -11G>T, disease. Recent large-scale studies have reported a number of psoriasis c.576dupC (Asn193GlnfsX72), c.706 G>A Gly236Arg, IV
S7 +1G>T were iden- susceptibility genes. Most of these genes were identified in large cohorts tified. Moreover, two compound heterozygote and five homozygote muta- not defining the clinical phenotypes and exploration of genes in distinct tions were detected in exon 6, suggested this region of ITGB2 gene might subtypes of psoriasis is missing. We recently reported that straItLif2ic2a tion ac- be a hot spot. This is the first comprehensive report of ITGB2 gene analysis cording to age at onset was helpful in dissecting the genetic profile of early. in Iranian families with LAD1. Our results indicated that mutations distri- oILn2s2et psoriasis. Here we investigated the genetic association to in three buted across the ITGB2 gene. Every population should develop a mutation psoriasis populations: disease onset between 0-9, 10-20 and 21- 40 years database for their own rare genetic disorders. However, we suggest that to encodes for a cytokine with an established role both in psoriasis skin make a private database, appropriate screening strategy could be started pathology and in host defenseI, Lt2h2us exemplifying delicate balance between w 
P0 it 7h . 2co 0m -Mmon alleles initially. autoimmunity and control of infIeLc2t2ion. Herein we report strong association Identification of monoallelic forms of Bernard-Soulier syndrome to regulatory elements in the promoter confined to onset of psoriasis D. De Rocco1, E. Nicchia1, C. Greco2, P. Noris3, C. Cagioni3, A. Pecci3, V. Bozzi3, F. Lanza4, C. before puIbLe2r2ty. The associated variants contain putative binding sites L. Balduini3, A. Savoia2,1; for the transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon receptor, which is a potent in- 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3University of Pavia and ducer of expression in T cells. We next compared the transcriptional IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 4INSERM UMR-
S949 /EFS-Alsace, activity between a high-risk and a low-risk gene variant in a luciferase assay Strasbourg, France. which consistently resulted in significantly higher activitye fxr ovmivo t he high-risk construct. Furthermore, in children carrying a high risk variant, T cells from peripheral blood produced significantly moErSe HILG-2 22 a0ft1er4 | MILsAtimNu, laITtiAonL Y | B W ernW arW d-S.E ouS liH erG s. yO ndR roG me (BSS) is a rare inherited macrothrombocy1to4p3e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index G
P1 BA, G
P1 BB G
P9  nia caused by mutations in and , the genes encoding for disease activity and the presence of Löfgren syndrome. In a meta-analysis, three subunits of the GPIb-IX-V complex, which is the platelet receptor for seven SNPs were associated with non-Löfgren sarcoidosis (NL; the stron- von WillebranGdP f1aBctAor (vGW
P1 FB).B In addition to the biallelic form, a less severe gest association with rs3177928 in HLA-DRA, P=1.79E-07, OR=1.9) and autosomal dominant form (monoallelic) of BSS is due to mutations identi- eight with Löfgren syndrome (LS; the strongest association with rs3129843 fied so far in or . Except for p.Ala172Val (Noris et al, 2012), in BTN
L2 /HLA-DRA region, P= 3.44E-12, OR=3.4) when compared with which is relatively frequent at least in the Italian population, other mutati- healthy controls (n=870). The high LD between SNPs and an HLA-DRB1 ons have been reported only in single families. In order to evaluate the fre- challenged the result interpretation. In addition to these SNPs, population- quency of the monoallelic form in our thrombocGytPo1pBeAnic cohoGrtP, IwBBe selec- specific associations for sarcoidosis were observed. ted 1G2
P09  probands with large platelets and no mutations in candidate genes. In conclusion, there is clear evidence that polymorphisms in the BTN
L2  and In 11 cases we found heterozygous mutations in (n=4), (n=6) HLA-DRA have a role in sarcoidosis susceptibility. Most importantly, our stu- and (n=1). In addition to 4 variants previously identified in biallelic BSS dy revealed sarcoidosis-related variants that were shared across ethnicities patients, the others are all novel mutations. They are classified as missense as well as ethnicity-specific genetic markers. Future functional studies are (n=8), nonsense (n=1) or frame-shift (n=2) mutations. Segregation analy- required to reveal the causal variants of these associations and the immuno- sis within the families showed that only the affected individuals carry the genetic basis related to sarcoidosis. 
P07 .23-S mutations. Functional studies are in progress to determine the effect of the Impact of immunogenetic polymorphisms in predisposition to mutations on GPIb-IX-V complex formation and its capacity to interact with lymphoid malignancies in NBS patients vWF. Considering that half of the patients with inherited thrombocytopenia H. Akopyan, O. R. Hnateyko, N. Markevych, H. Makukh, K. Sosnina, I. Kovaliv; remain without a molecular diagnosis, we could estimate that the frequency Institute of Hereditary Pathology of National Academy of Medical Sciences, Lviv, of the monoallelic form of BSS could account for 5% of the cases. This sug- Ukraine. gest that monoallelic BSS should be always taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis of inherited thrombocytopenia. 
P07 .21-S MHC and the 1000 genomes: genotyping from exome data The Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a recessive genetic disorder, re- S. Juhos1, K. Rigo1, P. Gourraud2, G. Horvath1; sulting in high predisposition to developing a malignancy. The 5bp deletion 1Omixon Biocomputing, Budapest, Hungary, 2University of California San Francisco, San (c.657-661del) in the NBN gene is founder mutation for Slavic populations. Francisco, CA, United States. In Ukraine 40 NBS cases were diagnosed, and in 12 cases (30%) lympho- id malignancies has been developed at age 5-12 years. It remains unclear why the carriers of same mutation are implemented in a different morbidity. The publicly available 1000 genomes (1KG) data is still a valuable source The purpose of this study was looking for immunogenetic criteria for tumor of scientific discovery after years of its release. We have demonstrated pre- developing in NBS patients. Interleukin-10 (IL-10) and interferon-gamma viously that HLA typing of MHC-I genes is possible from 1KG exome data for (IFN-γ) play a key role in controlling the immune response and SNPs IL-10 HapMap samples. In this study we are aiming to determine types for MHC-II -1082 A/G and IFN-γ +874A/T respectively can significantly affect their ex- genes and for any 1KG exome samples passing certain quality control (QC) pression. Patients with severe outcome (multiple chronic recurrent inflam- conditions. We are presenting the generation and interpretation of these QC mation, developing of tumor, death) and moderate course of disease were values. Besides the HLA genes we are showing typing results for other po- comparatively investigated. The distribution of IL-10 1082AA, 1082GG and lymorphic MHC genes like TA
P1 , TA
P2 , MICA and MICB. The HLA genotype 1082AG genotypes in cases of severe and mild outcome established as 42.9% assignations were compared to classical HLA typing obtain by sequencing and 33.3%, 35.7% and 33.3%, 21.4% and 33.3% respectively. The distributi- techniques. Typing a diverse set of genes of MHC sheds light on linkage dise- on of IFN-γ 874AA, 874AT and 874TT genotypes in groups of patients with quilibrium and makes it comparable to the previously known HapMap sta- severe and mild outcome was 20.0% and 29.4%, 40.0% and 58.82%, 40.0% tistics. Furthermore, differences in results from different exome capturing and 11.86% respectively. The results allow to suggest, that severe outcome kits are also to be presented. in NBS may depends on carrying of IL-10 1082AA genotype, associated with 
P07 .22-M decreased anti-inflammatory activity, and IFN-γ 874TT genotype, known by SNP variants in MHC are associated with sarcoidosis susceptibility increased pro-inflammatory properties. In conclusion, disruption in balance and subgroups - a joint case-control association study in four of pro- and anti- inflammatory cytokines may strongly affect NBS course. European populations 
P07 .24-M A. Wennerström1,2,3, E. Lahtela2, V. Anttila4,5,3, J. Grunewald6, C. van Moorsel7, M. Petrek8, MEFV gene mutations in pediatric patients with PFAPA syndrome in A. Eklund6, J. Grutters7, V. Kolek8, L. Padyukov9, A. Pietinalho10, M. Ronninger11, M. Slovenia Seppänen12, O. Selroos13, M. Lokki14; D. Perko1, N. Toplak1, T. Avčin1, M. Debeljak2; 1National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL) Public Health Genomics Unit, Helsinki, 1UMC Ljubljana, University Children‘s Hospital, Department of Allergology, Finland, 2Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Rheumatology and Clinical immunology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC Ljubljana, University Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Helsinki The Institute for Molecular Medicine Children‘s Hospital, Unit for Special Laboratory Diagnostics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Finland (FIMM) Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland, 4Analytical and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical Introduction School, Boston, MA, United States, 5Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Respiratory Medicine Unit, : PFAPA syndrome is the most commonM aEuFtVoinflammatory fe- Department of Medicine Solna and CMM Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University ver disorder in childhood, characterized by recurrent fever, aphthous sto- Hospital, Solna, Sweden, 7Department of Pulmonology, St Antonius Hospital Nieuwegein, matitis, pharyngitis and adenitis. Mutations in the gene are known and Heart and Lung Center University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, to cause syndrome with PFAPA overlapping symptoms (Familial Mediter- 8Laboratory of Immunogenomics and Immunoproteomics, Faculty of Medicine and rOabnjeeacnti vFeever), which is common in eastern Mediterranean popuMlaEtFioVn, but Dentistry, Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 9Rheumatology Unit, rarely reported in patients from Slovenia. Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 10Raasepori Health Care Centre, Raasepori, Finland, 11Respiratory Methods: The aim of this study was to assess the frequency of gene Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine Solna and CMM, Karolinska Institutet and mutationsM inE FpVediatric patients with PFAPA syndrome from Slovenia. Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Finland, 1210 Immunodeficiency Unit, Division : We collected clinical and laboratory data and results of genetic of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, testing of gene of PFAPA patients under the age of 18, who were follo- Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 13Semeco AB, Vejbystrand, Sweden, 14Transplantation wReesdu flrtosm the beginning of 2006 to the end of 2013. AlMl 1
E0 F Vexons and intron/ Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. exon regions of gene were directly sequenced. : In total, 91 PFAPA patients were tested for gene mutations. All of them were under the age of 18, mean age at diagnosis was 7 years. The Sarcoidosis is a multiorgan inflammatory disorder of unknown aetiology. ratio of women to men was 1:1. The most probable pathophysiology of sarcoidosis, the dysregulation of the 15 patients (16%) were found to have at least one mutation. 11 patients immune response strongly suggests benefits from a better understanding (12%) were heterozygote and 4 patients (4%) were compound heterozy- of the role of the immune mediating genes (e.g. MHC genes) in sarcoidosis gote, 3 with R408Q/
P369 S and 1 with K695R/I591T mutation. The overall susceptibility. number of mutation found was 19. The most frequent was K695R(26%), We present results from a Finnish case-control discovery sample as well as fCoollnocwluesdi onby R408Q(16%), 
P369 S(16%), 
E148 Q(10%), I591T(10%), three independent replication studies from the Swedish, Dutch and Czech M694V(5%), 
S730 F(5%), A289V(5%) and A744S(5%). populations. We studied four genes in the MHC Class III region (LTA, TNF, : In order to evaluate effect of these mutations MonE FPVFAPA phe- AGER, BTN
L2 ) and HLA-DRA in relation to HLA-DRB1 alleles to detect vari- notype, we are planning to determine the carrier rate in healthy Slovenian ants predisposing to sarcoidosis and to identify genetic differences between population and evaluate genotype-phenotype correlation in gene mu- p 1a 4ti 4ent subgroups. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, tIaTtAioLnY p o|s WitivWe pWat.iEenStHs.G.ORG Patients with sarcoidosis (n=805) were further subdivided based on theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .25-S 1Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Sciences, A new gene involved in an autosomal dominant form of common Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, variable immunodeficiency (CVID) Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. V. Di Pierro1, R. Zuntini1, E. Bacchelli2, A. Schaffer3, B. Grimbacher4, I. Quinti5, S. Ferrari1; 1S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Center for Chronic Primary Sjögren’s syndrome (pSS) is a complex chronic autoimmune di- Immunodeficiency, UniversitatsKlinikum, Freiburg, Germany, 5Center for Primary sease characterized by the inflammation of the exocrine glands leading to Immunodeficiency, University of Roma La Sapienza, Roma, Italy. dry eyes and impaired salivary flow. Apart from glandular symptoms, syste- mic manifestations such as arthritis and chronic fatigue are common, and 75% of the patients have autoantibodies in their sera. PSS patients have a Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID, MIM#607594) is the most com- 15 fold increased risk of developing B cell lymphoma. Increasing evidence mon symptomatic primary antibody deficiency in adults. It includes a hete- suggests an epigenetic contribution in the pathogenesis of autoimmune rogeneous group of disorders characterized by defects in the terminal stage diseases, including pSS. Epigenetic modifications represent a dynamic link of B lymphocyte differentiation, whose underlying genetic defects remain between genotype, environment and phenotype, by for example modulating unknown in the majority of cases. gene expression. As methylation of the DNA base cytosine is considered as We studied a five-generation Italian family with an autosomal dominant a prototypic epigenetic mark, our aim was to investigate the role of DNA form of CVID through whole exome sequencing, giving priority to the va- methylation in pSS. We performed a genome-wide DNA methylation study in riants within a 9.2 Mb candidate genomic interval on chromosome 3q27.2- purified CD19+ B cells from 17 pSS patients and 28 healthy controls using Il- q29 previously identified by genome-wide linkage analysis. Since no causa- lumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays which cover about 486,000 tive mutation was identified by whole exome sequencing, we performed a CpG sites across the genome. Significant differentially methylated CpG sites whole genome high resolution SSNT
P6  GaArrLa1y, aRnPaLly3s9iLs,, wRThPic1h, aMllAoSwPe1d, tRoT dPe4t, eScSt Ta, between patients and controls were identified. We found disease-associated R~T 8
P820  kb tBanCLd6em duplication in 3q27.3, located inside the candidate linkage changes in DNA methylation in pSS and highlight pathways that may contri- region and involving 8 genes: bute to the pathogenesis of this autoimmune disease. 
P07 .28-M and . Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis and its genetic background TSTh6eG eAxLp1reRsPsiLo3n9 LpaRtTtePr4n anaBlyCsLis6 in control peripheral blood lymphocy- U. D. Hüffmeier1, Y. Frambach2, A. Jacobi3, M. Müller4, V. Oji5, S. Philipp6, R. Renner7, M. tes (PBL) of all genes included in the duplicated region revealed that only Sticherling7, H. Traupe5, A. Weyergraf8, D. Wilsmann-Theis9, R. Mössner10; , , and are expressed in mature circulating lym- 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of phocytes, allowing us to exclude the remaining four genReTsP f4rom further Dermatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 3Institute for Health Services investigations. Preliminary qRT-PCR analyses conRdTuPc4te d on affected vs Research in Dermatology and Healthcare, University Medical Center, Hamburg, unaffected subjects showed a significant upregulation of in affected Germany, 4Department of Occupational Health, University Göttingen, Göttingen, members (t-test, p < 0.0001). This finding suggests overexpression as Germany, 5Department of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, a possible pathogenetic mechanism underlying CVID in this family. RT
P4  is 6Department of Dermatology, University of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 7Department of Dermatology, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 8Department of Dermatology, a Golgi chaperone and we hypothesize that it might be involved in the regu- Fachklinik Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim, Germany, 9Deparment of Dermatology, lation of the Unfolding Protein Response (UPR), a key process of plasma cell University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Department of Dermatology, University of d Pi 0ff 7e .r 2e 6n -t Miation. Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. A family based exome sequencing identifies ADA2 deficiency as a novel cause for PIDD L. Trotta1, A. Zavialov2, S. Hämäläinen3, H. Almusa1, M. Lepisto1, T. Hautala4, M. Ilander5, Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis (PPP) is a chronic inflammatory skin disea- S. Mustjoki6, K. Porkka6, M. Seppänen7, J. Saarela1; se characterized by sterile pustules, erythema and hyperkeratosis on palms 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland, and soles. In at least 25% of PPP cases, psoriasis vulgaris (PsV) is also pre- 2Turku Centre for Biotechnology P.O. Box 123, FI-20521, Turku, Finland, 3Department sent and many patients suffer from psoriatic arthritis. Smoking and female of Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital P.O.B. 1777, Puijonlaaksontie 2, 70211, Kuopio, sex are more frequent in PPP compared to PsV. So far, there are no confir- Finland, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 55Department of Virology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, med genetic risk factors for PPP. Recently, inI Lg3e6nReNralized pustular psoriasis 6Hematology Research Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki (GPP), an extreme manifestation of pustular psoriatic disease, homozygous University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 7Immunodeficiency Unit, Division of and compound-heterozygous mutations in have been identified to Infectious Diseases, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Hospital District of Helsinki and be causal.The same mutations have been described to be more frequent in Uusimaa. Aurora Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. a group of 139 European PPP patients.Here, we recruited a group of >140 PPP patients,most of them were female and smokers (>60%, respectively). About half of them had a manifestational age of ≤40 years.We could con- Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDD) encompass a wide and hete- firm previous data showing that the frequency of the HLA-C risk allele, the rogeneous group of disorders caused by mutations in genes with immune major IgLe3n6eRtNic risk factor for PsV, was comparable to the frequency of con- function. The molecular mechanisms behind many forms are not yet known. trols, indicating that PPP is genetically different from PsV. We further ana- The significant clinical and immunological heterogeneity of PIDD often de- lyzed for mutations in coding exons and for intragenic deletions/ lay the diagnosis making treatment challenging. Few thousand individu- duplications. We identified three heterozygous carriers of mutations and no als are expected to suffer from PIDD in Finland, where the unique genetic carriers of copy nILu3m6bReNr variants. C.ompared to a population-based control background has proven to be very useful in identifying genes for monogenic group of 4.300 European individuals, there was no significant difference in disorders. An exome sequencing analysis of a Finnish PIDD family characte- the frequency of mutationsOur data indicate that PPP is genetically rized by recurrent prolonged bacterial infections complicated by basal cere- distinct both from PsV and GPP. Further effort is needed to identify genetic bral and frontal infarcts, subarachnoidal hemorrhage and occasional small factors contributing to PPP. 
P07 .29-S aneurysms, has identified compound heterozygous mutations in the CECR1 Genetic, functional and therapeutic insights into patients with rare gene not previously implicated in PIDD. The affected individuals carried a recurrent viral infections splice donor site mutation leading to nonsense mediated decay (NMD) of P. Arts1, F. L. van de Veerdonk2, J. A. Veltman1,3, J. W. M. van der Meer2, A. Hoischen1, M. G. the allele and a rare missense variant, highly conserved and predicted de- Netea2; leterious. Analysis of the patient sera confirmed that the protein product 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, (ADA2) of the mutated gene had no measurable activity. ADA2 is a member Netherlands, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud university medical center, of the adenosine deaminase family, which also includes ADA1, a known cau- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical se of severe combined immune deficiency (SCID). ADA2 is a secreted prote- Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. in which binds to cell surface via proteoglycans, may degrade extracellular adenosine and has been shown to induce T cell-dependent differentiation of monocytes into macrophages and stimulate macrophage proliferation. Thus Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are inborn defects in the immune sy- ADA2 deficiency is a plausible cause for the immunodeficiency complicated stem affecting about 1 in 500 people. In this present study we show that by infarcts and subarachnoidal hemorrhage in this family. The ongoing func- understanding the functional and/or genetic defect in patients suffering tional analyses will shed further light on molecular defects of the disease. from severe PIDs can provide us new leads for treatment. Here we studied 
P07 .27-S three patients suffering from severe recurrent viral infections with Herpes Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis in CD19+ B cells in Primary Simplex virus (HSV). The infections were caused by HSV2 in two of the pa- Sjögren’s Syndrome tients, with no history of other infections, while the third patient was initi- J. Imgenberg-Kreuz1, J. Nordlund1, J. Almlöf1, M. Eloranta2, L. Rönnblom2, G. Nordmark2, J. Sandling1; ally diagnosed with HPV6 papillomatosis and she developed recurrent HSV infections later in life. We isolated and stimulated PBMCs from patients and ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 145 controls, and stimulated them with various ligands among which the doubleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P07 .32-M Identification of susceptibility loci associated with primary Sjögren’s stranded RNA ligand poly:IC. Cytokine production was measured in patients syndrome by genome-wide association study and compared to controls, and a specific defect in poly I:C-induced interfe- I. Song1,2, H. Chen3, C. Chen3, C. Chen1, J. Wu1; ron-gamma was detected. Substitution therapy with interferon-gamma was 1Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Graduate institute successfully administered to all patients, leading to impressive ameliorati- of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Rheumatology, on. Additionally, we performed exome sequencing in all 3 patients, aiming Immunology and Allergy Division, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. to understand the genetic basics of the underlying immunodeficiency. While this genetic analysis did not identify one common cause of the primary immunodeficiency, rare variants in candidate genes SYK, IFIH1 and EIF3E were identified that may have caused the aberrant interferon signaling. In Primary Sjögren’s syndrome (PSS) is one of the most common autoimmune summary. These preliminary results indicate that patients with recurrent vi- diseases which primarily affect women, with a female-male ratio of 9:1. To ral HSV infections may have genetic heterogeneous forms of primary immu- identify the susceptibility genes predisposing individuals to PSS, we conduc- nodeficiencies; however, they show a common functional defect in double ted genome-wide association analyses comparing 242 PSS female patients stranded RNA-induced IFNgamma, and common replacement therapy with with 1444 female controls, recruited from the Han Chinese population resi- interferon-gamma was shown to be an effective treatment. ding in Taiwan. In discovery GWAS, SNPs in the MHC region of chromosome 
P07 .30-M 6 and the GTF2I gene of chromosome 7 were found to be associated with Allele specific expression of HLA haplotypes associated to PSS. In particular, SNP rs117026326 on chromosome 7 showed the highest autoimmune diseases association (P value = 6.71 × 10-13). The two loci were previously repor- A. Zhernakova, J. Fu, D. Zhernakova, L. Franke, C. Wijmenga; ted to be associated with PSS. Replication with additional samples is now University medical centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. under process. Our study confirmed the associations between the two loci and PSS. 
P07 .34-M HLA is strongly associated with many autoimmune diseases, including rheu- Functional analysis of genetic risk factors for canine SLE-related matoid arthritis (RA), celiac disease (CD) and type 1 diabetes (T1D). For disease complex and identification of genetic risk factors for human many diseases the association is established, but the underlying mechanis- SLE ms are unknown. For example, heterozygosity for DR3-DQ2/DR4-DQ8 is a F. H. G. Farias1, M. Wilbe2, S. V. Kozyrev1, D. Leonard3, H. Bremer4, J. Dahlqvist1, A. Hedlund4, G. R. Pielberg1, U. Gustafson2, M. Eloranta3, H. Hansson-Hamlin4, G. Andersson2, stronger risk factors to T1D compared to homozygosity for both DR3-DQ2 L. Rönnblom3, K. Lindblad-Toh1,5; and DR4-DQ8 alleles. We aimed to study the downstream effect of HLA ha- 1Uppsala University, Science for Life, Department of Medical Biochemistry and plotypes by looking for allele specific gene expression (ASE) and haplotype Microbiology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in HLA alleles associated to au- Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Uppsala University, toimmune diseases. We selected individuals heterozygous for DR3-DQ2/ Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, DR4-DQ8 and homozygous for both alleles (T1D and CD risk haplotypes), Department of Clinical Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, and individuals heterozygous for DR4-DQ8/DR4-DQ7 and homozygous for United States. these alleles (RA risk haplotypes). We run RNAseq to quantify gene expres- sion and performed eQTL and ASE analysis in these individuals. In total, 90 individuals were selected for this analysis. We observed different expression Dogs represent an excellent model to study complex genetic disorders inclu- of multiple genes in HLA locus in DR3-DQ2/DR4-DQ8 heterozygous indivi- ding many autoimmune diseases that they share with humans. A systemic duals, in compare with both homozygous group. In particular, HLA-DQA2, lupus erythematosus (SLE)-related disease complex, which shows similari- HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DQB9 (P-value Wilcox test <0.001 for all three genes). ties to human SLE, has high prevalence in Nova Scotia duck-tolling retriever ASE analysis of individuals heterozygous for DR3-DQ2/DR4-DQ8 indicated (NSDTR) dogs. Genome-wide association analyses have identified five candi- ASE effect for multiple variants located in TA
P2  gene, which plays a role in date loci in NSDTR containing several genes. Detailed analysis of the candida- antigen presentation. In DR4-DQ8/DR4-DQ7 analysis we identified multiple te loci identified variants that alter the expression of several of these genes. eQTLs in the HLA locus, as well as allele specific effect on SNPs located in Multiple genes involved in T-cell activation show expression differences, but DOA genes. regulatory mutations also alter expression of genes such as BANK1, involved 
P07 .31-S in human SLE. As a proof of concept, the genes and pathways identified in Phenotypic analysis of Peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 knock-out dogs and also genes relevant for human SLE were sequenced in 140 Swedish mice human SLE patients. Patients were divided in 9 pools according to disease A. Suzuki1, Y. Kochi1, H. Shoda2, K. Fujio2, E. Kanno1, R. Yamada3,1, K. Yamamoto2,1; manifestation and a group of healthy Swedish controls was also sequenced. 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto Targeted Nimblegen + Illumina sequencing of 219 genes and their regula- University, Kyoto, Japan. tory elements resulted in approximately 250x coverage per individual. We detected 4276 novel SNPs (not present in 1000genomes or dbSN
P137 ) of which 1258 SNPs were found only in cases. Seventeen genes showed ≥ 5 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is well-known as an autoimmune disease and is a novel case-only variants. Of these, three genes were previously associated chronic inflammatory disorder characterized by the destruction of multiple to human SLE and 14 were novel candidate genes. From the top genes, ten joints. Many genome wide association studies were performed and multiple variants that show strong regulatory potential have been selected and being RA-susceptibility loci and autoimmune-susceptibility loci have been iden- evaluated for their importance for gene expression and correlation with cli- tified. These studi(es suggested that multiple genes and its functions were nical phenotypes. Several variants appear to be potential regulators of spe- related with disease causing and development. Previouly, peptidylariginine c Pi 0fi 7c .S 3L 5E -S sub-phenotypes. deiminase type 4 PADI4) was identified as a susceptibility gene for RA in Deep analysis of TCR repertoires of twins by next generation a Japanese population by case-control association study (Ref 1). PADI4 is a sequencing member of the PADI gene family and converts arginine residue (peptidylar- M. V. Pogorelyy, I. V. Zvyagin, M. E. Ivanova, D. A. Bolotin, D. M. Chudakov, Y. B. Lebedev, ginine) to citrulline residue (peptidylcitrulline). PADI4 is highly expressed I. Z. Mamedov; in bone marrow, macrophages, neutrophils and monocytes. PADI genes are Shemyakin–Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry RAS, Moscow, Russian important genes in RA, because only PADs (translated protein from PADI Federation. genes) can provide antigens of ACPA, which are specific antibodies of RA. To evaluate the importance of PADI4 gene in the progression of RA, we ge- nerated Padi4 -/- DBA1J mice. We used Padi4-/- mice to show that PAD4 Immune system interacts with great diversity of pathogens. Receptors invol- is significantly affected to progress of collagen induced arthritis (CIA), well ved in antigen recognition - BCRs (B-cell receptors) and TCRs (T-cell recep- known as an RA model animal. In Padi4-/- CIA mice sera, the concentrations tors) - are not encoded in genome due to its limited capacity, but generated of serum anti-CII IgM, IgG, and levels of inflammatory cytokines decreased by V(D)J recombination. For a long time, no instrument to estimate TCR di- significantly rather than in WT CIA mice. Futhermore, the transcription le- versity in individual organism has been available. Next generation sequen- vels of inflammatory cytokines in CD11b positive splenocytes from Padi4 cing methods (NGS) have created the possibility of deep TCR profiling. Here, -/- CIA mice are also significantly lower than those from WT CIA mice. As the we aimed to estimate the role of genetic factors in TCR repertoire formation results, we suggested that Padi4 enhanced collagen-initiated inflammatory by sequencing TCR repertoires of monozygotic and dizygotic twins. responses. 1) Suzuki, A. et al Nat. Genet.34, 395-402 (2003) 16 cDNA TCR libraries were generated and sequenced on Illumina plat- form. Surprisingly, the overlap of amino acid sequences of CDR3 region in TCR 146 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, cITloAnoLtYyp |e Ws wWasW no.tE gSrHeaGte.rO inR MGZ twin pairs and depended on sample sizeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index only. However, the number of identical clonotypes was higher for monozy- variants was A736V in TMPRS
S6  gene which regulates serum iron level. In- gotic twins in the abundant clonotypes subset, representing mainly antigen- activation of TMPRS
S6  gene causes iron-deficiency anemia and impairment experienced T cells. At the same time V-segment usage is more similar in of iron absorption. It has been found that A736V variant of TMPRS
S6  gene twin pairs for clonotypes before and after thymic selection. is associated with lower levels of serum iron and erythrocyte MCV with hig- We also showed that the ratio of clonotypes with identical CDR3 and V-seg- her levels of serum hepcidin protein. It was also shown that inhibition of ments (coding for CDR1 and CDR2) to clonotypes with identical CDR3 is TMPRS
S6  has a therapeutic effect on Beta-thalassemic mice. However the higher in twin pairs in the abundant clonotypes subset. frequency of this variant among Beta-thalassemia patients is unknown. Re- All these features were not observed in a dizygotic twin pair, which probably lated with these data, we aimed to investigate frequency of A736V variant reflects the impact of genetic factors on TCR repertoire formation. of TMPRS
S6  gene among patients carrying beta-globin gene mutations. 93 
P07 .36-M patients investigated for beta-globin gene mutation with DNA sequencing A novel StripAssay identifies genetic variants modifying beta- method were enrolled in this study. A736V (rs855791) variant of TMPRS
S6  thalassemia disease severity H. Puehringer, B. Rauscher, C. Oberkanins; gene was detected by real-time quantitative PCR method. Erythrocyte pa- ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria. rameters and hemoglobin levels were measured and their distributions ac- cording to gene variants were analyzed. Frequency of TMPRS
S6  gene A736V variant was 0.47 among all patients. There was no association between Background: The clinical phenotype of patients with beta-hemoglobinopa- A736V variant of TMPRS
S6  gene and beta-globin gene mutations, hemoglo- thies is extremely heterogenous, ranging from nearly asymptomatic forms bin levels or erythrocyte parameters. However, frequency of A736V variant of thalassemia intermedia to severe transfusion-dependent thalassemia was higher among the patients having low levels of hemoglobin or erythro- major. The wide phenotypical variability is associated with the type of beta- cyte MCV with a wild type beta-globin gene. Further studies are needed for globin mutation, the co-inheritance of alpha-thalassemia and the ability better understanding the relationship between of A736V variant and Beta- for persistent production of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) in adult life. For the thalassemia prognosis. 
P07 .41-S latter, three different quantitative trait loci, accounting for 20-50% of HbF Novel 21 nucleotide duplication in alpha1/alpha2 globin gene variation, have been identified by now. Single nucleotide polymorphisms involves in a variety of hypochromic microcytic anemia from mild to (SNPs) in the gamma-globin gene promoter (HBG2), in the BC
L11 A gene Hb H Disease and the HB
S1 L-MYB intergenic region lead to increased residual HbF levels S. Farashi1, N. Faramarzi Garous1, F. Zeinali1, M. Ashki1, S. Vakili1, H. Imanian1, A. in adults. Methods: A teststrip-based reverse-hybridisation assay was de- Azarkeivan1,2, H. Najmabadi1,3; veloped for the simultaneous detection of SNPs in the HBG2 (g.-158 C>T), 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of BC
L11 A (rs1447407, rs10189857), HB
S1 L-MYB (rs28384513, rs9399137) Iran, 2Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization, Thalassemia Clinic, Tehran, Islamic genes. Results: The new StripAssay enables the concomitant identification Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation of genetic variants known to influence beta-thalassemia disease severity. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Based on the presence of positively modifying alleles, and combined with alpha- and beta-globin genotyping, it allows the prediction of patients likely to display less severe phenotypes. Favourable properties, such as the rapid α-Thalassemia (α-thal) is a common genetic disorder in Iran and many parts DNA extraction protocol, ready-to-use reagents and teststrips, as well as the of the world. Genetic defects in alpha-globin gene cluster can results in α-thal potential for automation of the hybridisation/detection and interpretation that may develop clinical phenotype varying from almost asymptomatic to a steps, make the StripAssay convenient and easy to perform within less than lethal hemolytic anemia. Loss of one functional α-gene, indicated as hetero- six hours. Conclusions: Testing for genetic modifiers influencing disease se- zygote α+-thal, show minor hematological abnormalities. Homozygosity for verity will lead to more specific and effective treatment, and support clinical α+ or heterozygosity for α◦-thal have more severe hematological abnorma- decisions regarding the beginning of transfusion therapy in beta-thalasse- lities due to a markedly reduced α-chain output. At the molecular level, the mia patients. Furthermore, the knowledge about prognostic markers has absence of three α-globin genes resulting from the compound heterozygous implications for genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis. state for α◦- and α+-thal, lead to Hb H disease. Here we present 21 bp dupli- 
P07 .37-S cation consists of 6 amino acids and 3bp of intronic sequence at exon-intron Family with inherited thrombocytopenia and homozygous pathogenic boundary, in the both α-globin genes. This duplication was detected in three variant in FYB gene patients originated from two different Iranian ethnic groups and one Arab H. A. Hamamy1, P. Makrythanasis1, N. Al-Allawi2, A. A. Muhsin3, S. E. Antonarakis1,4; 1Univesity of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Univesity of Dohuk, Dohuk, Iraq, 3Jin Center, during of more than 12 years. This duplication was found by direct DNA Dohuk, Iraq, 4University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. sequencing. The clinical presentation of these patients varies widely from a mild asymptomatic anemia (heterozygote in alpha1globin gene) to a seve- rely anemic state, requiring blood transfusions (duplication in alpha2 globin Inherited thrombocytopenias (IT) are a heterogeneous gene in combination with MED double alpha globin gene deletion) who was group of rare diseases characterized by a reduced number of blood plate- diagnosed as an Hb H patient. Third patient who was homozygote for this lets.The frequency of IT is probably underestimated because of diagnostic nucleotide duplication in alpha1 globin gene shows severe hypochromic difﬁculties and because not all the existing forms have yet been identified, microcytic anemia and splenomegaly. In the last decade numerous α-globin and some patients remain without a definitive diagnosis. We report a fa- mutations have been demonstrated the necessity of prenatal diagnosis for mily with IT with small size platelets seen in several members of a highly α-thal, and this study have contributed another one as an important novel consanguineous Kurdish family from Northern Iraq. Genotyping of all affec- m 
P0 u 7ta .4ti 2o -n M to be considered. ted, their unaffected siblings and parentFsY, Bfollowed by exome sequencing Recovery of SLAM-SAP signalling pathway factors mRNA expression revealed a strong candidate pathogenic variant in a homozygous state: a and invariant NKT cell deficiency characterizes sarcoidosis remission frameshift mutation was detected in the gene. The protein encoded by M. Rijavec, K. Osolnik, P. Korošec; this gene is a cytosolic adaptor molecule expressed by T cells, natural kil- University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia. ler (NK) cells, myeloid cells and platelets and is knoFwYnB to be involved in platelet activation and controls the expression of interleukin-2. This is the first report to hypFoYtBhesize that pathogenic variants in gene could cause Invariant Natural killer T Vα24-Jα18-Vβ11 (iNKT) cells play critical role thrombocytopenia in human. in controlling the strength and character of immune responses and have We propose that is the causative gene for this phenotype. shown to be important in disorders with increased Th1 responses, such as 
P07 .38-M sarcoidosis. Their exact role as well as factors involved in regulating the de- Distribution of A736V variant of TMPRS
S6  gene in beta-globin velopment and recruitment of iNKT cells is still to be determined. There is mutation carriers A. Toylu1, O. Altiok Clark1, T. Bilgen2, A. Kupesiz3, O. Salim4; growing evidence that the SLAM-SAP signalling pathway is essential for the 1Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Dept of Medical Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, development of iNKT cells. In our study we followed up the mRNA expres- 2Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Dept of Medical Biology and Genetics, Antalya, sion of SLAM-SAP signalling factors and iNKT cells together with detailed Turkey, 3Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Dept of Pediatric Haematology, Antalya, clinical data in newly diagnosed sarcoidosis patients over 4 years. Turkey, 4Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Dept of Haematology, Antalya, Turkey. Detailed clinical, functional, and radiographic evaluation and determination of blood mRNA expression of SLAM-SAP signalling factors and iNKT cells was carried out at presentation and after 3 months, 1 year, and 4 years of di- The genome-wide association studies on the genes related with iron meta- sease follow-up in 29 patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis. We also included bolism has been showed that some of the genetic variants were associated 28 healthy control subjects. with serum iron level and erythrocyte paEraSmHeGte r2s.0 O1n4e o| fM thIeLsAe cNo,m ImTAonL Y |W We WdemWo.nEsStrHatGed. Oa RdeGcreased expression of SLAM-SAP signalling fa1ct4o7rsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P08 .02-M Overgrowth and developmental delay associated with a 200 kb and marked deficiency of blood and lung iNKT cells in patients with new- deletion in 16p11.2 in two families lSyL AdMiagFn1oSsLedA MsaFr6coidosFisY. ND,uring 4 years of disease follow-up, there was a C. Zweier1, M. Krumbiegel1, H. Peters2, A. Reis1; significant increase in expression of SLAM-SAP signalling factors, mainly 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute for Medical and Human , , and and blood iNKT cells. This increase clearly cor- Genetics, Berlin, Germany. related with improvement in patients’ clinical symptoms as after 4 years the disease had gone into remission in the great majority of patients. Our longitudinal study showed that an increase in expression of SLAM-SAP Due to a high density of segmental duplications, the short arm of chromo- signalling factors and iNKT cells characterizes the clinical remission of pul- some 16 is prone to a number of recurrent rearrangements. A common 600 monary sarcoidosis. kb microdeletion or -duplication in 16p11.2 has been associated with au- 
P07 .43-S tism, intellectual disability, schizophrenia, and mirrored weight and head A late diagnosis of NOMID-syndrome /CINCA-syndrome - lessons to circumference phenotypes. An adjacent, but separate distal 200 kb region in learn 16p11.2, which contains the SH2B1 gene, has been associated with isolated K. Becker; Labor Krone, Bad Salzuflen, Germany. obesity as well as developmental delay. Both aberrations are associated with high variability and incomplete penetrance. We now report on two families harboring the 200 kb microdeletion in The case of a 10 ½ year old boy from Germany is presented with a new dia- 16p11.2. Both index patients were initially referred with suspected Sotos gnosis of NOMID syndrome, also known as CINCA-syndrome, the rarest and syndrome due to tall stature, obesity and developmental delay. After normal most severe of the Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS), which NSD1 testing molecular karyotyping showed the 200 kb deletion in 16p11.2 are genetic syndromes of autoinflammation. The diagnosis was delayed de- in both patients as well as in patient 2’s brother who had mild obesity and spite many clinical clues including the typical non-itching maculopapular unspecific moderate intellectual disability. In both families the deletion was rash which was present from the neonatal period, raised inflammatory mar- maternally inherited. Interestingly, patient 2, but not her cognitively more kers on many occasions without detectable infectious pathogens, progres- severely affected brother, additionally harbored a microduplication 1q21.1, sive macrocephaly with hydrocephalus, evolving short stature, progressive which has been recurrently associated with variable and incompletely pene- optic atrophy, progressive deafness, progressive arthropathy and other non- trant developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioural anomalies and specific haematological and immunological abnormalities. In addition, the large head circumference. Both aberrations were inherited from the mother, patient had episodic conjunctivitis and finger clubbing. Periodic fever does who was obese but otherwise healthy and without cognitive problems. The- not always occur in this condition and in the case of this patient was com- se two families further characterize the variable spectrum of phenotypes pletely absent. This patient was treated for several years with growth hor- associated with the 200 kb microdeletion in 16p11.2. Our findings in family mone in the absence of a diagnosis without any improvement of his short 2 also show that not even the co-occurrence of two ID-associated microab- stature. Early diagnosis of these patients is vital because treatment with in- e Pr 0r 8at .0io 3n -s S necessarily leads to cognitive impairment. terleukin -1-receptor antagonists is now well established and very effective. Clinical and molecular characterization of a patient with de novo 2.8 Untreated, the patients may develop a destructive arthropathy, blindness, Mb deletion of 17q24.2-q24.3 profound deafness and renal failure secondary to amyloidosis. The macroce- M. Hančárová1, M. Malíková1, J. Drábová1, M. Trková2, Z. Sedláček1; phaly, hydrocephalus and short stature result from the chronic aseptic me- 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Gennet, Prague, ningitis. The disease is caused by mutations (mostly new dominant) in the Czech Republic. NLR
P3  gene, which may be mosaic and thus are sometimes only detectable by next generation sequencing. 
P08 .01-S Microarray methods contributed to the identification of many rare microde- Chromosome 15q11.2 imbalances associated with neuropsychiatric letion syndromes including that associated with deletions of 17q24.2-q24.3, and developmental disorders - array-CGH findings in a cohort of 1000 characterized mainly by growth retardation, microcephaly, developmental patients delay, speech delay, intellectual disability, feeding problems, and teeth and L. M. Pires1, S. I. Ferreira1, J. Ferrão1, N. Lavoura1, F. Ramos2, A. Beleza-Meireles2, J. B. facial abnormalities. Seven patients have been described in detail since Melo1,3,4, I. M. Carreira1,3,4; 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de 2008, and additional cases with only limited clinical information are listed Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, CHUC, in databases. It becomes evident that not all 17q24.2-q24.3 deletions share Coimbra, Portugal, 3CIMAGO – Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e a single common region of overlap. Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 4CNC- Centro de Neurociências e Biologia Celular, We report a 12-year-old girl with a normal karyotype who shows clinical Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. features consistent with the syndrome. SNP array analysis revealed a 2.8 Mb long deletion of 17q24.2-q24.3 (chr17:65,281,651-68,017,013; hg19). FISH analysis confirmed the deletion and showed its de novo origin. The deleti- Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization has led to the knowledge that on affects 18 protein-coding RefSeq genes including PRKAR1A, MAPK2K6, some copy number variants (CNVs) correspond to susceptibility loci for and the ABCA gene cluster. Some of the genes could be candidates for the developmental disorders. CNVs at chromosomal region 15q11.2 involving clinical symptoms and some are predicted to exhibit haploinsufficiency, for 4 known genes, TUBGC
P5 , CYFI
P1 , NIPA2 and NIPA1, are of challenging in- instance PRKAR1A, encoding a postsynaptic density protein associated with terpretation due to their presence both in normal populations and in indi- Carney complex, or BPTF producing a transcript in fetal brain which binds viduals with diverse developmental disorders. In a cohort of 1000 patients FMRP and encodes a transcriptional regulator. Only much smaller populati- analyzed by Agilent 180K oligonucleotide array-CGH we identified 12 pati- on copy number polymorphisms are present in the region. The deletion of ents with 15q11.2 imbalances, 9 deletions and 3 duplications, 7 females and our patient overlaps two groups of previously reported deletions. Despite 5 males. Four of the 12 patients had additional genomic imbalances. The the proximity of the deleted regions, the candidate genes could be distinct. patients presented with global developmental delay, dysmorphisms, ID, epi- Identification of additional cases will help to define the genes involved and lepsy, mirocephaly, amongst others. To date, we were only able to determine their role in predisposition to neuropsychiatric phenotypes, as well as the inheritance in 4 patients, 2 deletions maternal in origin, 1 paternal, and a emerging genetic heterogeneity within the 17q24.2-q24.3 microdeletion de novo duplication. The proximal breakpoint was common in 11 of the 12 syndrome. patients, while the distal breakpoint was variable, but similar in some pati- Supported by CHERISH, NT/14200, 00064203 and CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. 
P08 .04-M ents. The 4 previously mentioned genes were involved in the genomic im- Deletions of 1p34.3, encompassing the AGO1, AGO3, and AGO4 genes, in balances of all the patients, except in the patient with the distinct proximal five children with microcephaly and intellectual disability breakpoint, where TUBGC
P5  gene was in normal copy number. Functional P. Prontera1, M. Tokita2,3, P. Chow2,3, G. Mirzaa2,3, N. Dikow4, B. Maas4, B. Isidor5, C. Le data have revealed that TUBGC
P5 , CYFI
P1  and NIPA1 genes are expressed Caignec5, L. Penney6, G. Mazzotta7, L. Bernardini8, A. Battaglia9, D. Earl2,3, E. Donti1; in developing mammalian brain and are involved in processes such as mi- 1Medical Genetics Unit, University and Hospital of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 2Division crotubule nucleation, interaction with other proteins and nervous system of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Seattle development and regulation, respectively To date, there is still no straight Children‘s Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg interpretation when a 15q11.2 genomic imbalance is detected, but in this University, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire cohort further evidence was given that this region is associated with neuro- de Nantes, Nantes, France, 6Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 7School of Specialization in Childhood Neurology and Psychiatry, University psychiatric disorders. of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 8Mendel Laboratory, IRCSS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, 9The Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute for Child and Adolescent Neurology and Psychiatry, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy. 148 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Small RNAs (miRNA, siRNA, and piRNA) regulate gene expression through unremarkable. Other features comprise small hands with camptodactyly of RNA interference (RNAi), a process that has emerged as a fundamental prin- fifth and second fingers of the opposite hands, unilateral transversal crease, ciple of normal cellular function. The Argonaute (AGO) proteins are critical and valgus, flat feet. Auto-aggressive behaviour, autism and sleep problems mediators of the RNAi pathway and constitute a highly conserved family of were also noted. Whole-genome microarray analysis revealed a 5.19 Mb de- genes found in almost all eukaryotes. Four AGO genes are present in hu- letion of 8q21.11q21.13 region encompassing 19 genes. The phenotypic and mans, three of which (AGO 1, 3, and 4) reside in a cluster on chromosome genetic findings of our patient will be compared with those of previously 1p35p34. reported patients. We indicate several candidate genes, providing new data The possible effects of germline AGO mutations or dosage alterations in hu- supporting further genotype-phenotype studies. Our results suggest that mans is not known, however, animal models deficient for AGO proteins dis- haploinsufficient genes within the deleted region, e.g. ZFHX4/STMN2, FA- play developmental brain defects including a reduction in total number of B
P4 /FAB
P5  and HEY1, could underlie the intellectual impairment, excess neurons and glia. Moreover, different studies have established that miRNA weight and cardiovascular disorders, observed in 8q21 microdeletion. This and siRNA are prevalently or exclusively expressed in the brain, where they study was supported by MNiSW Grant No. 0193/I
P1 /2013/72. 
P08 .07-S play an essential role in the development and function of the central nervous Clinical and molecular delineation of the emerging 8q22.3 system (CNS). microdeletion syndrome We describe five patients with hypotonia, microcephaly, intellectual disabi- C. Venegas-Vega1,2, M. Guardado3, E. Juarez3, G. Zafra4,2, J. Berumen3,2; lity, and facial dysmorphisms, in whom array-Comparative Genomic Hybri- 1Hospital General de Mexico, Servicio de Genetica, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Facultad de dization revealed overlapping de novo microdeletions of the chromosomal Medicina, UNAM, Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General de Mexico, Servicio de Medicina region 1p34.3. The minimal critical region is a segment of approximately Genomica, Mexico DF, Mexico, 4Hospital Español, Servicio de Genetica, Mexico DF, Mexico. 694 Kb that encompasses the AGO1, AGO3, and AGO4 genes. Background: We propose that the neurocognitive deficits present in these patients are due to deletion of the 1p34.3 region and resulting haploinsufficiency of Five patients with deletions that involving chromosome several AGO genes. It seems plausible that the 1p34.3 deletion syndrome 8q22.2-q22.3 has been recently reported. Four patients shared a similar cra- may eventually be recognized as a neurodevelopmental disorder associated niofacial phenotype with microcephaly, blepharophimosis, uni or bilateral with RNAi deregulation, however, further investigation is necessary to prove ptosis and little facial expression. They have moderate to severe intellectual this. disability (ID) and impairment or absent speech. These carrying an over- 
P08 .05-S lapping region deletion of 3.87 Mb (hg19:100.69-104.56). The other patient Two brothers with 2q23 microdeletion syndrome inherited from nMoett shhoodwse adn thdi sR feascuiallt sg:estalt but presented moderate ID, and speech impair- their mosaic father M. Fannemel1, E. Ormerod1, T. Barøy2, D. Misceo2; ment. She presented the shorter deletion of 1.92 Mb (hg19:102.01-103.93). 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Here, we described on 18-year-old female patient Oslo, Norway. with microcephaly, unilateral ptosis, moderate ID and speech impairment. CytoScan HD array analysis identified a 2.95 Mb 8q22.2-q22.3 deletion. The comparation of the present patient with the above five cases contribute Patient 1, the older brother, is 13 years old and has moderate intellectual to narrow down the critical region in 8q22.3 of ~1.47 Mb (hg19:101.95- disability. He communicates by single words, pointing and some signing. He 103.42). Furthermore, we analyze the gene funUcBtRio5n)al role s and probability walked at 4 years. He uses diapers, suffers from constipation and manifests of haploinsufficiency (HI) UofB tRh5i s genomic region; resulting the ubiquitin aggressive outbursts and stereotypic movements. His sleeping pattern is di- protein ligase 
E3  component N-recognin-5 ( gene as the best can- sturbed by periods of awakeness. He has teeth enamel erosions. His twin didate for the phenotype. belongs to ubiquitiUnB/pEr3oAteasome system sister, with Apert syndrome, died at 2 years. Patient 2, the younger brother, (UPS). NeurodevUelBoRp1mental genetic disorders involving alterations in UPS is 6.5 years and has moderate intellectual disability. He speaks a few words hUaBveE 2bAeen described such as Angelman syndrome ( ), J(oUhBaEn3soBn) -Bli- and infrequently combines two words. He has a heart murmur, enamel teeth zard syndrome ( ) and X-linked intellectual disability type Nascimento erosions and periodic sleep problems. He is restless and active. ( ). Recently, mutations in ubiquitin protein ligase E
C3 oBnclusions:in a ArrayCGH of the patients and father showed a deletion of blepharophimosis-ptosis-intellectual disability syndrome, which fits Kauf- chr2q23.1(148705701-148926786 bp), including the MBD5, considered man oculocerebrofacial syndrome have beUeBn Rr5e cognized. We critical in the 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome. By FISH the deletion in the suggested that this novel 8q22.3 microdeletion syndrome had a variable father was found to be a mosaicism found in 73% of lymphocytes. Assess- expressivity and proposed that the HI of could lead tothispeculiar ment of the mosaicism level in additional tissues is ongoing. The father recei- c Pr 0a 8n .i 0o 8fa -c Mial phenotype and ID of this novel genomic disorder. ved speech therapy in childhood and has dyslexia. He completed secondary An atypical inherited ATR-16 syndrome unrelated to SOX8 school with low-average marks, and did not finish high school. He has been haploinsufficiency working as a manual worker in the same factory for 18 years. In patient M. Donà1, C. Rigon1, V. Vicenzi1, E. Lenzini2, L. Salviati1, M. Clementi1, E. Trevisson1; 2 and his father aCGH detected also a chr15q26.1(9022468-90255068 bp) 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of deletion, including PLIN1. PLIN1 mutations cause dominant familial partial Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Molecular Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Women’s and lipodystrophy type 4, but the effect of PLIN1 haploinsufficiency is unknown. Children’s Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. Patient 2 and his father, but not Patient 1, are obese. To our knowledge this is the first familial case of the 2q23 microdeletion syndrome. We report the case of a girl affected by mild mental retardation, macroce- 
P08 .06-M phaly and microcytic anemia. Clinical examination did not reveal significant Microdeletion of 8q21 region: clinical and molecular analysis based dysmorphic features, except for frontal bossing and mild hypertelorism. on a new case Also her mother presents with mild intellectual disability. M. Kucharczyk1, K. Iwanicka-Pronicka2, M. Kugaudo1,3, A. Cieślikowska1, A. Jezela- Stanek1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; Array-CGH analysis detected a 493.1 Kb telomeric deletion on chromosome 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 16p13.3, which was found to be maternally inherited. Further examination Poland, 2Department of Audiology, Phoniatrics and Otolaryngology, The Children’s of mother’s medical history revealed that she was also affected by microcy- Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Child and Adolescent tic anemia, which had been treated with oral iron therapy without benefit. Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. The deletion involves the two alpha-globin genes (HBA1 and HBA2), explai- ning the haematological defect. Deletions of 1.5 and 2 Mb involving the telomeric short arm of chromosome Submicroscopic deletion of 8q21.11 is a rare cause of intellectual disabili- 16 cause the contiguous gene syndrome ATR-16 (MIM #141750) charac- ty, developmental delay and craniofacial dysmorphy. Hypotonia, impaired terized by alpha-thalassemia, mental retardation and variable dysmorphic balance, sensorineural hearing loss, abnormal behaviour as well as mild features (downslanting palpebral fissures, mild hypertelorism, broad nasal fingers and toes anomalies are frequently observed. To date, 13 cases, inclu- bridge, small ears and a short neck with webbing). Haploinsufficiency of ding 5 from the same family, have been clinically and molecularly characte- SOX8 (MIM #605923) is thought to be responsible for intellectual disability. rized. Here we report on the case of a 14-year-old girl with moderate mental The deleted region in our patient does not include SOX8, whereas it com- retardation, numerous dysmorphic features (a round face with full cheeks, prises 31 genes whose function is still partially unknown, except for HBA1 high forehead, ptosis, long and downslanting palpebral fissures, short phil- and HBA2. trum, Cupid’s bow of the upper lip, down-turned corners of the mouth, mi- To our knowledge this is the smallest 16p13.3 telomeric deletion characte- crognathia, high palate, low-set and prominent ears, and short neck), short rized by mental retardation and microcytic anemia, narrowing the critical stature and overweight. At birth, microtia o Ef Sth He Grig 2ht 0 e 1ar 4 w |i t Mh e Ix Lte Ar Nna ,l a ITu Adi- LY |r eWgiWon Wan.dE SpoHinGti.nOg RatG other candidate genes for intellectual disabi 1lit 4ie 9s. tory duct stenosis and atrial septal defect were diagnosed. Muscle tone was Moreover this is the first case of inherited ATR-16 syndrome.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P08 .09-S Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of Intellectual disability and autistic behavior due to de novo Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. microduplication of Xq28 involving part of the AFF2 (FMR2) gene. Is this a plausible explanation? N. Bukvic1, C. Cesarano2, C. Ceccarini2, A. D’Aprile2, D. C. Loconte3, M. Chetta4, V. Bruni3, R. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a range of complex neurodevelopmental Pietrobono5, E. Tabolacci6, A. Manghisi1, W. Latanzzi7, F. C. Susca3, R. Antonetti2, N. Resta3; conditions principally characterized by dysfunctions linked to mental deve- 1Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Consorziale Policlinico di Bari, Bari, Italy, 2OORR lopment. The understanding of its genetic basis is difficult, mainly because Foggia, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria, Departimento di Patologia Clinica - II the high allelic and locus heterogeneity together with the variable sympto- Laboratory, Sezione di Citogenetica, Foggia, Italia, Foggia, Italy, 3Dipartimento di matology. Therefore, multiple approaches have been applied to understand Scienze Biomediche ed Oncologia Umana Università degli Studi di Bari UOC Laboratorio di Genetica Medica., Bari, Italy, 4Genetica Medica, Università di Milano, Bari, Italy, its genetic basis. Thousands of clues have emerged from initial exome se- 5Servizio di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore,, Roma, Italy, 6Istituto quencing (ES) studies, identifying possible de novo Novel (DNN) mutations di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Saro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 7Istituto di associated to ASD. Since most of the variants reported to date were found Anatomia Umana e Biologia Cellulare, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. mostly in Caucasian or European descendant, we applied ES in a cohort of Colombian - South American (admixed population) trios. In this previous study, we found two DNN non-synonymous mutations in genes ALDH1A3 FRAXE is an X-linked form of intellectual disability characterized by mild and FOXN1 in the same child. Using bioinformatic approximations, we were to moderate cognitive impairment, speech delay, hyperactivity, and autistic able to locate several Retinoic Acid Response Elements (RARE) upstream behavior. The folate-sensitive fragile site FRAXE is located in Xq28 appro- of both genes in humans, as well as in mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitati- ximately 600 kb distal to the fragile X syndrome fragile site (FRAXA) and on (ChIP) followed by QPCR determined the relationship between Retinoid harbors an unstable GCC triplet repeat adjacent to a CpG island in the 5’ UTR Acid Receptor ß (RARß) in adult piriform cortex and in embryonic whole (untranslated region) of the AFF2 (FMR2) gene. The disorder results from brain. 
P08 .12-M amplification and methylation of the GCC repeats and consequence silen- Array Comparative Genome Hybridization (aCGH) in children with cing of AFF2. Although chromosome abnormalities (mostly deletions) that autistic spectrum phenotype disrupt AFF2 have been reported with mild-moderate intellectual disability, V. Oikonomakis, K. Kosma, M. Tzetis, E. Fryssira, N. Pervanidou, A. Xaidara, A. Syrmou, S. microduplication of Xq28 that partially involved AFF2 has not been descri- Rigoglou, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, E. Kanavakis; bed as a potential cause of FRAXE. We performed clinical and molecular cha- Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. racterization of patient with 301 kb interstitial de novo duplication at Xq28 Aim: (chrX:147˙490˙437-147˙791˙737bp)(GRCh37/hg19). This genomic mutati- on leads to the duplication of part of 5’ UTR region of the AFF2 (FMR2) gene Autism or autistic spectrum disorders ( ASD), are a group of complex which could be inactivated due to this genomic change. Namely, duplication neurodevelopmental disabilities, affecting social interaction and communi- of this segment potentially could have the same effects as amplification and cation skills (Rosti R O et al 2013). Only α few cases of chromosomal abnor- methylation of an unstable GCC triplet repeats. That’s why we are perfor- malities are identified by conventional cytogenetic techniques while mole- ming experiments aimed to study genic expression/metilation. As our pati- cular kaMrayotetyripael -a Mlloewthso fdosr :the detection of submicroscopic genomic rear- ent had cognitive impairment, speech delay, hyperactivity and mild dysmor- rangements providing a diagnostic yield ranging from 10% to 18% (Shen Y phism, we predict that partial duplication of AFF2 in our patient could be 2010). . A total of 629 patients were studied by the De- t Ph 0e 8 c .1au 0s -e M of his phenotype. partment of Medical Genetics, from which 114 fulfilled the the autism/ ASD Functional studies of ARX mutants linked to neurophenotypes and clinical criteria The arrays used were high definition1Χ244K and 4X180K Application of rescue strategies targeting KDM5C down-regulation with the additional ability of SNP identification for the detection of unipa- L. Poeta1, A. Padula1, C. Shoubridge2, S. Zucchelli3, F. Fusco1, S. Filosa1,4, P. Collombat5, K. rental disomy UPD and /or copyR enseuulttrsa:l loss of homozygosity (LOH).. All Helin6, L. Altucci1,7, M. Lioi8, S. Gustincich3, J. Gecz2, M. Ursini1, M. Miano1; patients were referred by Clinical Geneticists after detailed evaluation and 1IGB-CNR, Naples, Italy, 2Dep. of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, South Australia, normal conventional karyotype. Submicroscopic genomic rearran- Australia, 3SISSA, Trieste, Italy, 4Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy, 5Inserm U1091 Diabetes gements (CNVs), 0.08-19.01 Mb in size weNreR XdNet1e, cStHedA NinK 35,5 D/O1
C1 K48 s, uZbNjFe9ct2s, Genetics Team, Nice, France, 6Centre for Epigenetics, University of Copenhagen, wASitMhT a, HutSiFsmX1 ,o KrC ANSHD7, , wCHitRhF tAhMe 7fAo,l lCoHwRinNgA 7m,KosCtN iDm2poCrNtTanNtA gPe3n, ΜesΑ pΟrΑe,v MioAuOsBly, Copenhagen, Denmark, 7Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 8University of iSmTSp,l VicCaXteCdo innl tuhsei oentisology of autism or ASD: Basilicata, Potenza, Italy. , The identification of genetic alterations (CNVs) in a af- fected child with autism/ ASD allows more specific consultaion to the family Neurophenotypes linked to Aristaless-related homeobox (ARX) mutations about diagnosis, prognosis and recurrent risks, while genetic reevaluation present a huge spectrum of brain diseases including cortical malformations, with aCGH is also warranted in adult autism patients. malignant epilepsy and intellectual disability (ID). We have recently identi- 
P08 .13-S fied a crucial disease path, linking functionally ARX to another XLID/Epilepsy Phenotype of 20 novel autosomal recessive cognitive genes- a report gene, Lysine-specific demethylase 5C (KDM5C). It encodes an H3K4me2/3 from Iran demethylase required in neuronal differentiation. We found that ARX muta- K. Kahrizi1, A. Tzschach2,3, M. Garshasbi1, C. Hu2, S. Abedini1, H. Ropers2, H. Najmabadi1; tions, affecting PolyAlanine tracts or HD domain, cause functional damages 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, of the ARX-KDM5C interaction, which severity depends on the type of al- Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. teration. In Arx KO embryonic brain and ES-oriented GABAergic neurons, a defective ARX-KDM5C-H3K4me3 path has been found. We tested in vitro correction of KDM5C-H3K4me3 defects, ideally through endogenous physio- After releasing 50 novel intellectual disability (ID) genes by Najmabadi et logical mechanisms. We explored three different approaches: transcription al. in 2011, most of researchers working on cognitive pathway in human factor targeting, gene knock-up by SINEUP non-coding RNA technology and and animal models were interested in phenotypically aspect of some of the- epigenetic modifications. To UP-regulate transcription, we forced KDM5C se genes to reach the function of changes in mouse, drosophila and human transcription by PHF8/ZNF711 stimulation, a transcriptional complex that brain. seems to not synergize with the action of ARX. To UP-regulate translation, From 50 novel candidate genes of ID that have been reported, 20 families taken advantage of SINEB2 lncRNAs (SINEUPs) acting as activators of trans- had additional features that some of them could have been related to the lation, we generated synthetic lncRNAs antisense to KDM5C gene. In SINEUP effect of these genes on neuronal networking. Ten out of 20syndromic fa- KDM5C-transfected neuronal cell lines, we obtained increased levels of en- milies with microcephaly or neurological symptoms were selected and MRI dogenous KDM5C protein. To achieve epigenetic correction of KDM5C path, was performed for one or two affected siblings in each family. In the pre- we screened also a number of compounds targeting chromatin enzymes. A vious study, homozygosity mapping, coupled by conventional sequencing or strong compensation of KDM5C down-regulation has been obtained at cru- next generation sequencing (NGS) were used to define underlying genetic cial time-point of neuronal commitment upon treatment with an HDAC inhi- defects. bitor. Ongoing efforts to define rescue strategies may help to identify useful From total of 10 families, eight families showed different types of abnor- tools towards drug discovery for ARX XLID/Epilepsy phenotypes and many malities as periventricular leukoencephalopathy, reduced cerebral cortex, other disorders with malignant seizure. 
P08 .11-S pachygyria, polymicrogyria, small corpus callosum and cerebellar hypopla- Defining a link between retinoic acid and autism: molecular sia on MRI including subjects with mutations in CAPN10, TAF2, CNKSR1, approximation for exome sequencing results WDR45L, ERLIN2, PAR
P1  and SL
C31 A1 genes. Three syndromic families O. A. Moreno-Ramos1, A. Olivares2, N. B. Haider2,3, M. C. Lattig1; had normal brain architecture (ZBTB40, KIF7 and TMEM135). 1Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia, 2Schepens Eye Research Institute, More detailed of syndromic families have been described based on the table 150 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, oITf AnoLvYel |c oWgnWitivWe .gEenSeHs Gpu.bOliRshGed by Najmabadi et al. in Nature Oct 2011.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P08 .14-M Mutation in CAPN10 Causing Intellectual Disability in Two Independent Iranian Families with Overlapping Phenotypes tapered fingers, and coarsening of facial features. M. Oladnabi1, L. Musante2, Z. Fattahi1, H. Hu2, S. Abedini1, M. Hosseini1, T. Wienker2, K. We report a Danish family with four boys with developmental delay aged Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1, H. Ropers2; 3-12 years. They were related as brothers/cousins with mothers being si- 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, sters. All four boys had normal birth weight, poor suck, hypotonia, develop- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max- mental delay, no language, big ears, small penis and testes, tapered fingers, Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. and broad distance between 1st and 2nd toes. The pedigree was consi- stent with X-linked inheritance. Whole-exome sequencing was performed by exome capture (AgilentSureselect) followed by sequencing of all exons Intellectual disability (ID) is a broad diagnosis encompassing a wide variety and exon/intron boundaries at the X chromosome. A hemizygous mutation of phenotypes and severities. There are many reasons why the genetics of p.M1V in the PHF6 gene was found in all four boys and in heterozygosity in intellectual disability have been difficult to unravel, but the most important the two mothers and the grandmother. The mutation alters the start codon are extensive genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in autosomal-recessive where a p.M1T mutation has been reported previously. The mutation caused (AR) inheritance of ID. Therefore, our joined researches on ID started in BFLS in the four affected boys with three unaffected carrier females. BFLS 2003 with abroad centers to elucidate the molecular causes of ARID in Iran. might be underdiagnosed due to its rather unspecific phenotypic characte- As a part of this collaboration, whole genome homozygosity mapping and ristics. 
P08 .17-S exome sequencing was performed to identify novel genes and mutations in TALEN-mediated mutagenesis as a tool to generate disease models for two Iranian families affected with ID. diseases caused by dominant de novo mutations In our previous study, published in Nature 2011, we reported on a mutation C. A. Biagosch1,2, S. Hensler3, R. Kühn3, T. Meitinger1,2, H. Prokisch1,2; in CAPN10 gene In a consanguineous Iranian family with syndromic ID. In 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, the current study, two novel nonsense mutations were discovered in two un- 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, related Iranian families with ID in CAPN10 gene, which encodes calpain10 3Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, protein eight isoforms and involves in brain function, NIDDM and other cel- Germany. lular activities. In this study, in addition to the above mentioned mutations, we observed overlapping clinical findings including microcephlay, ID and di- stinct brain MRI features in two independent Iranian families. Here, our aim Engineering of the mouse germline has long been used to create targeted w 
P0 a 8s .t 1o 5 i -n Stroduce CAPN10 as a promising candidate gene in syndromic ID. mutants. The TALEN-mediated approach based on embryo microinjection De novo single exon deletion of AUT
S2  in a patient with profound of TALENs was shown to result in up to 50% efficiency of germline mutated intellectual disability offspring. As TALENs can modify one or two copies of the target gene eit- D. Babikyan, S. Midyan, A. Hovhannisyan, A. Gasparyan, T. Sarkisian; her before or after genome replication, mutant genotypes identified in the Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. founder generation may represent heterozygous, compound heterozygous or mosaic state. The high efficiency could allow the generation of mouse models for diseases caused by dominant de novo mutations. Here we tested The autism susceptibility candidate 2 (AUT
S2 ) gene has a critical role in this approach to generate a mouse model for X-linked dominant neurode- early brain development with its strong expression in fetal and adult brain. generation caused by de novo mutations in WDR45. After microinjection of Association of AUT
S2  with intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum dis- TALEN mRNA surviving Embryo’s have been transferred in groups of 10 into orders, and other neurodevelopmental disorders has recently gained more the oviducts of 3 pseudopregnant females resulting in 19% mutated foun- attention. Genomic rearrangements and copy number variations (CNVs) in- ders (5/26). Mutations are deletions between 10 and 57bp in length with a volving AUT
S2  have been implicated in a range of neurodevelopmental dis- predicted frameshift in 80% of mutations. From the in situ design and deli- orders with or without congenital malformations and dysmorphic features. very of the TALENs (~1month), over in vitro testing in cell culture to the in Here we report a 127 kb de novo deletion encompassing exon 5 of AUT
S2  at vivo injection into embryo’s (~2months) until the genotyping of the founder 7q11.22 which result in inframe deletion of 10 amino acids. The deletion was mutants it only takes 4-5 months. Hence, this presents an innovative tool detected by SNP-array analysis applying InfiniumHD whole-genome genoty- to investigate de novo arising mutations in mosaic status which would be ping assay with the HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip (Illumina Inc.). Obtained e Pm 08b .r 1y 8o -n Mic lethal. data were analyzed with Illumina GenomeStudio and QuantiSNP software. NR2F1 mutations cause optic atrophy with intellectual disability The single exon deletion was detected in a 10 year-old female patient with D. G. M. Bosch1,2, F. N. Boonstra2, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui3, M. Xu3, J. de Ligt1, S. Jhangiani3, severe speech disorder, intention tremor, fine motor activity deficit, beha- W. Wiszniewski3,4, D. M. Muzny3, H. G. Yntema1, R. Pfundt1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, L. Spruijt1, vior disturbance, residual lesion in the CNS, and intracranial hypertension. E. A. W. Blokland1, C. Chen3,4, Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics, R. A. This is one of the smallest de novo intragenic deletions of AUT
S2  described Lewis3,4, S. Y. Tsai3, R. A. Gibbs3, M. Tsai3, J. R. Lupski3,4, H. Y. Zoghbi3,4,5, F. P. M. Cremers1, C. in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. Along with the review of P. Schaaf3,4, B. B. A. de Vries1; 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Bartiméus, Institute for the previously reported 20 cases with small pathogenic CNVs and 4 cases with Visually Impaired, Zeist, Netherlands, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United different de novo balanced translocations of 7q11.2 interrupting the AUT
S2  States, 4Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 5Howard Hughes Medical gene with severe profound to borderline ID without autistic features or de- Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, United States. layed psychomotor development with mild to moderate autism, this report provides additional insight into the clinical spectrum of AUT
S2  disruptions. 
P08 .16-M Whole exome sequencing detected a novel PHF6 mutation as the Optic nerve atrophy and hypoplasia can be primary disorders or can result cause of Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome in four males in a from trans-synaptic degeneration arising from cerebral visual impairment Danish pedigree (CVI). CVI comprise a class of disorders of the projection and/or interpre- N. M. Gammelager1, I. S. Pedersen2, V. Q. Le2, T. H. Soerensen3, L. L. Bjerregaard3, A. tation of visual input in the brain, and symptoms can consist of low vision, Ernst2, S. Vaeth1, T. J. B. Lyngbye4,5, H. Krarup2, M. B. Petersen1,6; visual field defects and abnormal visual behavior. Here we report six indivi- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, duals with CVI and/or optic nerve abnormalities, born after an uneventful 2Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aalborg pregnancy and delivery. The affected individuals show mild to moderate University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 3Department of Pediatrics, Aalborg University intellectual impairment, without specific facial dysmorphisms. In three Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 4Department of Pediatrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 5Centre for Deafblindness and Hearing Impairment, Aalborg, pdea tnieonvtos large optic disc excavations were seeNnR, 2wFh1i ch are, until now, only Denmark, 6Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. reported in CVI caused by perinatal damage. In four of the affected persons heterozygous missense mutations in were identified. In the two other affected individualsN SRN2F
P1  array investigations revealed heterozy- Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (BFLS) is a rare X-linked mental re- gNoRu2sF d1eletions on 5q14.3q15 of 0.84 Mb and 2.83 Mb encompassing 4 and 5 tardation syndrome. BFLS was first described in 1962, and in 2002 the PHF6 genes, respectively, including . gene at Xq26 was identified as the responsible gene. encodes a nuclear receptor protein that regulates transcription. A Approximately 20 cases have been reported with mutations in the PHF6 luciferase reporter assay showed that missense mutations in the zinc-fin- gene. At least 12 different PHF6 mutations have been found in both familial ger DNA-binding domain and the putative ligand-binding domain decrease and sporadic cases, predominantly missense and truncation mutations. Five NR2F1 transcriptional activity. Additionally, previous studies in KO mice has recurrent mutations have been reported, which arose independently. indicated that the protein is important for neurodevelopment, including The main clinical features are normal birth weight, feeding problems and oligodendrocyte differentiation (partly in vitro experiment), cortical patter- hypotonia in infancy, developmental delay, mild/moderate mental retarda- ning, and guidance of thalamocortical axons, as well as eye and optic nerve tion, large ears, short toes, small genitaliaE, SgyHnaGe c2om01as4ti a|, MtruInLcAalN o,b IeTsiAtyL, Y |d WeveWlopWm.eEnSt.HG.ORG 151ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index NR2F1 In conclusion, these findings indicate that plays an important role in Intellectual disablity (IQ<70) affects up to 3% of the general population. Un- the neurodevelopment of the visual system and that its disruption can lead til recently, the underlying cause was unclear in about half of the affected to optic atrophy with intellectual disability. individuals. The introduction of whole exome sequencing (WES) techniques 
P08 .19-S enables elucidating the genetic background of ID. Chromosomal microarray analysis of patients with intellectual We performed WES in a cohort of 250 individuals with unexplained ID and disability, autism or multiple congenital anomalies presenting for identified heterozygous de novo CTNNB1 mutations in five unrelated indi- genetic services O. Palumbo, P. Palumbo, R. Stallone, T. Palladino, L. Zelante, M. Carella; viduals (three frameshift, one stop, and one splice mutation). All five pati- IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. ents have severe motor delay, profound speech impairment, hypotonia of the trunk and hypertonia of the legs. The craniofacial phenotype comprises microcephaly (4/5) and some consistent facial features - a broad nasal tip, Copy number variations (CNVs) are the most common identifiable causes small alae nasi, long philtrum and thin upper lip vermillion. of intellectual disability/developmental delay (ID/DD), autism spectrum Beta-catenin is a key downstream component of the canonical Wnt signaling disorders (ASDs), or multiple congenital anomalies (MCAs). Chromoso- pathway, and acts as a negative regulator of centrosome cohesion. Whereas mal microarray analysis (CMA), with a 10-20% diagnostic yield, can iden- somatic gain-of-function mutations have already been found in various tu- tify CNVs≤1 Mb. We report our experience with the use of the Affymetrix mor types, germline loss-of-function mutations were suspected in animal SNP Arrays in 1600 Italian patients during the past 6 years (2008-2013). models to influence neuronal development and maturation. This was sup- We identified CNVs with a high score of pathogenicity in 415 (27%) pati- ported by the finding of dominant inactivating CTNNB1 mutations as a cau- ents. Among them 143 (34.4%) showed a CNV overlapping with a known se of ID in 3/865 patients (0.35%, deLigt etal., 2012). Their phenotype was syndrome, 272 (65.6%) a likely pathogenic rearrangement. Of particular additionally characterized by absent/limited speech, microcephaly and spa- interest, we found some CNVs useful to further delineate the clinical fea- sticity with severely impaired walking. tures associated with deletions in 8q12.1q12.3, in 15q25.2, in 17q21.31, in Our finding of five individuals in our cohort of 250 (2.0%) suggests that CT- 2q24.1q24.2, in 22q11.2, and duplications in 16p13.3 and in 11p13. Some NNB1 loss-of-function mutations might be a more frequent cause of ID than CNVs were useful to describe new syndromes such as a 1.7 Mb deletion in estimated from the data of deLigt and colleagues. Our data further empha- 3q13.2q13.31. Also, we have identified a large group of small CNVs (< 1.0 size the importance of Wnt signalling in human brain development and/or Mb) encompassing, either in whole or in part, functionally related genes to f Pu 0n 8c .t 2io 2n -M. the phenotypes such as CASK, CNTN6, SNTG2, HI
P1 , DLG2, NRXN1, MCPH1 Deletions limited to CTNND2 cause mild intellectual disability and CH
L1  genes. Among these small CNVs, we have reported a FOX
P1  gene S. Azzarello-Burri1, R. Asadollahi1, E. Bijlsma2, J. Andrieux3, A. Dieux4, D. FitzPatrick5, A. microdeletion in a boy with autism and speech delay, and a de novo intersti- Ekici6, A. Baumer1, B. Oneda1, A. Reis6, O. Jenni7, A. Rauch1; tial deletion of 0.122 Mb at 2q24.2 region harboring only TBR1 gene in a boy 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Department with moderate to severe intellectual disability. Variants of uncertain signi- of Clinical Genetics, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 3Institut de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne ficance (VOUS) because unreported, containing genes of uncertain clinical de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 4Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, Hôpital significance or non-genic but potentially regulating nearby gene expression, Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 5MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC w 
P0 e 8re .2 i 0de -Mntify in 128 individuals (8%). Institute for Genetic and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh EH4 2XU, United The Cohen syndrome-associated protein COH1 functions as Golgi Kingdom, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 7Child Development Center, University Children‘s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, matrix protein required for Golgi integrity Switzerland. S. Wenke1, J. Kühnisch2,3, T. Maritzen4, S. Bachmann1, H. Hennies5, D. Horn6, V. Haucke4; 1Institute of Vegetative Anatomy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, FG Development and Disease, Using chromosomal microarray testing we detected a 113 kb de novo out of Berlin, Germany, 4Laboratory for Molecular Pharmacology and Cell Biology, Leibniz- frame deletion encompassing exons 4-7 of CTNND2 in a patient with bor- Institute for Molecular Pharmacology, Berlin, Germany, 5Cologne Center for Genomics, derline ID. This gene was mapped to the cri-du-chat syndrome critical regi- University of Cologne, Berlin, Germany, 6Institute of Medical Genetics and Human on in chromosome 5p15.2 and encodes a regulator of neuronal migration. Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. CTNND2 was considered responsible for the severe intellectual disability in cri-du-chat syndrome patients with terminal deletions. Extended dele- tion mapping however indicated that interstitial deletions restricted to the Mutations in the COH1 (VP
S13 B) gene cause autosomal recessive Cohen CTNND2 locus produce a milder level of intellectual disability. The girl was syndrome, which is mainly characterized by mental retardation, postnatal born at term with no complication and normal measurements. Apart from microcephaly, pigmentary retinopathy, and intermittent neutropenia. Ho- 2 episodes of acute subglottic laryngitis there were no remarkable health wever, the biochemical characteristics, cellular localization, or functional problems. Developmental milestones were within normal limits. The pati- role of the encoded protein COH1 (3997aa) have so far not been addressed. ent was referred to developmental testing because of behavioural issues and Our cell biological analysis showed strong co-localization of COH1 with the was diagnosed with mild intellectual disability. She showed a dissociated cis-Golgi marker protein GM130, which was preserved even upon chemical cognitive profile with better language than nonverbal functions (full scale disruption of the Golgi architecture. Further biochemical analysis showed IQ 77) and suffered from short attention span, poor executive functioning that COH1 is a peripheral membrane protein similar to its remote homo- and impaired working memory. Three other patients with deletions limited logue, Vps13p in yeast. Vps13p has been found to regulate anterograde and to CTNND2 were found in the DECIPHER database. One patient had a 413 kb retrograde vesicular transport of transmembrane proteins between the deletion with mild intellectual disability, autism and hypotonia. The other prevacuolar compartment and the trans-Golgi network. Consequently, we patient showed a 479 kb deletion with learning difficulties, behavioral pro- found that loss of COH1 upon RNAi impairs the ability of the Golgi ribbon blems and autism spectrum disorder. In the third patient a 154 kb deletion to (re)assemble and thus induces fragmentation into mini-stacks. Moreover, was detected. He showed intellectual disability and neurological problems we found that COH1 regulates the formation of Golgi-derived membrane tu- which may be caused by an additional unidentified disorder. We assume that bules consistent with its predicted function in intracellular membrane traf- CTNND2 haploinsufficiency is a novel cause of mild neurodevelopment fea- fic. Further protein-protein interaction studies identified COH1 as a potenti- tures. al effector protein of the Golgi-associated small GTPase RAB6, emphasizing 
P08 .23-S a role of COH1 for Golgi-related vesicle transport. Thus, our accumulated A familial case of 15q26.3 microduplication evidence suggests COH1 as a molecular regulator of antero- and retrograde S. Puusepp1,2, O. žilina1,3, K. Kuuse1, K. Õunap1,4; 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Golgi membrane trafficking. As RAB6-associated Golgi transport critically 2Department of Human Biology and Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational regulates neuronal development and neuron function the Cohen syndrome Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, p Pa 0t 8h .o 2l 1o -g Sy is likely caused by a failure of intracellular vesicle transport. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, De novo heterozygous mutations in beta-catenin 1 (CTNNB1) appear Estonia. to be a frequent cause of intellectual disability (ID) A. Kuechler1, B. Albrecht1, K. Cremer2, C. Czeschik1, E. Graf3, H. Lüdecke1, T. Wieland3, A. M. Zink2, H. Engels2, T. M. Strom3, D. Wieczorek1; The “15q overgrowth syndrome” has been associated with the very distal 1Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, 15q duplication. At least 26 cases with trisomy of 15q25-26qter have been Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, published, of which approximately 70% have presented IwGiFth1R overgrowth Germany. and about 65% have been the result of a parental balanced translocation. Overgrowth has been associated with the dosage effect of (insulin-li- 152 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG ke growth factor 1 receptor) gene located on 15q26. However, about 50% ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index IGF1R patients with larger duplications of distal 15q (15q21-24qter, including the may be responsible for autosomal recessive non-syndromic intellectual gene) on the contrary presented with growth retardation, although a disability. 
P08 .26-M few authors have reported overgrow th as well. Mutations in FOX
P1  result in a recognizable mental disability We report 12 and 8 years old brothers with identical 0.77 Mb microdupli- phenotype cations in 15q26.3 region (chr15: 101,031,538-101,802,565, Hg19). The B. L. Callewaert1, A. Dheedene1, F. F. Hamdan2, J. Michaud2, D. Lederer3, S. Moortgat3, B. elder sib presents with postnatal overgrowth - at the age 12 his height is Menten1; 175 cm (+4 SD), but his birth length was 52 cm (0 SD). The younger sib 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, has normal growth (+1 SD). In addition, they both present with expressive Belgium, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center of excellence in Neuromics of Université de Montréal, speech disorder, some facial and hand microanomalies, and poor fine motor Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Institut de pathologie et de génétique, Gosselies, Belgium. skills. Their father has overgrowth (+2.5 SD), prominent facial features and presented with dysarthria in childhood. Therefore, the duIpGlFic1aRtion is with high probability of a paternal origin (analysis in work). This is the smallest Mental retardation with or without minor dysmorphic features represents “pure” 15q26 duplication reported so far. Interestingly, the gene is not a major challenge in clinical genetics. Over a decade ago, the introduction duplicated in our patients. Furthermore, they demonstrate variable clinical of arrayCGH analysis introduced the concept of reverse genetics in clinical phenotype. Therefore, we give further evidence that a more complex patho- practice identifying recurrent phenotypes in patients with similar molecu- genesis for the development of somatic overgrowth should exist in case of lar defects. With the increasing resolution of arrayCGH analysis, monogenic distal 15q duplication. defects can sometimes be readily identified. A careful clinical description of 
P08 .24-M the concurrent phenotype may therefore direct specific gene analyses in pa- 6p21.33 microdeletion associated with EHMT2 haploinsufficiency tients with similar phenotypes (‘gestalt’ diagnosis) or may prioritize variant and intellectual disability analysis through next-generation sequencing of gene panels or exomes. K. Kurosawa1, I. Ohashi1, Y. Kuroda1, T. Naruto1, T. Saito1, M. Masuno2; 1Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kawasaki University of We present three novel patients with FOX
P1  mutations. All patients pre- Medical Welfare, Kurashiki, Japan. sented with moderate to severe intellectual disability with nearly absent speech, patient 3 additionally had tonic-clonic seizures, horizontal nystag- mus, spastic tetraparesis and aggression. The facial features in these pati- Microdeletion of 6p21 is a rare condition that has been described in pati- ents included a frontal upsweep, a broad forehead, broad and bent palpebral ents with multiple congenital malformation and intellectual disabilEitHyM. WT2e fissures, hypertelorism, a bulbous nasal tip, prominent nasolabial folds and report on a patient with a 0.4 Mb microdeletion in 6p21.33 and intellectu- a wide mouth. These striking features and the identification of a de novo al disability. The genomic loss contained 30 RefSeq genes ncluding 420kb intragenic deletion on arrayCGH analysis in patient 1 enabled us to which is a primary enzyme for mono- and dimethylation at Lys 9 of histone identify a FOX
P1  mutation (p.R525X) by direct sanger sequencing in patient H3 (H3K9me1/2), and plays critical roles in various biological processes. 2 and to prioritize data analysis in a large gene panel analysis for mental The 6-year-old boy was referred for evaluation of intellectual disability and disability in patient 3 (p.W508X mutation in FOX
P1 ). macrocephaly. He was born at 37 weeks of gestation to a 32-year-old G1 
P1  We further delineate the clinical phenotype due to FOX
P1  mutations. Our mother and 34-year-old father after uneventful pregnancy. The birth weight and literature data evidence an emerging and recognizable syndrome. In the was 2418 g, length 45 cm, and head circumference 33 cm. His psychomotor era of exome/genome analysis the clinical definition of phenotypes remains development was delayed. He achieved head control at 4 months, sitting at i Pm 0p 8o .2rt 7a -n St to order to enable genotype-phenotype correlations. 10 months, and walking alone at 2 years. He spoke his first word at 2.5 years. Triplet repeat-primed (TRP)-PCR changes the paradigm for Fragile He never had seizures and his hearing was normal. His height was 106 cm X Syndrome (FXS) testing: Experience from the Greenwood Genetic (-1.7 SD), weight 20.3 kg (-0.3E SHDM)T, a2nd head circumference 53.5 cm (+1.4 Center SD) respectively. Brain MRI at age of 4 years showed incomplete rotation M. J. Basehore, J. R. Jones, M. J. Friez; of the bilateral hippocam EpuHsM. T1 is a human homologue of mouse G9a Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States. that exists predominantly as a G9a-GLP heteromeric complex. The human homologue of the GLP is , which is a causative gene responsible for Kleefstra syndrome with characteristic facial dysmorphism and severe in- VirtuaFlMlyR a1ll clinical testing for FXS revolves around the determination of the tellectual disability. This case provides insight into the etiological mecha- length of the CGG repeat tract in the 5’UTR of the Fragile X Mental Retarda- nism of histone modification and human development. tion ( ) gene. Repeat lengths generally fall into four categories, where 
P08 .25-S <45 CGG repeats is accepted as normal, 45-54 repeats is the intermediate EPHA1 as a new candidate gene for autosomal recessive non- range (gray zone), 55-200 repeats is considered the premutation range, and syndromic intellectual disability >200 repeats is a full mutation. Diagnostic testing for FXS has traditionally R. V. Gulkovskyi1,2, G. Volynets1, S. Chernushyn1, S. Kravchenko1, L. A. Livshits1,2; employed both standard PCR and Southern blot techniques since they provi- 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics of NASU, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Taras Shevchenko de distinct, yet overlapping, levels of resolution and complementary pieces Kiev National University, Kyiv, Ukraine. of information. However, newer PCR prFoMtoRc1ols such as TRP-PCR have the potential to allow amplification of full mutations, thereby providing a me- thod of screening for expansions at the locus. The molecular diFagMnRo1- We report a Ukrainian family consisted of healthy and non-consanguineous stic laboratory at the Greenwood Genetic Center has offered FXS testing for parents and two affected children with moderate intellectual disability (ID) nearly 25 years. In 2010, we implemented a validated, lab-developed and similar psychoneurological symptoms. Biochemical and CGH-array in- PCR assay utilizing commercially available TRP-PCR reagents (Abbott Mole- vestigations revealed no genetic abnormalities in children. cular) into our routine diagnostic workflow. Here we summarize our experi- Whole exome sequencing performed in family members identified two non- ence with the TRP-PCR assay, discuss how the implementation of this assay synonymous variants c.1475G>A and c.1891G>A in the EPHA1 gene. Both has changed our diagnostic workflow, and compare the hands-on time, cost, affected siblings were compound heterozygotes while father and mother and turn-around time for the samples tested over the past four years to the- were heterozygous carriers for the c.1891A and c.1475A variants respec- se statistics for samples tested prior to the implementation of the TRP-PCR tively. C.1475G>A and c.1891G>A frequencies analyses in 300 healthy Ukrai- assay. In conclusion, the implementation of the TRP-PCR assay has allowed nian controls revealed that the c.1475T allele frequency was 1,2% while the us to drastically reduce the hands-on time, turn-around time, and number c.1891A was not found. EphA1 belongs to Eph receptors family implicated of Southern blots performed for samples submitted to our laboratory for in axon guidance control but it was not previously associated with ID. To un- diagnostic FXS testing. derstand a possible effect of these substitutions the mutant EphA1 proteins’ 
P08 .28-M tertiary structures were predicted. As it turned out the substitutions are lo- A pilot study for prenatal and preconceptional Fragile-X syndrome cated in important functional domains of EphA1. The substitution of positive screening in the Balearic Islands charged Arg492 to uncharged Gln492 (c.1475G>A) is in the fibronectin type R. Alfaro Arenas1,2, D. Heine Suñer1,2,3, N. Marlowe4, J. Rosell1,2,3, Balearic Islands Fragile X Study Group; III repeat of EphA1 ectodomain involved in signal transduction and binding 1Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Institut d‘Investigacions with ligands or protein-partners. The substitution Gly631Arg (c.1891G>A) Sanitaries de Palma (Idispa), Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación is in the glycine-rich region of EphA1 tyrosine kinase domain responsible Biomedica en Red de enfermedades raras (ciberer), Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 4Abbott for ATP binding. We assume the c.1475G>A and c.1891G>A mutations may Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, United States. cause changes in conformational flexibility and solubility of these EphA1 domains resulting in impaired Eph signal transduction. Predicted structural EphA1 changes and low c.1475A and c.1891A frequen- The Fragile X-syndrome (FXS) is caused by the expansion of a CGG triplet cies allow us to hypothesize that missensE eS mH uG ta t2 io0 n1 s 4 in | t M he I EL PA HN A1, I gT eA neL Y | l oW caW tedW in.E thS eH 5G ’re.O gioR nG of the FMR1 gene and is one of the most freq1 u5 en3 tABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index causes of hereditary intellectual disability. The estimated incidence of FXS studies of patients have reported variants within the GAB
P2  binding domain in males in the Spanish population is 1 in 2500 with full mutation and about p.Gly876Ser in an individual with autism spectrum disorder (Piton et al., 1 in 250 with premutation (Fernandez-Carvajal et al. 2009). In women, 2011) and p.Ala864Thr in a patient with mental retardation (Tarpey et al., although the prevalence in Spain of premutation has not been established, 2010). The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing in both patients estimates in other western countries range from approximately 1/150 to and their mother. Extended family studies are ongoing. 
P08 .31-S 1/250. Given the severity of the disease, its high incidence in the general po- HDA
C8  duplication in a patient with de Lange -like phenotype pulation, the exclusively maternal expansion, the familial and social impact L. R. Bettini1, S. Redaelli2, S. Maitz1, M. Mariani1, A. Cereda3,1, F. Crosti2, A. Selicorni1; of the FXS, and the high level of detection of current techniques (99%), we 1Pediatric Department at Monza Brianza per il Bambino e la sua Mamma (MBBM) think that screening for FXS in women of reproductive age is a reliable and Foundation, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 2Genetic Department, San Gerardo desirable option. Therefore, we have initiated a pilot study in the Balearic Hospital, Monza, Italy, 3Pediatric Department, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Islands to determine the feasibility and acceptability of prenatal and/or pre- Italy. conceptional screening in women of childbearing age. The results obtained so far, in a total of 3118 women (252 preconceptional and 2866 prenatal) indicate a high acceptability of testing both, in women that are referred for K.K., female, was referred to our attention with a previous clinical diagnosis prenatal or preconceptional consultation. Surprisingly, the incidence of car- of Silver Russel syndrome. Prenatal ultrasound were normal. No prenatal riers of a premutation (55-200 repeats) is (to date) very high: 1 in 97, which cytogenetic examination was performed. She was born at 40+5 week of may indicate a higher prevalence than previously thought. We will present gestational age through cesarean section; birth weight was 2,320 ( < 3rd updated results based on a total of approximately 3500 women. pc), length was 45 cm (< 3rd pc), head circumference was 30 cm (< 3rd pc). 
P08 .29-S The karyotype was normal (46,XX). Major malformations were excluded. GPM6A is duplicated in a patient with learning disability and We evaluated her at 6 years and a half; she showed prominent eyes, long influences cholesterol response and long-term memory in Drosophila thick eyelashes, posteriorly rotated ears, high nasal bridge; short and mild melanogaster micrognathia and hirsutism. Her weight was 18,900 Kg (10th pc), length A. Gregor1, J. M. Kramer2, M. van der Voet2, I. Schanze1,3, A. Reis1, A. Schenck2, C. Zweier1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 110,5 cm (3-10th pc) and head circumference was 46,5 cm (<<3rd pc); she Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical also presented severe mental retardation. Hands and feet X-rays showed hy- Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, poplasia of the 5th meacarpal and the 5th metatarsal. A CGH-array showed Magdeburg, Germany. duplication of a part of HDA
C8  gene (exon 5 and 6) from nt 71,630,467 to nt 71,697,179. HDA
C8  gene was recently found implicated in Cornelia de Lan- de novo GPM6A ge syndrome with variable clinical expressivity. Up now only complete dele- In a patient with learning disability and behavioral anomalies we identified tion or mutation of the gene have been described. No reports of duplication a duplication of by routine chromosomal microarray testing. of this gene are available. Our patient shows some clinical features related Glycoprotein M6A (GPM6A) is a neuronal transmembrane protein of the to de Lange syndrome also if her phenotype is not classic at all. Expression PLP/DM20 family that associates with lipid rafts and promotes filopodia study are in progress in order to define the biological consequences of this formation. GPM6A variants have not yet been implicated in cognitive im- finding and the relationships with the phenotype. 
P08 .32-M pairment. An increase of membrane protrusions in our patient’s lymphobla- Clinical characterization of a patient with a complex rearrangement stoid cells supports a funcDtiroonsaolp ehfifleac mt eolfa tnhoigs adsotesrage alteration. To further involving duplication and deletion of 9p and 9q study the function of GPM6A/m6 and the effects of m6 overexpressioDnr oasnod- M. Martin-DeSaro1, J. Valdes-Miranda2, A. Perez-Cabrera2, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; pknhiolackdown, we employed as a model organism. We 1Medical Genetics Department, Hospital Materno Infantil ISSEMyM, Toluca, México., could show that, as described for other animal models, expression of Toluca, Mexico, Mexico, 2Genetica, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital General de Mexico, m6 is stress responsive. Using the courtship conditioning paradigm, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Toluca, Mexico, Mexico, 3Genetica, Facultad we demonstrated thaGtP cMor6rAect m6 levels are necessary for proper long term de Medicina, Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico. memory function, which indicates dosage sePnLsPit1ivity of m6 and supports a causative role of the duplication for the cognitive impairment found in our patient. Defects in the close homolog are causative for Pelizae- us-Merzbacher disease (PMD), a severe demyelinating neurodevelopmental Rearrangements of the distal región of 9p are an infrequent chromosome disorder. Prompted by recent results on successful therapy of phenotypes in imbalance in human beings. Trisomy 9p is the fourth most frequent chromo- PMD mice by the administration of a cholesterol-enriched diet, we investi- some anomaly in life-born and was characterized as a clinically recognizab- gated if the cellular phenotype of GPM6A/m6 dosage alterations could also le syndrome, Rethoré syndrome. Kleefstra syndrome, previously named 9q be improved by cholesterol. Indeed, cholesterol supplementation partially subtelomeric deletion syndrome, is either caused by a submicroscopic dele- improved the phenotypes observed in patient cells with GPM6A overexpres- tion in 9q34.3 or an intragenic mutation of EHMT1. We report the first case sion as well as in flies with m6 knockdown. Together with other recent fin- with 9p duplication and 9q deletion in a Mexican patient. Patient was refer- dings, these data point to an involvement of cholesterol metabolism in the red for dysmorphic facies and congenital heart disease. Clinical examinati- pathomechanisms of some ID forms. on revealed brachycephaly, upslanting palpebral fissures, depressed nasal 
P08 .30-M bridge, anteverted nares, long filtrum, downturned mouth, lingual protrusi- A Novel HCF
C1  mutation associated with X-Linked Intellectual on, low set and cupped ears, short neck, small hands with clinodactyly and Disability aberrant palmar creases, left testicle shrink and small feet. He presented an C. Sismani, C. Koufaris, A. Alexandrou, L. Kokkinou, C. Ioannidou, P. Evangelidou, V. abnormal development. Conventional karyotyping reported 46, XY, add(9) Anastasiadou, P. C. Patsalis; (q34.3), 21 pstk+. Microarray analysis showed 9p24.3p23 (203,861-11- The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. ,842,172)x3, 9q34.3 (138,959,881-139,753,294)x3, 9q34.3 (139,784,913- 141,020,389)x1. All procedures were normal in both parents. Partial du- plication of 9p is one of the most commonly detected autosomal structural X-Linked Intellectual Disability is a heterogeneous disorder with a variable abnormalities in live born. It seems that the high frequency of the partial phenotypic spectrum. Currently over 90 XLID genes have been found to be trisomy 9p may indicate a particular breakpoint sensitively of one or more implicated in XLID. The host cell factor 
C1  (HCF
C1 ) gene is located on chro- regions of chromosome 9p. Patients with partial duplication of 9p display mosome Xq28 and is a member of the host cell factor family. A mutation considerable phenotypic similarity. Our patient with a duplication of 11.6 in HCF
C1  has been previously found to be associated with XLID in a non Mb, from 9p24.2 to 9p23 displays some features like upslanting palpebral syndromic XLID family namely MRX3. Currently very few studies exist that fissures, downturned corners of the mouth and developmental delay. In spi- further confirm HCF
C1  as an XLID gene. te of the great duplication region, the major clinical findings in our patient We present an XLID family with two affected sons having mild intellectual corresponded to the deletion region. disability epilepsy and no congenital abnormalities. Fragile X analysis and 
P08 .33-S array-CGH using a chromosome X exon-specific array were performed and Exome sequencing in carriers of 1q21.1 CNV revealed normal results. Subsequently, next generation whole exome se- C. Badduke1, L. Zhang2, F. Tang3, D. Cowieson2, H. Bagheri4, S. Lewis5, A. Volchuk2, E. quencing analysis for both brothers was performed on Illumina HiSeq 2000 Rajcan-Separovic4; 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Division of Advanced following Agilent SureSelect sample preparation (20x coverage). Reads were Diagnostics-Metabolism Toronto General Research Institute University Health Network, aligned using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner and the Genome Analysis Tool Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Univeristy of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Child and Kit. Autosome variants and variants present in dbSNP 135 were filtered out. Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5Child and Family Research Institute, Analysis of rare X chromosome variants present in both brothers revealed a UBC, Vancouver, BC, Canada. n 1o 5n 4-synonymous mutation in exon 4 of HCF
C1  (p.AEla
S89 H7GVa l2).0 T1hi4s m| uMtaItLioAnN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG is located within GAB
P2  and ZBTB17 binding domains. Previous screeningABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The 1q21.1 CNV is associated with a variable clinical phenotype and normal old girl, with pre- and postnatal growth retardation, severe psychomotor to delayed neurodevelopment. We performed whole genome transcription retardation, spastic quadriparesis, dysmorphic features, cleft palate, bila- and exome sequencing analysis in 5 subjects from 2 families with 1q21.1 de- teral congenital cataract, severe epilepsy with status epilepticus episodes. letion (3 subjects) and duplication (2 subjects), in search for genetic chan- aCGH on an 105K Agilent platform was done according to manufacturer’s ges that could affect the phenotype. The subjects had variable learning diffi- recommendations; the results were validated by FISH. In the two siblings, culties. A pathogenic variant in the ATF6 gene from 1q22-23, which plays a aCGH revealed the same genetic abnormality: arr 4p16.3p16.1(72,447- role in endoplasmatic reticulum stress response, was detected in the mildly 8,373,151)x3,10q26.3(130,977,858-135,434,178)x1 pat. The balanced affected father and his more severely affected child with 1q21.1 duplication. t(4;10)(p16.1;q26.3) translocation was detected by FISH in the genome It was validated by Sanger sequencing and associated with reduced ATF6 of the patients’ father. In the second case, aCGH showed another genetic RNA and protein expression in patient lymphoblast cell lines. However, the anomaly involving 4p16.3 region: arr 4p16.3p16.1(72,447-9,371,067) ER stress response, as measured by induction of known ER stress genes x1,8p23.3p23.1(176,452-8,094,773)x3. The genetic investigations of the (GPR78, Dnajb9, Sdf2l1) in response to tunicamycin was not altered in pa- parents were normal. The 4p region includes over 140 genes, many inclu- tient vs control cell lines. No candidate pathogenic mutation that could be ded in OMIM Database as involved in various pathologies. The 10q deleted linked to altered gene expression status and/or phenotype was found in the region consists of over 60 genes, many also described in the OMIM Databa- 3 subjects with the 1q21.1 deletion, either in the CNV region or genome- se. The 8p duplicated region has a size of 8 Mb and includes 116 genes. The wide. Interestingly, for all 5 subjects with 1q21.1 CNV a larger number of the complexity of the phenotype, both for deletion and duplication of 4p16.3 107 genes implicated in ER stress response showed altered expression in region, of these cases can be explained by the association of other genetic comparison to controls on the whole genome expression array (15-28% in anomalies (10q deletion and 8q duplication, respectively). Acknowledge- subjects in comparison to 0-6% in controls). Perturbed ER stress response ments: project PN 09.33.02.03. 
P08 .36-M caused either by dysfunction of genes from 1q21.1, genome wide, or both, Recurrent CNVs in 15q11.2-q12 in Bulgarian patients with could play a role in the observed phenotypic variability and result in more generalized epilepsy and intellectual disability severe developmental abnormalities in unfavourable environmental cir- V. Peycheva1, K. Kamenarova1, N. Ivanova1, P. Dimova2, S. Jhelyazkova3, D. Avdjieva4, E. c Pu 0m 8.s 3ta 4n -Mces. Slavkova2, G. Maximov2, V. Stoyanova2, I. Litvinenko4, I. Tournev3, V. Bozhinova2, V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1, A. Jordanova1,5; Contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, unexplained intellectual and developmental disabilities in 149 Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Child Neurology, University Lebanese patients Hospital of Neurology and Psychiatry “St. Naum”, Department of Neurology, N. Choucair Alam1,2,3, J. Abou Ghoch4, N. Jalkh4, S. Sabbagh5, P. Cacciagli2,6,7, A. Fawaz8, T. Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital Ibrahim9, L. Villard2,6, A. Mégarbané1,10, E. Chouery1; “Alexandrovska”, Department of Neurology, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 1Unité de Génétique Médicale et Laboratoire Associé INSERM à l’Unité UMR_S 910, 4University Pediatrics Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Sofia, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 2Faculté de Médecine Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Neurogenetics Group, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University de la Timone, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 3Institut National de la Santé of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium. et de la Recherche Médicale UMR_
S910 , Marseille, France, 4University of Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 5Service de Pédiatrie, Hotel Dieu de France Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon, 6Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UMR_
S910 , Marseille, France, 7Département de Génétique Médicale, Assitance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Copy number variants are frequent in autism spectrum disorders and gene- d‘Enfants de La Timone, Marseille, France, 8Neuropediatrics Department, Lebanese ralized epilepsy. In this study, we performed comparative genomic hybridi- University, Beirut, Lebanon, 9Département de Médecine interne, Hotel Dieu de France zation assay (aCGH) using Agilent Microarray Kit, 4x180K in a preselected Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon, 10Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France. sample of 36 Bulgarian patients with epilepsy and intellectual disability (ID). The region most often engaged in copy number changes included 15q11.2- 15q12. In 7 patients (19.4%) CNVs were located in 15q12. Five of them har- Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) is nowadays the most adopted bored microduplications in GABRG3 gene, 1 patient showed microduplica- clinical test for patients with unexplained intellectual disability (ID), de- tion in GABRB3 gene and in 1 patient both rearrangements were present. velopmental delay (DD), and congenital anomalies. Its use has revealed its Aberrations in 15q11.2 region were observed in 2 patients. One of them was capacity in detecting copy number variants (CNVs) as well as regions of ho- a 0.161 Mb deletion, including SNURF/SNRPN upstream reading frame. In mozygosity which, upon their distribution on chromosomes, indicate uni- the other patient, a 2.608 Mb duplication covering 36 genes was revealed. parental disomy or parental consanguinity that is suggestive of an increase Genomic region on 15q11-13 is involved in many clinically important re- of occurrence of recessive disease. We screened 149 Lebanese probands arrangements. These include aberrations of various sizes which can affect having ID/DD and 99 healthy controls using the Affymetrix Cyto 2.7M and the neuronal differentiation by disrupting normal epigenetic control and SN
P6 .0 arrays. We reported all identified CNVs that we divided into groups gene expression. All Bulgarian patients with CNVs harboring 15q12 shared and confirmed the utility of this CMA technique in the detection of paren- a common clinical phenotype of severe ID, speech impairment or complete tal consanguinity in 42 cases (28.2%). Pathogenic CNVs were identified in lack of speech, different types of seizures, facial dysmorphisms, microcepha- 11.4% of the patients. We reviewed and reported the genotype/phenotype ly and behavior abnormalities of the autistic spectrum. In contrast, the two correlation in a patient with a 1q44 microdeletion, as well as defined the patients with 15q11.2-rearrangements displayed different clinical characte- minimal critical regions responsible for the 10q26 and the 16q monosomy ristics and milder forms of mental retardation. Our results are in line with syndromes. Several likely causative CNVs were also detected, of which, new the central role of GABAergic systems in ID and epilepsy. Further studies are homozygous microdeletions (9p23p24.1, 10q25.2, and 8p23.1) in 3 patients needed to investigate the parental origin and elucidate the effect of the CNVs issued from consanguineous parents (patient‘s ROH size ≥ 66 Mb), involving and the phenotype-genotype correlations. Acknowledgement: the study was genes that are reported as potential candidates. However, the clinical inter- supported by DTK02/67/2009, DUNK01-2/2009 funded by NSF. 
P08 .37-S pretation of several other CNVs remains uncertain. Among those, 2 microde- Disruption of the Methyltransferase-Like 23 Gene METT
L23  Causes letions touching ATRN
L1  and the 3‘UTR of SOX5. These CNVs of unknown si- Mild Autosomal Recessive Intellectual Disability gnificance were inherited from the patients‘ normal parent, which requires G. Webersinke1, M. Bernkopf1, C. Tongsook2, C. N. Koyani3, M. Arshad4, M. Ayaz5, D. a screening of more ethnically matched controls in order to obtain enough Mueller6, C. Enzinger7, M. Aslam5, F. Naeem4, M. Speicher8, E. Malle3, P. Macheroux9, M. e Pv 0i 8d .e 3n 5c -e S for their classification. Ayub4, J. B. Vincent10, C. Windpassinger8, H. Duba6; 1Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern Linz, Linz, Austria, 2Institute of Biochemistry, Unbalanced translocations involving chromosome 4p associated with University of Technology, Graz, Austria, 3Institute of Molecular Biology and complex phenotypes: report of 3 cases Biochemistry, Center of Molecular Medicine, Graz, Austria, 4Molecular Neuropsychiatry M. Budisteanu1, S. Papuc1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, C. Burloiu2, I. Minciu2, M. Cristea1, I. and Development (MiND) Lab, The Campbell Family Brain Research Institute, The Borcan1, A. Arghir1; Centre for Addiction & Mental Health (CAMH), Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Lahore Institute 1Victor babes National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alex. Obregia of Research and Development, Lahore, Pakistan, 6Landes-Frauen und Kinderklinik, Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania. Dept. of Human Genetics, Linz, Austria, 7Dept. of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 9Institute of Biochemistry, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria, 10Department of Large imbalances of chromosome 4p, either deletions (associated with Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, WHS) or duplications have a defined clinical phenotype. Here, we present 2 situations of genetic abnormalities involving 4p16.3 region. Three patients were referred for genetic testing: 2 siblings, a We describe the characterization of a gene for mild non-syndromic autoso- 16 years old boy and a 12 years old girl, both with the same phenotype, in- mal recessive intellectual disability (ID) in two unrelated families, one from cluding dysmorphic features, severe mentEalS rHetGar d2a0tio1n4; s|e MverIeL AspNee,c hIT dAe-LY |A WustWriaW, th.EeS oHthGer. fOroRmG Pakistan. Genome-wide single nucleotide poly 1m 5o 5r- lay; hyperkinesias, aggressivity; epilepsy; skin allergic reactions. An 8 years phism (SNP) microarray analysis enabled us to define a region of homozygo-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index sity-by-descent (HBD) on chromosome 17q25M.1.E WTThLo2le3 exome sequencing SATB2. Two cases were compound heterozygous for two very rare or novel and analysis of this regMioEnT TinL 2a3n affected individual from the Austrian family variants in two different potential ID candidate genes, and in the remaining identified a 5bp frameshifting deletion in the gene. By means of two cases, no candidates were identified. Work supported by FIS grants: Sanger sequencing of , a nonsense mutation was detected in a con- PI080778 and PI10/01710. 
P08 .40-M sanguineous ID family from Pakistan for which homozygosity-by-descent The degree of Intellectual Disability is significantly associated with an mapping had identified a region on 17q25. Both changes lead to truncati- excess of Runs of Homozygosity (ROH) on of the METT
L23  protein, which disrupts the predicted catalytic domain I. Gandin1,2, F. Faletra2, M. Carella3, V. Pecile2, G. Ferrero4, E. Belligni4, P. Palumbo3, O. and alters the cellular localization. 3D-modelling of the protein indicates Palumbo3, P. Bosco5, C. Romano5, C. Belcaro1, D. Vozzi2, A. P. d‘Adamo1,2; that METT
L23  is strongly predicted to function as a S-adenosyl-methionine 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3IRCCS Casa (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase. Expression analysis of METT
L23  in- Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy, 4AO citta‘ della salute e della dicated a strong association with heat shock proteins, which suggests that scienza, Torino, Italy, 5IRCCS Oasi Maria SS, Troina(EN), Italy. these may act as a putative substrate for methylation by METT
L23 . A num- ber of methyltransferases have been described recently in association with intellectual disability. Disruption of METT
L23  presented here supports the Several recent studies focused on the effect of extended homozygosity on importance of methylation processes for brain function and development. highly complex and polygenic traits where recessive inheritance may play 
P08 .38-M an important role. Since excess of homozygosity might increase the risk for Targeted next generation sequencing in a new cohort of 996 disorders like schizophrenia, Alzheimer disease and autism, we have set out individuals with Intellectual Disability a study to investigate the effect of ROHs on the degree of Intellectual Disa- D. Grozeva1, K. Carss2, O. Spasic-Boskovic1, Z. Hussain1, Y. Xu1, A. Hackett3, M. Field4, J. Gecz5, A. Renieri6, M. I. Tejada7, J. Floyd2, U. K10K Consortium2, M. Hurles2, F. L. Raymond1; bility (ID). About 370 unrelated individuals with ID were collected and clas- 1Department Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, sified into mild/moderate ID (MM-ID) for IQ ranging from 35-40 to 70-75 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Genetics of and severe/profound ID (SP-ID) for IQ below 35-40. High-density SNP array Learning Disability Service, Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia, 4Department of data were processed with the aim of detecting and analyze ROHs. Since dif- Medical Genetics, ferent array platform were used, homozygosity and ROHs mean length were 5 compared in MM-ID vs SP-ID separately in each dataset. Results were then Royal North Shore Hospital , St. Leonards, Austra6lia, W omen’s and Children’s Hospital, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, Genetica Medica, combined for a meta-analysis. Our data revealed an association between Università degli Studi di7 Siena e Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese Policlinico the amount of homozygosity and the degree of ID, according to the recent “Le Scotte”, Siena, Italy, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, findings on autism (Gamsiz et al., 2013). Accounting for principal compo- BioCruces Health Institute, Cruces University Hospital, Plaza de Cruces s/n, 48903, nents to control population stratification, we tested for ROHs mean length Barakaldo, Spain. and detected significantly (p<0.005) longer stretches in SP-ID compared to We screened DNA from 996 individuals with Intellectual Disability (ID) for MM-ID. Weaker association was detected in burden ROH analysis, showing variants in known genes and candidate genes for ID in order to identify the an increase of the percentage of genome covered by ROHs for SP-ID cases. cause of disease. Overall, we investigated the coding sequence of 565 candi- Extent of ROHs seems to contribute to the pathogenesis of ID, suggesting date genes in individual cases affected with moderate to severe ID. that autosomal recessive variants have a crucial role on the modulation of We observed 8225 non-synonymous variants passing quality control crite- t Ph 0e 8 s .e 4v 1e -r Sity of ID that still need to be investigated. ria and frequency filter (<1% in internal and population controls). The rate A familial interstitial 14 Mb deletion of 5p13p14 associated with of loss of function (LoF) variants (frameshift, nonsense or canonical splice a mild phenotype challenges the current genotype-phenotype site) was 0.43 per person. Overall, we have identified pathogenic LoF muta- correlation attributed to the MR III region tions in 11% of the cases (110 out of 996) affecting known genes previously K. Steindl1, B. Oneda1, R. Baldinger1, P. Joset1, P. Hunkeler2, A. Rauch1; reported to harbour mutations causing ID. LoF mutations in ATRX, C
C2 D2A, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Children‘s ARID1B and CU
L4 B were the most commonly observed (frequencies varied Hospital, Department of Developmental Paediatrics, Zurich, Switzerland. from 0.4% to 0.6%). The interpretation of the vast number of missense mu- tations in known genes proved to be more challenging, as rarity of variant is insufficient to assign pathogenicity in such a genetically heterogeneous Varying degrees of developmental delay or intellectual disabilities and dys- phenotype. morphic features appear to be strongly associated with deletions involving Although the cohort consisted of predominantly non-syndromic ID cases, 5p. Most of these deletions are associated with cri du chat syndrome. These the yield of mutations in genes associated with a syndromic phenotype was deletions can be terminal, interstitial, or associated with complex chromo- high, for example, ATRX, C
C2 D2A, CHD7 and ARID1B. This suggests that the somal rearrangements. To establish the genotype-phenotype of 5p deletions distinction between syndromic and non-syndromic ID is an increasingly ar- many efforts had be done in the last years in dissecting the phenotype and tificial concept in a genotype-driven diagnostic era. three different critical regions had been determined. But there had been 
P08 .39-S controversaries about the relationship between MR and deletions of MRI- Discovery of new mutations using exome sequencing in adult patients II encompassing bands 5p13.2p14.3. Deletions limited to this region were with intellectual disability and psychiatric disorders reported to show no phenotype, but to aggravate the phenotype in case of N. Baena1, M. Viñas1, R. Rabionet2, X. Estivill2, E. Gabau1, S. Esteba3, N. Ribas3, R. Novell3, M. Guitart1; accompanying aberrations (Zang X., et al. 2005). We now observed a novel 1Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 2Center for Genomic Regulation, 3- generation family with a interstitial deletion del(5)(p13.2p14.3) limited Barcelona, Spain, 3Specialized Service in Health Mental and Intellectual Disability, Parc to MRIII without additional rare CNVs in microarray testing. The index pa- Hospitalari Martí i Julià, Salt (Girona), Spain. tient, a 15 years old girl, showed learning disability (IQ 75), microcephaly, high pitched voice and a subtle facial phenotype. The patients mother and grandmother had the same deletion and likewise the learning disabilities, Next Generation Sequencing offers the opportunity to identify new muta- the high pitched voice and subtle facial features, but no microcephaly. In tions and increasing the proportion of patients with ID receiving a genetic contrast to the current literature we therefore propose that deletions limi- diagnosis. We have analyzed a cohort of 102 adult patients affected by ID, ted to the MRIII region have a mild, but distinct phenotype with particular psychiatric diseases and minor dysmorphic features, identifying a genetic emphasis on the high pitched voice. 
P08 .42-M cause of ID in 28 (27,5%). We recruited 9 trio cases negative for fragile X Inverted triplication of 7q11.22 embedded within the 7q11.21q11.23 syndrome, chromosomal and subtelomeric rearrengements and pathogenic duplication segment in a child with stigmata dysplastica, copy number variants. The exome was captured with Agilent sure select developmental and speech delay technology, multiplexed, and sequenced in an Illumina HISeq2000 lane. Po- T. Hovnik1, J. Kovač1, S. Bertok2, M. Avbelj Stefanija2, M. Volk3, L. Lovrečič3, D. Neubauer4, tential damaging variants detected were selected and filtered (condel score, T. Battelino2; EVS, 1000genomes, dbSNP). Variants were finally confirmed by Sanger se- 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Children‘s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, quencing. We detected an average of 8624 non-synonymous variants in the 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University cases, of which an average of 23 were de novo. Frequency and functionality Children‘s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Clinical Institute of medical Genetic, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Department of Child, Adolescent & based filtering reduced the number of potential candidate ID genes harbou- Developmental Neurology, University Children‘s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia. ring de novo variants to 1-10 per case. In 5 cases, potential disease-causing variants were identified in genes previously implicated in ID syndromes: Introduction: One case was compound heterozygous for two RPGRI
P1 L rare missense A q-arm of human chromosome 7 harbours many copy variants, two cases carried a de novo mutation in (an in-frame deletion in number variants (CNV) with known pathogenic significance. Chromosome U 1B 5E 63A and a missense variant in MLL), one familialE cSasHe Gwa 2s c0a1rr4y i|n gM a IrLaAreN , 7IT qA 11L .2Y | W upW licaW tio.E S syH nG dr. oO mR G 3 d n e (OMIM#609757) is a multisystem develop- variant in TCF4 and in the last case a frameshift deletion was identified inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mental disorder with mild craniofacial anomalies and increased incidence motifs are repetitive guanine-rich sequences, known as G-quadruplexes, on of congenital anomalies. Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; OMIM#194050) one strand and the complemMeEnCtPar2y cytosine-rich sequences on the opposite is caused by ~ 1.8-Mb hemizygous deletion on chromosome 7q11.23. WBS strand, known as i-motifs. G-quadruplexes and i-MmEoCtPif2s are present within tCraipseli cparteiosne nstyantdioronme with similar but more severe clinical features has the coding sequence of the gene. been also described. Here, we report a case of MAEDCOP d2etected during molecular analysis : We present a 3-years-old boy with developmental and in two unrelated patients with Rett syndrome. In both girls, the mutati- severe speech delay, dysmorphic signs, bilateral cryptorhidism and hypo- ons were in exon 4M oEf CthPe2 gene (c.1137delC and c.1151_1201del50; plasic corpus callosum. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis revealed a com- c.1163C>T) and were detected as seemingly homozygous. The mutations plex de novo chromosomal rearrangement which we characterize as inver- are located in the WW binding domain and fall in a region where tMede tthriopdlisc aatniodn r oefs 7uqlt1s1: .22 segment embedded within larger 7q11.21q11.23 a number of small deletions/single point mutations have been reported in duplication. literature. Molecular characterization by array-CGH revealed a Under the assumption of ADO, we have investigated the presence of the 1.93-Mb duplication of segment 7q11.21, 5.27-Mb triplication of segment wildtype allele with a change in PCR condition and the priMmEeCrsP.2 7q11.21q11.22 and 1.33-Mb duplication of segment 7q11.23. Further mole- We prove that the complexity of exon 4 sequence leads to allele amplifica- cular cytogenetic investigation was performed with multiple combinations tion failure and that allele drop out is a technical risk in molecular of specific FISH probes. Metaphase and interphase FISH confirmed the loca- analysis. 
P08 .45-S tion of triplication 7q11.22 segment within the 7q11.21q11.23 duplication. MEC
P2  duplication in France: delineation of brain MRI abnormalities Additional FISH analysis revealed that triplicated 7q11.22 segment on de- in 30 affected patients rCiovnatcilvues ciohnrosm: osome 7 was inverted. Parental cytogenetic analysis demon- S. El Chehadeh1,2, V. Des Portes3, P. Callier4, A. Mosca-Boidron4, N. Marle4, M. Lefebvre1, strated de novo origin of this complex chromosomal rearrangement. Réseau AChropuce, J. Amiel5, M. Nizon5, R. Touraine6, F. Prieur6, L. Pasquier7, S. Julia8, C. Although chromosomal imbalances are the major cause of de- Sarret9, C. Francannet9, F. Laffargue9, O. Boespflug-Tanguy10, A. David11, B. Isidor11, C. velopmental delay, large de novo CNVs are relatively rare events. We have Lecaignec11, B. Leheup12, L. Lambert12, C. Philippe13, J. Cuisset14, J. Andrieux15, G. Plessis16, identified a novel complex rearrangement on chromosome 7, duplication A. Toutain17, A. Goldenberg18, V. Cormier-Daire5, M. Rio5, J. Bonnefont19, J. Thevenon20, H. Journel21, A. Afenjar22, L. Burglen22, T. Bienvenu23, M. Addor24, S. Lebon25, C. Baumann26, with embedded inverted triplication also known as DUP-TRP/INV-DUP L. Perrin26, P. Jouk27, F. Devillard28, D. Lacombe29, N. Philip30, A. Moncla31, C. Badens32, N. structure. Triplication of segment 7q11.22 is probably generated by long Perreton3, C. Thauvin-Robinet20,2, L. Faivre20,2, L. Guibaud33; r Pa 0n 8g .e 4 3in -v Serted repeats which still need to be identified. 1FHU TRANSLAD, Centre de référence maladies rares « anomalies du développement Identification of novel variants in PIGQ, PGA
P3  and PIGY further et syndromes malformatifs » de l’Est, Centre de Génétique, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2GAD, EA4271, Génétique et Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, implicate the GPI pathway in the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental Dijon, France, 3Service de neurologie pédiatrique, CHU de Lyon-GH Est, Bron, France, abnormalities 4Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Plateau technique de biologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, A. T. Pagnamenta1, H. Martin1, M. F. Howard1, A. Goriely1, Y. Murakami2, K. Hudspith1, France, 5Service de génétique clinique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, C. Anzilotti1, S. J. L. Knight1, H. Stewart3, E. Blair3, T. Kinoshita2, P. Donnelly1, J. C. Taylor1, 6Service de Génétique Clinique Chromosomique et Moléculaire, CHU de Saint-Etienne, U. Kini3; Saint-Etienne, France, 7Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU de Rennes, 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, 3Oxford Rennes, France, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom. 9Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont Ferrand, France, 10Service de Neuropédiatrie et maladies métaboliques, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 11Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 12Service Around 30 genes are required for glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) bio- de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 13Laboratoire de génétique synthesis. Mutations in many of these are reported to cause a spectrum of médicale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 14Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHRU de Lille, neurodevelopmental abnormalities. Here we describe novel mutations in Lille, France, 15Laboratoire de génétique médicale, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 16Service de génétique, CHU de Caen, Caen, France, 17Service de génétique, CHRU de Tours, Tours, three members of this pathway. PIGQ France, 18Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 19Laboratoire de Whole genome sequencing was applied to a sporadic patient with severe génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France early-onset epilepsy. This approach identified a homozygous splice mutation, resulting in exon skipping and defective GPI biosynthesis. Addi- tionally, autozygosity mapping and exome sequencing were combined to Xq28 duplications encompassing MEC
P2  have been described in male pati- investigate two consanguineous Pakistani families where multiple affected ents with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with hypotonia individuals presented with intellecPtuGaAlP d3isability and microcephaly. In the and spasticity, severe learning disability, stereotyped movements and recur- first family, seizures were present in 2/3 affected individuals. A homozygous rent pulmonary infections. We report on standardized brain magnetic reso- p.G92D mutation was detected in that co-segregated with disease. nance imaging (MRI) data of 30 affected patients, including 5 symptomatic Affected individuals had elevated alkaline phosphatase, a marker for de- females, carrying a MEC
P2  duplication, the size of which varied between fective GPI biosynthesis. Functional studies using CHO cells confirmed the 228 kb and 11.7 Mb. The aim of this study was to compare brain MRI re- mutation influenced GPI-anchor remPoIdGeYll ing. For the second family, the con- sults to seek recurrent malformations and attempt to determine whether current release of ENCODE data prompted us to examine UTR variants and variations in imaging features could be explained by differences in the size a c.-540G>A variant was detected in which co-segregated with disease. of the duplications. We showed that 90% of patients had brain MRI abnor- Disruption of an S
P1  binding motif suggested that the variant might influ- malities, and that they shared certain non-specific brain malformations ence gene expression. IonTorrent sequencing confirmed that in heterozygo- such as corpus callosum abnormalities (n=20), ventricular dilatation (n=9), te carriers ~9% of transcripts were expressed fPrIoGmQ the mPuItGaYnt allele. reduced volume of the white matter (WM) (n=12), increased T2 signals in Our work strengthens the role of the GPI pathway in the pathogenesis of posterior periventricular WM (n=6), and vermis hypoplasia (n=5). The occi- neurodevelopmental abnormalities. Although and both encode pito-frontal circumference could be highly variable since it was >+2DS in 5 subunits of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, the range of phenotypes seen patient and <-2DS for 4 patients. Among the 9 patients with dilatation of the in the families described recapitulates the pleiotropic effects of defective lateral ventricles, 6 (67%) had a duplication involving 
L1 CAM. The only pa- GPI biosynthesis as a whole. This study also highlights the importance of tient harbouring bilateral posterior subependymal nodular heterotopia also assessing UTR variants during analysis of exome data. 
P08 .44-M carried a FLNA gene duplication. We could not demonstrate a link between Careful consideration is necessary in MEC
P2  testing and allele drop periventricular WM hypersignals / delayed myelinisation and duplication of out IKBKG. These results show that patients with MEC
P2  duplications share cer- E. Bettella, R. Polli, E. Leonardi, A. Murgia; tain common but non-specific brain abnormalities. These imaging features, Laboratory of molecular genetics of neurodevelopment, Department of Women‘s and therefore, do not constitute a diagnostic clue. We did not clearly demonstra- Children‘s Health, Padua, Italy. te a genotype-imaging phenotype correlation. 
P08 .46-M Clinical relevance of the genotype-phenotype correlation in a patient with a de novo monosomy 9pter-p24.1 and duplication Xq28-qter Allele drop out (ADO) leads to the preferential amplification of one of two E. Italyankina1, B. Buldrini1, R. Gruppioni1, A. Bonfatti1, A. Mauro1, V. Aiello1, G. allele due a series of reasons among which the occurrence of sequence Parmeggiani1, A. Sensi2, A. Ferlini1, S. Bigoni1, S. Fini1; mismatch within a primer-binding site or a complex DNA motif. The drop 1Department of Medical Science - Section of Medical Genetics, Ferrara University, out can cause false results during PCR amplification and be responsible of Ferrara, Italy, 2Medical Genetic Unit, AVR, AUSL Cesena, Cesena, Italy. potential pitfall in diagnosis. It is known that genomic DNA sequences can assume different complex secondary structures which can prevent DNA re- plication and transcription and, if altered EbyS HmuGta 2ti0on1s4, m |a My bIeL AreNsp,o InTsAib-LY |W We WrepWor.tE tSheH cGas.Oe oRf Ga 12 years old boy admitted to our observati1on5 7in le of ADO events in PCR amplification. An example of these genomic DNAABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index the first year of life with severe neonatal encephalopathy. Since birth, the areas. Unlike most previous data that linked microcephaly to mental retar- clinical conditions have been worsening during time. Now he shows severe dation, these findings suggest i) that these microcephalic ASPM-related pa- mental retardation, dysmorphic features, extreme generalized hypotonia, tients are able to learn despite their cognitive disabilities and ii) that other white matter leucomalacia, drug-resistant epilepsy, blindness, genitourina- master genes than ASPM are necessary for the development of hippocam- ry and gastrointestinal abnormalities, generalized joint laxity and recurrent pus formation and function. 
P08 .49-S respiratory tract infections. High resolution karyotype was normal. Subtelo- Microduplication 17q12 in a patient with microcephaly and moderate meric FISH probes identified a derivative 9 of an unbalanced translocation psychomotor delay t (9p;Xq) with monosomy 9p and Xq disomy. FISH studies of the parents re- M. R. Sanso‘1, M. H. N. Contri2, A. Fratoni3, A. Castiello4, M. Ferrari5, F. Raviglione6, F. Di vealed that the alterations were de novo in the patient. Array CGH was per- Nuovo1; formed and identified two rearrangements: a 6Mb deletion on chromosome 1Pathology and Cytogenetics Unit , G. Salvini Hospital, Garbagnate Milanese, Italy, 2Child 9 from p24.3 to p24.1 and a 5Mb duplication on chromosome X from q28 to Neuropsychiatry , G. Salvini Hospital, Garbagnate Milanese, Italy, 3Pediatrics Unit, G. qter. This double rearrangement has never been described in literature. Our Salvini Hospital, Rho, Italy, 4Diagnostica e Ricerca San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 5Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 6Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, G.Salvini Hospital, patient presents urogenital birth defects, facial dysmorphism (possibly due Rho, Italy. to the 9p deletion) and developmental regression, axial hypotonia, Hirsch- sprung disease, feeding difficulties, recurrent infections, epilepsy, absence of language, white matter disease (typically related to the Xq28 duplication). 17q12 microduplication is a very rare genomic rearrangement associated Several genes, included in the deleted (KANK1, DMRT1, SL
C1 A) and in the with a variable phenotype, consisting of intellectual disability/developmen- duplicated region (MeC
P2 , 
L1 CAM), are known to have an important role tal delay of various degree, epilepsy, behavioral problems, brain abnormali- in the Central Nervous system development. This report allows to compa- ty, esophageal atresia, renal, heart and ocular anomalies. re the phenomics of our patient to the other cases described in literature, We report a case of a 9 years-old boy born from no consanguineous healthy to contribute to the knowledge about genotype-phenotype correlation and parents. to provide new informations for future studies about the 9p24.3-pter and Array-CGH analysis has revealed a 1,8 Mb de novo microduplication of chro- Xq28-qter regions and the genes included. 
P08 .47-S mosome region 17q12 : arr[hg19]17q12 (34,906,638-36,756,170)x3 dn Exome sequencing identifies candidate gene for MEHMO syndrome The proband presents microcephaly without dysmorphic features, mode- M. Skopkova1, D. Stanikova1,2, K. Brennerova2, J. Ukropec1, D. Danis1, M. Novotova3, L. rate mental retardation, language delay, learning disabilities and impulsive Ticha2, T. Kurdiova1, B. Ukropcova1, J. Stanik1,2, I. Klimes1, D. Gasperikova1; behavior. Brain Magnetic Resonance is normal. EEG shows multifocal spikes 1Diabgene & Diabetes Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2First Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Comenius and waves. University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics SAS, The microduplication extends from gene GGNB
P2  to gene SRCIN1 and en- Bratislava, Slovakia. compasses 20 genes in 17q12. The neurologic phenotype seems to be associated with gene LHX1. Lhx1 is expressed in the brain and is implicated in Purkinje cell differentiation in the The patient is a 3,5 years young boy suffering from severe psychomotor de- developing cerebellum as well as in migration of motor axon to the limbs. lay, microcephaly, epilepsy, and multiple endocrine disorders (i.e. obesity, Lhx1 knockout mice shows anencephaly. These data support the hypothesis diabetes, hypogenitalism, and partial deficiency of pituitary hormones). that LHX1 is a dosage-sensitive gene, involved in neurological phenotype There are no other living male members in the mother’s family, as mother’s of patients with 17q12 microduplication. Additional studies are needed to brother and grandmother’s brother died in the first months of life. The clini- further delineate the phenotypic impact of expression of this gene. cal picture and family history indicated towards the MEHMO syndrome, an Clinical features of this syndrome may depend on the size of microduplicati- X-linked disease which has been described in three families only. on variable for different breakpoints, the insertion site and/or orientation of Exome sequencing of proband’s DNA revealed 23 previously unreported va- duplicated fragment in the genome as well as additional genetic factors such riants on X chromosome as confirmed also by Sanger sequencing. Haplotype as incomplete penetrance. The survey of this case contributes to extend the analyses showed only 3 of them to be shared with proband’s mother and his correlations among the phenotype and the genotype of this peculiar syn- mother’s mother. Only one of them, a variant in EIF2
S3  gene, is in the region d Pr 0o 8m .5e 0. -M of X-chromosome previously described to be associated with MEHMO syn- Syndromic intellectual disability diagnosis by combined use of MLPA drome. EIF2
S3  encodes a γ subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor kits 2 (eIF2) that is responsible for transporting the initiator Met-tRNAiMet to C. Rusu1, R. Popescu1, M. Gramescu1, E. Braha1, L. Butnariu1, M. Panzaru1, A. Sireteanu2; the 40S ribosomal subunit. Point mutations in this gene were previously de- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Children‘s Hospital, Iasi, Romania. scribed in two families with intellectual disability. The variant found in the patient is a frame-shift mutation with premature stop codon influencing 8 last amino acids of the protein. In-sillico analyses evaluate this change as Intellectual disability (ID) is a common disorder, with major consequences disease causing. for individual, family and society. Due to clinical and genetic heterogeneity, Our results support the role of EIF2
S3  as a candidate gene, disruption of in about 50% of cases an etiologic diagnosis cannot be established. The aim which might significantly contribute to this severe clinical symptomatology. of this study was to evaluate the ability of a combination of MLPA kits to S Pu 0p 8p .4o 8rt -e Md by APVV 0187-12, KCMM (ITMS 26240220071) establish the diagnosis in 380 patients with syndromic ID. All patients were New insights on cognitive and structural brain imaging phenotype in assessed for chromosome imbalance using standard karyotype and MLPA primary microcephaly due to ASPM mutations analysis using SALSA 
P064  or 
P096  kit, if the phenotype was suggestive for s. passemard1, m. Schaer2, M. Laurent1, K. Hernandez1, O. Boespflug Tanguy1, T. Billette a microdeletion syndrome (subgroup A - 188 patients), or subtelomeric kits, de Villemeur3, M. Elmaleh1, P. Gressens4, A. Verloes1, S. Eliez1; if the phenotype was not suggestive for a microdeletion syndrome (sub- 1hopital robert debré, paris, France, 2Service Médico-Pédagogique, Département de group B – 192 patients). Abnormal results detected by both MLPA kits were psychiatrie, Université de Genève, geneve, Switzerland, 3hopital Trousseau, paris, France, further characterized using appropriate follow-up MLPA kits (Telomere 4Inserm U1141, hopital robert debré, paris, France. Follow-up set, 
P029 -B1, 
P250 -B2). In subgroup A we identified 27 patients with microdeletions (14.3%). In subgroup B 8 patients showed an aberrant telomeric signal detected by only one of the two MLPA kits, 31 patients sho- Primary recessive microcephaly (MCPH) caused by ASPM mutations is a wed abnormal results detected by both MLPA kits (~16%), and 153 patients model of abnormal brain development linked to neural progenitors prolife- had normal results. In summary, the combined use of MLPA kits led to the ration defects. MCPH is defined as a homogenous reduction of cerebral volu- diagnosis in 58 out of 380 patients (15.2%). The use of follow-up MLPA kits me principally affecting the cortex. The reduction of brain volume has been allowed us both to confirm abnormalities and to determine their size, which correlated to cognitive disabilities. However, correlation between cognitive facilitated the interpretation of the clinical significance of these rearrange- functions and structural brain phenotype has not yet been well established ments. For laboratories that do not have yet access to microarray technolo- in genetic microcephalies. Here, we provide evidence that specific cogniti- gy, using several MLPA kits represents an effective strategy for establishing ve functions are preserved in ASPM-related patients and this is correlated the diagnosis in ID patients. 
P08 .51-S with their structural brain changes. General intelligence, memory scales and Expanding the phenotype of a recurrent de novo Mutation in PAC
S1  structural brain magnetic resonance imaging scans were acquired from 6 D. Bartholdi1, D. Gadzicki2, D. Döcker1, M. Menzel3, B. Schmorl2, M. Schubach3, F. ASPM-related patients. Using cranial MRI, we measured the volume of the Stellmer4, S. Biskup1,3; different brain structures and focused on the analyze of the cortical volume, 1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Stuttgart, Germany, 2Endokrinologikum, Hannover, surface and thickness. These microcephalic patients have a normal mnesic f1un5c8tioning and preserved hippocampal volume coE mS pH arG ed 2 to0 o1 th4 e r| cM orI tL icA alN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Germany, 3CeGaT, Center for Genomics and Transcriptomics, Tübingen, Germany, 4genteQ, Hamburg, Germany. (15:75). The mutation could be excluded in the maternal grandfather and both healthy maternal uncles of the patients. De novo mutations in the auto- The PACS (phosphofurin acidic cluster sorting) proteindse rneopvroesent a family phagy gene WDR45 have been previously described in patients with BPAN PoAf CmSu1ltifunctional membrane traffic regulators that mediate organ homeo- (beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration), a recently esta- stasis. Recently, exome sequencing revealed identical AJHG mutations in blished subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA). in two unrelated individuals with intellectual disability and remar- Mutations in WDR45 have been associated with an X-linked dominant form kably similar facial features (Schuurs-Hoeijmakers et al. 2012). Func- of NBIA, predominantly affecting females and presumed to be nonviable in tional experiments indicated that the mutation exerts a dominant-negative males with germline mutations. Similar phenotypes in few reported males effect by affecting the ability of PAC
S1  to mediate the specification adned n omvio- and females have been attributed to somatic mosaicism in surviving males gration of SOX10-positive cells in the neural crest. PAC
S1  and skewing of X-inactivation of females. A retrospective evaluation of brain Here, we describe a third patient carrying the identical heterozygous MRI in the index patient at the age of 10 years was not suspicious for iron missense mutation c.607C>T; p.R203W in exon 4 of (NM_018026.3). deposition. Axial MR images (mesencephalon) at the age of 19 years show The patient is a 2 year-old boy with developmental delay, congenital heart clear hypointensity of the substantia nigra on T2w images and also on T2*, defect (atrio-ventricular septal defect), low levels of immunoglobulins and indicative of pathological iron accumulation. The primary developmental borderline microcephaly. His facial features are strikingly similar to the two delay and stable course of the disease until young adulthood and transmis- patients described by Schuurs-Hoeijmakers et al.: He has hypertelorism, sion of the mutation via a healthy carrier expends the clinical spectrum of long eyelashes, downslanting palpebral fissures, a wide mouth with thin up- t Ph 0e 8 W .5D 4R -M45 associated phenotype in X-linked intellectual disability. per lips, downturned corners and a flat philtrum. His ears are low-set and TRP
C5  et KLH
L15  are candidate genes for X-linked intellectual rotated. disability The combination of his features (congenital heart defect, hypotonia, deve- N. Philip1,2,3, C. Mignon-Ravix1,2, P. Cacciagli1,2,3, N. Choucair1,2,4, C. Missirian3, M. Milh1,2,5, lopmental delay, facial dysmorphisms) initially prompted us to analyse thdee A. Mégarbané1,2,4, T. Busa3, S. Julia6, N. Girard2,7, C. Badens1,2,3, L. VILLARD1,2; gneonvoes of the RAS/MAPK patPhAwCaSy1. However, this did not lead to establishing 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 3Dpt a diagnosis. Finally, exome sdeeq uneonvocing revealed the previously describPeAdC 
S1  de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d‘Enfants Timone, Marseille, France, 4Unité de Génétique missense mutation in . Médicale, Université Saint-Joseph, Beyrouth, Lebanon, 5Sce de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital d‘Enfants Timone, Marseille, France, 6Sce de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital In summary, the recurrent mutation c.607C>T; p.R203W in Purpan, Toulouse, France, 7Sce de Neuroradiologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France. causes a phenotype characterized by developmental delay/intellectual disa- bility, variable organ malformations and highly recognisable facial features. 
P08 .52-M Whole exome sequencing approach to reveal the genetic aspects of High-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) enables extreme phenotypic variability of Incontinentia Pigmenti the detection of intragenic rearrangements, such as single exon deletion or M. I. Conte1, M. Paciolla1, A. Pescatore1, E. Esposito1, I. Agliata1, M. B. Lioi2, M. G. Miano1, duplication. This approach can lead to the identification of new disease ge- M. V. Ursini1, F. Fusco1; nes. We report the analysis of 54 male patients presenting with intellectual 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics ‘Adriano Buzzati-Traverso’, IGB-CNR, Naples, Italy, deficiency (ID) and a family history suggesting X-linked (XL) inheritance or 2University of Basilicata, Potenza, Italy. maternal skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI), using a home-made X- chromosome specific microarray covering the whole human X-chromosome at high resolution. The majority of patients had whole genome array-CGH Incontinentia pigmenti (IP, MIM308300, 1/10.000) is an X-linked dominant prior to the selection and we did not include large rearrangements such as neuroectodermal disease associated with skin defects and with extracuta- MEC
P2  and FMR1 duplications. We identified 4 rearrangements considered neous manifestation (ocular, dental, hair, nail and central nervous system_ as causative or potentially pathogenic, corresponding to a detection rate of CNS defects) at variable frequency. In 30% of IP patients CNS anomalies 8%. Two CNVs affected known XLID genes and were therefore considered (seizures, encephalopathy, encephalomyelitis, ischemic stroke) are repor- as causative (I
L1 RAP
L1  and OPHN1 intragenic deletions). Two new CNVs ted. IP patients carry a mutation in the IKBKG/NEMO gene (IKBKG/Nuclear were considered as potentially pathogenic as they affected interesting can- Factor kappaB, Essential MOdulator) that encodes for NEMO/IKKgamma re- didates for ID. The first CNV is a deletion of the first exon of the TRP
C5  gene, gulatory protein of the IKK complex, required for the activation of the cano- encoding a cation channel implicated in dendrite growth and patterning, in nical NF-kappaB pathway. We collected a large cohort of IP patients with an a child presenting with ID and an autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The se- high variability of clinical phenotype. A variable CNS defect was observed, cond CNV is a partial deletion of KLH
L15 , in a patient suffering from severe even in IP families with the identical NEMO mutation. The skewed X-chro- ID, epilepsy and anomalies of cortical development. In both case, in spite mosome inactivation could only partially explain this variability thus modi- of strong arguments for clinical relevance, we were not able at this stage fier loci may contribute to the severity of IP phenotype. Here we present an to confirm pathogenicity of the mutations and the causality of the variants IP trios-family with both child and mother with NEMOdel4_10 deletion: in identified in XLID remains to be confirmed the mother only skin defects were present, in the child also a severe mental 
P08 .55-S retardation with neuromuscular defects were reported. We have designed Central nervous system developmental disorder in Noonan syndrome: an exome-sequencing approach to identify the modifier genes. From exome- a genomic approach enriched library and sequencing a list of single nucleotide/indels variants G. Baldassarre1, M. Crippa2, F. Dutto1, I. Bestetti2,3, A. Mussa1, A. Sironi2, C. Molinatto1, M. were produced. We will present candidate genes selected by applying com- Cirillo Silengo1, P. Finelli2,3, G. B. Ferrero1; 1Department of Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and bined filtering method to exclude benign and inherited variants and prioriti- Molecular Genetics, Milano, Italy, 3Department of Medical Biotechnology and zing the genes implicated in well-established pathways associated to NF-kB Translational Medicine, University of Milano, Milano, Italy. and neurogenesis. The identification of modifier genes able to influence the severity of IP phenotype will be useful to anticipate the outcome of the IP disease in order to apply a personalized therapeutic iter. 
P08 .53-S Noonan syndrome (NS – OMIM 163950) is a multisystemic dominant dis- NGS based whole X-exome analysis reveals a familial WDR45 order with a prevalence of 1/1000-1/2500 live births. It is clinically and missense mutation in 3 males with intellectual disability and brain genetically heterogeneous, with mutations in several genes of the RAS/ iron accumulation MAPK pathway detectable in up mtou l7ti5p%le hoift chayspeost.h Peasitshogenesis of central A. Dufke1, U. Grasshoff1, C. Dufke1, V. Kalscheuer2, C. Schroeder1, S. Beck-Wödl1, A. nervous system (CNS) developmental anomalies has not been thus far fully Tzschach1, T. Nägele3, O. Riess1, P. Bauer1, I. Krägeloh-Mann4; enlightened. We have applied the to study in deep the 1University of Tübingen, Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, pathogenic mechanisms implicated in NS related CNS anomalies. In this oli- Tübingen, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics; Department of gogenic model, point mutations and genomic rearrangements cooperate in Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3University of Tübingen, Department of Neuroradiology, Tübingen, Germany, 4University Children‘s Hospital Tübingen, an additive manner in the pathologic development of CNS. Usingarray CGH Paediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Tübingen, Germany. technology, we analyzed 15 samples of selected patients with molecularly confirmed diagnosis of NS and a severe impairment of CNS. We found 37 rare CNVs (one/several per patient) most of them inherited from an healthy X-exome sequencing in an adult male patient with intellectual disability, parent. According to the Database of Genomic Variants 12/37 were never epileptic seizures during childhood and otherwise normal somatic develop- reported and 25/37 were reported in very few cases. Based on the function ment revealed a novel missense mutation c.698G>A; p.R233H at a highly of the genes mapping in the identified CNVs, 10/37 (27%) were probab- conserved position in WDR45 (Xp11.23). Segregation analysis confirmed ly involved in the pathogenesis of CNS anomalies observed in our patients. the presence of the mutation in his two similarly affected younger mono- We provided first data supporting the hypothesis that CNS involvement in cygotic twin brothers and their healthy mE otS hH erG w i2 th0 s1 k4 ew | e M d XI -L inA aN cti, v aIT tiA onL Y |N WS dWoeWs n.EotS dHeGpe.nOdR eGxclusively on single gene mutations but also o1n 5th9eABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index multi-hit hypothesis concurrent presence of other genomic penetrant variants. These results re- Here we report the first case of co-existence of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and a present an initial assumption for the application of the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. A 15-year-old girl was born after a se- in the dissection of the NS pathogenesis. Further studies on larger cohorts cond uneventful pregnancy of healthy young non-consanguineous parents. are deserved to better define the meaning and the clinical implications of Notrhmal delivery and birth growth parameters (head circumference at the these findings. 10 percentile). Shortly after the birth the girl presented with hypotonia, 
P08 .56-M poor sleep pattern, unexplained irritability and episodes of crying, delayed NPA
S3 -related copy number variants: a role in developmental delay? L. Badalato1, S. M. Nikkel1, I. J. Anderson2, M. P. Dinulos3, S. E. Vallee4, E. Baxter5, J. development and early closure of fontanel (at 3 months). During the infan- McGowan-Jordan1, J. A. Rosenfeld6, C. M. Armour1; cy she developed absence seizures without EEG changes. At the age of 15 1Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Tennessee years she was found to have a postnatally developed microcephaly, seizures, Genetics Center, Knoxville, TN, United States, 3The Geisel School of Medicine at ataxic gait, severe intellectual disability with absent speech, drooling, self- Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, United States, 4Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, mutilation, and stereotypic behaviour. Patient‘s dysmorphic features were NH, United States, 5British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6Signature highly suggestive of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: Deep set eyes, strabismus, pro- Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer, Inc, Spokane, WA, United States. minent nasal bridge, wide mouth with everteTdC lFo4wer lip, thenar hypoplasia, tapering fingersF,O feXtGa1l pads, and hdyep onpolvaos.tic nails. MLPA analysis revealed a heterozygous deletion of exons 4b-6 of the gene and a heterozygous Neuronal PAS domain-containing protein 3 (NPA
S3 ) is a transcription factor deletion of TthCeF 4 gene, both Chromosome analysis and SNP of expressed primarily in developing and adult brain tissues. Current evidence the only exon array were normal. No changes were revealed by sequence suggests it is involved in neuronal development and maturation, and it has analysis of . recently been highlighted as potentially playing a key role in the evolution of We speculate that co-existence of two different gene mutations is not as ex- the human brain. Clinically, NPA
S3  has been identified as a candidate gene ceptional as commonly thought in the field of monogenic disorders. Additio- for schizophrenia, and numerous studies have supported this association. In nally, the contribution of each deletion to the phenotype is discussed. addition, several cases of learning disabilities in patients with disruptions of 
P08 .59-S this gene are reported, but this association remains relatively unexplored. Exome sequencing reveals a rare TSEN54 mutation in an Iranian Here, we present four unrelated individuals with small copy number vari- family with Ponto Cerebellar Hypoplasia ants (CNVs) within NPA
S3 : two intragenic duplications and two intragenic R. Jazayeri1, H. Hu2, Z. Fattahi1, L. Musante2, T. Wienker2, H. Ropers2, H. Najmabadi1, K. Kahrizi1; deletions. These CNVs range between 111-460kb in length and encompass 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, exonic sequences within the NPA
S3  gene. All four patients had variable de- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max- grees of developmental delay, and three had subtle distinctive facial features. Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Two patients also had macrosomia and macrocephaly, while the other two had autistic features and behaviour issues, including psychosis in one indivi- dual. In contrast, CNVs involving exonic sequences in NPA
S3  have only been Ponto Cerebellar Hypoplasia (PCH) is a heterogeneous group of autosomal seen in one of over 19,000 controls. In summary, these four cases support recessive disorders characterized by an abnormally small cerebellum and an association between NPA
S3  and developmental delay. This association brainstem. PCH type 2 (PCH2), the most frequently subtypes, is characte- is compatible with this gene’s postulated effects on neuronal development, rized by cerebellar hypoplasia affecting the hemispheres more severely and suggests that abnormal function of NPA
S3  may be implicated in other than the vermis and progressive cerebral atrophy, microcephaly, dyskinesia, c Pa 0s 8e .s 5 o 7f - Snon-specific cognitive impairment. seizures progressive microcephaly from birth, extrapyramidal dyskinesia A 9q21.3 microdeletion involving the NTRK2 gene as a possible cause and dystonia. This study was designed to find the genetic defect in a consan- of intellectual disability guineous Iranian family with two affected children, by means of homozy- E. Karásková, M. Hančárová, A. Puchmajerová, J. Drábová, Z. Sedláček; gosity mapping and exome sequencing. Clinical examination of the affected Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. individuals in this family showed microcephaly and severe intellectual disa- bility. Cerebellar hypoplasia in brain MRI was present in one affected indivi- dual. Linkage analysis with the use of Affymetrix Axiom® Array platformre- Microarray analyses identify new common copy number variants (CNVs) vealed two promising intervals (LOD score 1.927) onchromosomes 17 and and microdeletion/microduplication syndromes. However, some CNVs are 20. Exome Sequencing with 96% at 20x depth of coverage in one affected unique and no comparison with similar genotypes (and phenotypes) is avai- individual, detected a previously rare known homozygous missense mutati- lable to assist in deciding about their causality. on in TSEN54 gene (c.371G>T, p.G124V) which was about 9 Mbps, located in We identified a twelve-year old stigmatized female patient with growth fai- the second interval on chromosome 17. Albeit this is a known mutation, but lure, microcephaly, severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, muscular it is considered as a rare mutation in PCH patients. Co-segregation analysis atrophy, hip dislocation, foot deformity, vesicoureteral reflux and conge- of the identified mutation was confirmed with Sanger sequencing. This data nital heart disease. Her karyotype was normal. SNP array analysis (Illumi- shows that combination of homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing in na HumanCytoSNP-12) revealed a unique 1.7 Mb long deletion in 9q21.3 populations with high rate of consanguinity could be applied as an efficient (chr9:86,595,071-88,357,495; hg19) flanked by segmental duplications. technique for molecular genetics practice of clinically and genetically hete- FISH analysis of the family confirmed that the aberration was de novo. It rogeneous diseases. 
P08 .60-M removed 5 protein-encoding RefSeq genes. The NTRK2 gene encodes a neu- Identified A Novel Mutation in CDK5RA
P2  Gene in Iranian Family rotrophin receptor involved in the regulation of brain development, neuro- with Autosomal Recessive Primary Microcephaly Using Whole Exome transmission and synaptic function. Therefore NTRK2 is a good candidate Sequencing gene for intellectual disability (ID). A missense NTRK2 mutation has been S. Abedini1, L. Musante2, H. Hu2, M. Hosseini1, Z. Fattahi1, R. Jazayeri1, T. Wienker2, K. described in a boy with ID and obesity, and NTRK2 was considered also in Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1, H. Ropers2; autism and other psychiatric disorders. The mouse homologue of another 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, deleted gene, AGTPB
P1 , is associated with neurodegeneration. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max- Just one literature report exists describing a much more severely affected Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. patient with a slightly larger deletion involving NTRK2. Remarkably, the deletion in our patient corresponds to an inversion described in several un- affected individuals. The presence of the inversion and segmental duplicati- Introduction:Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a conge- ons at the breakpoints could indicate a specific mechanism predisposing to nital disorder caused by impaired neurogenic mitosis lead to defect in brain rearrangements. However, the inversion could not be identified in any of the development. This disorder is heterogeneous genetically and characterized parents of the patient. by reduced head circumference (-2 SD or more) under age and sex-based Supported by CHERISH, NT/14200, 00064203 and CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. mean and mild to severe intellectual disability. So far, 12 genetic loci (MCPH1- 
P08 .58-M 12) with twelve corresponding genes (MCPH1, WDR62, CDK5RA
P2 ,CAS
C5 , Co-occurrence of TCF4 and FOXG1 genes deletions in a 15-year-old girl ASPM, CENPJ, STIL,CE
P135 , CE
P152 , ZNF335,PH
C1 and CDK6) have been E. Kuchinskaya1,2, M. Rehnberg1, M. Stefanova1; 1Department of Clinical Pathology and Clinical Genetics, University hospital, Linköping, identified for this disease.Using whole-exome sequencing (WES) as a new Sweden, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, pioneer technology and diagnostic tool, we can provide an opportunity for Linköping, Sweden. identifying the causal mutations with more efficient and cost-effectiveness in Iranian patients with autosomal recessive primary microcephaly. Case presentation:We report an Iranian family with two affected individuals with Both Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and a congenital variant of Rett syndrome are moderate intellectual disability, large toes and primary microcephaly with 160 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG rare genetic syndromes with similar clinical features and development. consanguineous marriage. We performed WES for one affected and focusedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P08 .63-S Ageing in Rett Syndrome: Characteristics of long term survivors on genes associated with microcephaly and homozygous variants. We iden- reported through the British Isles Rett Syndrome Survey (BIRSS) tified a homozygous novel frameshift mutation in CDK5RA
P2  in the affected A. Hryniewiecka-Jaworska1, H. Archer2, A. J. Clarke1; individual. Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of the homozygous 1Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University Hospital of mutation in the other affected and heterozygous state for parents and nor- Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom. mal siblings. Discussion:WES led to cost-effectiveness and rapid identificati- on of novel frameshift deletion in CDK5RA
P2  in Iranian family with primary microcephaly. We can facilitate genetic counseling for this family. To date, We report what is known about the health and wellbeing of thirty women of only five different mutations have been reported for CDK5RA
P2  gene which at least 40 years with Rett syndrome (RTT). The study is based on longitudi- most of them were from Pakistan. Moreover, this study implies that WES is nal data from the British Isles Rett Syndrome Survey (BIRSS). These 30 wo- a suitable diagnostic tool for identifying mutations responsible for MCPH men have a clinical diagnosis of RTT: 24 women of 40-49 years, five women families. of 50-59 years and one older woman of 64 years. Tweny nine women were 
P08 .61-S diagnosed with classic RTT and one with atypical RTT (AR). New case of biallelic TRMT10A deficiency identified by exome MEC
P2  mutations were identified in 14 of the 18 women tested. There were sequencing confirms the associated phenotype of primary six missense mutations; one early truncating; two late truncating; three microcephaly with intellectual disability and short stature C-terminal deletions and two large deletions. A simplified Smeets severity M. Zweier *1, L. Gogoll *1, P. Joset1, M. Papik1, O. Hasselmann2, K. Steindl1, A. Rauch1; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, score was calculated for every decade of the women’s lives. Little increase in 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ostschweizer Kinderspital, St. Gallen, Switzerland. severity was observed and, for most, the severity rating was ‘mild’. Factors contributing to disease severity have been assessed. Findings inclu- TRMT10A de: (1) severity of phenotype is milder amomg older women, indicating sur- Recently a mutation in the gene was identified in a large consan- vival advantage; (2) depression among middle-age RTT may be a substantial guineous family of Moroccan origin defining a new syndrome of young on- but under-recognised problem; (3) menopause does not seem to occur ear- set diabetes, short stature and microcephaly with intellectual disabilitTyR. MBy- lier than in other women; (4) nutrition standards from the general popula- lTin10kaAge anaRlyGs9isM aTnDd2 exome sequencing a homozygous nonsense mutation tion will often be inapplicable; (5) multiple opportunities exist to prevent was identified in all three affected siblings. The protein encoded by functional decline through detailed attention to the quality of the medical (also ), which was proposed to have tRNA methyltransferase and social care. activity, was shown to be ubiquitously expressed with enriched levTeRlsM iTn1 t0hAe There is a particular need to increase awareness of RTT amongst staff caring affected tissues brain and pancreatic islets and to be absent in lymphoblasts for older adults with disabilities so that they can identify and meet the needs from the affected siblings. We now report a new case of biallelic o Pf 0 t 8h .e 6i 4r -a Mdult patients with RTT. deficiency in a girl born to apparently noTnR-McoTn1s0aAnguineous parents of Koso- Italian brother and sister with familial Xp22.12 microduplication vo origin. By exome sequencing in our patient we identified a homozygous including RP
S6 KA3 gene and phenotype description nonsense mutation (c.379C>T) in the gene. Of note, this is the A. Fabretto, P. Costa, F. Faletra, P. Gasparini, V. Pecile; same mutation as recently reported, introducing a premature stop codon Institute of Maternal and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. at position 127 of the protein. Our patient presented with primary micro- cephaly, intrauterine onset borderline growth, mild intellectual disability and fine motor problems, a high palate with uvula bifida and minor facial RP
S6 KA3 gene is responsible of Coffin Lowry Syndrome, but recent studies features such as long narrow face with narrow palpebral fissures, long thin have demonstrated that microduplication of this gene can cause nonsyn- nose and small mouth. At age 4 years a seizure disorder started. Notably, dromic X-linked ID, ADHD and localization-related epilepsy. The RP
S6 KA3 at age 8 years, our patient did not yet manifest diabetes, which was of ado- gene encodes a member of the ribosomal 
S6  kinase family. RSK proteins are lescent onset TinR tMhTe 1p0rAev iously described family. In conclusion, our report of activated by MAPK proteins in response to growth factors, polypeptide hor- a novel patient confirms the phenotype of the novel syndrome associated mones, and neurotransmitters. RSKs appear to have important roles in cell with biallelic deficiency including short stature and microcephaly cycle progression, differentiation, and survival. Further studies have eviden- w 
P0 it 8h . 6in 2t -e Mllectual disability. ced that the presence of a small amount of residual enzymatic activity may Analysis of MEC
P2 , CDK
L5 , and FOXG1 genes in Czech patients with be sufficient to maintain normal osteoblast differentiation and has also been Rett syndrome and Rett-like features linked to cognitive performance, with higher level of intellectual function. D. Zahorakova1, A. Puchmajerova1, A. Baxova2, P. Martasek1; Our case describes a brother and a sister affected by intellectual disabili- 1Department of Pediatrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, ties, language delay and behavioural difficulties, with more severe clinical Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Clinical manifestations in the affected male. Both show some dysmorphic features Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles University in as very large and long nose, mild hypotelorism and dental crowding. The Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. boy performed some instrumental exams as cerebral NMR and CT, which Background: didn’t reveal any major cerebral malformation, but showed an absent pneu- matisation of the sphenoid sinus, moreover no other skeletal abnormalities Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked dominant neurodevelop- were found. No seizures were reported, except during pharmacological mental disorder primarily caused by de novo MEC
P2  mutations. Clinical sleeping EEG, some low waves in the right frontal area were identified. The features include developmental regression at the age of 6-18 months, ac- boy had previously performed some molecular exam as FMR1 and COH1 quired microcephaly, autistic behavior, loss or severe impairment of speech mutation screening and karyotype, all normal. We performed high density and purposeful hand use, stereotypic hand movements, gait apraxia, and SNPs-array analysis, which revealed a 512 Kb microduplication on Xp22.12 seizures. CDK
L5  mutations have been identified in early-onset seizure vari- (19.842.599-20.355.406) in both brother and sister. The duplication was in- ant and FOXG1 mutations in congenital variant of Rett syndroMmaete. Wriea lrse paonrdt herited from the mother who is completely asymptomatic. 
P08 .65-S mthee trheosdulst:s of mutation analysis of these genes in Czech patients with Rett Exploring the effect of adducins genetic variability on cognition in syndrome and mental retardation with Rett-like features. schizophrenia MEC
P2  was analyzed in 416 patients, CDK
L5  was analyzed in 59 M. Bosia1,2, A. Pigoni3, L. Zagato4, L. Merlino4, N. Casamassima4, C. Lorenzi1, A. Pirovano3, patients, and FOXG1 was analyzed in 20 patients. MEC
P2  and CDK
L5  were E. Smeraldi1, P. Manunta4, R. Cavallaro1; analyzed by high-resolution melting analysiRs easnudl tDs:NA sequencing. FOXG1 1San Raffaele Scientific Institute,Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Milan, Italy, was analyzed by DNA sequencing. Large deletions and duplications were 2Institute for Advanced Study, Center for Neurolinguistics and Theoretical Syntax, analyzed by MLPA analysis (MRC-Holland). Pathogenic mutations Pavia, Italy, 3Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 4San Raffaele Scientific in the MEC
P2  gene in were identified in 45 patients with classic Rett syn- Institute,Nephrology and Dialysis, Milan, Italy. drome, 7 patients with atypical Rett syndrome, 11 patients with Rett-like features, and 1 patient withC aountcislmus. iCoDnKs:
L5  mutations were found in 2 pati- ents with early-onset seizures and Rett-like phenotype. No FOXG1 mutation Schizophrenia is a chronic disease characterized by cognitive impairment. was detected in this study. MEC
P2  mutations are common in Biological bases of cognitive deficits are still poorly understood and may lie classic Rett syndrome patients, but they are less frequent in atypical or Rett- in insults in the neurodevelopmental process. Synapses structural proteins like phenotypes. However, analysis of MEC
P2  in these patients should not be are claimed to have an ethiopathogenic role in schizophrenia and a more discouraged. More patients should be examined to determine frequencies direct effect on core cognitive functions. Adducins family proteins seem of of CDK
L5  and FOXG1 mutations in Czech Republic. Supported by grants NT great interest, as they are fundamental constituents of synaptic structures, 13120-4/2012, UNCE 204011/2012, MZCR RVO-VFN64165/2012. involved in actin cytoskeleton assembly-disassembly responsible of synap- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |t iWc pWlasWtic.iEtyS. IHn Gpa.OrtiRcuGlar, ADD2 is prominently expressed in brain ti 1ss 6ue 1s and previous researches reported a role of this gene in memory and lear-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P08 .69-S A novel X-linked trichothiodystrophy associated with a nonsense ning processes, commonly impaired in schizophrenia. Based on this rationa- mutation in RNF113A le, we analyzed three common genetic variants of Adducins, ADD1 G1532T M. A. Corbett1, T. Dudding2, P. A. Crock3,4, E. Botta5, L. M. Christie2, L. Hobson1, J. Boyle2, (rs4961), ADD2 
C1797 T (rs4984) and ADD3 IV
S11 +386A>G (rs3731566) in A. Mansour6, K. L. Friend1, J. Crawford1, G. Jackson7, L. Vandeleur1, A. Hackett2, M. R. a sample of 342 patients with schizophrenia, assessed with a broad battery Stratton8, G. Turner2, J. Gecz1, M. Field2; evaluating core cognitive domains that are typically impaired in schizophre- 1University of Adelaide, North Adelaide, Australia, 2Genetics of Learning Disability Service, Hunter Genetics, Newcastle, Australia, 3Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, nia. The analysis showed significant effects of ADD1 genotype on executive John Hunter Children‘s Hospital, Newcastle, Australia, 4University of Newcastle, function (p<.025)and of ADD2 genotype on several domains: working me- Newcastle, Australia, 5Istituto di Genetica Molecolare CNR, Pavia, Italy, 6The Children’s mory (p<.003), verbal fluency (p<.018), verbal memory (p<.001), abstract Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia, 7Brain Research Institute, Florey reasoning (p<.009), cognitive flexibility (p<.02570) and sustained attention Neurosciences Institutes, West Heidelberg, Australia, 8The Wellcome Trust Sanger (p<.010). Moreover an interaction effect of ADD1 and ADD3 genotypes was Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. observed on symbol coding (p<.029) and verbal memory (p<.027). Our fin- dings suggest that genes involved in synaptic building and plasticity, such as Adducins, may have a key role in cognitive impairment in schizophrenia and Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) describes a group of rare autosomal recessive m 
P0 a 8y . h 6e 6l -p M us to better understand the ethiopathogenesis of the disease. disorders that variably affect a wide range of organs derived from the neu- The power of Next Generation Sequencing in identifying mutations in roectoderm. The key diagnostic feature is sparse, brittle, sulphur deficient non-specific ASD-ID phenotypes: the example of SHANK3 hair that has a “tiger-tail” banding pattern under polarizing light microsco- H. Poquet1, M. Willems2, J. Thevenon1, C. Redin3, M. Lefebvre1, C. Redin1, A. Mosca- py. At the molecular level, TTD genes have a role in DNA damage repair pa- Boidron1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, Y. Duffourd1, S. Lumbroso2, B. Gerard3, J. Mandel3, J. thways. Rivière1, A. Piton3, L. Olivier-Faivre1; We describe two male cousins affected by TTD with microcephaly, profound 1CHU, Dijon, France, 2CHU, Montpellier, France, 3IGBMC, Strasbourg, France. intellectual disability, sparse hair, aged appearance, short stature, facial dys- morphism, seizures, immunoglobulin deficiency, multiple endocrine abnor- malities, cerebellar hypoplasia and partial absence of the corpus callosum Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) comprise a range of early onset neuro- and absence of photosensitivity. Mutations in known TTD genes were ruled developmental conditions of varying severity, with or without Intellectual out. Obligate female carriers showed 100% skewed X-chromosome inacti- Disability (ID), characterized by impairments in relatedness and communi- vation suggesting a potentially X-linked disorder. Linkage analysis localised cation, accompanied by restricted interests and repetitive stereotyped be- the disease allele to a 7.75 Mb interval from Xq23 - q25. Sanger sequen- haviors. SHANK3 haploinsufficiency implicated in PhSeHlaAnN-MK3cDermid 22q13 cing of 737 X-chromosome, Vega genes and whole exome sequencing was microdeletion is one of the more prevalent monogenic causes of ASD, ex- used to identify a nonsense mutation in the highly conserved RNF113A plainidneg naot vloe aSsHt A0N,5K%3 of cases, but the indication of sequencing in gene (c.901 C>T, p.Gln301*) ruling out other possible X-linked variants. The patients with ASD and ID remain difficult. Here we report on two patients mutation segregated with the disease in the family and was not observed with mutations identified by next generation sequencing in over 10,000 control X chromosomes from public and in-house data. The (NGS). Patient 1, SaHgAedN K135, was part of a cohort of 40 patients screened by mutation markedly reduced RNF113A protein expression in extracts from exome sequencing for undiagnosed severe ID, and a truncating mutation lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from the affected individuals. Knockdown was identified in (c.4381C>T ; p.Gln1461*). Patient 2, SaHgeAdN 1K03, was of orthologs of RNF113A in model organisms strongly support a role for the part of a cohort of 106 patients with ID screened by targeted NGS of 220 ID gene in DNA repair and neurogenesis. The association of RNF113A mutation genes, and a causative heterozygous truncating mutation of was with TTD identifies a new locus for these disorders on the X-chromosome. 
P08 .70-M identified (c.2955_2970dup;p.Pro992Argfs*325). They both had normal An hiPSCs based in vitro model of Angelman Syndrome and dup15 measurements, severe ID, developmental and speech delay with acquisition Autism of a few words and secondary regression with absence of speech, attention F. La Carpia1, M. Gentile2, C. Schwartz3, G. Neri1, F. Gurrieri1, E. Sangiorgi1; deficit and behavioral disorders necessitating treatment, autistic traits, in- 1università cattolica del sacro cuore, roma, Italy, 2Dipartimento Materno-Infantile ASL, somnia and tantrum. Patient 1 had eating and digestive difficulties, patient Bari, Italy, 3Greenwood Genetic Centre, Greenwood, SC, United States. 2 had distal spasticity, epilepsy from age 5, anSdH fAaNciKa3l dysmorphic features. These two clinical presentations appear nonspecific wSitHhAinN tKh3e ASD-ID spec- trum. After reviewed the other patients with mutations, we argue UB
E3 A gene maps on 15q11q13 chromosome and encodes for the pro- that NGS will be helpful to determine patients with mutations in tein 
E6 AP, an Ubiquitine-ligase involved in protein degradation process. t Ph 0e 8 a .6b 8se -n Mce of clear distinctive clinical features. The gene is maternally imprinted in central nervous system and different Interpretation of TCF4 Variants Requires mRNA Splicing Analysis in studies show that loss of expressed copy causes Angelman Sydrome (AS) Patients with Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome while the duplication of 15q11q13 represents the genetic cause in 1-3% of M. Nasser1, L. Drévillon1, J. Ghoumid1, A. Briand-Suleau1, T. Gaillon1, V. Bodereau1, A. autistic patients (dup15 Autism). Using 2 cohorts of AS and dup15 autism Aissat2, A. Hinzpeter1, S. Whalen3, L. Pasquier4, J. Amiel5, M. Goossens1, E. Girodon- patients, we applied induced Pluripotent Stem cells (iPSCs) technology and Boulandet1, D. Héron3, I. Giurgea1; neuronal differentiation to identify molecular targets of a dys-regulated 1Groupe Hospitalier Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier, Créteil, France, 2INSERM U955, dosage of UB
E3 A. To generate iPSCs we used 4 canonical factors identified Equipe 11, Créteil, France, 3Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4CHU de by Yamanaka (c-Myc, Klf-4, Oct3/4 e Sox2) through retroviral or lentiviral Rennes, Rennes, France, 5Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. vectors. We performed 14 attempts and in 13 we generated cells that we defined as “partially reprogrammed” because they lost their typical fibro- blasts morphology, but died after passaging. In the last experiment we used Background: Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) combines severe intellectual a commercial lentiviral vector with the same 4 pluripotency factors making disability (ID), hyperventilation, and a characteristic facial gestalt. The di- a dup15 hiPSCs cell line positive to pluripotent expression markers; further sease-causing gene TCF4 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcrip- characterizations are still ongoing. Once we have hiPSCs we will proceed tion factor. Patients carry de novo TCF4 deletions, truncating mutations, or with neuronal differentiantion. With our experiments we confirm that the missense mutations located chiefly in the bHLH domain. Variants that do hiPSCs genesis is a stochastic process with a successful rate of 0.1-2% and not fall into one of these categories are difficult to interpret. We describe that no standard protocol exists. In the other hand this new challenging and a comprehensive mRNA analysis method for assessing TCF4 variants of arduous technology give to the scientists the possibility to understand the uncertain significance (VUS). Methods and Results: Using leukocytes from pathogenetic mechanisms in tissues that for obviously reasons are difficult patients and minigene assays, we documented impaired splicing for the syn- to study. onymous variant c.1071A>G p.(Ala357Ala), and for the only two missense 
P08 .71-S variants outside the bHLH domain that are described to date, c.1073G>T Maternal uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 4 in a subject with p.(Gly358Val) and c.1604A>G p.(Asp535Gly). All assessed variants result in mild intellectual disability aberrant splicing and premature termination codons (PTC). Conclusions: All P. Palumbo, O. Palumbo, M. Leone, R. Stallone, T. Palladino, L. Zelante, M. Carella; Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. TCF4 mutations reported so far in PHTS are either missense mutations lo- cated in the b-HLH domain or result in a PTC. Splicing tests ought to be per- formed in patients with de novo TCF4 VUS, especially missense mutations lying outside the bHLH-specifying domain, even in the absence of in silico Uniparental Isodisomy (iUPD) is a rare condition characterized by the inhe- prediction for a splicing defect. ritance of two homologous chromosome from one parent and the absence of the homologous chromosome from the other parent. Several mechanisms of UPD formation have been previously decribed, including trisomy rescue, 162 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, mIToAnLoYso m| Wy rWescWue. EaSndH gGa.mOeRteG complementation. Problems associated toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index UPD are homozigosity of autosomal recessive inherited mutations and aber- 
P54 NRB/NONO protein and overexpression of the two other DBHS prote- rant genomic imprinting. iUPD of chromosome 4 is a rare conditions. To date ins. In patients’ cells, whole transcriptoPm5e4 annrba/lyNsoisn roevealed severe gene ex- only few cases are reported, with heterogeneous phenotype, and all were pression deregulation, and reporter assays showed reduced circadian clock maternal. We describe a patient with mild intellectual disability and slight amplitude. Finally, CT scans analysis of -deficient mice demon- speech delay, harboring maternal iUPD of chromosome 4 detected by high strate a dramatic flattened nose phenotype that may mimic the severe malar resolution SNP-array and confirmed by microsatellite analysis. Our patient hypoplasia observedP in54 pNaRtiBen/NtsO.NO, did not show any dysmorphic feature and did not present any other anoma- These findings demonstrate the existence of a recognizable XLID syndrome ly. To the best of our knowledge, this is the second patient carrying maternal due to mutations in and highlight the crucial role of DBHS chromosome 4 iUPD that show a behavioral phenotype. Chromosome 4 ma- proteins in brain development and function. 
P08 .74-M ternal iUPD is a sporadic and rare event, that may present little or not di- The KIAA2022 duplication found by high-resolution custom-designed stinguishable phenotype. Thus, it seems unlikely that important maternally array CGH in Polish patient with X-linked intellectual disability imprinted genes are on this chromosome. Because iUPD is associate with a S. O. Rzonca1, A. Charzewska1, M. Janeczko2, M. Nawara1, D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, J. Bal1; complete unmasking of recessive mutations, it is possible that such mutati- 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2University Children’s Hospital of on could be responsible for the intellectual disability in our patient, and this Cracow, Cracow, Poland. hypothesis could justify the phenotypic variability among other reported cases. It will be useful to study further cases with chromosome 4 paternal iUPD, in order to compare clinical phenotype and to exclude or confirm the The X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a common, clinically complex p Pr 0e 8s .e 7n 2c -e M of paternally imprinted genes on chromosome 4. and genetically heterogeneous disease arising from mutations in genes X- Chromosome imbalances by array-CGH - from single gene to along the X chromosome. Approximately 5-10% of XLID cases in males chromosomal regions imbalances are due to the presence of copy number variations (CNV). The array-based I. M. Carreira1,2,3, S. I. Ferreira1, A. Jardim1, A. Mascarenhas1, M. Pinto1, E. Matoso4, M. comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) using NimbleGen custom assays Venâncio5, L. Ramos5, J. B. Melo1,2,3; (72F0MKR)1 dedicAatReXd for X chromosome was performed for 45 patients with the 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de family history suggesting X-linked intellectual disability, excluded mutation Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2CIMAGO – Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, in and genes and normal results in MRX-MLPA test. In 7K oIAuAt o2f0 4252 Genética e Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CNC- Centro de Neurociências e Biologia patients (15.5%) the molecular defect was identified. In one patient, the 363 Celular, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Laboratório de Citogenética, kb microdupKlIicAaAt2io0n2 2(hg: 73,899,064-74,262,928) encompassing Hospital Pediátrico, CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital gene was found. According to DECIPHER CNVs database, reported micro- Pediátrico, CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal. duplication gene, could be associated with XLID. The duplication was identified in a male patient with moderate intellectual disability that was also present in his four male relatives (brother, mother’s 2 brothers and Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) has increased the son of mother’s sister). The female relatives of the patient were unaffected diagnostic yield in patients with intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum that supports the X-linked recessive inheritance. The KIAA2022 protein, disorders and multiple congenital anomalies due to its improved resolution. also known as XPN, is rKelIaAtAe2d0 t2o2 neurite extension and regulation of the cell- X-chromosome has been focus of attention due to the bias in the affected cell, cell-matrix adhesion and migration. The copy number variations and male-to-female ratio and to the knowledge of X-linked genes associated with point mutaKtIiAoAn2s 0in2 2the gene have been recently found to be causa- ID. With array-CGH we can either detect single gene imbalances, chromoso- tive for intellectual disability. Therefore, we postulate that the found variant mal region imbalances and even aneuploidies. In a cohort of 1000 patients involving gene can be pathogenic and related to clinical features studied by Agilent 180K oligonucleotide array-CGH we have detected sever- observed in our patient with XLID. al X-chromosome imbalances. Single gene deletions involving ZNF41 or I
L1 - 
P08 .75-S RAP
L1  genes were equitably observed in 8 patients; DMD imbalances in 3 Identification of intellectual disability genes in female patients with females and SHOX gene duplications in 1 female and 9 males. We also detec- skewed X-inactivation ted an intragenic deletion in SL
C9 A6 gene associated with Christianson syn- N. Fieremans1,2, S. Belet1,2, H. Van Esch1, K. Devriendt1, F. Martinez3, E. De Baere4, F. drome that segregated in the family. In 6 patients we identified Xp22.31 du- Roelens5, A. Jansen6, S. Seneca6, P. Marynen1, G. Froyen1,2; 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2VIB, Leuven, Belgium, 3Hospital Universitario La Fe, plications, 3 females, 1 male with maternal inheritance and 2 males whose Valencia, Spain, 4Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 5H-Hartziekenhuis, Roeselare, inheritance was not yet determined. We identified chromosome Xq27.1q28 Belgium, 6UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. interstitial duplications in 2 males, 1 maternally inherited and the other not yet determined. We also found other genomic imbalances but in single ca- ses: a complex rearrangement with multiple imbalances at Xp22.33p22.2 Intellectual disability (ID) is a very heterogeneous disorder and the etiology in a male patient, maternally inherited; an Xp11.3p11.23 duplication in a remains unknown in about 50% of cases. Traditionally, X-linked ID (XLID) female with ID whose mother is also affected and a case of triple X in an au- studies focused on males from XLID families due to the hemizygous state tistic female. The challenge with X-chromosome imbalances is to interpret of the X chromosome. Females can be carrier of the mutation but are gene- their impact on the phenotype, due to the presence of some alterations in rally not affected due to inactivation of the mutant X chromosome in most the normal population and to X-chromosome inactivation in females. 
P08 .73-S of their MceEllCsP (2skewing). Previously we idMenEtCifPie2d two female patients with Mutations in the 
P54 NRB/NONO gene cause a novel syndromic XLID RETT-like phenotypes caused by a de novo microduplication at Xq18, in- with a slender built-macrocephaly gestalt cluding . While carrier females of duplications are generally M. Langouet1, M. Rio1, S. Moutton1, K. Siquier-Pernet1, C. Bole-Feysot1, N. Cagnard1, P. unaffected due to skewing ofA XT-RinXactivation, these 2 females show complete Nitschke1, A. Munnich1, D. Mircsof2, P. Seebeck3, S. Brown2, J. Amiel1, L. Colleaux1; inactivation of the apparently normal X chromoMsoEmCeP.2 By exome sequencing, 1Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 2Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich, we identified a mutation in located on the other X, which might have Switzerland, 3Center for Integrative Rodent Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland. caused the skewing in that patient forcing the duplication to be ex- pressed. Since this two-hit mechanism could also occur in other female ID patients with skewed X-inactivation, we analyzed the X-inactivation pattern We report on two unrelated and sporadic patients presenting a novel syn- of 147 ID females, which revealed a higher percentage (6.8%) of extreme dromic XLID featuring macrocephaly, severe elocution disability with open skewing (≥ 90% skewing) than reported in the general population (4.0%). bite, high arched palate, malar hypoplasia, a thin nasal bridge with deviated X chromosome-array-CGH analysis of these skewed females revealed two nasal septum, slender build, and scoliosis. Brain MRI showPe5d4 aN RthBi/cNk OcNorO- de novo aberrations on Xp11 that could explain their ID phenotypes. Exome pus callosum. High-throughput sequencing identified two distinct mutati- sequencing revealed a further two promising variants. Our data thus de- ons (c.1131G>A and c.1394dup, p.Asn466Lysfs*13) in the monstrate that skewing can be used to screen for (novel) genetic mutations X-linked gene. 
P54 NRB/NONO belongs to the DBHS (Drosophila Behaviour resulting in XLID in females. Human Splicing) protein family. In mammals three members belong to this 
P08 .76-M family: 
P54 NRB/NONO, PSP
C1 , and PSF/SFPQ. DBHS proteins are multi- Microduplication of Xp22.31 region involving the STS gene in two functional nuclear proteins implicated in multiple aspects of RNA produc- males with intellectual disability tion and processing. Beyond RNA production, they also play a role in RNA I. Sansović, L. Morožin Pohovski, I. Barišić; Children’s Hospital Zagreb, University of Zagreb Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia. surveillance (binding and retaining hyper edited RNA in the subnuclear bo- dies named paraspeckles), as well as in the control of mammalian circadian rhythms. Finally, PSF and 
P54 NRB have also been implicated in dendritic RNA transport. Genomic instability is a feature of the human Xp22.31 region: deletions, du- We demonstrated that both mutations lEeaSdH toG c2om01pl4et e| MabIsLeAncNe ,o IfT tAheL Y |p WlicaWtioWns.,E tSripHliGca.tOioRnsG and other complex rearrangements were iden1tif6ie3dABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index at this locus. Submicroscopic duplication of Xp22.31 has been reported as the ventricular system and evidence of small brain. Our second patient is the either a possible cause of neurobehavioral phenotypes or a benign variant. second daughter of an apparently healthy, non-consanguineous couple born Recently, two large cohorts of patients with the microduplication at Xp22.31 at 39 weeks by cesarean section frodr small gestational age. The auxological were reported. The size of the Xp22.31 duplication varied between 149 kb parameters were all below the 3 percentile. At birth, brain MRI showed and 1.9 Mb and mostly included the steroid sulfatase (STS) gene. Patients mild hypoplasia of corpus callosum and cerebellum. She had generalized hy- with Xp22.31 recurrent duplications generally presented with a neuroco- potonia, hyporeactivitGyD, sIu1cking deficit, seizures, and congenital heart disea- gnitive and behavioral phenotype, including developmental delay. The STS se. Physical examination showed microcephaly, dysmorphic features of the gene could be a candidate gene contributing to the abnormal phenotype in face and extremities. has been associated with ID and noGnD-sI1yndromic Xp22.31 duplication. microcephaly in a high percentage of males. Our patients and the revision of Here we report 2 boys with the microduplication of Xp22.31 found by MLPA cases from literature and DECIPHER database strengthen the involve- analysis. The duplication was minimum 246,2 kb in size and included STS ment in intellectual disability and microcephaly not only in male but also in and HDHD1A genes. Both of them presented with mild to moderate intel- female subjects. Of note, neurological and neuroimaging abnormalities, such lectual disability/developmental delay mainly affecting speak ability, beha- as ventricular system enlargements, cerebellar or corpus callosum hypopla- vioural abnormalities and minor facial dysmorphisms. Proband B also had sia are recurrent clinical features associated with this rare microduplication a hypotonia. The mother of proband A, carrying the same duplication, had a syndrome. 
P08 .79-S mild intellectual disability. Mutations in YY1 cause intellectual disability and a distinct facial Our cases overlap with those previously described in most clinical features. appearance Although there is no clear evidence to support pathogenicity of the Xp22.31 A. T. Vulto-van Silfhout1, J. H. M. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, B. W. M. van duplication, there is still enough evidence to consider the Xp22.31 duplicati- Bon1, W. M. Nillesen1, A. P. M. de Brouwer1, A. Zada1, J. Andrieux2, P. Chambon3, S. Patrier3, on as a risk or modifier factor for intellectual disability and behavioural pro- S. Briuglia4, S. Kjaergaard5, J. Morton6, A. Stray-Pedersen7, S. Lynch8, T. Takenouchi9, K. blems. We hope that the description of these two cases will contribute to the Steindl10, S. M. Papub10, P. Joset10, H. G. Brunner1, K. Kosaki9, A. Rauch10, B. B. A. de Vries1, phenotype delineation and elucidation of the role of Xp22.31 duplication. D. A. Koolen1; 
P08 .77-S 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Hopital Jeanne de Xq12 and Xq13 submicroscopic duplications in a single patient: Flandre, Lille, France, 3Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 4CSS-Mendel Institute, confirming the existence of a new X-linked disorder and narrowing Rome, Italy, 5Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, the critical region. Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, E. Alfei1, S. D‘Arrigo1, C. Pantaleoni1, F. Novara2, R. Ciccone2, O. Zuffardi2, F. Natacci3; 8Our Lady‘s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 9Keio University School of Medicine, 1Developmental Neurology Division, Carlo Besta Neurological Institute, I.R.C.C.S. Tokyo, Japan, 10University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Foundation, Milano, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, “Ca’Granda” Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, I.R.C.C.S. Foundation, Milano, de novo YY1, Italy. Background - Trio-based exome sequencing of 10 patients with intellectual disability (ID) previously identified a missense mutation in a transcription factor with an important role in variousY Yb1io logical processes, In 2012 Kaya et al. reported three related patients with a recurrent dupli- such as proliferation, differentiation, embryogenesis, apoptosis, and tumdoer cation Xq12-q13.3 with mental retardation, autism, seizures and dysmor- dnoevvoelopment. To aYscYe1rtain whether the mutation in was causative for phic features. The duplicated region (9.4 Mb) contains numerous genes and the patient’s phenotype, we set out YtoY 1i dentify additional patients with the authors pointed out the possible role of an increased dosage of specific mutations in . genes focusing on their presumed role in developmental delay and autism. Methods - Targeted resequencing of and further eYxYo1m e sequencing stu- Subsequent reports (Prontera et al. 2012; Wentz et al. 2013) described 4 dies in a cohort of patients with unexplained ID were pderef onromvoed. Detailed more patients with a variable association of severe global developmental pheYnYo1t ype information of patients with mutations in was compared. delay, microcephaly, dysmorphism and autism spectrum disorder, all car- Results - We identified three additional patients with YY 1mutations rying a duplication in the Xq12-q13.3 region, supporting the existence of in (two missense and one nonsense mutation). The four mutations all a clinically recognizable X-linked recessive disorder. We describe a further occurred in the region containing the zinc finger domains of , which is patient affected by global developmental delay, epilepsy, autistic traits and involved in DNA binding. All four patients had ID, intrauterine growth retar- carrying two non-contiguous duplications detected by array CGH, involving dation and similar facial dysmorphism, including facial asymmetry, broad Xq12 and Xq13 regions. Detailed clinical description is provided and com- forehead, full upper eyelids, fdlaet n movaolar region, full nasal tip, thick alae nasi pared to previous reported cases. Due to the narrowed size of the duplicated and a Gingko leaf-like shape of the upper lip. regions (123 Kb and 509 Kb, respectively), this case helps to redefine the Conclusions - We show that mutations in the zinc finger domains region OoPf HinNt1e,r eSsNtX f1o2r, tMhiEsD c1o2n, dNitLioGnN.3 T, hGeJB t1w, oZ MduYpMli3c,a TtiAoFn1s in our patients of the transcription factor YY1cause ID, low birth weight, and overlapping invoSlNveX 1123 genes, and 7 of them are mainly expressed in the nervous sy- facial dysmorphism, including a distinctive shape of the upper lip. 
P08 .80-M stem ( ) and all, except Mutations in ZBTB18 are responsible for intellectual disability for , are involved in the pathogenesis of a known human disease. Our A. Röpke, C. Müller-Hofstede, A. Bohring, A. Bröcher, M. Hoffmann, P. Wieacker; observation provides further evidence of the existence of a new genomic Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany. condition, helping to define the corresponding clinical phenotype, and to identify a more definite critical region. 
P08 .78-M Xq28 duplication detected by SNP-array in two girls with Microdeletions of 1q43q44 were described in patients with intellectual disa- microcephaly, intellectual disability and neurological features bility (ID) with limited or no expressive speech, microcephaly, dysmorphic V. Parisi1, L. Sinibaldi1, P. Castelluccio2, S. Loddo1,3, G. Serra4, H. Goel5,6, B. Albrecht7, G. features, abnormalities of the corpus callosum, hand and foot abnormali- Baujat8, B. Torres1, A. Novelli1, A. Battaglia9, L. Bernardini1; ties, and seizures. Different genes were predicted as candidate genes for the 1Mendel Laboratory; “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza” Foundation, Rome, Italy, 2UOSC microcephaly (AKT3), abnormalities of the corpus callosum (ZBTB18), and Medical genetics, “A. Cardarelli” Hospital, Naples, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 4Institute of Child Neuropsychiatry, seizure (FAM36A, 
C1 orf199, HNRNPU). Recently, a mutation in the ZBTB18 University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 5Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia, 6University gene was identified in a patient with ID and further signs of the 1q43q44 of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia, 7Institut f. Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum microdeletion syndrome. Knock-out mice with loss of Znf238 die at birth Essen, Essen, Germany, 8Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, with neocortical defects but a brain-specific knock-out of this gene in mice Paris, France, 9Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute for Child and Adolescent causes microcephaly, reduced thickness of the cortex and agenesis of the Neuropsychiatry, Pisa, Italy. corpus callosum. The ZBTB18 gene acts as a transcriptional repressor of key de novo neurogenic genes such as NeuroG2 and NeuroD1 or ID2 and ID3. Here, we MEC
P2  RP
L10  DNAS
E1 L1
 TAZ AT- describe two patients carrying de novo mutations in ZBTB18, one patient PW6eA rPe1poPrLtX oNnA 3two giGrDlsI 1ca rrying a Xq28 microduplication, distal to with a missense mutation (p.R495G) and a further patient with a nonsense , overlapping for about 90Kb, including , , , mutation (p. E286
X). The first patient, a 23 years old woman, demonstrated , and genes. X chromosomes resulted randomly inactiva- a non-syndromic ID with mild facial dysmorphic signs. The other patient, a ted in the first case while the test was not-informative in the second. Our first 7 years old boy, showed ID, facial abnormalities, significant speech and mo- patient is the eldest daughter of an apparently healthyt,h non-consanguineous tor developmental delay. In both patients normal karyotypes (550 bands), couple. Birth weight and lengtht hwere around the 10 percentile and head array-CGH results and normal FMR1 gene analyses were shown. Our results circumference was 33cm (<<10 percentile). The girl had poor suction and indicated that ZBTB18 is responsible for neurogenic development and mu- anomalies of the face and extremities. At 19 months she had a generalized tations within ZBTB18 cause ID with variable phenotypic abnormalities. e1p6ile4ptic seizure followed by other episodes. Brain MESRIH shGo w2e0d1 d4ila |t aMtioILn AofN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P08
.81-S Klinefelter syndrome: 48, XXXY aneuploidy in a patient with mild mental retardation and psychotic personality traits two sisters. Our observation highlights the difficulties of interpretation of M. F. Hernandez-Amaris1, H. Pachajoa1,2; CNV particularly in case of large CNV inherited from an unaffected parent. 1Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia, 2Fundacion Clinica Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia. Moreover, regarding ongoing discussions about application of microarray in prenatal diagnosis, our case allowed us to postulate that the size is not sufficient to prejudge the pathogenicity of the CNV.  P09
.003-S Klinefelter syndrome is the most common aneuploidy in males with a pre- aCGH for neurological disorders in paediatric population at Clinical valence of 0.1-0.2% in the general population, which rises up to 3% in males Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana with fertility issues, although only 35% of cases are diagnosed. The affec- M. Volk1, L. Lovrecic1, S. Bertok2, B. Gnidovec Stražišar3, B. Peterlin1; ted males tend to be tall, have narrow shoulders, wide hips, sparse body 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department hair, gynecomastia and small testis; they present androgen deficiency and of Paediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University Children‘s azoospermia. Besides the previous physical characteristics, there have been Hospital, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Child, Adolescent & reports on the expression of behavioral and cognitive traits that tend to be Developmental Neurology, University Children‘s Hospital, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. very variable, possibly according to the type of aneuploidy, with an esta- blished association between the number of extra X chromosomes and cogni- tive deficit, and a not so clear association of different chromosomal variants Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a quick method to ana- of Klinefelter and psychotic behavior, with some authors proposing the ori- lyze the whole genome for imbalances at a higher resolution. In conventional gin of the extra chromosome as a determinant of different behavioral traits. diagnostic settings aCGH is used as a first-tier diagnostic test in the group Here is presented the case of a 13 years old male with karyotype 48,XXXY, of patients with unexplained developmental delay (DD) and/or idiopathic who besides presenting the classical physical features, is under psychiatric intellectual disability and/or dysmorphic features and/or multiple conge- treatment because of presenting trouble at home and at school for being nital anomalies. aggressive and impulsive. A review on the literature is made, concluding on AIM: Our aim was to evaluate the diagnostic yield/clinical utility of aCGH the importance of an opportune starting of hormonal therapy and a multi- in the group of children with neurological disorders at Clinical institute of disciplinary approach including endocrinology, pediatrics, genetics, neuro- Medical Genetics Ljubljana, tested in 2012-2013. psychology and psychiatry when needed.  P09
.001-S PATIENTS AND METHODS: We included 244 children, 91 with DD and/or 4H (Hypomyelination, Hypodontia and Hypogonadotropic dysmorphic features, 44 with epilepsy, 34 with autism, 45 with develop- Hypogonadism) syndrome caused by POLR3B mutations mental abnormalities of the CNS, and 30 with abnormal muscle tone. DNA F. Faletra1, E. Rubinato2, S. Nieder2, G. Bernard3, P. Gasparini1,2; was hybridized to Agilent 180K or 60K Human CGH microarrays. Discove- 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy, red genomic imbalances were interpreted according to the data in Internet 2University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Departments of Pediatrics Montreal Children‘s Hospital, McGill University Heath Center, Montreal, QC, Canada. databases (ISCA, DECIPHER, ECARUCA) and scientific publications cited in PubMed. RESULTS: Altogether, 37 pathogenic copy number variations (CNVs) were Leukodystrophies are a heterogeneous group of inherited neurodegenerati- found that could explain the phenotype of patients (Table 1). In addition, ve disorders characterised by alterations of Central Nervous System white 26 variants of unknown significance (VUS) were detected, most of them de mPOaLttRe3r.A SeverPaOl LclRin3iBc al forms have been described and genes involved in novo. Eleven patients (4,5%) had complex CNVs. generating the hypomyelinating leukodystrophy, but recently, mutations in CONCLUSION: We found out that pathogenic CNVs were causative in 15% and genes have been reported to cause a specific syndro- of cases with neurological disorders with/or without dysmorphic features me named 4H characterized by the association of the hypomyelination with or CNS developmental abnormalities. Our data demonstrate that aCGH is an hypodontia and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. We visited a 27-year-old important diagnostic tool in neuropediatrics. Table 1. CNVs in different phenotype groups female born from a non consanguineous mating with a leukodystrophy and Diagnostic an unlikely clinical / endocrinological diagnosis of Pelizaus - Merzbacher Number of tested Pathogenic Yield Phenotype VUS syndrome. Her phenotype was characterized by teeth alterations (neona- patients CNV (pathogenic tal tooth and permanence of deciduous dentition), thin hair, high myopia, CNVs) DD with or without hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and minor dysmorphic features. Moreo- 91 22 10 24.2% dysmorphic features ver, a gradual, but consistent motor and cognitive deterioration was noted. Developmental abnormalities Putting together all the clinical, radiological and phenotipic characteristics of the CNS 45 5 6 11.1% of the proband a clinical diPaOgnLRos3iAs of 4HP OsLyRn3dBrome has been made. Sub- Abnormal muscle tone 30 2 4 6.7% Epilepsy 44 6 3 13.6% sequently, a Sanger sequence of the entire coding region and the fPlaOnLkRi3nBg Autism 34 2 3 5.9% exon/intron boundaries of and has been performPeOdL. RT3hBe  P09
.004-M analysis revealed the two mutations p.V523E and p.G695fs*5 in the Genetic analysis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the Slovenian gene. This case further expands the knowledge about the role of the population g Pe 0n 9e . 0in 0 2ge -Mnerating the 4H syndrome. K. Vrabec1, D. Glavač1, B. Rogelj2, M. Ravnik-Glavač1; 1Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute Jožef Štefan, Ljubljana, Slovenia. A familial 9q22.1q22.31 deletion of 3.8 Mb, challenging interpretation of large, inherited copy-number variation Background: A. C. tabet1, L. perrin1, S. Toujani1, J. Leger1, V. Vantalon1, C. dupont1, L. bouffard1, E. pipiras2, A. Delahaye2, B. Benzacken2, A. Verloes1; Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a complex neurodege- 1Robert Debre Hospital APHP, paris, France, 2Jean Verdier Hospital APHP, Bondy, France. nerative disease characterised by progressive degeneration and loss of up- per and lower motor neurons in the cerebral cortex, brainstem SaOnDd 1spFinUaSl cToArRdD lBePading Cto9 OdReFa7th2 due to respiratory failure within 2-5 years from on- Chromosomal microarray analysis are now the first-line diagnostic test for sPeatt. iTehnets m aonsdt mcoemthmoodns :g enes involved in the disease process are , , patients presented with intellectual disability, autism, or multiple conge- and . nital anomalies. An ongoing challenge for the clinician and biologist is the Blood samples from 72 Slovenian AC L9
SO pRaFti7e2nts were interpretation of copy number variation. Many tools have been proposed collected and the exons of genes of interest were PCR amplified followed by in order to facilitate their interpretation including linking data to several Sanger sequencing on ABI310 Genetic Analyzer. In case of repeat- genome browsers, gene contains and prioritization, inheritance of the copy- pRreismueltds P: CR was performed folloSwODed1 bFyU frSagTmARenDtB lPength aCn9aOlyRsFis7 2on ABI310 number variation (CNV) and the size of the variant. Indeed, large CNV (>500 Genetic Analyzer. Results were analyzeSdO uDs1ing Gene Scan software. kb) are supposed to be strongly associated with morbid consequences. We Genotyping of genes , FUS, TARD BaPnd revealed report on a large 9q22.1q22.31 deletion of 3.8 Mb identified by whole ge- some changes in the DNA sequence. In gene two mutations (V15M and nome SNP array (HumanCytoSNP-12, Illumina) in a 6 year old girl presen- G94C) weFreU Sdetected. Sequencing oTf ARD BaPnd genes did not reveal ted with growth retardation and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder any amino acid changes. Although two substitutions were detected, R522R (ADHD). Neuropsychological evaluation excluded a mental retardation. The (G>A) in  C9
OR aFn7d2  L330
L (A>G) in . The latter was not previously deletion encompassed 24 genes, was inherited from her apparently nor- dCeosnccrliubseido. nIns: 2 ALS patients we detected expansion of repeats in the first mal father. Nevertheless, the familial history was marked by hyperactivity intron of . and dyslexia in the father’s childhood. The older sister presented also with This study represents first genetic analysis of Slovenian ALS ADHD and carried the same deletion. Grandparents will be further analyzed. patients. Our findings are in concordance with other studies provided on We discuss the implication of this CNV inE tShHe aGb n2o0rm1a4l p| hMenIoLtAypNe ,o IfT tAheL Y |E WuroWpeWan. EASLSH pGat.iOenRtsG. Of these four analyzed genes repeat expansi1on6 5inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Institute“, Gatchina, Russian Federation.  C9
ORF72 remains the most common cause of ALS although for the majority o Pf 0 c 9a .s 0e 0s 5 t -h Se main causes are yet to be revealed. While amyloid-beta-protein (Aβ) has been implicated in development of Aging-related genes modulate the early altered expression in young ADlrzohseoipmhielra’ sm deilsaenaosgea, sttheer exact functional role of amyloid precursor prote- 3xTg-AD mice hippocampi: a whole transcriptome approach in (APP) is still unclear. In our study, neuromuscular junction of transgenic M. D‘Aurora1,2, S. Sperduti1,2, L. D‘Onofrio1,2, A. Granzotto2, S. L. Sensi1,2, L. Stuppia3,2, V. lines was used as a model to analyze changes in Gatta3,2; presynaptic function caused by APP overexpression. Miniature excitatory 1Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, “G. d’Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy, junction potentials (mEJPs) were recorded intracellularly from muscles 6 2Center of Excellence on Aging (Ce.S.I.), Chieti, Italy, 3Department of Psychological, and 7 in third instar larvae at room temperature in H L3
 solution. Confo- Humanities and Territorial Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, “G. cal microscopy with cytochemistry was also used. It was obseArvPePd that the d’Annunzio” University, Chieti, Italy. mEJP amplitude distribution in control was bimodal with peaks at 0.46 mV and 0.74 mV; only rare giant mEJPs were observed. Human gene ex- pression in motor neurons decreased mean mEJPs frequency (p<0.01) from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a multifactorial neurological condition asso- 2.5/s in control up to 1.6/s, while fraction of giant mEJPs (mean amplitu- ciated with a genetic profile that is still not completely understood. In this de 1.41 AmPVP) incrβe-asseecdre tuaps et o 29%. In addition, enhanced axon branching study, using a whole gene microarray approach, we investigated age-de- and decreased expression of synaptobrevin was observed. Co-expression of pendent gene expression profile changes occurring in the hippocampus of human and genes (production of Aβ and decrease in APP young and old transgenic AD (3xTg-AD) and wild type (WT) mice. The aim level) recovered both mean mEJPs frequency and quantity of giant mEJPs to of the study was to assess similarities between aging- and AD-related modi- control values. The resting membrane potentials, time course oDf mroEsoJPpsh ialas fications of gene expression and investigate possible interactions between well as peaks of their amplitudes bimodal distribution never differs signi- the two processes. ficantly from control line. Distributions of mEJPs latencies in all Global gene expression profiles of hippocampal tissue obtained from 3xTg- lines were best fitted as a mono-exponential decay as predicted by the Pois- AD and WT mice at 3 and 12 months of age (m.o.a.) were analyzed by hier- son model. Our data suggests that APP overexpression disturbs molecular archical clustering. Interaction among transcripts was then studied with the machinery of vesicular exocytosis without alteration in the random nature Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software, a tool that discloses functional of spontaneous release. Supported by St.Petersburg State University grants networks and/or pathways associated with sets of specific genes of inte- #1.50.1621.2013 and #1.38.231.2014. rest.  P09
.008-M Cluster analysis revealed the selective presence of hundreds of upregulated An increase in X chromosome aneuploidy rates in the Alzhemer‘s and downregulated transcripts. Functional analysis showed transcript in- disease brain can hallmark both neurodegeneration and aging volvement mainly in neuronal death and autophagy, mitochondrial functio- Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, T. Liehr4, I. Y. Iourov1,2,5; 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, ning, intracellular calcium homeostasis, inflammatory response, dendritic 2Institute of Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian spine formation, modulation of synaptic functioning, and cognitive decline. Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Thus, over-expression of AD-related genes (such as mutant APP, P S1
, and Federation, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 5Department of Medical tau, the three genes that characterize our model) appears to favor modi- Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, fications of additional genes that are involved in AD development and pro- Moscow, Russian Federation. gression. The study also showed overlapping changes in 3xTg-AD at 3 m.o.a. and WT mice at 12 m.o.a., thereby suggesting altered expression of aging-related ge- Post-zygotic mosaic aneuploidy is common in the normal and diseased hu- n Pe 0s 9 t .0ha 0t 6 o -Mccurs earlier in 3xTg-AD mice. man brain. Somatic chromosomal mosaicism affecting the brain is, probably, The role of p35/CDK5 regulation by miR-15/107 family in the result of disturbances of adult neurogenesis/gliogenesis during the early Alzheimer’s disease ontogeny. It was proposed that aneuploidy of the brain is somehow involved S. Moncini1, M. Lunghi1, A. Valmadre1, F. Fontana2, M. A. Denti2, P. Riva1, M. Venturin1; in pathogenesis of neurodegenerative brain disorders including Alzheimer’s 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale - Università degli disease (AD). Here, we have analyzed X chromosome aneuploidy (a feature Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Centre for Integrative Biology, Università degli Studi di of aged cell populations) in the brain tissues of females with/without AD. Trento, Trento, Italy. Molecular cytogenetic analyses were performed by multiprobe/quantitative FISH and interphase chromosome-specific multicolor banding (ICS-MCB) in 10 AD and 10 age/sex matched control samples, scoring 160,000 cells per Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by the presence of β-amyloid each sample set. In AD, the mean rate of aneuploidy (2.79%, 95% CI 1.88- plaques and neurofibrillary tangles of hyperphosphorylated Tau. CDK5 ki- 3.69) was two times higher than in control (1.32%, 95% CI 0.92- 1.71%); P nase has a key role in abnormal phosphorylation of Tau and β-Amyloid Pre- =0.013 (Mann-Whitney U-test). An AD sample demonstrated mosaic aneu- cursor Protein (APP). CDK5 is activated by p35, encoded by CDK5R1, whose ploidy (X chromosome loss) confined to the hippocampus in about 10% of expression can be modulated by miR-103/107, members of the miR-15/107 cells. More than 75% of cells with X chromosome aneuploidy were NeuN- group, a family of microRNAs involved in AD pathogenesis. negative (non-neuronal cells; glia and, probably microglia). These prelimi- In our study, we observed a significant reduction of p35 levels in cells trans- nary data indicate that somatic (post-zygotic) chromosome instability cau- fected with miR-103/107, -15a and -16 precursors compared to control, ses large-scale genomic variation in a significant proportion of hippocampal while the transfection with antisense LNA molecules for miR-15/107 group cells in AD. In context of a causal relationship between brain aging and AD leads to increased CDK5R1 transcript and p35 levels, suggesting the action pathogenesis, our findings suggest that X chromosome aneuploidy can con- of the whole miR-15/107 family on CDK5R1 expression. tribute to both brain aging and neurodegeneration in females with AD. We We thus hypothesize that reduced levels of miR-15/107 in AD can lead to speculate that mosaic aneuploidy in the brain is a new non-heritable genetic Tau and APP hyperphosphorylation via upregulation of p35 levels and con- factor predisposing to AD. Supported by BLR 11/002, the Russian Federati- sequent enhanced CDK5 activity. In order to test this hypothesis, we are stu- on President Grant (MD-4401.2013.7), and RFBR 12-04-0021.  P09
.009-S dying CDK5R1 and miR-15/107 expression and the CDK5 activity on Tau Genetic analysis of Angiogenin gene in Italian patients with and APP in frozen brain tissues (hippocampus, temporal cortex and cere- Alzheimer’s disease bellum) from 12 AD patients and 7 control individuals. In the temporal cor- S. Gagliardi1, A. Davin2, P. Bini3, E. Sinforiani4, L. Polito2, A. Guaita2, L. Benussi5, R. tex and hippocampus most miRNAs are downregulated in AD compared to Ghidoni5, C. Cereda1; control samples, while in the cerebellum all miRNAs show a similar expres- 1C. Mondino National Neurological Institute,lab. of Experimental Neurobiology, Pavia, sion between AD patients and controls, with the exception of miR-107 and Italy, 2Golgi Cenci Foundation, Abbiategrasso, Italy, 3C. Mondino National Neurological miR-15a which are more expressed in AD patients. Interestingly, CDK5R1 Institute, Division of General Neurology, Pavia, Italy, 4C. Mondino National Neurological mRNA levels are higher in AD hippocampus, but not in temporal cortex and Institute, Laboratory of Neuropsychology/UVA, Pavia, Italy, 5NeuroBioGen Lab- Proteomics Unit, IRCCS Centro San Giovanni di Dio- Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. cerebellum tissues, compared to controls. Project supported by FIRB2008 grant (RBFR0895DC_002).  P09
.007-S Human APP overexpression alters spontaneous quantal release at Background. Despite enormous investigative efforts, the pathological basis Drosophila larvae neuromuscular synapse for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) remains unclear. It has been suggested that AD A. N. Vasiliev1, E. A. Guseva1, G. A. Kislik2, V. V. Kravtsova1, S. V. Sarantseva2, I. I. Krivoi1; is mediated by pathological angiogenesis. Angiogenin is a angiogenic ribo- 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2B.P. nuclease whose activity is related to its ability in regulating ribosomal RNA Kontantinov Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, National Research Centre „Kurchatov (rRNA) transcription [Cronin 2006]. Mutations in the coding region of ANG 166 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, (ITEnAtrLeYz G| eWneW IDW 2.8 E3
S) HhaGve. ObeRenG detected in Amyotrophic Lateral SclerosisABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (ALS) and Parkinson’s disease (PD). A decreased level of ANG protein was gnificant aberrations (microdeletions and/or microduplications) ranging in found in AD patients serum [Kim 2012]. Objectives. to investigate the role size from 0.015 to 31.6 Mb and encompassing importantC goenncelsu sreiolant:ed with of the ANG gene in AD. Methods. Genetic analysis of ANG gene was done in syndromic microcephaly. 25/50 patients (50%) had abnormal MRI findings a cohort of 509 AD patients and 417 healthy volunteers over 65 years of and in 19 of 25, arrays-CGH revealed pathogenic CNVs. Array- age using Sanger sequencing of the coding regions. Results. Genetic analy- CGH contributes to the elucidation of undefined syndromic microcephalic sis showed the presence of a nonsynonymous mutation in heterozygosis in cases, by permitting the discovery of plausible novelmicrodeletion and/or position g.2162012 causing the change of a lysine to a Stop codon (K73X). microduplication syndromes and contributing to more precise genotype- This new mutation was found in two AD patients (0.48% of the whole AD phenotype correlations.  P09
.012-M cohort): patient 1 is a man, 69 years old, with family history of dementia; Exome sequencing reveals a new CLN5 mutation in an adult form of patient 2 is a woman, 74 years old, with no familiarity for AD or dementia. cerebellar ataxia No mutations were found in control subjects. Discussion and conclusion. C. Mancini1, S. Nassani2, Y. Guo3, E. Giorgio1, A. Calcia1, X. Liu4, E. Di Gregorio5, S. This study suggests that ANG gene mutations may be associated with rare Cavalieri5, E. Pozzi1, A. Brussino1, Y. Xie4, F. Wang3, L. Tian3, W. Chen4, B. Nmezi6, Q. S. cases of AD. Interestingly, the K73X mutation may be specific for AD, since Padiath6, H. Jiang4,7, A. Kyttala8, N. R. Pizio2, H. Hakonarson3,9,10, A. Brusco1,5; it has not been found in the numerous genetic studies on ALS and PD so far 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Italy, Torino, Italy, 2U .O. reported, proposing an important specificity mutation-disease. Neurology Ospedale di Lavagna, Genova, Italy, Genova, Italy, 3Center for Applied  P09
.010-M Genomics, The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, Dog as an animal model for idiopathic epilepsy: identification of 4BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 5A.O. Città della Salute e della Scienza, S.C.D.U. common risk variants in the ADAM23 gene Medical Genetics, Torino, Italy, 6Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of L. L. E. Koskinen1,2,3, E. H. Seppälä1,2,3, M. Arumilli1,2,3, P. Jokinen1,2,3, E. Nevalainen1,2,3, R. Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 7The Guangdong Viitmaa4, T. Jokinen4, H. Lohi1,2,3; Enterprise Key Laboratory of Human Disease Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Research Programs Unit, Molecular China, 8National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL) Public Health Genomics Unit, Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Veterinary FIN-00251, Helsinki, Finland, 9Division of Human Genetics, The Children’s Hospital of Biosciences and Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 10Department of Pediatrics, The Perelman Finland, 4Department of Clinical Veterinary Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Finland. CLN5 mutations (13q21.1-q32) are reported in severe autosomal recessive Idiopathic epilepsy (IE) is a common neurological disease in human and dog. forms of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (vLINCL, OMIM*608102), charac- Relatively few risk genes have been identified for common IE to date. We terized by rapid death of cortical neurons and intracellular accumulation have used dog as an animal model for human focal and generalised epilepsy of autofluorescent lipopigment material. The clinical course includes pro- to identify disease risk genes. The seizure characteristics are similar bet- gressive intellectual and motor deterioration, seizures, and visual failure. ween the two species and reduced genetic heterogeneity of purebred dogs Typical CLN5 forms have an onset between 4-7 yrs. is advantageous for genetic studies. Recently, we identified a risk locus for IE We describe two italian siblings affected by an adult form of ataxia, who pre- in the Belgian Shepherd breed on CFA37 in a genome-wide association stu- sented with a homogeneous phenotype characterized by onset between 54- dy (GWAs). GWAs meta-analysis of 158 cases and 179 controls in three other 56 yrs, walk difficulties, dysarthria. Progressive cognitive decline associated breeds suggested association to the same locus (p=2.9e-07). To investigate to visual loss, ascribed to glaucoma, appeared only after few years of disea- this locus further, we performed targeted next-generation sequencing at the se. Neurological evaluation at 61yrs. showed nystagmus and head/truncal locus. Twelve Belgian Shepherd cases and twelve controls were selected for tremor, and no sensory-motor neuropathy. MRI showed severe cerebellar the sequencing based on homozygosity for the risk and non-risk haplotypes. atrophy and mild cortical atrophy of both hemispheres. Thirty-six variants unique for the cases were identified in the sequencing Exome sequencing identified a homozygous c.935G>A (p. S312
N) transition experiment. All variants located in the ADAM23 gene region. Twenty-seven in CLN5 gene, never reported before nor present in Exome variant Server variants were selected for validation in 235 cases and 320 controls from (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/). Alignment of orthologous sequences and four dog breeds. Association analysis yielded a strong signal at the locus in silico softwares predict the substitution Ser>Asn to be disease causing. (p=5.3e-11). Haplotype analysis suggests a common risk haplotype in all We studied the subcellular localization of the mutated protein, transfecting studied breeds. This indicates that there is a common genetic risk factor for the CLN5* S312
N-pCMV plasmid in Hek293 cells: as reported for vLINCL epilepsy in several dog breeds. ADAM23 interacts with LGI1 and LGI2, both mutations, p. S312
N seemed to affect trafficking and maturation of the CLN5 known causative genes for Mendelian forms of epilepsy, and plays a role in protein, resulting in its accumulation in ER compartment and indicating that synaptic transmission. Based on the genetic association and gene function, misfolding may be the major cause for its retention. A  P0
D 9A .M 012 13 -i Ss a potential risk gene for epilepsy. We speculate this mutation acts as mild or modifier genes/epigenetics fac- High resolution array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array- tors may contribute to this late clinical onset. CGH) in syndromic microcephaly: clinical interpretation and Our results further demonstrated the power of exome sequencing in iden- genotype-phenotype correlation tifying genes disease causing, especially when linked to atypical pheno- E. Tsoutsou1, M. Tzetis1, K. Giannikou1,2,3, S. Psoni1, V. Oikonomakis1,2, E. Kanavakis1,2, H. t Py 0p 9e .s 0. 13-S Fryssira1; Genetic and functional studies of autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) 2Research Institute for the Study of Genetic and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, J. Pilliod1, J. Lavie1, S. Moutton2, I. Coupry1, E. Maurat1, M. Anheim3, M. Barth4, A. “Aghia Sophia, Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Guichet4, C. Rooryck-Tambo1, J. Bourron1, B. Arveiler1, S. Forlani3, F. Lesne3, F. Mochel3, K. Foundation, Athens, Greece. N‘Guyen5, C. Thauvin6, A. Tataru7, G. Lesca8, A. Brice3, D. Lacombe1, G. Stevanin3, A. Durr3, Introduction: R. Rossignol1, G. Benard1, C. Goizet1; 1Univ. Bordeaux, Maladies Rares : Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM)/EA Microcephaly can be either isolated with no additional ano- 4576, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU Pellegrin, Service of Genetics, Bordeaux, France, malies, or it may coexist with other neurological entities and/or multiple 3Pitie congenital anomalies, known as syndromAici mm:icrocephaly. Although many 4 ‐Salpetriere Hospital, INSERM/5UPMC UMR_ S975
, Paris, France, CHU Angers, syndromic cases can be classified based on the characteristic phenotype, Service of Genetics6, Angers, France, Timone Hospital, Depar7tment of Medical Genetic, some others require further investigation. The present study describes Marseille, France, CHU Dijon, Gen8etic center, Dijon, France, Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, the application of high resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization Service of Genetics, Paris, France, CHU Lyon, Service of Genetics, Lyon, France. (array-CGH), as a diagnostic tool for the study of patients with syndromic SACS ARSACS is the second most frequent form of hereditary spastic ataxia after microcephaly in order to identify clinically relevaMnet tchoopdys :number variati- Friedreich‘s ataxia. ARSACS is caused by mutations in the gene enco- ons (CNVs). We evaluate the MRI findings with patients’ clinical profile and ding for sacsin which is partially localized to the mitochondria. The function the underlying molecular findings. Material and From a cohort of sacsin2 i0s1 s2till poorly understood. Recently, the mitochondrial network ab- of 210 unrelated patients, who were referred for genetic evaluation due to norSmACaSl was observed in immortalized fibroblasts of two Quebec‘s patients syndromic microcephaly of unknown etiology, accompanied by at least one (Girard, ). We searched for point mutations and gene dosage anomalies further pathological manifestation, 50 undiagnosed cases underwent array- in using direct sequencing and customized CGH array in 325 patients CGH analysis. In all cases previous standard karyotype as well as other gene- presenting with progressive spastic ataxia and age at onset < 45 years re- tic tests were negative. HRigehs ureltsso:lution 4x180K and 1x244K Agilent arrays cruited through the SPATAX network. We obtained primary cultures from (>170.000 and >236.000 probes respectively, average resolution 8.9Kb) skin fibroblasts from ten ARSACS patients. On these fibroblasts ®we perfor- were used in this study. In 32 out of 50 patients (64%) featuring microcephaly among other phenotypic anEoSmHalGie s2, 0ar1ra4y -|C MGHI LreAvNea,l eIdT Asi-LY |m WedW a lWab.eEliSngH oGf t.hOe RmGitochondrion using the Mitotracker Green . We 1id 6en 7- tified 42 different mutations in a total of 32 patients carrying two mutationsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SACS  P09
.016-M Eight new ATM gene alterations in Polish patients with ataxia- in . Customized CGH array on the two only patients carrying one hete- telangiectasia rozygous truncating mutation were revealed no anomalies. The diagnosis of M. Podralska1, A. Stembalska2, R. Ślęzak2, A. Lewandowicz-Uszyńska3, B. Pietrucha4, ARSACS was confirmed in 13% of our cohort, the largest series of ARSACS S. Kołtan5, J. Wigowska-Sowińska6, J. Pilch7, M. Mosor1, I. Ziółkowska-Suchanek1, A. patients reported. Mean age at onset was 4 years but late-onset > 25 years Dzikiewicz-Krawczyk1, R. Słomski1; was observed. Although demyelinating neuropathy and cerebellar atrophy 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznań, Poland, 2Wroclaw Medical University, Department of Genetics, Wrocław, Poland, 3Wroclaw Medical University, 3rd Department and Clinic were frequently associated with spastic ataxia, the clinical spectrum ap- of Pediatrics, Immunology and Rheumatology of Developmental Age, Wrocław, Poland, peared larger than previously. Analysis of the mitochondrial network in all 4Department of Immunology, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warszawa, patients’ fibroblasts revealed altered mitochondrial shape associated with a Poland, 5Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, Institute of Pediatrics, significant decrease of the mitochondrial mass. These alterations observed Medical Academy, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 6Department of Developmental Neurology in the mitochondrial network of ARSACS patients bring a real interest to University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 7Department of Child Neurology, Medical study the role of sacsin regarding the mitochondrion. University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.  P09
.014-M The 901bis pedigree of ataxia is linked to SCA37 locus H. San Nicolàs Fernàndez1, J. Corral Seijas1, L. De Jorge López1, B. Campos Estela1, M. Corral Juan2, C. Roig Arnall3, I. Sánchez Díaz2, C. Serrano Munuera4, A. Matilla Dueñas2, Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT, MIM#208900) is neurodegenerative and immu- V. Volpini Bertran1; nodeficiency disorder, is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. AT 1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, IDIBELL, L‘Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, results from mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. 2Health Sciences Research Institute Germans Trias I Pujol, IGTP, Badalona, Spain, We studied the entire ATM gene coding sequence for mutations using PCR- 3Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital de Martorell, HD, PCR-SSCP and MLPA techniques. 38 changes in ATM sequence were Martorell, Spain. detected in 25 AT families. The mutation types are diverse, including 18 nonsense (58,1%), 10 splicing (32.3%), 2 missense alterations (6,4%) and 1 large genomic deletion (3,2%). Only 2 mutations have been found in ho- Autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a clinically, gene- mozygous state ( [c.4007_4008insA; c.4007_4008insA], [c.9021_9022insA; tically and pathologically heterogeneous group of movement disorders c.9021_9022insA]). Most frequent mutations among our AT patients are: defined by variable degrees of cerebellar ataxia and often accompanied c.6095G>A (7 times), c.7630-2A>C (6), c.5932G>T (5), c.7010_7011delGT by additional cerebellar and non-cerebellar symptoms. The clinical sym- (2). Several families had newly diagnosed DNA alterations in Polish ptoms are triggered by neurodegeneration of the cerebellum and its relay population (8/38; 21,1%). New detected variants were: c.8441delC, connections. Recently we report the clinical and genetic findings from Spa- c.6145T>G, c.434T>G, c.6754_6754delAfsX5, c.4007_4008insA, c.7606G>A, nish kindred (901 family) presenting a cerebellar phenotype characterised c.3402+30_3402+32delATC, deletion of 62 and 63 exons of gene. The effects by ataxia, atypical early-altered vertical eye movements, variable severity, of two missense changes were predicted to be pathogenic by in silico ana- no evidence of anticipation, age at onset ranging from 35 to 64 years and lysis. The c.3402+30_3402+32delATC was identified in 3 AT families (12%) Cranial CT or MRI showing cerebellar atrophy in sPe veral patients without and none of control samples. According to data from the NHLBI Exome brainstem involvement. We have found significant linkage with the highest Sequencing Project the ATC deletion allele has a frequency of 0.11% total two-point LOD score Zmax = 3.831 at theta = 0.00 ( < 0.001), between the alleles studied and is not observed in the homozygous state. In this study, locus trait and D1 S2742
, assuming an age-dependent penetrance model we confirmed status of recurrent mutations, but also detected new changes with twelve liability classes. Multipoint analysis and haplotype reconstruc- in ATM sequence. Most of the Polish patients are compound heterozygotes tion traced this novel SCA locus to a 0.66-cM interval flanked by D1 S200
 and none of them having the same combination of mutations, what makes and D1 S2742
 (multipoint Zmax = 6.052). The Human Genome Nomenclature molecular diagnostic more difficult. Committee (HGNC) has assigned it as SCA37. We presented here another Supported by grant NN401098240 from the Ministry of Science and Higher ataxia pedigree (901bis family) with 5 affected members over a total of 17 Education in Poland. individuals, which show a multipoint lod score of 3.0 to respect the same  P09
.017-S genetic markers used in the 901 family. This family comes from the same Finding patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) which are region than the previous 901 and probably has a common founder ancestor. heterozygotes for Atp7b gene in Russia E. Y. Ilyechova1, M. N. Karpenko1,2, I. V. Milyukhina1, L. V. Puchkova2,1; The linkage results from this pedigree reinforces the hypotheses of linkage 1Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. from the same ataxia locus trait localized in 1p and named SCA37.  P09
.015-S Petersburg State Polytechnical University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation. Reduction of neurological symptoms in Ataxia Teleangiectasia patients by Intra-Erythrocyte infusion of Dexamethasone (EryDex) L. Chessa, M. Piane, IEDAT-01 trial group; Significant part of PD patients are heterozygotes for Wilson’s disease (WD). University La Sapienza, Roma, Italy. WD is a monogenic, autosomal recessive disease characterized by toxic copper accumulation in brain and liver, which results in hepatolenticular degeneration. The major biochemical manifestation of WD is reducing of Ataxia Teleangiectasia (AT) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized serum copper status (CS) indexes: copper and ceruloplasmin concentration by early onset ataxia, oculocutaneous telangiectasias, immunodeficiency, re- as well as oxidase activity. Atp7b gene encoding copper transporting ATPase current infections, radiosensitivity and cancer proneness. No drug therapies  P1
 type that takes part in copper excretion and cuproenzimes metallation are approved for treating AT; recent observational studies showed benefi- in Golgi complex is responsible for WD. In heterozygotes for WD, CS is ½ of cial effect of steroid treatment. wide type. Common mutations in AT P7
B of patients with WD and PD are To avoid side effects of long-term steroid administration we developed a not the same. method for encapsulation of dexamethasone sodium phosphate into auto- The blood sera of 50 PD patients without regard to gender with severity in- logous erythrocytes (EryDex) allowing the slow release of dexamethasone dexes 1-4 (Hoehn and Yahr scale) were analyzed for copper (FAAS), cerulo- for up to one month. plasmin (immunoelectrophoresis and immunoblotting), and SOD3 (ELISA) The efficacy and safety of EryDex treatment was evaluated in an open-label, concentration as well as oxidase and SOD3 activities (p-phenylenediamine single-arm study on 22 AT patients (F:M=1) confirmed molecularly, with a and quercetin assay, respectively). Multivariate statistical analysis showed monthly infusion for six consecutive months. Primary efficacy assessment that low levels of CS correlated with early onset of PD. Analysis of the pri- was the International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) which best mary structure of the exon 14, which encodes a nucleotide binding domain score is 0, while the worst 100. Significant improvements in ICARS were no- of the ATPase and contains the most common mutation associated with WD, ted in the intention to treat (ITT) population (n=22; p=0.02) and in patients showed that none of the 30 patients with PD (who are putative heterozy- completing the study (PP, n=18; p=0.01), with a mean reduction of 4 points gous for WD according to biochemical parameters) contain these mutations. for ITT and 5.2 points for PP. EryDex was well tolerated, without steroid However,  C1079
G was found in 11 patients of this group. This mutation in side effects. patients with WD has not been described previously. At the end of the trial four patients continued Erydex treatment for 27 Revealing heterozygous WD carriers among the PD patients may permit to months (until now) and their ICARS variations were compared to those treat these cases of PD more specifically.  P09
.018-M of four AT who discontinued. A mean ICARS score reduction of 11 points Genetic contribution to Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (range -4 to -19) was detected in the patients of the extended study, while (ADHD) in 320 Spanish patients a mean increase of 7 points (range + 1 to +14) was found in controls. This C. Gómez Sánchez1, R. Riveiro Álvarez1, V. Soto Insuga1, M. Rodrigo Moreno1, P. Tirado confirms the safety of infusion therapy suggesting that Erydex treatment Requero2, J. Carballo Belloso1, C. Ayuso García1; could delay the progression of the disease. 1Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain. 168 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Introduction Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the mising several cellular mechanisms, namely transcription. Gene expression most common neurobehavioral disorders of childhood, characterized by profiling arrays have the potential to contribute to advances in the under- age-inapprop riate levels of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity. De- standing of mechanisms related with disease pathophysiology, often sugge- spite its high heritability (76%), the results of association studies have Pbaeetin- sting new potential targets for treatment. In MJD, however, the analysis of einnctosn asnisdte Mntetahnodd psoor replicated. The aim of this study was to replicate in a gene expression changes has been limited to animal and cellular models; Spanish cohort, the association of previously reported gene variants. thus far, transcriptional changes in MJD patients have not been investigated. 324 children and adolescents (6-17 yeaDrAsT o1ld:) diagnosed In the present study we used microarrays to evaluate a global gene expres- with ADHD according to DSM-IV-TR, and 344 controls wDeRreD 2re:cruited. Pati- sion profile in blood samples of 12 MJD patients, compared with 12 normal DenRtDs 4and controls were genotyped for 23 genetic vaSrLiaCn6tAs:4 rs2550948, controls. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) software was used to analyze the rs261759, rs26 5H2T5R121A, VNTR-3UTR, NVETN1T:R -Intron8; rs 1A8D0R0A429A7; most dysregulated pathways in MJD. Thirty pathways were found to be dys- : rs3758653, VNTRL-PEHxNon3-3, VNTR-Promotor, : VNTR-ProCmOoMtoTr:, regulated (log p-value False Discovery Rate (FDR) adjusted > 3); amongst VNTR-InFtrAoDnS-22:; : rs S7
N3A2 P22354
:7; rs28D3D8 C6840
, r5569; : these, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling is observed, with rs553668, rs1800544; : rs1397458, rs2305339, rs6551655; significantly dysregulated expression levels in 211 genes (p-value FDR adju- rs24 680; Resu lrtss498793; rs3746544; :rs6592961.Pearson’s sted < 0.05). mTOR has been described as influencing a variety of molecular X test, and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were used to assess genetic as- processes including protein synthesis and autophagy. Moreover, rapamycin, sociation. The most significant associations found in this study which inhibits the activity of mTOR, is pointed as having neuroprotective were: NET1-rs28386840 A/T genotype was significantly increased in both effects in several neurodegenerative disorders, mainly by induction of au- ADHD patients (OR:1.54D, pis: c0u.0ss2i7o)n a anndd c oCmonbcinluedsi-oAnDHD subtype (OR:1.72, tophagy. The present results highlight the potential of mTOR inhibitors as p:0.0043). DAT1-5/5 genotype resulted increased in inattentive-ADHD pati- potential therapeutic compounds that should be investigated for MJD.  P09
.021-S ents (OR:2.13, p:0.052) The difficulties found Three SNP haplotypes in Neuroligins may correlate to autism identifying risk ADHD associated gene variants could be explained by the susceptibility heterogeneity and complexity of this disorder. Further studies designed to M. Landini1, A. Mezzelani1, I. Merelli1, M. Raggi2, F. Ciceri2, L. Villa2, M. Molteni2, A. examine the contribution of gene-gene or gene-environment interaction are Marabotti3,1, L. Milanesi1; needed. In addition, the use of endophenotypes instead of DSM-IV diagnoses 1Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Segrate (Milano), Italy, could improve the detection of genetic effects. 2Scientific Institute, IRCSS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 3Dept. Chemistry  P09
.019-S and Biology, University of Salerno, Fisciano (SA), Italy. Variation in the phenotype of Machado-Joseph disease (MJD/SCA3): the role of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroups A. Ramos1,2, C. Santos3, M. Raposo1,2, M. de Araújo1,2, M. Lima1,2; 1Centre of Research in Natural Resources (CIRN), Department of Biology, University of Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder showing a striking sex bias with the Azores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC), a male:female ratio of 4:1. Despite some genetic variants are causative for University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Unitat d’Antropologia Biològica, Departament autism in about 17% of cases, its etiology is still largely unknown. Increa- BABVE, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. sing evidences highlight the possible role of environmental factors, such as infections, xenobiotics and drugs in enhancing autism genetic susceptibili- ty. Among genetic variants, we focused on the X-linked neuroligins that are Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in the pathogenesis of se- involved in synaptic plasticity, are mutated in a few number of autistic pa- veral neurodegenerative disorders, such as Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), tients, and are hemizygous in males. Hence we analyzed NLGN-3 and NLGN- a late onset poly-Q ataxia that results from an unstable expansion of a CAG 4X in 52 Italian autistic cases (male:female=4,6:1) and in 31 healthy siblings tract in the ATXN3 gene. The CAG expansion size is incompletely correlated (male:female=1:1,1) by Sanger sequencing. Among the other variants, in with the age at onset, highlighting the existence of genetic modifiers. Alt- NLGN-4X, we found 2 de novo SNPs and 3 SNPs in non-coding regions (1 hough the way by which mitochondria is involved in the neurodegenerative intronic and 2 in the 3’UTR), giving 2 different haplotypes: one was new and cascade is still unknown, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroup-specific one was already described in a non-specific mental retardation Chinese pa- polymorphisms have been associated to other poly-Q disorders. To evalu- tients. In NLGN-3, we found 3 already described intronic SNPs in haplotype ate whether mtDNA variation contributes to MJD phenotype, namely to age block. The 3 haplotypes have statistical significance in autistics comparing at onset (AO), we determined the mtDNA haplogroups in 113 MJD patients to the minor allele frequencies (MAF) from the 1000-Genomes Project CEU. with Azorean ancestry, by sequencing the mtDNA hypervariable region I. Interestingly, healthy siblings, half of which were female, have a middle sta- The frequency of mtDNA haplogroups in unrelated patients (n=68) was si- tistical significance between autistics and MAF-CEU. As these SNPs map to milar to the one previously described for the general Azorean population. non-coding regions, they could be involved in the genetic susceptibility to MJD patients classified as haplogroup J present a significantly earlier on- trigging environmental factors (probably lacking in siblings), and, being lo- set (mean AO of 33 years). Haplogroup W seems to have a protective ef- cated on X-chromosome, could explain the male prevalence of autism. ACK- fect, causing a delay in onset (mean AO of 51 years). Although haplogroup NOWLEDGEMENTS: Italian Ministry of Health “GR-2009-1570296” project, J has already been implicated in other neurodegenerative disorders, there Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research “InterOmics” Flag- are no previous reports of an association between haplogroup W and disea- ship project.  P09
.022-M se. In conclusion, our results suggest that mitochondrial single nucleotide Diagnostic utility of microarray analysis to detect rare CNVs in autism polymorphisms defining these haplogroups could modify AO in MJD. The spectrum disorders complete mitochondrial genome of MJD patients classified as J and W haplo- N. Brison1,2, S. Iqbal1, W. De la Marche3,2, J. Steyaert3,2, I. Noens4,2, S. Van Vooren5, G. Thijs5, group were further sequenced in order to better understand the impact of K. Devriendt1,2, H. Peeters1,2; the haplogroup-defining variants on mitochondrial function and their inter- 1Center for Human Genetics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Leuven Autism Research action in MJD phenotype. Consortium (LAuRes) , University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Adolescent  P09
.020-M and Child Psychiatry, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Parenting Transcriptional profile of Machado-Joseph Disease (MJD): mTOR and Special Education, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Cartagenia, Leuven, signaling pathway is dysregulated in blood cells of patients Belgium. M. Raposo1,2, C. Bettencourt3, G. Coppola4, A. Ramos1,2, N. Kazachkova1,2, A. Rodrigues5,6, Background: P. Maciel5,6, B. Bettencourt7,2, J. Bruges-Armas7,2, D. Geschwind4, M. Lima1,2; 1Center of Research in Natural Resources (CIRN), Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Department The genetic causes of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) are of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, heterogeneous and still unknown in the majority of cases. Copy number va- 4Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, riant (CNV) detection is part of routine clinical workup. An interesting para- University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Life and Health digm for clinical practice is that each rare CNV may account for only a small Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, University of Minho, proportion of variance in ASD at population level but may have largMea etfeferciatsl Braga, Portugal, 6ICVS/3B’s - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, ainn pda mrteictuhloard sfa:milies. We aim to evaluate family and patient specific charac- Portugal, 7Hospital de Santo Espírito da Ilha Terceira, SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, teristics that may alter the clinical utility of autism risk variants. Portugal. The study contains 466 clinically well characterized patients with ASD from 392 families. Individuals were genotyped by either Affyme- trix SNP 6.0 array, OGT Oligo array or Illumina Omni2.5-8v1 SNP array. Ge- Machado-Joseph disease (MJD; MIM #109150; ORPHA98757), or spino- notype data of each platform were preprocessed and normalized by limiting cerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3) is a protein misfolding-associated disease, the resolution to 200 Kb and developing customized analysis protocols per being the worldwide most prevalent autosomal dominant ataxia as well as platform to detect smaller variants in targeted regions. A filtering pipeline the second more common polyglutamine E(pSoHlyGQ) 2di0so1r4de |r .M AbILnoArmNa, lI cToAn-LY |s WpecWificW fo.Er SASHDG w.aOs RdeGveloped using standard and customized Carta1ge6n9ia formation of mutated ataxin-3, promotes a gain of a toxic function compro-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Results: Bench software applications. We present a family based study on Band-like brain calcification (BLC) or pseudo TORCH syndrome is a rare au- the validity of CNV detection in ASD using microarray analysis. The clinical tosomal recessive with distinctive clinical and neuroimaging. Severe micro- utility of this screening is evaluated for different parameteCros n(ecl.gu.s sipoonr:adic cephaly, early onset seizures, profound developmental delay together with versus familial ASD, IQ, comorbidity). In some cases, we found a better dia- band-like calcification in brain, simplified gyral pattern and polymicorgyria gnostic performance of the higher resolution platforms. We are the hallmark of the syndrome. In 2010 O’Driscoll et al. attributed BLC contribute to the diagnostic utility and indication of rare CNV detection in to homozygous mutation in occludin (OCLN) gene through a description of ASD families with respect to clinical presentation and family history. 5 families from a worldwide series including an Egyptian one. Since then, a  P09
.023-S single family was reported associated with extracranial phenotype namely Genetic evidence that hyperactive Th2 and NK immune pathways renal involvement due to cortical calcification. Herein we describe eight pa- contribute to the pathogenesis of Autism Spectrum Disorder I. S. Piras1,2, S. Gabriele1, V. Napolioni1, R. Sacco1, A. M. Persico1,2; tients derived from six Egyptian Families with BLC. All presented at early life 1Unit of Child and Adolescent NeuroPsychiatry & Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry with severe microcephaly, failure to acquired developmental skills, growth and Neurogenetics, University „Campus Bio-Medico“, Rome, Italy, 2Mafalda Luce Center arrest and mixed seizures types with predominance of the myoclonic. Pati- for Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Milan, Italy. ents showed a unique calcification pattern; subcortical band, basal ganglia, dentate nucleus and pons. Molecular analysis revealed that two families were linked to known genetic mutations while four families had novel mu- Converging evidence suggests that abnormal immunity is involved in the tations in OCLN gene. Three of our patients deceased at the end of the first pathophysiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) both in children and year of life. Interestingly, the single patient with novel mutation in exon 5 adults. Altered immune processes include ongoing neuroinflammation in had non-neurological manifestations including high imperforate anus and post-mortem brains, elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines in cerebrospinal genital anomalies. Further, he had the best life performance with fairly con- fluid and blood, altered immune cell function, presence of brain-specific trolled seizures and achieved few skills although no comparable neuroima- auto-antibodies, and dysregulated immune transcriptome. One strategy to ging findings were present. This study is considered the largest series with assess whether dysimmunity contributes to ASD pathogenesis or represents BLC from same ethnic group. Assigning more families will allow delineation a collateral by-standing effect is to investigate whether functional SNPs of the phenotype-genotype spectrum of BLC.  P09
.026-M known to influence immune gene expression or function are associated with Association study of 240,000 rare coding variants in bipolar patients ASD. We genotyped 484 simplex and 18 multiplex families with an ASD pro- and controls from Germany and Norway band at 34 known functional SNPs located in 26 immune genes involved in S. Herms1,2, P. Hoffmann1,2,3, T. W. Muehleisen3, S. Djurovic4, F. D. Degenhardt 2,5, A. aIlLl 4major immune patChTwLaAy4s. Statistically significant oppositeIL t4ransmission Forstner2,5, M. Rietschel6, M. M. Noethen5,2, O. Andreassen4, S. Cichon1,3,7; patterns bCeTtLwAe4en ASD and unaffected siblings were evident for rs2243250 1Genomics Research Group, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, ( ) and rs231775 ( ), with the combination of high expression Switzerland, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, and low , function alleles assoc iate TdN wFAith au ItFisNmG and the opposite Germany, 3Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Juelich, alleles overtransmitted to unaffected siblings. Similarly, at rs361525 and Juelich, Germany, 4KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital & Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of rs2430561 functional SNPs located inthe and genes, the combi- Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, nation of high expression alleles wIaLs4 assocCiTatLeAd4 with autismTN, wFAhile thIeF NoGp- 6Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health posite alleles were protective. These results indicate that common variants Mannheim, Univ. of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 7Division of Medical Genetics, conferring hyper-responsive Th2 ( and ) and NK ( and ) University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. activation also confer autism vulnerability. Hence previously-reported in- creases in plasma Th2 cytokine levels and NK cell activation are not mere by-standing effects, but are instead part of the pathophysiological cascade Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of bipolar disorder (BD), a high- r Pe 0s 9u .l 0ti 2n 4g - i Mn autistic disorder in a sizable subgroup of patients. ly heritable disorder of mood with a lifetime prevalence of approximately Array-CGH contribution to Child & Adolescent Neuropsychiatry: 0,5-1% in all populations world-wide, have identified several common gene- update and prospectives tic risk factors. It is currently unclear, to what extent low-frequency and rare C. Lintas1, S. Gabriele1, C. Picinelli2, I. S. Piras2, R. Sacco1, M. Verdecchia1, A. M. Persico1,2; variants contribute to disease development. A valid hypothesis seems to be 1Unit of Child and Adolescent NeuroPsychiatry & Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry that low-frequency and rare variants in coding gene regions have a higher and Neurogenetics, University „Campus Bio-Medico“, Rome, Italy, 2Mafalda Luce Center probability to have a functional (deleterious) effect. This subset of human for Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Milan, Italy. genetic variation might therefore be enriched for disease-relevant variants. The Illumina HumanExome arrays make particularly this window of genetic variation accessible for association studies. This array contains 240’000 rare Many behavioral disorders display prominent genetic underpinnings. We markers derived from exome sequencing. That array was used to test 1314 have thus introduced array-CGH analysis (Agilent, 180K) in our routine cli- bipolar patients (895 from Germany, 419 from Norway) and 2700 controls nical assessment of all autistic and cognitively impaired children, as well (2366 / 339). Genotypes were exproted from a single GenomeStudio project as in the presence of high familial loading and/or dysmorphology. Blood to minimize clustering artifacts. Statistical analysis was performed using samples were collected from 176 families and genetic counselling has al- Cochrane-Mantel-Hansel test statistics. Clusters for all associated variants ready been provided to 65 of them. Eight families are multiplex, yielding were checked by zCall and manually. The two variants with the strongest a total of 81 patients. Proband diagnoses include: 52 autism, 9 cognitive association to bipolar disorder were found in the gene SYN E2
. Interestingly, disabilities, 4 developmental delay, 4 generalized dyspraxia, 3 learning disa- common variants in another member of the same gene family (SYN E1
) had bilities and 9 other disorders. Patients were divided into 5 classes based shown genome-wide significant association in the discovery step of the first on array-CGH results: [1] certainly causal CNV, N=12 (15%); [2] probably mega-analysis of bipolar disorder performed by the international Psychia- causal CNV, N=23 (28%); [3] rare variant of uncertain interpretation, N=19 tric Genomics Consortium (PGC; Sklar et al. 2011). We are currently aiming (23%); [4] common variant without causal role, N=20 (25%); [5] negative to follow-up this and other strong findings of our analysis in independent result, N=7 (9%). Array-driven medical diagnostic work-up was prescribed samples of bipolar disorder genotyped on the HumanExome array.  P09
.027-S to 10 (12,3%) patients and 3 parents, while drug therapies or supplements Clinical profile of paediatric Brown-Vialetto-VanLaere syndrome were prescribed to 4 (7,5%) patients. The diagnostic work-up was positive M. Ryten1, C. Hammond1, M. Lim2, D. Josifova1; in 3 patients and 1 parent, while therapies were ineffective in 1 case and still 1Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Evelina Children’s Hospital, London, United pending evaluation in the other three. Array-CGH is thus a powerful clinical Kingdom. tool, provided its focus includes the functional role of duplicated or dele- ted genes, their presence in neurodevelopmental disorder databases and possible imprinting. Currently the main limitation is the translation of this Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere Syndrome (BVVLS) is an autosomal recessive knowledge into effective drug therapies. Array-CGH data will be especially neurological disorder presenting with progressive sensorineural hearing useful when drugs currently undergoing phase II-III trials and potentially loss and bulbar neuronopathy, followed by a mixed picture of upper and b Pe 0n 9e .0fi 2ci 5a -l S to specific subgroups of patients, will become available. lower motor neuron palsies. Until recently there has been no treatment Band-like brain calcification (BLC) or pseudoTORCH syndrome: A available for this progressive neurodegenerative disorder. However, the dis- report of six Egyptian families with expansion of the phenotypic and covery that it is caused by mutations in the riboflavin transporter genes, mutational spectrum SL C52
A2 and SL C52
A3, have led to the use of riboflavin supplementation M. S. Zaki, M. S. Abdel-Hamid, M. Y. Issa, G. M. H. Abdel-Salam; and there is growing evidence to suggest that this may be an effective treat- National Research Centre, Dokki,, Egypt. ment. This makes the identification of this disorder particularly important 170 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, aITnAd LleYd |u sW toW reWvi.eEwS cHlinGic.aOl RinGformation about the phenotype of childrenABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index with BVVLS. Our cohort consisted of patients diagnosed at the Molecular ly. Fibroblasts were grown in DMEM with 10% FBS, Glutamine, Streptomy- Diagnostic Laboratory at Guy’s and St. Thomas Hospital and by our collabo- cin-Penicillin. At 80% of confluence, cells were washed in TBS and fixed on a rators in Germany and Iceland, as well as molecularly-confirmed reports in slide with paraformaldehyde. the literature. After excluding patients with insufficient clinical data availab- The slides were treated with a mouse anti Human Notch3 antibody that re- le, we identified a total of 28 SL C52
A2 and 15 SL C52
A3 patients for analysis. cognizes the extracellular domain ECD and a rabbit antibody that recognizes We identified differences in the clinical presentation and progress of these the intracellular domain NICD. Anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary anti- two patient groups. In particular, while hearing loss, muscle weakness and bodies revealed the primary antibodies. bulbar palsy were common clinical features in both patient groups, amongst Different patterns of localization were detected. In cells with mutation R61W SL C52
A2 mutation carriers, ataxia and optic atrophy were also surprisingly an immunoreactive predominance of the intranuclear NOTCH3 NICD, and in common. These findings suggest that BVVLS may have a wider clinical phe- cells from patients with R332C mutation an immunoreactive predominance notype than presently appreciated. This is an important observation given of the N3ECD extracellular NOTCH3 domain was observed when compared emerging evidence that it can be ameliorated using riboflavin supplemen- both with cells from normal subject, and with the remaining CADASIL cells. tation. The obtained results show that in CADASIL fibroblasts the mutation type  P09
.028-M is associated with a relative differential localization of Notch3. This likely Effects of sapropterin on endothelium-dependent vasodilation in might be due to alterations in the protein processing. patients with CADASIL: a randomized controlled trial  P09
.030-M R. De Maria1,2, J. Campolo1,2, M. Frontali3, F. Taroni4, A. Federico5, D. Inzitari6, A. Tavani7, aCGH reevaluation reveals clinically relevant CNVs, in patients with S. Romano8,9, E. Puca10, A. Francia11, C. Mariotti4, C. Tomasello4, M. T. Dotti5, M. L. previously unexplained developmental delay / ASD, candidate for Stromillo5, L. Pantoni12, F. Pescini12, R. Valenti6, C. Pelucchi7, M. Parolini1,2, O. Parodi1,2; exome sequencing. Presentation of selected cases. 1CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Milan, Italy, 2CardioThoracic & Vascular K. Varvagiannis1,2, E. Ranza2, E. Stathaki2, S. Gimelli2, F. Sloan-Béna2, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, Department, Niguarda Ca‘ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3CNR Institute Translational A. Bottani2; Pharmacology, Rome, Italy, 4Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, 1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Geneva University Hospitals Milan, Italy, 5Dept. Medicine, Surgery & Neurosciences, University of Siena, Siena, - HUG, Geneva, Switzerland. Italy, 6NEUROFARBA Dept, Neuroscience Section, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 7Dept Epidemiology IRCCS Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy, 8Centre for Experimental Neurological Therapies (SR) and Neurology Unit, S. Andrea Hospital-site,, Rome, Italy, 9Dept NESMOS, Faculty of Medicine and Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) constitutes a first-tier Psychology, University of Rome „La Sapienza“, Rome, Italy, 10Neurovascular Treatment diagnostic test for individuals with unexplained developmental delay (DD) Unit, University of Rome “La Sapienza” Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy, 11Neuroimmunological or autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with an estimated diagnostic yield of Centre, Dept Neurology & Psychiatry, La Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, about 15% to 20%. The advent of exome sequencing has revolutionized the 12Stroke Unit & Neurology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Careggi,, Florence, Italy. diagnostic process in the remainder of undiagnosed patients, allowing the identification of causal mutations in an additional 25% to 55% of such pati- ents, depending on the different studies‘ criteria. Background and Purpose - CADASIL, a rare autosomal dominant disorder Over the last few years, copy number variation databases have accumulated caused by NOTCH3 mutations, is characterized by vascular smooth musc- significant amounts of data, often facilitating the task of distinguishing bet- le and endothelial cells abnormalities, altered vasoreactivity and recurrent ween benign and pathogenic copy number variants and the delineation of lacunar infarcts. Vasomotor function may represent a key factor for disease novel, recurrent, microdeletion/microduplication syndromes. progression. Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), essential cofactor for nitric oxide We present selected cases of patients, candidate for exome sequencing synthesis in endothelial cells, ameliorates endothelial function. We assessed analysis. Reevaluation of aCGH data allowed re-classificationC oAfM vTaAri1anRtsB 1o-f whether supplementation with sapropterin, a synthetic BH4 analogue, im- pCCre1viCoNuTs NuAnPkn2own clinical significance, to the category of clinically relevant proves endothelium-dependent vasodilation in CADASIL. CNVs overlapping newly recognized DD/ASD genes such as , Methods -- In a 24-month, multicenter randomized, double-blind, placebo- , and others. controlled trial, CADASIL patients aged 30-65 years were randomly assigned Our examples demonstrate that aCGH remains a valuable diagnostic tool for to receive placebo or sapropterin 200-400 mg b.i.d. The primary endpoint the investigation of such patients, and underscore the need to reassess the was change in the reactive hyperemia index by peripheral arterial tonome- pathogenicity of previously detected aCGH variants before consideration of try (RH-PAT) at 24 months. We also assessed the safety and tolerability of exome sequencing. sapropterin. Analysis was done by intention-to-treat (ITT).  P09
.031-S Results -- The ITT population included 61 patients. We found no significant CNVs analysis in patients with Cerebellar and Brainstem Congenital difference between sapropterin (n=32) and placebo (n=29) in the primary Defects (CBCD) S. Loddo1,2, V. Parisi1, F. Mancini1, C. Cesario1,2, G. E. Calabrò1,3, A. Capalbo1, A. Ferraris1, A. endpoint (mean difference in RH-PAT changes 0.19 (95% CI -0.18;0.56)). Novelli1, L. Bernardini1, E. M. Valente1,4; RH-PAT increased after 24 months in 37% of patients on sapropterin and 1Mendel Laboratory, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza 28% on placebo; however, after adjustment for age, sex and clinical charac- University, Umberto I Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Hygiene, Preventive teristics, improvement was not associated with treatment arm. The pro- Medicine and Public Health, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 4Department of portion of patients with adverse events was similar on sapropterin and on Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy. placebo (50% vs 48.3%); serious adverse events occurred in 6.3% vs 13.8%, respectively. Conclusions -- Sapropterin was safe and well-tolerated at the average dose Cerebellar and brainstem congenital defects (CBCD) affect about 1 in 3000- of 5 mg/kg/day, but did not affect endothelium-dependent vasodilation in 4000 live births. Typical clinical signs include hypotonia, ataxia, abnormal CADASIL patients. ocular movements and psychomotor delay/intellectual disability, but phe- Registered at URL: https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu Unique Identifier notypic variability is wide with possible dme unlotivoor gan involvement. 2  P0
 00 97 .0-0 20 94 - S370
-55. With the exception of few autosomal recessive or X-linked conditions, CBCD Comparison of NOTCH3 expression in fibroblasts from CADASIL are frequently sporadic, suggesting that mutations or genomic rear- patients versus normal controls rangements may represent common pathogenetic mechanisms. R. Mazzei1, C. Ungaro1, F. L. Conforti1, S. Bianchi2, A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, M. Muglia1, We analyzed by genomic microarray platforms 83 sporadic CBCD patients, M. T. Dotti2, A. Federico2, A. Qualtieri1; enrolled in a multicentric project focused on studying the genetic causes of 1National Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of Neurological, CBCD. Eight pathogenic or potentially pathogenic CNVs were detected in 7 Neurosurgical, and Behavioural Sciences, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. patients (8.4%). Further 11 patients, investigated in our Cytogenetic diagnostic lab for in- tellectual disability and/or congenital anomalies, have been subsequently CADASIL is an inherited cerebrovascular disease caused by mutations in the included in the CBCD project, since they showed CNVs overlapping to deleti- NOTCH3 gene, encoding a protein belonging to the Notch receptor family. ons/duplications detected in CBCD patients and/or were affected by CBCD. Notch signalling is involved in a broad spectrum of function, from the cell Of note, we detected eight deletions that defined three recurrent imbalan- proliferation to apoptosis. Recently it has been shown that it is expressed ces. Three deletions were partially overlapping in 3q22.3q26.1, three in in adult human tissues such as peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and 6q25.1q27 and two in 10q26.2q26.3. These three chromosomal regions fibroblasts. Our aim was to evaluate Notch3 protein expression in human have been already associated to CBCD, although literature and DECIPHER fibroblasts from CADASIL patients. database revision suggest incomplete penetrance. In addition we report We perform the investigation on the fibroblasts from four CADASIL patients six patients with non-recurrent CNVs: del(2q36.3), dup(6p22.3), inv/ and a normal subject. The patients were genetically characterized, and car- dupdel(8p), del(8p21.3p21.2), dup(13q34), dup(Xq28). ried a  C174
Y, a R332C, a c.341-24_26delAAE CS , aH RG 61 2 W0 m1 u4 ta | t iM onI sL , rA esN pe, cI tT ivA e-LY | T W heW se dW at. aE cS oH nfiG rm.O thR eG crucial role of microarray analysis as a tool to ide1 n7 ti1 fyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pathogenic CNVs in patients with congenital defects. Our data confirm that A subset of atypical Rett syndroCmDeK w L5
ith infantile spasms or early seizures CBCD are characterized by high genetic heterogeneity and incomplete pene- starting in the fiCrDstK pLo5s tnatal months is caused by mutations in the Cyclin- trance, suggesting the involvement of further mechanisms (modifier genes, Dependent Kinase-Like 5 gene ( ) located in the Xp22 region. Mutati- e Pn 0v 9i .r 0o 3n 2m -e Mntal factors) in cerebellar and brainstem mal-development. on screening of was pMerEfoCrPm2ed in 20 female and 5 male patients, re- ferred for infantile spasms,C wDhKoL 5w ere previously tested negative for methyl The structure and functions of the transcription factor PHOX2B: CpG-binding protein 2 gene ( ) mutations. All coding exons (2-21) and new insights in the molecular pathogenesis of Congenital Central intron-exon boundaries of gene were screened for mutations by En- Hypoventilation Syndrome D. Belperio1, S. Di Lascio1, R. Benfante1,2, D. Fornasari1,2; zymatic Cleavage Mismatched Analysis (ECMA) followed by direct sequen- 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Dept. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational cing. A novel frameshift mutation (c.2530delC; p.H844IfsX19) was detected Medicine, Milan, Italy, 2CNR-Institute of Neuroscience, Milan, Italy. and, due to its deleterious nature, predicted to affect the carboxy-terminal region of the protein. The female patient, aged 10- years-old, presented psychomotor delay and epileptic spasms which began at the second month. Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS) is a very rare neona- Subseqdue ennotv sot udies in both parents and in 50 chromosomes from normal tal neurological disorder characterized by abnormal ventilatory response to subjects failed to detect the c.2530delC mutation indicating that it is pro- hypoxia and hypercapnia, owing to failure of autonomic respiratory control: bably and dCiDseKaLs5e -causative. The novel mutation was directly sub- affected children hypoventilate during sleep, with possible very severe neu- mitted in the RettBASE (IRSF MEC P2
 Variation Database) and LOVD dCaDtaKbLa5- rological damages. ses. Our studies of gene were carried out in patients with Rett-like Frameshift mutations (5%) and poly-alanine triplet expansions (95%) have pMhEeCnPo2t ypes and epileptic spasms with early onset. The incidence of been detected in the coding region of the homeobox gene PHOX2B in about mutations in female patients with Rett-like features who were negative for 90% of CCHS patients. A correlation between length of the expansion and mutations was 5% (1/20), while in female patients with spasms it severity of the respiratory phenotype has been reported. Since some of the was 17% (1/6), rates both lower than those reported by other studies (7.8% mutations alter the sub-cellular localisation, the DNA-binding affinity and a Pn 0d 9 .2 08 3% 5-, Srespectively) probably because of their larger sample sizes. the transcriptional activity of the protein, and that mutated PHOX2B pro- No evidence for a contribution of CHRNA7 rare variants in autism teins can interfere with the activity of the wild-type protein by sequeste- susceptibility ring it into aggregates, one crucial question concerns the identification of E. Bacchelli1, A. Battaglia2, C. Cameli1, S. Lomartire1, S. Thomson3, J. S. Sutcliffe3, R. the functional domains of the protein, the role of the poly-alanine tract and Tancredi2, E. Maestrini1; the effects of its expansion on the general architecture and function of the 1FaBiT – Dipartimento di Farmacia e BioTecnologie, Bologna, Italy, 2Stella Maris Clinical protein. We have performed a deletion analysis of PHOX2B and identified Research Institute for Child and Adolescent Neuropsychiatry, Calambrone (Pisa), Italy, two nuclear localization signals in the homeodomain, both required for the 3Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Centers for Molecular Neuroscience and Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States. complete import of the protein in the nucleus, corresponding to residues necessary for the binding to DNA, and partially blocked by the expanded poly-alanine tract. By using mammalian two-hybrid system we have also Recurrent microdeletions of chromosome 15q13.3 are causally associated demonstrated that PHOX2B can form homo-dimers and we are currently in- with a wide range of phenotypic features, including autism spectrum disor- vestigating if the mutations alter the dimerization properties of the protein der (ASD), seizures, intellectual disability, and other psychiatric conditions. and the potential contribution to the range of phenotypes and pathogenesis The pathogenicity of the reciprocal microduplications is more uncertain. in CCHS patients.  P09
.033-S Even if the recurrent deletion contains several genes, CHRNA7, encoding for Transcriptional dysregulation and impairment of PHOX2B auto- the alpha7 subunit of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, is consi- regulatory mechanism in the pathogenesis of Congenital Central dered the culprit gene in mediating the neurological phenotypes in patients Hypoventilation Syndrome with the 15q13.3 deletion. S. Di Lascio1, S. Moncini1, T. Bachetti2, I. Ceccherini2, R. Benfante1,3, D. Fornasari1,3; In order to evaluate the role of CHRNA7 rare variants in ASD susceptibility, 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Dept. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational we have performed copy number variant (CNV) analysis and mutation scree- Medicine, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 3CNR-Institute of Neuroscience, Milan, Italy. ning of the coding sequence of CHRNA7 in a sample of 135 ASD individuals from Italy. Rare sequence variation in this gene remains largely unexplored, given the existence of a fusion gene, CHRFAM7A, which includes a partial PHOX2B duplication of exons 5-10 of CHRNA7. Hence, any attempts at sequencing to The PHOX2B transcription factor plays a crucial role in autonomic nervous detect mutations must distinguish between CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A, ma- system development. In humans, heterozygous mutations of the king next-generation sequencing approaches unreliable for this purpose. gene lead to Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS), a rare CNV analysis led to the identification of a CHRNA7 microduplication in a disorder characterized by a broad variety of symptoms of autonomic ner- subject with autism and moderate cognitive impaiment. No pathogenic vous system dysfunction including inadequate control of breathing. The vast mutations were identified in CHRNA7 coding regions. However, we detec- majority of patients with CCHS are heterozygous for a poly-alanine repeat ted rare variants in the proximal promoter region, previously described expansion mutaPtHioOnX o2fB a twenty residues poly-alanine tract in the C-terminus to functionally reduce transcription. In conclusion, rare sequence variants of PHOX2B. Although several lines of evidence support a dominant-negative in CHRNA7 do not significantly contribute to ASD susceptibility, at least in mechanism for mutations in CCHS, the molecular efPfeHcOtsX o2fB PHOX2B our clinical sample characterized by low frequency of associated medical mutant proteins on the transcriptional activity of the wild-type protein have comorbidity. This study represents the first sequence variant analysis of the not yet been elucidated. One of the targets of PHOX2B is the gene it- CHRNA7 gene in a sample of idiopathic autism. self, and we have recently demonstrated that mutated PHOX2B variants can  P09
.036-M actually negatively interfere wPiHthO Xth2eA exDpBrHessTioLnX 2of the normal allele. Sin- Phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of CLCN2-related ce in vitro the poly-alanine expanded proteins alter the regulation of other leukodystrophy three PHOX2B target genes ( , , ) in a promoter-specific D. Di Bella1, S. M. Caldarazzo1, M. Savoiardo2, A. Quattrone3, G. Arabia3, F. Triulzi4, E. manner and that, in CCHS patients, different PHOX2B mutations may affect Scarpini5, P. Basilico5, S. Bonato5, G. Uziel6, D. Pareyson7, L. Farina2, E. Salsano7, F. Taroni1; different target genes, this highlights the importance of identifying PHOX2B 1Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Disease, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 2Unit of Neuroradiology, Fondazione target genes in order to get new insights into the molecular pathogenesis of IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University the disease. To this purpose, we carried out Chromatin Immunoprecipitati- Magna Græcia, Catanzaro, Italy, 4Unit of Neuroradiology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda on experiments from IMR32 neuroblastoma cell line, followed by massively Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Unit of Neurology, Fondazione IRCCS parallel sequencing of the co-immunoprecipitated genomic DNA fragments Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 6Unit of Child Neurology, (ChIP-Seq). We are currently validating the most promising candidate target Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 7Unit of Neurology 8, genes by biochemical and functional approaches. Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy.  P09
.034-M Molecular investigation of CDK L5
 gene in patients with Rett like infantile spasms in Greece-Preliminary results Mutations in the CLCN2 gene encoding the brain chloride channel ClC-2 M. Kouskou, E. Tzagkaraki, C. Sofocleous, H. Fryssira, S. Psoni, K. Kosma, S. Kitsiou, E. Kanavakis; have been recently associated with a rare autosomal recessive leukoen- Laboratory of Medical Genetics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Agia cephalopathy, characterized by variable age at onset and clinical features, Sofia Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece. with specific brain MRI findings caused by chronic white matter edema. We sequenced CLCN2 in 6 patients from 5 families presenting characteristic 172 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, MITRAI LwYh i|t eW mWattWer. EalSteHraGtio.OnsR inGvolving middle cerebellar peduncles, cere- bral peduncles, and posterior limb of the internal capsules. We identifiedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 3 homozygous CLCN2 mutations in 5 patients (4F/1M) from 4 families, „probably pathogenic“ in 12/213 (5.6%) a nNdR X“uNn1c ertain” or “benign” in while one male patient tested negative. One novel homozygous splice-site 39/213 (18.3%). Our most frequent rare CNV was 2p16.3 microdeleti- mutation was identified in a young asymptomatic woman who underwent on (49,294,769-51,251,557) disrupting the gene, present in 7/69 MRI because of headache. A previously described nonsense mutation was (10.1%) patients. Other regions of interest included 2q22, 6q26, 15q11.2, identified in 3 women from 2 apparently unrelated families from Southern 16p11.2 and 22q11.2. Potential candidate genes will be discussed. Italy. One patient presented at 58y with dystonic posture of the neck, mild Conclusions: Our study highlights the importance of the use of microarrays postural tremor of the hands, and head tremor. Of the two sisters, one pre- in the clinical diagnosis of patients with epilepsy. It discusses ‘definitely pa- sented at 26y with migraine without aura followed, at 46y, by progressive thogenic’ variants which have been previously reported and potential candi- postural imbalance, hypoacusia and tinnitus, and degenerative retinopathy; date genes within ‘probably pathogenic’ CNVs which need further research.  P09
.039-S her sister, aged 60y, suffers from cluster headhache since 30y with negative Genome-wide search implicates a potassium channel gene in neurological examination. Repeated MRI in both sisters show stability of the cognitive performance in the elderly leukodystrophic pattern. Finally, a novel homozygous missense mutation T. W. Mühleisen1,2, S. Lux1, S. Lenzen1, T. Vaitsiakhovich3, S. Caspers1, A. Schleicher1, was found in a male patient presenting asymptomatic leukoencephalopathy C. Jockwitz1, K. Jütten1, P. Hoffmann1,4,2, N. Pundt5, S. Moebus5, K. Jöckel5, R. Erbel6, H. discovered during assessment for infertility and azoospermia. This study Schütz7, V. Gras8, U. Mödder1, A. Bauer9,10, D. Sturma7,11, J. Shah8,12,13, K. Zilles1,13,14, T. shows that CLCN2 mutations can be associated with a wide, but relative- Becker15,3, K. Amunts1,16,17, S. Cichon1,4,2; ly mild, phenotypic spectrum and suggests that a second, yet unidentified, 1Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics and Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, gene can be associated with this peculiar white matter disease.  P09
.037-S Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, A mutation in SBF2 deleting the plekstrin homology domain affects University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Department of carriers Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Institute of Medical Informatics, R. Parvari1, E. Wajsbrot1, E. Muhammad1, D. Landau2,1, Y. Sadaka2,1, I. Noyman2,1, Z. Biometry and Epidemiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, Shorer2,1; 6Department of Cardiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 7Institute of 1Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka Medical Center, Beer Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-8), Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 8Institute Sheva, Israel. of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 9Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-2), Research Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 10Department of Neurology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 11Institute for Science and Ethics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 12Department of We searched for the molecular basis of Charcot Marie-Tooth neuropathy Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 13JARA-Brain, Jülich-Aachen type 4B (CMT4B) in a consanguineous Bedouin family consisting of the Research Alliance, Jülich, Germany, 14Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and parents and their 4 children. Two of the children were affected, another Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 15German Center for child presented with slow motor conduction velocity similar to the father Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 16JARA-Brain, Jülich-Aachen who also had mild pes cavus and in-toeing feet. Assuming homozygotization Research Alliance, Aachen, Germany, 17C. & O. Vogt Institute for Brain Research, Heinrich oPfR aX ,f oFuGnDd4e, rS Hm3uTtCat2i,o EnG wRe2 ,u NseEdF Lli, nGkDaAgeP 1a,n MalPyZsi,s for MthFeN k2nown genes affec- Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. ted in CMT to identify the chromosomal locus of the mutatSiBonF2. The genes SBF2 and were negated by the linkage analyses. Homozygosity was identified for the locus. Se- Normal aging of the brain is characterized by changes of its structure and quencing the patients‘ DNA for identified a homozygous deletion of 12 function resulting in decreasing cognitive abilities. However, the age-depen- bases including the acceptor splice site at the 5‘ of an exon of the gene. The dent decline of the cognitive performance (CP) can vary greatly in subjects transcript presented a deletion of 19 bases in this exon causing a frameshift of the same age. Here we assessed CP-profiles (attention, executive func- that deletes the plekstrin homology domain. Quantitative RT-PCR determi- tions, language, and memory) of 482 elderly subjects from a population- ned that the stability of this transcript was comparable to that of the normal based cohort from Germany (1000BRAINS) revealing 323 high-performers transcript suggesting that the truncated protein is produced. The parents (HPs) that cognitively performed better than 159 low-performers (LPs). To and the child with slow motor conduction velocity were heterozygotes for detect genetic variants that contribute to these CP-differences, we compared the mutation. The mutation causing elimination oSfB tFh2e plekstrin homology both groups in a genome-wide association study (GWAS). domain may impair motor conduction velocity in some carriers. This is the No SNP reached genome-wide significance (P<5E-8). However, 28 SNPs first documentation of an effect of a mutation in in the heterozygote showedK CsNtrHo8ng-to-moderate evidence for association with CP-differences state that may act in a dominant negative manner. (P<5E-5). The most significant finding was a SNP located 200 kb upstream  P09
.038-M of the gene. The minor allele was significantly over-represented in Rare Copy Number Variants underlying Genetic Epilepsy: a regional LPs compared to HPs (38% vs. 26%, OR=1.77, P=1.94E-6) suggesting that it study contributes to reduced CP. R. F. Oliveira1,2, C. Noakes3, A. Smith3, R. Candlin3, E. Blair2, R. Gibbons4, J. Hurst5, A. Neither the top SNP nor a SNP in strong linkage disequilibrium have recei- Nemeth2, J. Poulton6, S. Price2, D. Shears2, H. Stewart2, J. Roberts3, C. Campbell3, U. Kini2; 1Medical Genetics Unit, Paediatric Hospital, Centro Hospitalar e Universitario de ved evidence for association with a cognitive endophenotype through a pre- Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford University vious GWAS. KCNH8 is expressed in important brain regions and belongs Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, to a family of voltage-gated potassium channels that likely are involved in Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4MRC Molecular modulating the overall excitability of neurons (Zou et al., 2003). Our study Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University proposes a promising new candidate gene for CP. However, replication in Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5NE Thames Genetics Service, Great independent samples is necessary to confirm our result. Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Great Ormond Street, London, United  P09
.040-M Kingdom, 6Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Oxford University Two novel missense CO L4
A1 mutations and genetics heterogeneity in Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom. porencephaly G. Vaula1, E. Giorgio2, G. Bosco1, M. Conterno1, D. Quartana1, A. Calcia2, C. Mancini2, E. Di Gregorio3, S. Cavalieri2, E. Pozzi2, A. Brussino2, A. Brusco2,3; Background: Epilepsy is a common neurological condition affecting 0.5-1% 1University of Torino, Department of Neurosciences, Torino, Italy, 2University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, 3A.O. Città della Salute e della Scienza, of the population. Increasingly, it is being recognised that genetic predispo- S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Torino, Italy. sition underlies most epilepsy. The use of new technologies such as whole exome/genome sequencing and microarrays have led to the identification of several single genes and copy number variants (CNVs) as the cause of CO L4
A1/CO L4
A2 mutations have been reported in porencephaly and in epilepsy. small vessels cerebral vascular diseases (CVD), often associated with ocu- Objective: To identify and discuss causal CNVs in patients with suspected lar, renal and muscular features. We screened three families with a broad genetic epilepsy spectrum of porencephaly and vascular leukoencephalopathy for CO L4
A1/ Methods: We studied all 213 patients with epilepsy referred to the Oxford CO L4
A2 mutations. In family LEU-1-TO, three patients on two generation University Hospitals Genetics Laboratory for arrayCGH as part of their clini- presented with leukoencephalopathy variably associated with retinal, deep cal diagnostic work up between 2006 and 2013. We classified the abnormal and periventricular cerebral haemorrages and aneurysms. One subject pre- CNVs into “definitely”, „probably“, “uncertain” and “benign” pathogenicity sented a small periventricular porencephalic lesion. The proband in family groups. We studied the epilepsy phenotype of the patients, especially those LEU-2-TO had a history of congenital glaucoma and cataract, presented a in the „definitely“ and “probably” groups, wherever possible. . sudden and reversible motor impairment at 14 yrs, followed by progressive Results: Abnormal CNVs were identified in 69/213 patients (32.4%); sin- gait imbalance in her 30thies. She delivered two newborn severely affected gle CNVs in 50/69 (72.5%) and multiple CNVs in 19/69 (27.5%) of pati- by porencephaly. In the post partum she had an haemorragic stroke. MRI ents. We classified rare CNVs as „definitelEy SpHathGo g2e0ni1c“4 i n| M18I/ L2
A13N (,8 .I5T%A)L, Y | s W howW edW p. aE rS ieH taG l h. aO emRG orrage, diffuse microbleeds, severe leukoencep1ha7l3o-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index pathy and aneurisms of intracranial vessels. In family LEU-3-TO two male evaluation showed the indication to immediately start a behavioral therapy brothers presented an overlapping clinical picture with history of recurrent and a speech therapy intervention. These features improve the delineation haemorragic strokes in the first two decades and a severe leukoencepha- of the phenotype of individuals with rare HRAS mutations.  P09
.043-S lopathy, brain microbleeds and ischemic lacunae at the neuroimages. We Anticipation of age at death and possible bias in Creutzfeldt-Jacob identified two novel missense mutations in CO L4
A1 (c.1249 G>C, p.G417R Disease in LEU-1-TO; c.2662 G>A, p.G888R in LEU-2-TO) by sequence analysis. Both D. Gras1, J. Brandel2, A. Welaratne2, L. Laplanche3, S. Haik4, A. Brice5,1, J. Feingold5,1, A. are predicted pathogenic and hit highly conserved Gly residues of the Gly- Durr5,1; X-Y repeat in the collagen triple helical domain. As reported for CO L4
A1 1AP-HP, Fédération de Génétique, Paris, France, 2AP-HP, Cellule Nationale de Référence missense changes in the first third of the gene, mutation p.G417R seems des Maladies de Creutzfeldt Jakob, Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique–Hôpitaux de Paris associated with a variant phenotype in which porencephalic lesions are not Service de biochimie et biologie moléculaire, Paris, France, 4Inserm UMR S1127
, Paris, France, 5Inserm UMR S1127
/NEB, Paris, France. the major characteristic. Patients in family LEU-3-TO, negative for CO L4
A1/ CO L4
A2, suggest a genetic heterogeneity for this disease.  P09
.041-S The role copy number variations (CNVs) in cryptogenic Cerebral Palsy Mutations in PRNP that encodes the prion protein are causative for inhe- R. Segel1,2, H. Ben-Pazi1,2, S. Zeligson1, A. Fatal-Valevski3,4, A. Aran1,2, V. Gross-Tzur1,2, D. rited Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). The  E200
K substitution is the most Shmueli5, N. Shneibaum3,4, D. Lev6, S. Perlberg1,7, L. Deutsch8, E. Levy-Lahad1,2; 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hadassah School of Medicine, Hebrew frequent mutation. Earlier age at death in successive generations has University, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Tel been reported in two clusters, from Israel (Rosenmann et al. Neurology Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5Child Development Center, Clalit, Jerusalem, Israel, 1999;53(6):1328-9) and Italy (Pocchiari et al. PLoS One 2013;8(4):e60376). 6Metabolic-Neurogenetic Clinic, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 7Hebrew No molecular or environmental explanations have been found. The aim was University, Jerusalem, Israel, 8Biostatistical Consulting, BioStats, Jerusalem, Israel. to analyze a possible observational bias in  E200
K CJD patients from fami- Background lies living in France. Ages at death from 42 parent-offspring pairs from 19 families were collected and compared: parents 63.5 years ±13.9 (range 43 : Cerebral palsy (CP) is an „umbrella term“ for congenital, non- to 90) offspring 59.8 years ±10.4 (25 to 80), indicating a significantly earlier progressive motor disability, reflecting multifactorial insults to the develo- age at death in offspring (p=.015 paired t-test). Including ages at last follow- ping brain. Etiologic factors include perinatal asphyxia, infection, inflamma- up or at death of an unaffected but obligate carrier-parent, the difference tion, and stroke. However, in many individuals with CP the pathogenesis is increased to - 9.8 years anticipation p=.004. Considering the large range of unknown. Copy number variations (CNVs) cause various neurodevelopmen- ages at death and the intra-sib-ship variability, the most obvious bias lies in tMale ctohnoddist:ions. We investigated the prevalence and characteristics of CNVs in the fact that sibs could develop disease later in life. When analyzing pairs individuals with cryptogenic CP. with at least 50% affected with known ages at death, the anticipation was 52 participants with non-progressive pyramidal or extra-pyrami- lost: parents 68.1 ± 19.9 years and offspring 62.8 ± 7.9 years p=.957, n=12. dal signs since infancy and no identified etiology were enrolled. Individuals This result could indicate a possible observation bias. Another hypothesis with acquired cause (i.e. stroke) were excluded. Analysis was performed could be the loss of modifying genes outside inbred clusters. The search for using the Affymetrix HD array. CNVs were classified as: pathogenic CNVs, genetic modifiers in familial CJD is of great importance.  P09
.044-M likely pathogenic, or likely benign. Main outcome measures were: clinically A new autosomal recessive syndrome: Severe developmental delay sRiegsnuiflitcsa:nt (pathogenic and likely pathogenic CNVs) or not-significant (likely and dysmorphic features causing by a missence mutation in FTO gene benign and no CNVs) findings. A. Caglayan1, B. Tüysüz2, K. Bilguvar1, M. Gunel1; 40 CNVs were found in 26/52 (51%) participants. Most CNVs were 1Department of Neurosurgery, Program on Neurogenetics, Yale School of Medicine, New considered clinically significant (11/26 pathogenic and 5/26 likely patho- Haven, CT, United States, 2İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, genic vs. 10/26 likely benign) and were not previously reported to cause Turkey. motor disability (12/16). Most CNVs were de-novo. Compared to individuals FTO without clinically insignificant CNVs, individuals with clinically significant CNVs were more likely to have multiple CNVs (p<0.001), dysmorphic fea- Fat mass and obesity-associated gene ( ) associated with variation in tures (p=.01) and non- motor comorbidities (p=0.03). In 2/16 participants body weight and metabolic disorders. Recently, Boissel et al. reported a ho- wCoitnhc clulisniiocanlsly significant CNVs the phenotype was characteristic for the ge- mozygous loss-of-function mutation in a family with nine affected members nomic findings (SPAT and KANK1 deletions). who had a severe development delay and multipleF TcOongenital anomaly. We : Clinically significant CNVs were found in 16/52 (31%) of in- performed whole-exome sequencing analysis and identified a novel homo- diviedsupaeclsia wlliyt hin c irnydpitvoidgueanlisc wCiPt ha nddys wmeorrep hoifcte fnea mtuurletsip alne da ncodm doer-bniodvitoi.e Ws. e re- zygous missense mutation (c.812A>C) within the gene in a 9.5 months commend that this useful test be performed in individuals with cryptogenic -old girl with dysmorphic facies and developmental delay. She was the first C PP 0 9.042-M child from the consanguineous parents. She had microcephaly, prominent Behavioral phenotype in Costello Syndrome with atypical mutation: a metopic ridge, coarse face, long philtrum, microretrognathia, prominent al- case report veolar ridge, antevert nostil, and brachydactyly. She follow up until 4 years P. Alfieri1, C. Caciolo1, G. Piccini1, L. D‘Elia1, G. Valeri1, M. Tartaglia2, M. Digilio1, B. and 9 months of age and she gained head control at first year of life, sitting Dallapiccola1, S. Vicari1; 2 years, walking with help at 4.5 years old of age. She could say only three 1Bambino Gesu` Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, words at 4 years and 9 months. Denver testing at 4 years old of age confir- Roma, Italy. med severe developmental delay (DQ:23). Cranial CT imaging showed pre- mature fusion of metopic suture. She also had splenomegaly on abdominal examination and grade-1 esophageal varices on endoscopy. Hearing assess- Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder caused, in the majority ment by auditory brainstem response showed conductive and sensorineural of cases, by germline missense HRAS mutations affecting Gly12 promoting hearing loss. Eye examination revelaed optic atrophy, strabismus, nystag- enhanced signaling through the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling cascades. In mus and abnormal electroretinogram. The clinical findings of the patient general, the neuropsychiatric phenotype in CS is fairly homogeneous with were very similar to first described family. In additionF,T sOhe had high levels mild or moderate intellectual disability, and a behavior usually characteri- of creatine kinase was persisted since birth. As a result, we report second zed by irritability and shyness at younger ages, and sociable personality and patient with novel homozygous missense mutation in and discuss phe- good empathic skills after 4-5 years. We report on a 7-year-old boy a hetero- notypic extension of this gene mutations.  P09
.045-S zygous for a rare duplication of codon 37 (p. E37
dup) in HRAS, manifesting Diagnosing dystonia using a Next-Generation-Sequencing panel an impairment in his social interaction and non-verbal communication with K. Grundmann, J. Bickmann, U. E. A. Faust, A. Soehn, M. Sturm, O. Riess, P. Bauer; circumscribed interests. The neuropsychiatric evaluation meets the DSM- Dept of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany. IV criteria for Pervasive Developmental Disorder-Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS). He showed marked impairment in the use of multiple nonver- bal behaviors (eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body posture, and gestu- Dystonias are a heterogeneous group of movement disorders which a strong res to regulate social interaction). Also a neuropsychological battery of tests inherited basis. Overlapping, non-specific features of many dystonias ham- was used to evaluated the subject. A behavioral treatment was prescribed per a clear clinical diagnosis and make targeting a specific gene difficult or to reduce aberrant behaviors and compulsions. Regarding communicative impossible. We developed a panel of 42 genes for Next Generation Sequen- aspects, we recommended a speech therapy intervention. After one year the cing containing the most relevant dystonia genes and covering the most patient and his parents have benefited from these treatments. In conclusion relevant dystonia phenotypes known so far in order to analyze a cohort of we have investigated a CS patient with an uncommon HRAS lesion showing a1n7 a4typical profile in which a careful neuropsychE oS loH giG ca l2 a0 n1 d 4 b e| h M aviI oL rA alN , uITnAseLleYc t|e dW dWystWon.iEa SpaHtiGen.tOsRG We have established a selector-based enrichment method (HaloPlex, Agilent)ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index targeting 42 dystonia genes. A total of 310kb is enriched and sequenced by in idiopathic generalized epilepsy combined with a variable degree of in- Illumina MiSeq (2x 150 bp paired-end). A first batch analysis in 27 dystonia tellecStuYaNlG dAisPa1bility including severe speech impairment. Our patient shows patients showed that HaloPlex enrichment provided enrichment efficiency additional symptoms, expanding the spectrum of phenotypes for patients superior to standard whole exome procedures (>95% covered >20 reads; with mutations.  P09
.049-S 90-95% of reads on target; mean coverage >500 reads per base). Linkage and subsequent exome sequencing analyses in a We identified presumed disease-causing mutations in 2 out of 27 patients consanguineous family reveal two novel genes associated with including one patient with a DYT6 dystonia and one patient carrying a mu- pattern-sensitive idiopathic generalized epilepsy tation in SL C2
A1. In 7 patients, we identifed so far unknown probable disea- F. N. Tuncer1, S. A. Uğur İşeri1, N. Bebek2, B. Baykan2, U. Özbek1; se-causing variants including mutations in AT P7
B, PLA2G6, PARK2, FBCO7, 1İstanbul University, Institute for Experimental Medicine Genetics Department, İstanbul, VP S13
A and GCDH. This technology enabled the identification of a genetic Turkey, 2İstanbul University, İstanbul Faculty of Medicine, Neurology Department, cause in approximately 7 % of patients in an unselected cohort of dystonia İstanbul, Turkey. patients in whom the most common genetic form (DYT1) was excluded. Tar- geted NGS may be a useful and cost-effective method to screen for mutations in multiple genes associated with dystonia. Epilepsy is a complex neurological disorder affecting 1% of the world’s  P09
.047-S population. Among different forms of epilepsies, idiopathic generalized Using exome-sequencing for the diagnosis of rare disorders: two epilepsies (IGEs) are characterized by generalized seizures in the absence siblings affected by a congenital encephalopathy with microcephalia, of detectable brain lesions or metabolic abnormalities. Thus, the prima- polymicrogyria and dystonia F. Incani1, C. Cossu1, A. Coiana1, M. L. Serra1, F. Dettori1, L. Saba1, L. Boccone2, M. C. ry etiology for this disorder is believed to be genetic. This study includes Rosatelli1; a consanguineous family diagnosed with pattern-sensitive IGE and aimed 1Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 2Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, ASL to identify novel epilepsy gene(s) to delineate the molecular basis of this 8, Cagliari, Italy. intriguing form of IGEs. Physical, neurological, neuroimaging and electro- encephalography (EEG) examinations were performed on the subjects re- cruited with information on family history. There were two affected siblings Exome sequencing was performed on two siblings of a Sardinian family having pattern sensitivity in form of absence, myoclonic and generalized affected by a severe, congenital encephalopathy characterized by microce- tonic-clonic seizures. Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip was used in phalia, polymicrogyria and dystonia. MPS was achieved with the platform genotyping of affected and five unaffected family members. Genotype data HiSeq2000 (Illumina). Quality filtered reads were aligned to the human re- was utilized using easyLinkage Plus interface, where multipoint LOD scores ference hg19. SNPs and in/dels were detected using Samtools and BWA soft- were calculated under the assumption of autosomal recessive inheritance wares. To obtain a list of candidate genes, the variants were filtered against and haplotypes were constructed through GeneHunter. Linkage peak with a a set of polymorphisms available in public databases (dbSN P138
, 1000Ge- LOD score of 3.16 was revealed on Chromosome 22 comprising 113 genes nomes, ES P6500
) and prioritized with Ingenuity Variant Analysis software. within a 3.72Mb region. To analyze the candidate linkage region and identify This analysis led us to identify in both siblings an homozygous variant in any novel epilepsy genes residing outside this region, Illumina HiSeq2000 a gene of the MBT (Malignant Brain Tumor) family, expressed in mamma- was used to perform whole exome sequencing on one of the affected sibs. lian brain. This variation causes a Ser-Asn substitution in one of the MBT Two genes with homozygous variants were located within the linkage re- domains. The MBT domain is a “chromatin reader”, a protein module that gion that segregated with the condition. Our study indicated homozygous recognizes mono/di-methylated lysines on histones tails. The MBT proteins variations in a gene encoding brain specific, spliceosome component and interact with the enzymes that catalyze the histones methylation. This inter- a gene with an unknown protein function possibly responsible in a family action plays a role in the repression of target genes. Although the pathway with pattern sensitive IGE.  P09
.050-M of the candidate gene is not well characterized, several studies show that Whole genome SNP genotyping confirms segregation of Unverricht- its ortholog downregulates genes expressed in the early stages of neuronal Lundborg Disease (ULD) with a repeat expansion in CSTB on 21q in development in Drosophila. a large consanguineous family followed by a novel haplotype based In a preliminary study in vitro we have found that the protein binds the di- approach identifying the parent of origin and carrier status in the methyltransferases SUV4-20H demonstrating its involvement in the process child with Trisomy 21 under the age of onset for ULD of histone methylation. F. Y. Kesim1, F. N. Tuncer1, E. Yucesan1, K. Cavusoglu1, M. Calik2, A. Iscan3, S. U. Iseri1, U. We speculate that the variant protein in our patients could destabilize the Ozbek1; interaction between the MBT domain and the dimethyltransferases, altering 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Harran University, Faculty of the affinity for methylated histones and presumably its repressive proper- Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Sanliurfa, Turkey, 3Bezmialem Vakif ties. University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey.  P09
.048-M A new mutation in SYNGA P1
 expanding the phenotypic spectrum: a case report Unverricht-Lundborg disease (ULD) is an autosomal recessive progressive J. Juengling1, C. Funke1, I. Steiner1, M. Doecker1, K. Reicherter1, J. Hoffmann1, F. Battke1, G. Kluger2, C. von Stülpnagel2, H. Lerche3, S. Biskup1, K. Hoertnagel1; myoclonus epilepsy characterized by generalized myoclonic jerks and tonic- 1CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of Neuropediatrics, Schön Klinik clonic seizures. In this study, we analyzed a large consanguineous family with Vogtareuth, Vogtareuth, Germany, 3Department of Neurology and Epileptology, 10 children from Turkey afflicted with an undiagnosed form of syndromic University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. epilepsy. All 6 affected family members along with 3 unaffected members and the youngest child with trisomy 21 have been genotyped using Illumina 300K SNP array. Linkage analysis was performed utilizing easyLinkagePlus We report a 15 year-old girl presenting with generalized epilepsy and intel- interface under the assumption of autosomal recessive inheritance. Linkage lectual disability. After normal development in the first two and a half years analysis pinpointed a locus on chromosome 21q22.3 with a LOD score of of life, delayed language development became apparent. At age 3 drop at- 4.33. CSTB gene which resides within this region was screened for mutati- tacks occurred. Later on the patient developed clonic and clonic-tonic seizu- ons in this family via DNA sequencing and long PCR, as mutations in CSTB res, predominantly at night time. Most remarkably, photosensitivity and a have been implicated in ULD. This analysis revealed a dodecamer repeat ex- special EEG phenomenon occured. Under the treatment with antiepileptic pansion of almost 40 copies in the promoter region of CSTB in all affected drugs the patient remained nearly seizure-free. Anti-convulsive treatment children. We have also analyzed the genotyping data of the youngest child was stopped at the age of 13, leading to aggravation of the EEG only. Asto- with Trisomy 21, as CSTB resides on this chromosome. It is not possible to nishingly, two years later the EEG showed normalization of the paroxyso- detect the carrier status with conventional PCR techniques, as there are 3 mal activity triggered by eye opening. We performed next generation se- copies of the gene. We have first managed to detect parent of origin for tri- quencing (NGS) for a paneSl YoNf GgAePn1es known or suspected to be causative somy via analyzing the chromosome 21 genotyping data as a trio. Additional in the pathogenesis of seizures. We identified a heterozygous stop dme untoavtoi- haplotype analysis of three copies of chromosome 21 revealed that this indi- on (c.348CS>YAN,G pA.PY1116*) in which was validated using Sanger se- vidual, who was under the age of onset at the time of the study, has only one quencing. Analysis of the parents suggests that the mutation arose . copy of the defective allele and probably will not develop ULD. The gene encodes an excitatory synapse-specific Ras GTPase and is a major component of the postsynaptic deSnYsNitGyA. PIt1 is thought to regulate synaptic strength e.g. by suppressing signaling pathways linked to NMDAR- mediated synaSpYtNicG ApPla1sticity. Mutations in are known to cause autosomal dominant mental retardation type 5 (MRD5). More recently, the ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 175 publication of mutations in patients with seizures suggested a roleABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.051-S SCN8A Exome sequencing reveals mutations of a solute carrier gene in an autosomal recessive form of epileptic encephalopathy of the first days Sanger sequencing. Since the clinical phenotype aSsCsoNc8iAated with of life mutations have previously identified only in a number of cases, these data J. Thevenon1, F. Feillet2, M. Milh3, J. St-Onge4, Y. Duffourd5, A. Roubertie6, E. Raffo7, together with our results suggest that mutations in can lead to ear- C. Jugé4, D. Héron8, B. Isidor9, D. Sanlaville10, S. Wahlen11, V. Darmency-Stamboul12, A. ly infantile epileptic encephalopathy or inteSllCeNct8uAal disability with broad Masurel-Paulet1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, A. Toutain13, G. Lesca14, S. Odent15, C. Philippe16, L. phenotypic spectrum. Additional investigations will be worthwhile to de- Olivier-Faivre1, J. Rivière4; termine the prevalence and contribution of mutations to epileptic 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2Hôpital d‘Enfants Brabois, encephalopathy and intellectual disability, and provide insight into the me- Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3APHM, Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Hôpital chanisms of pathogenesis in neurologic diseases. This study was supported de la Timone, 13005 Marseille, France; INSERM, UMR 910, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France, 4Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, b Py 0 9th .0e 5 E 3u -r SoEPINOMICS grant SARLA 11091E. Dijon, France, 5EA 4271 - Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université de Ambroxol and Bromhexine derivatives act promoting on mutant Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6INSERM U 1051 Institut des neurosciences de Montpellier, alpha-galactosidase A forms in cell culture systems of Fabry disease Montpellier, France, 7Médecine Infantile, Hopital d‘enfants, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, J. Lukas1, S. Seemann1, C. Richter1, A. Pockrandt1, M. Sharif2, M. Beller2, D. Großmann1, A. France, 8Genetics and Cytogenetics Department, GRC-upmc,Pitié-Salpétrière CHU, Paris, Rolfs1, A. Giese1; France, 9Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes; INSERM, UMR-S 957, Nantes, 1Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Rostock, Germany, 2Leibniz Institute France, 10Department of Genetics, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France; Claude for Catalysis, Rostock, Rostock, Germany. Bernard Lyon I University; CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Lyon, France, 11AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique et de Cytogénétique, Unité fonctionnelle de génétique clinique, Paris, France, 12Service de pédiatrie, Hopital d‘enfants, Dijon, France, 13Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire - Service de Génétique, Fabry disease (FD) is a rare hereditary disease caused by the absence or Tours, France, 14Service de Génétique and Centre de Référence des Anomalies du deficiency of lysosomal enzyme activity of the glycosylase α-galactosidase Développement, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon; INSERM U1028, A (GLA, EC 3.2.1.22, α-gal A). This enzyme breaks down macromolecular CNRS, UMR5292;Neuroscience Research Center, TIGER Team, University Claude Bernard structures of neutral glycosphingolipids. A lack of particular hydrolase ac- Lyon 1, Un, Lyon, France, 15CNRS UMR 6290 (IGDR), Université de Rennes 1; Service de tivity leads to lysosomal glycosphingolipid storage and subsequently multi- Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 16Département de Génétique, CHU Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France. subcellular dysfunction. Many mutations in the GLA gene have been identi- fied compromising the enzymeʼs stability causing a premature proteasomal degradation. Therefore, treatment strategies apply the use of small molecule enzyme inhibitors having the ability to promote enzyme folding and trans- Epileptic encephalopathy (EE) refers to a clinically and genetically hetero- port intracellularly, the so-called pharmacological chaperones (PC). It was geneous group of devastating disorders characterized by seizures combined demonstrated that those molecules specifically bind to the (mutated) tar- with abnormal inter-critic encephalography Age of onset can be a key dia- get enzyme which leads to a thermodynamically favoured conformational gnostic feature for epileptic syndrome definition, treatment and prognosis. change and in turn further cellular transport and an increase of the required We ascertained two multiplex families (including one consanguineous fami- activity in the lysosomes. One such compound is 1-Deoxygalactonojirimy- ly) consistent with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern of EE. All se- cine (DGJ). We recently described an auxiliary function of Ambroxol (ABX), ven affected individuals developed seizures in the first day of life, resistant a PC described for mutant glucocerebrosidase in Gaucher disease, for the to treatment and leading to repetitive “Etat de mal”. Evolution was marked observed DGJ activity in over-expression based cell culture systems of FD. by severe EE with major delay in motor acquisitions and one patient died Here, we report the results of a derivatisation project of Ambroxol and the at 11 years of age. No facial dysmorphism was noted, but oligodontia. Given structural analogue Bromhexine that led to the discovery of compounds the similarity in clinical presentation in the two families, we hypothesized that preserved the ability to enhance mutant α-gal A activity in combination that the observed phenotype was due to mutations in the same gene, and with DGJ. Structure-function analysis may give indications on the underlying performed exome sequencing in three affected individuals. Analysis of rare functional mechanism we aim to elucidate. Moreover, our findings did not variants in genes consistent with an autosomal recessive mode of inheri- support the occurrence of a direct compound:enzyme interaction. tance led to identification of mutations in a solute carrier gene. Causality  P09
.054-M was confirmed by co-segregation analysis in additional family members. Functional Analysis of DEPD C5
 variants identified in familial focal To assess the frequency of alterations of this gene in early onset EE, coding epilepsy with variable foci (FFEVF) and in cancer. exons were screened for mutations in a cohort of 70 unrelated affected indi- M. van Kranenburg, M. Nellist; viduals by targeted sequencing on a MiSeq instrument (Illumina). This expe- Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. riment led to identification of compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in a simplex case with a similar clinical presentation as the other affected patients. These results highlight the value of careful clinical characterization The target of rapamycin (TOR) complex 1 (TOR C1
) is an essential regulator for genetic studies in heterogeneous diseases such as EE. of cell growth. Stimulation of TOR C1
 kinase activity promotes anabolic meta-  P09
.052-M bolism, including protein, lipid and nucleotide synthesis. Multiple upstream Exome sequencing identifies novel SCN8A mutation associated with signals, including growth factors and the availability of nutrients and ener- neonatal epileptic encephalopathy, multiple congenital anomalies gy, act through two GTPase activating protein (GAP) complexes to control and movement disorder TOR C1
 activity. The TSC complex, consisting of TS C1
, TS C2
 and TB C1
D7, M. Nõukas1,2, U. Vaher3, T. Nikopensius1,2, M. Kals1, T. Annilo1,2, M. Nelis1, L. Milani1, K. Õunap3,4, T. Reimand3,4,5, I. Talvik3,6, P. Ilves7, A. Piirsoo5, E. Seppet8, A. Metspalu1,2, T. is required for growth factor and energy dependent inhibition of TOR C1
, Talvik3,6; while the GATOR-1 TcSoCm1plexT, ScCo2nsisting of DEPD C5
, NPR L2
 and NPR L3
, is 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Molecular required for amino acid-dependent regulation of TOR C1
. In humans, inacti- and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Children’s Clinic, Tartu University vatDinEgP mDCu5tations in or cause tuberous sclerosis complex, a disea- Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University se characterised by seizures and benign hamartoma-like lesions. Mutations Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, in have been identified inD hEuPmDCa5n tumours and were recently de- Department of Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Department of scribed in association with familial focal epilepsy with variable foci (FFEVF). Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 7Radiology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 8Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pathophysiology, We have investigaitne dv itthroe effects of variants identified in tumours or University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. iDnE iPnDdiCv5iduals with FFEVF on TOR C1
 signaling and GATOR-1 complex forma- tion using simTpSlCe1 TSC 2assays. Our functional daDtaE PdDem C5
onstrate that some mutations result in increased TOR C1
 activity, similar to pathogenic Epileptic encephalopathies represent clinically and genetically heteroge- mutations in or . Functional analysis of variants of uncer- neous group of disorders of which the majority are of unknowSCnN a8eAtiology. tain clinical significance will help define the role of the GATOR-1 complex in It is hypothesized that novel variants may contribute to most of these de- F PF 0E 9V .0F 5 a 5n -d S tumour pathogenesis. vastating group of epilepsies. Within recent years the role of in hu- A female with clinical features of FOXG1 syndrome and 1.5-Mb size man disease has become apparent from next generation sequencing studies. 14q12 microdeletion located more proximal to FOXG1 Whole-exome sequencing of a parent-offspring trio was used to identify the K. Õunap1,2, O. Zilina1,3, A. Kolk4,2, T. Reimand1,2,5; genetic cause of severe early infantile epileptic encephalopathy in a boy, 1Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of where previous chromosomal, gene and metabolic investigations revealed Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Biotechnology, Institute no abnormalities. The patient hadde n neoovnoatal seizures, movement disorder, of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Biomedicine, Institute of multiple congenital anomalies.S HCNe 8dAied at the age of 17 months due to re- Biomedicine and Translation Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. spiratory illness. We identified a heterozygous missense mutation (c.3979A>G; p.Ile1327Val) in (voltage-gated sodium-channel type V1I7II 6alpha subunit) gene. The variant was confirmEeSd HinG th 2e 0p1ro4b a|n Md IwLiAthN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG A severe Rett-like neurodevelopmental disorder is associated with de novoABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index FOXG1 FOXG1 FOXG1 point mutations or submicroscopic 14q12 deletion, which invol- to available literature. Patients heterozygous for a GAA expansion and point ve gene. It is now known as syndrome which clinically cau- mutation had an earlier age at onset, but were able to ambulate longer com- ses postnatal microcephaly, severe mental retardation, absent language, pared to patients with bi-allelic GAA expansions.  P09
.058-M dyskinesia, and dysgenesis of the corpus cFaOlXloGs1um. More than 30 cases of Mitochondrial genome encoding tRNAs sequence in frontotemporal FFOOXXGG11 syndrome have been published. Cases of a submcisicroscopic 14q12 lobar degeneration deletion, involving regulatory elements of , with the coding region of I. Oliveira1, I. Santana2,3, M. J. Santos1, D. Duro3, R. Gaspar1, D. Luís1,2, M. Grazina2,1; FOXG1 being unaffected, are described very seldom. A -acting regulato- 1CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology - Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics, ry sequence, acting as a silencer, is deleted more than 0.6 Mb distally from University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, in these cases. We report a new case with clinical features of FOXG1 Coimbra, Portugal, 3Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, syndrome and 14q12microdeletion. She was born at term with birth weight Portugal. 3636g, length 51 cm and head circumference 33.5 cm. Since the birth de- velopmental delay was noticed. At 11 months she has only weak head con- trol, microcephaly (-3 SD), focal epilepsy, deep set and almond shape eyes, Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is the second most common protruding tongue, increased muscle tonus and brisk tendon reflexes. Brain type of degenerative dementia, characterized by progressive changes in be- MRI showed hypogenesis of the corpus callosum, hypomyelinisation, arach- haviour, executive dysfunction and/or language impairment. Some patients noid cyst in the left temporal region and subtle padche yngoyvroia. Chromosomal present clinical and neuropathological overlap with Alzheimer‘s disease, microarray analysis revealed 1.5F-MOXbG s1ize 14q12 microdeletion (arr[hg19] suggesting similarities in pathophysiology, including mitochondrial DNA 14q12(27,584,943-29,170,974)x1) appeared to be . The end of this (mtDNA) involvement. Mutations in mtDNA, particularly in mt-tRNAs, have deletion is 65-kb proximal from leaving the gene itselFf OinXtGa1ct. There been described as an important cause of human disease. are no known protein-coding genes located in the deleted area. Therefore, The aim of present work was sequencing the 22 mitochondrial tRNAs genes, we can hypothesize that there is some regulatory element of located ascertaining their involvement in FTLD. proximal to the gene which deletions can also cause FOXG1 syndrome. A sample of 70 patients, diagnosed with probable FTLD, was studied (39  P09
.056-M females and 31 males; age range: 38-82 years, mean±SD: 63±11 years. Total Cy5 Analysis System in molecular diagnosis of Fragile-X Syndrome DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. The 22 tRNA genes sequences and Huntington disease were sequenced and variants were submitted to in silico analysis. A total of A. Mencarelli1, P. Prontera1, I. Isidori1, D. Rogaia1, V. Ottaviani1, G. Stangoni2, E. Donti1; 1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 2Neonatology, Hospital of 28 different sequence variations were identified in 32 patients (46%). Ac- Perugia, Perugia, Italy. cording to in silico analysis, 6 variations are probably pathogenic, all causing structure and binding minimum free energy changes. The most frequent va- riation found is m.12308A>G, in the variable region of mt-tRNALeu2, and Expansion of DNA repeats causes hereditary disorders in humans; our gene- it is totally conserved in all mammals tested. The m.15946C>T variation is tic diagnosis center is studying (CGG)n repeFarta igni lteh-eX F SMynRd1r goemnee in Fragile-X located in the acceptor stem and it is highly conserved. Syndrome and (CAG)n repeat in the HTT gene in Huntington’s disease (HD) Further investigation is needed to better understand the relationship bet- by a high performing systems, Cy5-labeled The critical ween mtDNA alterations found and FTLD, considering also the involvement issues in FMR1 analysis usually are: of nuclear genes in this disorder. However, this is the first study of complete - discriminate between fully mutated females from normal homozygotes. sequencing of the mt-tRNA genes in FTLD. - determine the proper CGG repeat size between 110 and 200 repeats Supported by “Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia” (PTDC/SAU- - determine methylation status E PP 0I 9/ .1 02 51 98 - S11
/2010 and PEst-C/SAU/LA0001/2013-2014). We routinely use a combination of two PCR-systems (CE-IVD) to determi- Assessment of Plasma Glucosylsphingosine as a biomarker for ne the proper CGG repeat size until 200 repeats and alternative methods to Gaucher Disease SHouunthtienrgnt oBnlo Dt (isMeSa-sMeLPA, High Resolution Melting ) to determine methyla- A. Giese1, U. Grittner2, J. Lukas1, D. Mascher3, A. Mühl4, S. Eichler4, H. Mascher5, A. Rolfs1; tion status. 1University of Rostock, Albrecht-Kossel-Institute, Rostock, Germany, 2Institute for In HTT gene the critical issue is define the exact CAG Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Charité-University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 3Pharm-analyt Laboratory GmbH, Baden, Austria, 4Centogene GmbH, Rostock, Germany, repeat size considering the small range that exists between premutation (36 5Pharm-analyt Laboratory GmbH, Rostock, Germany. repeats) and mutation status (40 repeats). The PCR-system (CE-IVD) we in- troduced in 2013 in our laboratory includes a positive control that helps to estimate the proper CAG repeat size in sample. Biomarkers play an essential role in the early detection, and monitoring Our results refer to 400 Fragile-X Syndrome suspected cases analyzed from of metabolic diseases, this also holds true for Lysosomal Storage Disor- 2010 to 2013 and to 30 Huntington’s Disease suspected cases analyzed in ders (LSDs). The ideal biomarker facilitates the initial diagnosis, evalu- 2013. Use of these systems (CE-IVD), high performing, fast and easy, has tates the disease severity and progress and may be assist in determining allowed us to reach good diagnostic results using instruments already sup- proper treatment. Here, we analyzed Glucoyslsphingosine for the primary plied in our department.  P09
.057-S diagnosis and monitoring of Gaucher disease (GD), where a defect in the Comparison of Friedreich Ataxia Patients with Trinucleotide Repeat beta-Glucosidase (GBA) gene leads to the accumulation of glucocsylerami- Expansions and Point Mutations in FXN-Encoded Frataxin de. Overall, we evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of Glucosylsphin- R. Gavrilova, R. Dhamija, J. Hesemann, C. Teigen, J. Johnson, M. Ackerman, G. Isaya, M. gosine by comparing healthy controls, Gaucher patients, Gaucher carriers Patterson, P. Tebben, D. Oglesbee; and patients with other LSDs. The determined cut-off of 12ng/ml yielded Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. a 100% sensitivity and specificity for Glucosylsphingosine. In addition the biomarker was compared to Chitotriosidase and CC L18
/PARC, which both are highly elevated in a number of LSDs and reflect the burden of disease on We retrospectively reviewed records of 40 patients with Friedreich Ataxia macrophages due to accumulation of macromolecules but are not specific (FRDA). The majority of patients, 88% had bi-allelic GAA expansions (Group for GD. In addition, Chitotriosidase levels may be normal even in GD patients 1, n=35) while 12% were heterozygous for an expansion and point mutation due to a common 24-bp duplication in the CHIT1 gene. Glucosylsphingosine (Group 2, n=5). Group 1 had a mean age of onset of 12.26 years compared proved to be more specific and sensitive than Chitotriosidase (p=0.027) and to Group 2 with a mean of 5 years. The average age at diagnosis in Group CC L18
/PARC (p<0.001). We also assessed long-term data of 19 GD patients 1 was 17.86 years and 15.2 years in Group 2. Neurological manifestations before and after onset of enzyme replacement therapy. Overall, Glucosyls- were the presenting symptom in the majority of both groups at 94% and phingosine is a reliable biomarker for the primary diagnosis and follow-up 80% respectively. Within Group 1, 53% had lost their ability to ambulate of Gaucher Disease. We will proceed with determining the correlation of di- at a mean of 10 years after disease onset compared to Group 2 where 50% sease severity, progress of the disease and treatment with varying levels of had lost their ability to ambulate at a mean of 16 years after disease onset. Glucosylsphingosine. In Group 1, all patients had evidence of cardiac involvement, including 43%  P09
.060-M having left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) on echo. In Group 2, all patients Saposin C deficiency: an inherited lysosomal disease caused by had evidence of cardiac involvement with 60% having LVH. Frataxin enzyme rapidly degraded mutant proteins levels had a mean of 6 ng/mL (N=2) in Group 1 while the mean for Group 2 M. Motta, M. Tatti, S. Camerini, M. Tartaglia, R. Salvioli; Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy. was 2.67 ng/mL (N=3). Genotype-phenotype correlation within FRDA patients is currently not well characterized. A greater percentage (Group 2) of patients with FRDA evalu- ated at Mayo Clinic do not have the classicE bSi-HallGeli c2 e0x1pa4n s| iMon IaLsA coNm,p IaTrAedL Y |S WapoWsinW (.SEaSp)H CG is. Oa 8R0G residues-long glycoprotein functioning as esse 1n 7ti 7al cofactor for the lysosomal degradation of glucosylceramide (GC) by gluco-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index sylceramidase (GCase). It promotes rearrangement of the organization of li- we have initially missed the characteristic sudden onset. 2) The difficulties pids in lysosomal membranes and provides GCase greater accessibility to GC with the annotation of deletions/insertions in the used software package.  P09
.063-S substrate. Rare functional deficiency in Sap C results in a rare variant form Very late onset Friedreich ataxia: a case report of Gaucher disease (GD). Sap C has six conserved cysteine residui.ee.s, involved R. Selvatici1, A. Armaroli1, A. Ravani2, M. Caniatti3, E. Groppo3, M. Tola3, A. Ferlini1, F. in three disulphide bonds making the protein structure remarkably stable Gualandi2; to acid environment and degradation. Five different mutations ( p. C315
S, 1Dip. Scienze Mediche e Dip. Riproduzione e Accrescimento, Ferrara, Italy, 2Dip. p.342_348FDKMCSKdel, p. L349
P, p. C382
G and p. C382
F), four of them invol- Riproduzione e Accrescimento, Ferrara, Italy, 3Dip. Neuroscience e Riabilitazione, ving a cysteine residue, are known. Here we report on the functional and Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria S. Anna, Ferrara, Italy. biological behaviour of disease-associated Sap C proteins. Lipid-binding properties and activating efficiency on GCase of Sap C mutants, analyzed by surface plasmon resonance and biochemical assays, were comparable to Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a rare autosomal recessive hereditary disorder those of wild type Sap C. On the contrary, mass spectrometry analyses of caused by expansion of a GAA repeats in the first intron of the X25 gene. It protease-treated mutants revealed a rapid degradation of those carrying a typically begins before the age of 25, but up to 25% of patients may be con- mutation involving a cysteine residue. Our data provide evidence that mu- sidered atypical with respect to the established diagnostic criteria, showing tant activator protein instability is the underlying pathogenetic mechanism delayed age at onset with mild clinical impairment, slower progression of of Sap C deficiency. disease, and fewer secondary complications. These patients are arbitrarily  P09
.061-S subdivided into late-onset FRDA [LOFA; 25-39 years] and very late-onset Genetic analysis of glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene in Italian patients FRDA [VLOFA; ≥40 years], show retained deep tendon reflexes and unu- with Parkinson disease and Lewy Body Dementia sually gradual disease progression. Here we describe a 63-year-old white F. Consoli1,2, S. Petrucci1,2, M. Ginevrino1, M. T. Pellecchia3, L. Bonanni4, A. R. Bentivoglio5, C. Criscuolo6, F. Ciccocioppo4, T. Ialongo5, A. De Luca1, M. Onofrj4, P. Barone3, E. M. woman showing lower limb spasticity with ataxia and preserved ankle and Valente1,3; knee jerks. The progression was slowly during the past 6 years, family histo- 1Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni ry was negative for neurological diseases and no consanguinity was repor- Rotondo, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, ted. Cerebellar dysartria, axonal neuropathy and reduced glucose tolerance Italy, 3Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy, were also present. Brain NMR showed cerebellar and cortical atrophy. Mole- 4Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, University G. d‘Annunzio of Chieti-Pescara, cular analysis revealed a pathologic GAA expansion in the gene encoding Chieti, Italy, 5Department of Neurology, Movement Disorder Unit, Catholic University frataxin, carrying expanded alleles in the low-range size, corresponding to of The Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and 110 and 180 GAA repeats. VLOFA is an infrequent subtype of the disease Odontostomatological Sciences, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. with onset ranging between 40 and 67 years. Nevertheless, considering the frequency of FRDA mutations carriers in the general population (1/60), and the associated risk of recurrence, this condition deserve to be considered Gaucher‘s disease (GD), the most common lysosomal storage disorder, is in atypical ataxic patients, even when the full clinical criteria for a classical associated with recessive mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA). form are not satisfied. It is known that GD patients and their heterozygous relatives more com-  P09
.064-M monly develop parkinsonism, and that GBA heterozygous mutations in- Correlation between genotype, phenotype, and effect of mutant crease of at least 5 times the risk to develop Parkinson‘s disease (PD) and protein in REE P1
-associated motoneuron degeneration Lewy bodies dementia (LBD). In this study, we evaluated the frequency C. Beetz, A. Beindorf, J. Falk, C. Hübner; of GBA mutations in Italian patients with PD or LBD. To this aim, we used Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany. long-template PCR to screen the entire GBA coding region for mutations in 216 patients with PD and 84 with LBD. GBA mutations were identified in 24 of 216 PD (11.1%) and in 4 of 84 LBD (4.7%) cases. Fourteen different Mutations in REE P1
 have classically been associated with a pure form of GBA heterozygous mutations were detected, including two previously un- the neurodegenerative condition hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP type reported mutations (c.1095G>C [p.Glu365Asp]) and a frameshift mutation SPG31), i.e. a phenotype resulting from exclusive involvement of upper (c.1197_1198insCTGTA [p.Met400Leufs*2]). motoneurons. We recently reported on a unique REE P1
 alteration which In conclusion, we report a high frequency of GBA mutations in Italian pati- results in complete skipping of the in-frame exon 5 and is associated with ents with either PD or LBD, indicating that GBA mutations represent a signi- distal hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN type V), i.e. an exclusive lower ficant risk factor for these disorders in Italy. motoneuron phenotype. Using minigene constructs we found that additio-  P09
.062-M nal exon 5 mutations, apparently representing non-sense or silent variants, Genome sequencing identifies a novel mutation in AT P1
A3 in a family confer partial missplicing of this exon. Interestingly, these mutations are as- with a seemingly atypical phenotype sociated with complicated forms of HSP in which both upper and lower mo- K. Lohmann1, I. Braenne1, L. Bertram2, K. Wiegers1, T. Anderson3, R. Wilcox4, C. Klein1; 1University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, toneurons seem to be involved. A meta-analysis of published reports reveals Berlin, Germany, 3Canterbury District Health Board Hospital, Christchurch, New that lower motoneuron involvement in SPG31 is significantly associated Zealand, 4Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia. with mutations that truncate the protein after the first ~100 residues. This border co-incites with the C-terminus of the REEP homology domain which mediates hetero- and homomeric interactions. By overexpression we show Mutations in AT P1
A3 have been reported in rapid-onset dystonia-parkin- that such truncated polypeptides resemble the previously reported exon 5 sonism (RDP). Dystonia in RDP has a characteristic sudden onset, typically deletion variant in localizing to large peri-nuclear “clumps”. Moreover, we in adolescence in response to physical or mental stress. Dystonic symptoms observed that these structures indeed depend on presence of the REEP ho- usually involve the bulbar region and are accompanied by symptoms of par- mology domain, and that their number and size increases over time. This in- kinsonism. More recently, mutations in AT P1
A3 have been linked to alterna- dicates that they represent aggregates rather than intact cellular structures. ting hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) and CAPOS syndrome, respectively. We thus suggest that N-terminal mutations act via haploinsufficiency which We investigated a family with dystonia from New Zealand with ten affec- causes pure HSP, while for more C-terminal mutations there is an additional, ted members. Interestingly, only females were affected. After exclusion of aggregate-mediated toxic gain-of-function effect which results in complex mutations in TOR1A and THA P1
, we performed genome sequencing in two p Ph 0e 9n .0o 6ty 5p -e Ss due to lower motoneuron involvement. affected cousins. For filtering, we used the KnomeDiscovery Data Filtering Identification of the first Spastic Paraplegia 11 families in Sudan and Software. Since re-sequencing of 20 candidate variants did not elucidate the report of novel SPG11 mutations genetic cause, we performed exome sequencing in another affected indivi- L. E. O. Elsayed1,2,3, M. Idris3,4,5, H. Mohamed4,5, M. Coutelier1,2, C. Tesson1,2, A. Mohamed6, dual. Analysis of the raw data using an in-house bioinformatics pipeline re- H. Eltahir7, R. Siddig6, M. Koko6, A. Ahmed3, E. Mundwiller1,8, D. Bouteiller1,8, K. El- vealed a previously unreported three base-pair deletion (c.443_445delGAG, Hachimi1,2, K. Bouya1, M. Elbashir3, M. Ibrahim9, A. Durr1, A. Brice1, A. Ahmed3,4,5, G. p.148_149delSer) in AT P1
A3 in all three genome/exome sequenced pati- Stevanin1,2,8; 1Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Inserm, CNRS, UM 75, U1127, UMR 7225, ents. Segregation analysis showed the mutation in all patients and in one Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris, France, 2Neurogenetics team, unaffected male. The mutation was not found in 200 controls. Subsequent Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes - Hesam Université, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, ICM, clinical re-examination, revealed sudden onset of dystonic symptoms after Paris, France, 3University of Khartoum, Faculty of Medicine, Khartoum, Sudan, 4Sudan stressful events. None of the patients reported any history of AHC or CAPOS Medical Council, Neurology, Khartoum, Sudan, 5Royal College of Physicians, London, syndrome. United Kingdom, 6University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, 7University of El Imam EL In conclusion, our study identifies a novel mutation in AT P1
A3 as cause of Mahdi, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, Kosti, Sudan, 8Genotyping and RDP and highlights two important challenges when using next generation sequencing platform, ICM, Paris, France, 9University of Khartoum, Institute of Endemic s1e7qu8encing: 1) The importance of detailed clinical inEfoSrHmGat i2on0. 1In4 o u| rM famILiAly,N , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Diseases, Department of Molecular Biology, Khartoum, Sudan. in wild-type STHdh(Q7)/Hdh(Q7) and mutant STHdh(Q111)/Hdh(Q111) Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) constitutes a heterogeneous group of cell lines derived from the murine embryonic striatum. We observed a si- syndromes with core features of progressive lower limb spasticity and wea- gnificant reduction of PMCA1 protein in glial differentiated mutant cells kness, without or with other manifestations (pure / complex HSP). All mo- (p<0.05) and SERCA2 protein in undifferentiated mutant cells (p<0.001). des of inheritance have been described. Using doxycicline-inducible rat striatal cell lines (Hd19 and HD43 Sipione HSP with thin corpus callosum (TCC) represents a distinct entity for which et al. 2002) we confirmed the reduction of SERCA2 as a mutant huntingtin mutations in SPG11 are the most frequent causes. expression dependent event. As a part of a larger study to elucidate the molecular basis and the phenoty- To evaluate the role of PMCA1 and SERCA2 gene expression as biomarkers pic patterns of HSP in Sudan, we report 2 extended Sudanese families with of disease onset or/and progression we compared their mRNA levels in the complex HSP and multiple consanguinity loops. Ten patients were clinically peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of 20 pre-symptomatic and 90 phenotyped and DNA was obtained from blood and saliva samples. symptomatic HD subjects and in sex and age matched healthy subjects. We The age at onset in the first family ranged from 12 to 17 years. Patients pre- observed a reduction of SERCA2 mRNA both in pre-symptomatic and sym- sented with ataxia, mental impairment and skeletal deformities in addition ptomatic HD patients compared with healthy subjects. Our data highlight to spasticity. Exome sequencing performed in 3 patients identified a homo- SERCA2 gene down-regulation as a biomarker of HD having a role in early zygous deletion (c.6709del/p.Ala2237Gln*7) in exon 36 of SPG11. cellular dysfunction. In the second family, the age at onset extended from 11 to 24. The phenotype Finally, in PBMC we studied the neuroprotective angiogenic factor vascular was more complex, with psychiatric symptoms, dysphagia and peripheral endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA level. VEGF transcript level resul- motor involvement with distal muscle atrophy of both limbs. Direct sequen- ted significantly lower in pre-symptomatic HD compared to healthy subjects cing of SPG11 identified a stop mutation (c.6349G>T/p.Glu2117*) in exon (p<0.01) and even lower in late-symptomatic compared to pre-symptomatic 34 that segregated with the disease within the family. group (p<0.05). This finding suggests VEGF transcript as a peripheral bio- MRI of 3 cases from both families revealed TCC, cerebellar and cortical atro- m  P0
a 9rk .0e 6r 8u -s Meful for monitoring disease onset and progression. phy and WMLs. Mutations in B9D1 and MK S1
 cause mild Joubert syndrome: expanding Both mutations are novel and lead to premature truncation of spatacsin pro- the genetic overlap with the lethal Meckel ciliopathy tein. These families are the first described Sudanese families carrying SPG11 M. Romani1, A. Micalizzi1,2, I. Kraoua3, M. Dotti4, M. Cavallin5, L. Sztriha6, R. Ruta1, F. mutations. This study illustrates the wide range of clinical presentations as- Mancini1, T. Mazza1, S. Castellana1, B. Hanene3, M. Carluccio4, F. Darra5, A. Máté7, A. sociated with SPG11. Zimmermann6, N. Gouider-Khouja3, E. Valente1,8;  P09
.066-M 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Mendel Laboratory, San Giovanni Rotondo, Assessing an anaplerotic therapy on the brain metabolic profile in San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Department of Medical and Surgical Pediatric Sciences, Huntington disease University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Research Unit 06/11 and Department of Child I. M. Adanyeguh1, D. Rinaldi1, P. Henry2, R. Valabregue3, A. Durr1,4, F. Mochel1,4; and Adolescent Neurology, National Institute Mongi Ben Hmida of Neurology, Tunis, 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière; INSERM U1127; CNRS UMR7225; UPMC Tunis, Tunisia, 4Department of Medical, Surgical and Neurological Sciences, University Paris VI UMR_ S975
, Paris, France, 2Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Unit of Child Neuropsychiatry, Policlinico G.B. Rossi, Verona, Italy, of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 3Center for NeuroImaging Research, 6Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris, France, 4Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 7Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, de Paris, Fédération de Génétique, Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France. Hungary, 8Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy. Objective: To obtain a proof-of-concept for an anaplerotic therapy in Hun- Joubert syndrome (JS) is a congenital disorder diagnosed by the presence of tBinagcktognr oduisnedas: e (HD) using a validated functional biomarker of brain energy a peculiar mid-hindbrain malformation (the “molar tooth sign”), that con- metabolism. sists of cerebellar vermian hypodysplasia, thickened mal-oriented superi- Energy deficit has been greatly implicated in the pathophysio- or cerebellar peduncles and a deepened interpeduncular fossa. The typical lMogeyth oof dHsD: . Our previous work has indicated a need to refill the Krebs cycle neurological features of pure JS include hypotonia, ataxia, psychomotor de- which can be achieved using anaplerotic therapy. lay, abnormal ocular movements and intellectual impairment. This pheno- 31P brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) was coupled type may be complicated by defects of the kidneys, eyes, liver, skeleton and with th e activation of the occipital cortex to measure the levels of PCr and Pi orofacial defects, resulting in wide clinical variability. JS is recessively inhe- before (rest), during (activation) and after (recovery) a visual stimulus. At rited and genetically heterogeneous, with 24 known genes. All genes encode visit 1,we performed 31P brain MRS in 10 patients at the early stage of HD for proteins of the primary cilium, and indeed there is clinical and genetic and 10 controls. HD patients were then treated at home for one month with overlap with other ciliopathies. In particular, JS shares 13 genes with Meckel tRreihseuplttsa:noin and came back for a second visit during which we performed syndrome (MS), a lethal condition characterized by cystic kidneys, bile duct 31P brain MRS. proliferation of the liver, encephalocele and polydactyly. As part of a large At visit 1, we confirmed a significant increase in Pi/PCr ratio screening of ciliopathy genes in 26M0K JSS 1patients, we identified novel pathoge- (p=0.022) during brain activation in controls - reflecting increased ATP syn- nic mutations in two genes not previously implicated in this condition. Two thesis - followed by a significant return to baseline levels during recovery patients carrBie9dD m1utations in the gene, a 44-year-old man with JS and (p=0.008). In HD patients, we confirmed an abnormal brain energy profile retinal dystrophy, and a two-year-old child with a pure JS phenotype. Muta- with decreased Pi/PCr ratio before treatment. After one month of trihep- tions in the gene were identified in two other patients, a 9-year-old tCaonnocinlu tshioerna:py, the MRS profile was greatly improved in HD patients with boy and a 6-year-old girl both presenting with pure JS. All identified muta- increased Pi/PCr ratio during visual stimulation (p=0.004). tions were inherited from heterozygous healthy parents, were not reported This study suggests that triheptanoin is able to correct the bio- in public databases, and affected highly conserved residues. Missense muta- energetic profile in HD patients’ brain at an early stage of the disease. The tions were predicted as pathogenic by prediction web tools.  P09
.069-S administration of triheptanoin over a longer period of time is now required Pseudo-dominant inheritance of a novel CTSF mutation associated to assess its clinical benefit.  P09
.067-S with type B Kufs disease PMCA, SERCA and VEGF as potential patogenetic factors in F. Moro1, R. Di Fabio2, M. Meschini1, S. Doccini1, F. Pierelli2, A. Simonati3, F. Santorelli1; Huntington’s disease and as biomarkers of onset and progression 1Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone, Pisa, Italy, 2Department of Medical-Surgical F. Cesca1, G. Dubsky de Wittenau1, A. Poz1, G. Damante1,2, B. Peterlin3, M. Zadel4, G. Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University of Rome, Latina, Italy, 3Department of Siciliano5, F. Curcio1,6, R. Lonigro1,6; Neurological and Movement Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. 1Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche,Università di Udine, Udine, Italy, 2Istituto di Genetica, AOU di Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Institute Kufs disease (KD) is the rare adult form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis of Medical Genetics, Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center,, (NCL). Mutations in the cathepsin F gene (CTSF) (MIM 603539) have re- Ljubljana, Slovenia, 5Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale,Università di Pisa, cently been discovered in autosomal recessive Type B KD families characte- Pisa, Italy, 6Istituto di Patologia Clinica, AOU di Udine, Udine, Italy. rized by movement and behavioral abnormalities and dementia. We present a family in which pseudo-dominant transmission of Type B KD was explai- ned by a novel homozygous splice site mutation in CTSF leading to the lost To study calcium homeostasis deregulation in Huntington’s disease (HD) of exon 1. ethiology we investigated calcium pumps expression level in HD cellular Three affected individuals showed similar neurological pictures characte- models and in peripheral blood of pre-symptomatic and symptomatic HD rized by generalized seizures, cerebellar dysarthria and cognitive decline, patients. We compared the steady-state level of cellular membrane asso- ciated PMCA1-4 and endoplasmic reticulEumSH aGsso 2ci0at1e4d S| EMRCILA2A,3N p, uITmApsL Y |e WvolWvinWg i.nEtoS fHraGnk.O deRmGentia. The presence of three additional relatives 1 w 7it 9h a neurological syndrome compatible with KD and two instances of parent-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index to-child transmission proposed an initial hypothesis of a dominant form diagnostic molecular test. [Partly supported by Italian Ministry of Health of dementia representing a confounding factor for genetic testing. A more grant RF-2009-1539841 to FT]  P09
.072-M detailed clinical assessment of the patients, meticulous collection of fami- Combined analysis of linkage and exome sequencing identifies a novel ly history and recognition of the high degree of inbreeding in the isolated SYN E1
 mutation in a consanguineous family from Turkey with a rare community where this family lives, were crucial in disclosing an autosomal form of recessive cerebellar ataxia recessive pattern of inheritance, prompting investigation of CTSF. E. Yucesan1, B. Bilgic2, H. Hanagasi2, B. Bakir Gungor3,4, Z. Gormez4, A. Sarac4, M. In vitro experiments in cultured skin cells from the proposita and her aunt Sagiroglu4, H. Gurvit2, S. Ugur Iseri1, U. Ozbek1; demonstrated a dysregulated autophagy and aggresome-like structures, 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, confirmed by ultrastructural studies in skin biopsies. These data put for- Istanbul, Turkey, 3Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Abdullah Gul University, ward the hypothesis of a cytoplasmic toxicity of pathological cathepsin F in Kayseri, Turkey, 4The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK), Kocaeli, Turkey. KD type B.  P09
.070-M Lamin B1 expression is affected by EBV infection in lymphoblasts of patients with Autosomal Dominant Leukodystrophy through mir-23 Cerebellar ataxias are characterized by incoordination and unsteadiness of deregulation movement due to cerebellar dysfunction. In this study, we analyzed a con- E. Giorgio1, L. Favaro2, N. Lo Buono1, C. Mancini1, G. Vaula3, P. Cortelli1, S. Capellari4, sanguineous family with 4 affected individuals presenting very slowly pro- P. Mandich5, N. Dahl6, A. Melberg7, E. Pozzi1, E. Di Gregorio1, S. Cavalieri1, P. Labauge8, E. Eymard Pierre8, H. Rolyan9, O. Boespflug-Tanguy8, L. Gasparini10, Q. S. Padiath9, A. gressive cerebellar symptoms including dysartria, dysmetria and gait ataxia. Brussino1, A. Brusco1; All 4 affected and 3 unaffected members from this family were genotyped 1University of Torino-Dep Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, 2University of Torino- using Illumina Human HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip kit. The genotyping Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, Torino, Italy, 3University of Torino-Dep data obtained were further analyzed in terms of copy number variation of Neurosciences, Torino, Italy, 4University of Bologna, Department of Neurological (CNV) and linkage using Illumina proprietary software cnvPartition and ea- Science, Bologna, Italy, 5University of Genova, Department of Neurology, Oftalmology syLinkagePlus interface, respectively. The patients were negative for a com- and Genetics, Medical Genetics Unit, Genova, Italy, 6Dept. of Immunology, Genetics and mon CNV, while a single linkage peak on chromosome 6q25 was obtained Pathology, Section of Clinical Genetics, The Rudbeck laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 7Dept. of Neurology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 8University with a maximum LOD score of 3.42. Paris 7-Denis Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 9Department of Human Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in two affected sibs from Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, the family in parallel to linkage analysis. Genetic variants of the affected United States, 10Istituto Italiano di tecnologia, Department of Neurosciences and Brain individuals within the linkage interval were filtered against novel variants Technologies, Genova, Italy. with harmful effect. This approach has led to identification of a novel muta- tion in gene SYN E1
 (c.13086delC; p.His4362Glnfs*2) segregating with the condition in the family as confirmed by Sanger sequencing. SYN E1
 has 147 Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), obtained through the immortalization of B exons encoding 8797 amino acids. This mutation is predicted to truncate lymphocytes by Epstein-Barr virus, can provide a virtually unlimited sour- almost half of the protein. ce of DNA, mRNA and protein for research studies and have been used as SYN E1
 encodes a nuclear envelope protein, which is expressed in various a replacement for molecular and functional analyses of diseases including tissues, particularly in the cerebellum. Mutations in SYN E1
 have previously those affecting central nervous system (CNS). Autosomal dominant adult- been implicated in a rare form of recessive spinocerebellar ataxia observed onset leukodystrophy (ADLD) is a demyelinating disease of the CNS asso- especially in French-Canadian population. ciated with duplication of the lamin B1 gene (LMNB1). Studying LCLs com- Our study presents the combined analysis of linkage and WES as a powerful pared to fibroblasts from a survey of patients affected by ADLD, we showed and precise tool to diagnose a clinically unknown condition at the molecular a wide variability in LMNB1 levels both at mRNA and protein levels. Lamin level.  P09
.073-S B1 expression was inversely proportional to miR-23, a known LMNB1 re- Screening the LRRK2-3’UTR region on a Spanish cohort of PD-patients gulator. Linear regression analysis showed that there was a significant in- and controls and mRNA relative quantification in brain verse correlation between the mean miR-23 levels and lamin B1 expression L. F. Cardo, E. Coto, V. Álvarez; in patients’ LCLs, whereas no correlation was observed in fibroblasts. We Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. speculate that the immortalization of LCLs randomly deregulates miR-23 expression that, in turn, alters lamin B1 levels. This work further demon- strates the importance of miR-23 in the regulation of lamin B1 expression, Mutations in LRRK2 are recognized as the most common genetic determi- and suggests caution when using LCLs as the only source of mRNA in the nant of sporadic and familial Parkinson’s disease (PD). Recently, several contest of in vitro research and of lamin B1 as Western blots loading control studies of exonic variants in large populations were published; however, for nuclear extracts.  P09
.071-S none of them was focused in the 3’UTR region. Our aim was to screening Molecular analysis of EIF2B genes in adult-onset leukodystrophy with the 3’UTR of LRRK2 looking for risk variants, modifying factors, disrupted vanishing white matter targets for microRNA binding and a possible effect of this region in mRNA F. Taroni, S. Caldarazzo, M. Savoiardo, L. Farina, C. Lamperti, R. Mantegazza, D. expression. Pareyson, E. Salsano, D. Di Bella; Our cohort consisted of 743 PD patients (67±10 years; 52% male) and 523 Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy. healthy controls (67±12 years; 50% male). The human post-mortem tissu- es were obtained from three different brain regions of 9 PD and 5 healthy donors. Leukodystrophy with vanishing white matter (LVWM) is a rare autosomal Patients were genotyped for the LRRK2 mutations G2019S and R1441G/ recessive white matter disease due to mutations in one of the five eukaryo- C/H resulting in 16 G2019S carriers and 15 R1441G carriers. None of the tic initiation factor 2B genes (EIF2B1-5). Onset is typically in late infancy tissue donors was mutation carrier. We identified a total of 12 variants; 2 of or early childhood, but later onset is also reported. The adult-onset form them new (c.*130_131del and c.*1382C>A) in the 3’UTR region. We found is usually associated with EIF2B5 Arg113His mutation while, thus far, the- rs66737902 T>C as a possible variant related with PD risk being the C al- re are only 3 reports of mutations in EIF2B3. Genetic analysis of EIF2B5 lele overrepresented in patients; p= 0.01 OR=1.37 CI=1.07-1.74. To tested and EIF2B3 genes was performed in 6 adult-onset Italian patients from 5 if rs66737902 had an effect in the gene expression through the binding of families, for whom LVWM was suggested by MRI pattern. We identified 5 miRNAs, we study miR-138-2* as candidate miRNA (TargetScan, microR- different EIF2B5 missense mutation (2 novel), in 4 patients (2M, 2F) and NA.org) and miR-205 as control miRNA. We did not find any effect of miR- 2 different EIF2B3 missense mutations (1 novel) in 2 female patients. The 138-2*. In the mRNA expression study we found significant differences clinical presentation of mutated patients is heterogeneous and nonspeci- between TT and TC rs66737902 genotypes in the SN of PDs, with a minor fic, ranging from nearly-isolated neurogenic bladder or ovarian failure to expression level in the TC group (p=0.011). No differences between patients stroke-like episodes or various psychiatric disturbances. Overall, the clinical and control were found.  P09
.074-M course was slowly progressing over years or decades, although rapid mo- Variation in the promoter of the autophagic beclin-1 gene (BECN1) tor or cognitive deterioration was observed in one case. In all cases, brain and its impact on expression levels: a study in Machado-Joseph MRI was characterized by diffuse leukoencephalopathy associated with disease (MJD/SCA3) patients a varying burden of areas of rarefaction/cavitation. This study provides N. I. Kazachkova1,2, M. Raposo1,2, R. Montiel3, A. Ramos1,2, M. Lima1,2; further evidence that not only EIF2B5, but also EIF2B3 mutations can be 1Center of Research in Natural Resources (CIRN), University of the Azores, Ponta associated with a wide clinical spectrum of adult-onset LVWM, whereas the Delgada, Portugal, 2Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC), University of Porto, neuroradiological pattern - characterized by areas of white matter rarefac- 180 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG tion/cavitation - unequivocally guides the clinician to request the properABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Porto, Portugal, 3Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la Biodiversidad (LANGEBIO), Unidad de Genómica Avanzada, CINVESTAV-IPN, Irapuato, Mexico. homozygosity mapping and revealed linkage to at least one of the known MCPH gene loci in 23 families. In seven families all known MCPH loci could Background and Objectives: Autophagy, as a process of intracellular compo- be excluded. Subsequently, we anAaSlPyMzed DNA samples from members of the nents degradation, is especially important in disorders where accumulation “linked” families by Sanger sequencing of the corresponding known MCPH of the mutant protein is a hallmark, such as MJD, a late onset polyglutamine gene. We found 10 mutations in , five of them are novel and 9 families ataxia. We documented the variation in the promoter of the BECN1 gene carry the already rMepCoPrHte1d founder mutation p.W1326*. Among CtDheK 5rePmAPa2i- whose overexpression has been reported to exert neuroprotective effects in ning five families, two showed novel overlapping microdeWleDtRio6n2s. of 580.8 MJD. The relation between BECN1 promoter variation and expression levels kb and 164.2kb in , two other showed novel mutations in , were studied, as well as its impact on disease onset. and the last one showed a previouAsSlPyM reported mutation in This stu- Methods: The BECN1 promoter was sequenced in 95 MJD patients and 120 dy adds to the mutational spectra of known MCPH-associated genes. The controls. In silico analysis (PROMO) were performed to detect differences in observed high frequency of the mutation p.W1326* underscores its putative transcription factor binding sites (TFBS). BECN1 expression level p Pr 0o 9m .0in 7e 7n -St role as a founder mutation in the Pakistani population. was quantified by Real-time PCR in 29 MJD patients and 27 controls, for The metabolism of GABA and glutamate is affected in the brain of the which cDNA from peripheral blood was available. Mecp2-deficient mouse, a model for Rett syndrome. Results: Two previously described variants (rs60221525 and rs116943570) R. El Khoury1,2, N. Panayotis1,2, A. Ghata1,2, V. Matagne1,2, G. Alcaraz1,2, L. VILLARD1,2, J. were found in MJD patients and controls. In silico analysis predicted the Roux1,2; existence of less putative TFBS for rs60221525 and of more TFBS for 1Inserm UMR_S 910, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Université, Marseille, France. rs116943570. BECN1 expression levels were in agreement with the in silico predictions, showing decreased and increased expression for rs60221525 and rs116943570, respectively. CAG number explained 60.5% of the va- Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurological disorder affecting females. riance in onset; when rs60221525 and rs116943570 were added to the Most RTT cases are caused by mutations in the X-linked methyl-CpG binding multiple regression model, there was a tendency for the increase in the ex- protein 2 (MEC P2
) gene. RTT patients develop normally until 6-18 months planation. of age, before the onset of deficits in autonomic, cognitive and motor func- Conclusions: Variation found in the BECN1 promoter modulates expression tions. Studies on Mecp2-deficient mouse models have revealed severe neu- and has a potential to modify onset of MJD. The analysis of further patients rotransmission dysregulations, including deficits in bioamine levels and should increase the power of the study and confirm the role of BCN1 as mo- dysfunction of the GABAergic and glutamatergic systems leading to an imba- difier of MJD. lance between excitation and inhibition in the brain of the mutant animals.  P09
.075-S However, published results are divergent due to differences in age, model Study of the genetic architecture behind mood disorders by whole used and/or brain areas studied. Here, we have used real-time PCR, western exome sequencing on a large Italian pedigree E. Giacopuzzi1, C. Magri1, A. Minelli1, P. Valsecchi2,3, S. Monchieri4, G. Borsani1, E. blotting and HPLC dosage to compare the GABA and glutamate metabolism Sacchetti2,3, M. Gennarelli1,5; in eight different brain areas of the Mecp2-deficient mouse brain at two de- 1Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, velopmental stages (early and late symptomatic). Several key enzymes of University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, GABA and glutamate metabolism have been studied (Kcc2, Nkcc1, Vglut1/2, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 3Department of Mental Health, Brescia Spedali Civili, Gad1/2). Our results show : 1- a progressive reduction of the GABA and glut- Brescia, Italy, 4Fondazione Poliambulanza, Brescia, Italy, 5Genetics Unit, IRCCS San amate contents; 2- a spatial and temporal deregulation of the GABAergic and Giovanni di Dio, Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. glutamatergic key enzymes. We have used that information to assess a phar- macological stimulation of the GABAergic system in vivo and we showed that such a treatment increases the lifespan of Mecp2-deficient mice. Major depressive disorders (MDD) and bipolar disorder (BD) are mood dis-  P09
.078-M orders with a lifetime prevalence in the adult population of approximately MEF2C haploinsufficiency is a recurrent finding in patients with 16% and 4%, respectively. Estimated heritability is about 37% for MDD and autism spectrum disorders 75% for BD and the two disorders have a genetic correlation of about 43%. A. Ziegler1,2, R. Delorme3,2,4, P. Amati-Bonneau1,5, A. Guilmatre2,4, T. Bourgeron2,4,6, D. Bonneau1,5; As of today their genetic architecture remains unclear and no major gene- 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 2Human tic risk factors or causative genes have been identified yet. With the aim of Genetics and Cognitive Functions, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique- identifying susceptibility loci responsible for the MDD/BD phenotype, we Hôpitaux de Paris, Robert Debré Hospital, Department of Child and Adolescent studied a IV generation Italian pedigree composed of 20 subjects, 7 of whom Psychiatry, Paris, France, 4CNRS URA 2182 “Genes, synapses and cognition,” Institut are affected by mood disorders (5 MDD, 2 BD). Linkage analysis identified 5 Pasteur, Paris, France, 5UMR CNRS 6214 INSERM 1083, Angers, France, 6University Denis regions that were inherited by all the affected members, extending for 222 Diderot Paris 7, Paris, France. Mb overall. Exome sequencing performed on the 7 affected subjects and 2 unaffected relatives identified ~1930 genetic variants within linkage regi- ons, 222 of which are functional variants (missense, LoF, splicing) shared by Since the first description of MEF2C haploinsufficiency syndrome in 2009, all affected subjects. These latter variants affect several genes already asso- 42 patients have been reported either with deletion or point mutation of ciated to MDD/BD and other relevant biological pathways, such as synaptic this gene. Intellectual disability (ID) is the core disorder of this syndrome development and neurodevelopment. We also identified 28 rare variants but autistic features such as stereotypic movements and lack of social com- (MAF<1 % in dbSNP, 1000G and ES P6500
), 8 in the linkage regions, present munications are commonly reported. To further assess the role of MEF2C in only in the affected subjects. Among the genes affected by these variants, we autism spectrum disorder (ASD), we looked for MEF2C point mutations by selected 4 candidates that could differentiate affected from unaffected sub- Sanger sequencing and for MEF2C copy number variations by SNP-array in jects in the family. In conclusion, our data suggest that MDD/BD arise from a cohort of 195 patients with ASD and mild to severe ID. the combination of a shared mutational burden on risk genes together with We identified a de novo frameshift mutation leading to a premature stop a few rare variants triggering the observed phenotype. codon in 2 siblings with ASD and severe ID. A maternal germinal mosaicism  P09
.076-M was confirmed based on the haplotype. A de novo MEF2C deletion was also Spectrum of Mutations in a New Cohort of Pakistani Families with found in a patient with ASD and a mild ID. In this study, we observed MEF2C Primary Microcephaly haploinsufficiency in 1,5% (95% confidence interval: 0-3.2%) of patients I. Ahmad1, M. S. Hussain2, S. M. Baig3, P. Nürnberg1; 1Cologne Ceneter for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry I, Cologne, with ASD. This is the first study to look specifically at MEF2C in ASD. Of note, Germany, 3National Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), a mutation in MEF2C was also found once by whole-exome sequencing in Faisalabad, Pakistan. another cohort of 175 trios with ASD. According to this notable MEF2C ha- ploinsufficiency frequency in ASD, we strongly recommend to pay specific attention to this gene when performing non-targeted genetic screening in Autosomal Recessive Primary Microcephaly (MCPH) is a neurodevelopmen- A PS 0D 9 .w 08it 0h - Ma comorbid ID even for patients without severe ID. tal disorder resulting in diminution of brain growth in utero. The noticeable Importance of genotype-phenotype correlation in genetic diagnosis of features are reduced head circumference at birth, and varyingM dCePgHr1ee, W ofD inRt6e2l-, microcephaly CleDcKtu5aRl Aim P2
p,a CirAmSCe5n,t AwSiPthMo, uCtE oNthPeJ,r S nTeIuLr, oClEoPg1ic3 f5i,n CdEinPg1s5. 2T,o Z dNaFt3e,3 t5w, ePlHveC 1g,e anneds F. M. Nedelea1,2, A. Pavel2, L. Dimos2, V. Plaiasu3,2, D. Ochiana3, M. Bari1,4, D. Stambouli2, ChDavKe6 been reported tAoS bPeM associated with MCPH, including G. Peltecu1,4; 1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania, 2Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, . Among these, has been found to be most frequently mutated in Bucharest, Romania, 3Mother and Child Hospital, Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, the Pakistani population. In the current study, 30 new families were ascer- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 181 tained from different regions of Pakistan. We performed SNP array-basedABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 4University of Medicine ”Carol Davila”, Bucharest, Romania. riants within the candidate region pinpointed a novel missense substitution New genetic tools for the investigation of cases with neurodevelopmental in the SGK223 gene (c.1529T>C). In silico predictions strongly suggested an delay increased continuously the knowledge concerning the underline cau- alteration of a cryptic splice site in presence of this variant. Interestingly, ses of genetic syndromes. SGK223 codes for the pragmin protein involved in the reorganization of cy- Array CGH is a highly sensitive method for diagnosis of pathological CNVs toskeleton, which is a pathway already involved in the dHMN pathogenesis. responsible for malformative syndromes. Despite this functional consistency, further studies are warranted to con- We report a case of a 5y.o girl, who was referred to Medical Genetics De- f Pir 0m 9. 0th 8e 4s -e M findings. partment for evaluation due to microcephaly, mild dysmorphic features and In search of a new vascular dementia: An exome sequencing approach developmental delay. From her medical history, severe and frequent urinary to a Swedish multi-infarct family infections, in the absence of any malformation present in the urinary sy- M. Siitonen1, A. Börjesson-Hanson2, M. Pöyhönen3, P. Pasanen1, S. Kern2, J. Kern2, C. stem, are noticeable. Sundal4, O. Andersen4, M. Baumann5, R. Kalaria6, H. Kalimo7, J. Hardy8,9, M. Viitanen10,11, L. Conventional karyotype from peripheral blood revealed a 12p terminal Myllykangas7, R. Guerreiro8; deletion. Discrepancies between clinical findings and karyotype results re- 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience quired additional investigation using comparative genomic hybridization and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, method. Array CGH revealed a 5Mb terminal deletion on the long arm of 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, chromosome 10, result that matches with the clinical findings of our patient. 4Department of Neurology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska The molecular result was verified by FISH analysis .This finding is consistent Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 5Protein Chemistry Unit, with a complex chromosomal rearrangement involving insertion of genetic Institute of Biomedicine/Anatomy, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Institute material from chromosome 12p to chromosome 10 and consequent deleti- for Ageing Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, on of terminal region on the long arm of chromosome 10. 7Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 8Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University Parental karyotypes are normal, suggestive of a “de novo” rearrangement College London, London, United Kingdom, 9Reta Lila Weston Institute, UCL Institute of and consequence low recurrence risk for other siblings. Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 10Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and This case report illustrates the importance of considering genotype-pheno- Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 11Department of Geriatrics, University type correlation for each patient and the advantages and the limits of gene- of Turku, Turku, Finland. tic diagnostic techniques in our practice. In conclusion, clinical judgment complementary to genetic tests provides an a Pc 0c 9u .r 0a 8te 2 -d Miagnosis, prognosis and recurrence risk evaluation. In 1977, Sourander and Wålinder described a case of hereditary multi-in- New deletion in exon 32 and 33 in ML L2
 gene causes Kabuki farct dementia (MID) in a Swedish family. Later their disease was suggested Syndrome in a spanish patient to be cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts G. Pi, M. Ortiz, I. Aleixandre, A. Zuñiga; and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL). TNheO TclCinHi3c al picture of recurrent stro- HOSPITAL DE LA RIBERA, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. kNeOsT rCeHs3embles CADASIL, but we did not detect any pathogenic mutations in the entire 8091 bp reading frame of nor found evidence for the gene linkage. Neither did we find any evidence of the CADASIL- Kabuki syndrome (KS; OMIM# 147920) is a rare congenital disorder, cha- typical granular osmiophilic material (GOM) in skin biopsies. These mul- racterized by typical facial features including: long palpebral fissures, ever- tiple approaches suggest that in this Swedish family the hereditary MID sion of the lateral third of lower eyelids, arched and broad eyebrows with suspected to be CADASIL is a different disorder with dissimilar pathological lMatLeLr2a l sparseness, short columella and pMroLm L2
in ent ears. Point mutations and features, and belongs to the growing group of genetically uncharacterized large intragenic deletions and duplications of the histone methyl transferase familial small vessel diseases (SVDs). gene are the madien ncoavuos es of KS. encodes a large protein that In order to search for the pathogenic mutation behind the disease, we did belongs toK tDhMe  S6
EAT g1e nfaemily of human SET-domain protein methyltransferase a whole-exome sequencing for two healthy and three affected family mem- superfamily. Recently, partial or complete deletions and point mu- bers. The exon targeting was done with NimbleGen’s sequence capture tations of , have been identified as additional causes of KS. Case (Roche Inc. USA) and the sequencing with Illumina’s sequencing platform report: We report the molecular and phenotype studies of a Spanish patient (Illumina Inc. USA). who have typical features of KS. The patient is a 9 y.o. girl with mental re- After sequencing the results were filtered against public SNP databases in tardation, a peculiar facies characterized by long palpebral fissures, a broad order to identify the sequence variants that have not been published pre- and depressed nasal tip, large prominent earlobes, a cleft palate, scoliosis, viously as polymorphisms. Subsequently, we concentrated on the variants radiographic abnormalities of the vertebrae, hands, and hip joints, and that are shared by all the three patients and excluded the variants that are recurrMenLtL 2otitis media. Genomic DNA was extracted from the patient and also shared by the healthy controls. Since the disease is dominant we nar- parents and mutation screening of codingin e sxiloicnos and intron-exon junctions rowed our search by excluding the variants that are homozygous in all pati- of the gene was performed by direct sequence analysis using a 3130XL e Pn 0t 9s .. 0D 8e 5ta -Siled results of our studies will be presented at the congress. Genetic Analyzer. All found changes were analyzed (Polyphen 2.0) to Multiple sclerosis risk variant at the ch12q14.1b locus affect the estimate a possible damaging effect in the protein. We identified a deletion expression of the CY P27
B1 gene in activated monocytes in exon 32 that expands to the first portion of exon 33 (c.20711-c.21014 M. Karaky1, M. Fedetz1, C. Barrionuevo1, Ó. Fernández2, C. Delgado3, G. Izquierdo4, M. NG_027827). This deletion is absent in both parents and it has not been pre- Lucas5, M. Torrecillas6, F. Matesanz1, A. Alcina1; viously described. 1Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina ‘López Neyra’, Granada, Spain, 2Servicio de  P09
.083-S Neurología, Instituto de Neurociencias Clínicas, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos SGK223, a novel candidate gene for an autosomal recessive form of Haya, Málaga, Spain, 3Centro Regional de Transfusión Sanguínea Granada-Almería, dHMN Granada, Spain, 4Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple, Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, E. Gregianin1, A. Vettori1, E. Tognon1, D. Tessarolo2, M. Mostacciuolo1, G. Vazza1; 5Servicio de Biología Molecular, Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, 6Centro de 1University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2San Camillo Forlanini Hospital, Roma, Italy. Salud, Armilla, Granada, Spain. Background: Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMN) are a subgroup of Heredita- The region ch12q14.1 was shown to be associated with seve- ry Motor Sensory Neuropathies characterized by a predominant motor in- ral autoimmune diseases in different Genome Wide Association Studies. We volvement of the peripheral nervous system. In the present study a family have determined that a variantC wYPh2ic7hB a1lters the enhancer activity of a regu- affected by an autosomal recessive form of dHMN was examined by using a latory element explains the association of the locus with multiple sclerosis combined strategy of linkage analysis and whole-exome sequencing (WES) (MS). This region contains the gene encoding the enzyme 1-alpha- in two patients. WES variants in the known disease-related genes associated hydroxylase which catalyses the conversion of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2D, the with similar phenotypes, and copy-number variants shared by the affected active form of vitamin D. Since the vitamin DC iYs Pa2 k7eBy1 regulator of the immu- subjects were excluded. Considering the presence of two consanguineous ne response and plays aM reotleh oind Ms :S susceptibility, we want to determine the marriages in the family, the homozygosity mapping approach was perfor- effect of the variant on the expression of the gene in specific popu- med and a candidate autozygous region shared exclusively by the affected lation of immune cells. The monoCcYyPte2s7 B C1
D14 cells were purified subjects was highlighted on chromosome 8p23.1-p22. The candidate region from 111 healthy individuals. They were activated with Interferon-gamma contains 120 genes and is characterized by a high number of pseudogenes (IFNγ) and lipRoepsoulylstsa:c charide (LPS). The expression was then and paralogs which led to many false positive calls due to multiple-mapping measured by quantitative real time PCR and correlated with the genotype reads. No evident mutations were identified in the also poorly-covered exons of the variant. We observed that the MS risk allele of the polymor- 182 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG of the linkage region but the prioritization analysis of the about 230 WES va- phism rs10877013 was significantly associated with a low expression of theABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index CY P27
B1 Conclusion: 3Department of Health Sciences and IRCAD, Eastern Piedmont University, Novara, Italy, 4MS Centre, SCDU Neurology, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 5Center gene (p=0,007) in activCaYtePd2 7mBo1nocytes. In this work Hemostasis & Thrombosis, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. we demonstrate that the causal variant of MS association at the ch12q14.1 locus, alters the transcription of gene suggesting that the intracel- lular vitamin D levels could be affected. Our data point to lower production The Protein Kinase C Alpha (PRKCA) gene, encoding the Th17-cell-selective of 1,25(OH)2D is the functional cause of the genetic association with MS. PKCα kinase, was repeatedly associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), but the  P09
.086-M underlying biological mechanism remains unknown. Alterations of gene expression at the peak level in the experimental We replicated this genetic association in an Italian population (409 cases, allergic encephalomyelitis 723 controls), identifying a protective signal, corresponding to a GCC mi- A. Sen, G. Celik, O. Ozgun, S. Arslan; Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey. crosatellite in the PRKCA promoter (P=0.033, OR=0.12, 95%CI=0.015-0.94), and a risk haplotype in intron 3 (P=7.7*10-4; OR=1.57, 95%CI=1.24-1.99, meta-analysis P=1.1*10-12). Expression experiments demonstrated that Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) is the widely used model for the protective signal is associated with PRKCA promoter variants confer- studying multiple sclerosis (MS). MS is a chronic disease where the inflam- ring higher expression levels of the gene. Minigene-based transfection ex- mation throughout the brain and spinal cord cause demyelinated plaques periments proved that the risk signal is driven by an ins/del polymorphism of gliotic scar tissue. We have studied the alterations in gene transcription (rs35476409/rs61762387) influencing, with an hnRNP-H-dependent me- in the EAE induced in the  C57
/B L6
 mouse using real-time PCR. We have chanism, the skipping of a PRKCA alternative exon. studied the genes mediating MS progression, such as cytokines and chemo- Studies performed on RNA extracted from different cell lines and human kines, inflammatory and immune response genes, as well as genes involved tissues evidenced a complex pattern of alternatively-spliced (AS) PRKCA in cell adhesion, cellular stress and apoptosis whose expressions correlated isoforms, which are modulated by the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay across multiple analyses. For this purpose female  C57
/B L6
 mice weighing (NMD) and display a preferential association with the use of alternative po- between 18-20 gr were iMm.m tuubneirzceudl oss.cis. with 250 μg of MOG peptide (the 35- lyadenilation sites. 55 sequence)i. pe.mulsified in complete Freund‘s adjuvant (CFA) supplemen- MS patients showed significantly decreased PRKCA levels (49 cases, 61 ted with 4 mg/ml kille d . Pertussis toxin (PT, 500 ng/mouse) controls; P<1*10-4) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, with a conco- was injected immediately and 48 hours later. Control mice were received mitant unbalance in the relative abundance of its mRNA variants. One of only CFA and furtherPT. Clinical assessment was performed on the gene- these alternative transcripts is predicted to encode a truncated PKCα that, ral clinical scales. The average score of EAE group was 3.5. Expression of when overexpressed, aberrantly localizes to the plasma membrane and/or amyloid beta precursor protein, complement component 1s, chemokine (CC in cytoplasmic clusters. motif) ligand 5, CXC ligand 9, CXC ligand 10, CD4 antigen, G protein alpha Our data suggest that AS-NMD coupling, in the presence of specific geno- inhibiting 2, histocompatibility 2 class II antigen Eβ, I L6
, I L13
, MBP, NFκB types, modulates PRKCA expression and isoform diversity, and point to a light polypeptide gene, proteolipid protein 1, and TNF are found to be signi- dysregulation of PRKCA splicing in MS, with possible implications in Th17- ficantly different in the brain at about the peak of disease than control ani- c Pe 0ll 9- .m 08ed 9i -a Sted immune responses. mals. Our data revealed strong transcriptional regulation of genes involved A novel mutation in SCN4A gene, in a patient with an unusual clinical in inflammatory processes, such as antigen presentation and processing, presentation of Myotonia Permanents: Expanding the clinical and c Po 0m 9.p 0l 8em 7-e Snt activation and chemotaxis. molecular spectrum of SCN4A mutations Target resequencing of regions associated with Multiple Sclerosis in C. Vinkler1, E. Leshinsky Silvers2, T. Sagie Lerman3, M. Ginzberg4, F. Lehmann-Horn5; 1Institute of Clinical Genetics, Holon, Israel, 2Molecular-Genetic Laboratory Wolfson the Italian population Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 3Pediatric Neurology Unit, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, N. Barizzone1, M. Sorosina2, F. Clarelli2, S. Anand3,4, E. Mangano3, R. Bordoni3, F. Israel, 4Pediatric Neuromuscular Service, pediatric neurological Unit, Holon, Israel, Esposito2, PROGEMUS, PROGRESSO, IMSGC, O. Raymkulova5, G. Predebon1, V. Martinelli2, 5Department of Applied Physiology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. G. Comi2, M. Leone5, G. De Bellis*3, F. Martinelli-Boneschi*6, S. D‘Alfonso*1; 1A. Avogadro University, Novara, Italy, 2San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy, 3National Research Council of Italy, Institute for Biomedical Technologies, Segrate, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Congenital myotonias are a group of hereditary muscle disorders that pre- Italy, 5MS Centre, SCDU Neurology, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 6San sent in infancy and childhood, characterized by impaired muscle relaxation Raffaele Scientific Institute, Italy., Milano, Italy. following a voluntary forceful contraction. The core symptoms either relate to myotonia or to periodic weakness. These disorders are caused by muta- tions in genes encoding the skeletal muscle chlorides, sodium and calcium Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a multifactorial autoimmune demyelinatingdisea- channels. se of the CNS. Several large international association studies detected over We report a 7-years old boy with a severe early onset unique phenotype of 100 MS loci. However, for the majority of them the causal variant is not yet myotonia permanents. He had neonatal respiratory failure and as well as identified and, generally, only common variants have been studied. The aim severe recurrent episodes of laryngospasm during infancy. Massive general of this study was to follow-up the MS loci in the Italian population, searching muscle hypertrophy, eye lid myotonia and prolonged hand grip relaxation, for the primarily associated variants, focusing also on rare variants. After were present since early childhood. An unusual complication of tongue hy- an association study in 1750 Italian MS cases and 2272 matched controls pertrophy was noted during infancy and reoccurred again after surgical re- (Illumina 660-Q, and Immunochip), we selected for target resequencing 32 section. MS associated regions showing a significant association in the Italian popu- A novel V717G mutation in SCN4A was identified in the proband, but not in lation. The selected regions (1.9 Mb), either including the whole genomic his parents. segment (N=17 regions, 45 genes) or only the coding sequences (further 48 This is the first case of myotonia permanens reporting recurrent tongue genes), were captured (Agilent SureSelect) and sequenced (GAIIx Illumina) hypertrophy as a major clinical feature in this case. Tongue hypertrophy in 600 Italian MS patients and 400 matched controls pooled in groups of 12 resulted most probably from continued tongue contraction caused by his individuals.We used the variant caller CRISP to call the variants, ANNOVAR to permanent myotonia . annotate them, and custom R-scripts to calculate allele frequency. Validation The novel mutation found in SCN4A in this boy, has not been found in his of a subset of variants by individual genotyping demonstrate a high corre- parents. It has been suggested to be pathological by a number of in silico lation with allele frequency in the pools.After QC, results in the MS patients prediction programs. It is located in a well conserved area of the gene in showed that among the 23065 detected variants, 67% were absent in public the transmembrane helical part of the Sodium channel protein subunit. This databases, including 1061 variants with a predicted functional consequence mutation has not been describes previously in SCN4A related disorders. on the gene product (missense, nonsense, splice variants), thus potentially This case further expands the genetic and clinical spectrum of myotonia directly involved in the MS susceptibility. The comparison with the data of permanents.  P09
.090-M the controls and the replication in independent cohorts is ongoing  P09
.088-M PANK2 and  C19
orf12 mutations in neurodegeneration with brain iron Modulation of Protein Kinase C Alpha (PRKCA) mRNA expression accumulation (NBIA) and alternative splicing by functional polymorphisms contribute to G. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, M. Gagliardi1,2, G. Lesca3,4, E. Broussolle5,6, G. Iannello1,7, A. multiple sclerosis susceptibility Quattrone1,8; E. M. Paraboschi1, V. Rimoldi1, C. Dall‘Osso1, E. Saba1, T. Tabaglio1, L. Clario1, M. D. 1Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, Section of Neuroimaging, National Benedetti2, S. D’Alfonso3, M. Leone4, D. Gemmati5, S. Duga1, G. Soldà1, R. Asselta1; Research Council, Germaneto (CZ), Italy, 2University of Magna Graecia, Germaneto (cz), 1Department of Medical Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, University of Italy, 3Departement of Medical Genetics, Hospice Civiles de Lyon and ClaudeBernard Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Neurosciences, University Hospital, Verona, Italy, Lyon, University Lyon France, Lyon, France, 4CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292,INSERM U1028, ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 183ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Lyon, France, 5Universitè Lyon I, Centre de Neurosciences Cognitives,CNRS UMR5229,  P09
.093-S Lyon, France, 6Service de Neurologie C, Hopital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Lyon, Familial case of NBIA France, 7University of Magna Graecia, Germaneto (CZ), Italy, 8Institute of Neurology, K. Radic, N. Lojo-Kadric, J. Ramic, K. Bajrovic, L. Kapur-Pojskic; University Magna Graecia, Germaneto (CZ), Italy. Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Neurodegenerative brain iron accumulation Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) defines a group of (NBIA) is a group of inherited neurodegeneration diseases that share prominent extrapyramidal features, disorders with various symptoms and genetic aetiology. Common feature dementia and radiographic evidence of iron deposition in the basal ganglia. of all NBIA forms is accumulation of iron in basal ganglia and progressive Different forms of early onset NBIA with autosomal recessive transmission movement disorder. are associated with mutations in specific genes as (1) pantothenate kinase- NBIA belongs to rare genetic conditions affecting 1-3 per million individu- associated neurodegeneration (PKAN); (2) phospholipase-associated neu- als which makes it insufficiently studied and understood. Neverthemleitsosc, hnoenw- rodegeneration (PLAN); and (3) fatty acid hydroxylase-associated neuro- mdruiatal timonems banradn gee nperso tieminp-laicssaotecdia tined d inffeeurreondt eNgBenIAer taytpioens are being discove- degeneration (FAHN). Mutations in PANK2 are the most common cause of red. One of them is  C19
ORF12 mutation, which causes MPAN - these disorders.  C19
orf12 was recently reported as another causative gene. , characterized by In this study we recruited 20 subjects with NBIA that include clinical data childhood/early adulthood onset, dystonia, spacity, optic atrophy and neu- and associated DNA samples. DNA and clinical information were collected ropsychiatric changes. The disorder is progressive and symptomatic thera- and used after partecipants gave written informed consent. The 8 exons of py is the only currently available option. PANK2 and 3 exons of  C19
orf12 were amplified by PCR and sequenced on an Parents of affected child came to our institution for genetic counselling and ABI PRISM 3130 XL-AVANT Genetic Analyzer. Phenotypic data were obtai- testing for previously detected mutation on exon 3 ( C19
ORF12) of MMIN ned by neurologic examination and magnetic resonance imaging. Mutation gene, c.204-214del11bp homo, in the index patient (daughter, aged 17). Fa- screening of PANK2 and  C19
orf12 were found in 3 and 5 patients, respec- mily members (mother, father, daughter-proband and son-aged 5, asympto- tively. In conclusion mutations in both PANK2 and  C19
orf12 contributed matic) were tested using specifically designed amplification primers. Agi- s Pi 0gn 9i .0fic 9a 1n -t Sly to NBIA in the our patients. lent 2100 bioanalyzer was used for analysis of PCR products. Identification of the genetic factors involved in neural tube Deletion in sample of affected patient was confirmed as basis for linkage development and defects analysis. Both parents and son are heterozygous carriers for described mu- V. Massa1, G. Soldà2, L. Avagliano1, A. Gallina1, G. Bulfamante1, A. Marozzi2, F. Cotelli3, A. tation. Since MPAN is autosomal-recessive, risk of affecting future offspring Pistocchi2; is 25 % in this case. Risk for asymptomatic carriers is 50 %, so genetic coun- 1University of Milan-Department of Health Sciences, Milano, Italy, 2University of Milan- selling is highly recommended. Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Milano, Italy, Discovering new mutations associated with NBIA is significant process as it 3University of Milan-Department of Biosciences, Milano, Italy. could elucidate mechanisms underlying this group of disorders and create new possibilites in terms of gene therapy and effective therapeutic options in the future. Neural tube is the embryonic precursor of brain and spinal cord, and forms  P09
.094-M as a consequence of closure of the developing neuroepithelium. If closure A cell reprogramming-based approach to study 7q11.23 gene dosage events fail, the embryo will manifest a neural tube defect (NTD: spina bifida imbalances in Williams Beuren syndrome and autism spectrum or exencephaly). Despite significative advances in the field, the elucidation disorder S. Atashpaz1, A. Adamo1, P. Germain1, J. Chenoweth2, G. D‘Agostino1, M. Zanella1, P. of genetic factors associated to NTD has remained elusive and NTDs are Prontera3, C. Unger4, P. W. Andrews4, G. Pruneri1, B. Hamilton5, G. Merla6, R. D. McKay2, G. the second most common congenital defects affecting human pregnancies. Testa1; This project aims at investigating two different aspect of NTDs: on one side 1European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy, 2Lieber Institute for Brain Development, the analysis of the transcription factor Sax-1, that was found to be down- Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical regulated in a microarray screening in murine NTDs model (Zic2Ku). Sax-1 Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 4Centre for Stem Cell Biology, Department expression correlates remarkably closely with the progression of posterior of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 5Stemgent, closure of the neuroepithelium, overlapping with Zic2 expression. Functio- Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. nal studies of Sax1 and Zic2 in zebrafish will be flanked to mouse embryos and in vitro analyses. On the other side, this project investigates the role of miRNAs in neural tube development on human samples. From a database of 534 fetal autopsies, we selected 9 fetuses with NTDs (7 myelomeningoce- Symmetrical gene dosage imbalances at 7q11.23 cause two neurodeve- le, 2 anencephaly). Using a combination of bioinformatics tools (MirWalk, lopmental diseases, Williams Beuren Syndrome (WBS) and the 7q11.23 CO-ME-TA, DAVID), we have identified 4 candidate miRNAs whose predicted microduplication associated to autistic spectrum disorder (7dup-ASD). Be- targets are significantly enriched for functional pathways related to neuru- sides intellectual disability and craniofacial dysmorphisms, WBS patients lation, that are now under functional evaluation. display hypersociality and comparatively well-preserved language skills  P09
.092-M while 7dup-ASD is associated with impairments of varying severity across Mutations in RNA kinase CL P1
 cause neurodegeneration the autistic spectrum. The striking symmetry in genotype and phenotype V. R. C. Eggens, J. L. Cazemier, P. R. Kasher, M. A. J. Weterman, F. Baas; between the two conditions points to the 7q11.23 cluster as a surprisingly Academic Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. small subset of dosage-sensitive genes affecting social behavior and cogniti- Clp1 on. The molecular phenotypes of these syndromes in disease-relevant cell- types remain to be elucidated however, due to scarce availability of primary Cleavage and polyadenylation factor I subunit ( ) is an imCpLoPr1tant kina- diseased tissues. Convergent evidence both from human studies and mouse se in RNA metabolism. It is involved in processes as tRNA maturation and models, points to transcriptional dysregulation as a critical aspect of both mRNA 3’ end processing. Recently, a missense mutation in the gene has conditions, consistent with the presence of several transcription factors in been identified in patients with atropChlyp 1of the cerebelluinm s, iptuons and corpus the 7q11.23 interval. callosum. We have isolated an ENU induced zebrafish mutant, harbouring Here we present the first analysis of transcriptional dysregulation in human a p.R44X nonsense mutation in the gene. UsCinlpg1 hybridization physiopathologically relevant cell types carrying 7q11.23 dosage imbalan- and morpholino knockdown of p53 we examined the phenotype of homo- ces. We selected a large and unique panel of WBS and 7dup-ASD patients zygous p.R44X zebrafish embryos. We shColwp1 that knockout zebrafish and derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) with the most advanced do not survive beyond 4 days pootsxt2 fertilisation (dpf), have a reduced head reprogramming technology based on synthetic mRNAs. These were then size and show an S-curved body. At 2dpf, knockout fish show reduced differentiated into relevant lineages to establish experimentally tractable expression of midbrain marker , increased cell death in theC bLrPa1in and a models of these conditions. Next, we integrated high-throughput sequen- disturbed organisation of motor neurons. The phenotype can be partly res- cing for transcriptional and chromatin analysis and present here a functio- cued by injCeclpti1ng human wild type, but not by mutant p.R140H mRNA. nal dissection of these symmetric conditions that uncovers the principles of Morpholino knock down of p53 partially rescucelsp t1he phenotype as well. We dosage-dependent transcriptional dysregulation in disease-relevant human show that is an essential gene in both the central and peripheral ner- cells types. vous system. Similar to the human situation, mutations cause neuro-  P09
.095-S degeneration and motor neuron problems in zebrafish. We shCoLwP 1that the Next-generation sequencing in the diagnosis of neurodevelopmental neurodegeneration is mediated by the p53 apoptosis pathway. Our data sup- disorders ports the hypothesis that amongst other RNA processing genes, plays a N. Okamoto1, F. Miya2, T. Tsunoda2, M. Kato3, S. Saitoh4, M. Yamasaki5, Y. Kanemura6,7, K. Kosaki crucial role in neurodevelopment. 8 184 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |; WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.097-S 1 Genetic diagnosis of neurological diseases using NGS: first year of Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Me2dical Center and Research Institute experience for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, Laboratory for Medical Science M. Climent1, A. Romera-López1, D. Valero-Hervás1, V. Volpini2, A. Matilla3, C. Collado1, M3 athematics, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, R. Rodríguez-De Pablos1, Á. Arilla-Codoñer1, J. Triviño1, S. Zúñiga-Trejos1, G. Marco1, Depar4tment of Pediatrics, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata, D. Cantalapiedra1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, C. Buades1, C. Camprubí1, R. Miñambres1, S. Japan, Department of Pediatrics and Neona5tology, Nagoya City University Graduate Santillán1; School of Medical Sciences, Nagaoya, Japan6, Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Bellvitge, Takatsuki General Hospital, Osaka, Japan, Division of Regenerative Medicine, Institute Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain. for Clin7ical Research, Osaka National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan, Department of Neuro8surgery, Osaka National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan, Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. The diagnosis of neurological diseases is not straightforward, mainly due to the presence of nonspecific overlapping clinical symptoms and of genetic Introduction heterogeneity. A global approach using high throughput technologies such Recently, genetic bases of neurodevelopmental diseases including CNS as NGS could be of great help to improve their diagnosis. anomalies, intellectual disability (ID), and epilepsy have been significantly We present our experience in the analysis of Neurological diseases using a elucidated, but are still largely unknown. We have developed a target and 200-gene NGS targeted re-sequencing panel. Samples from 48 patients were whole exome sequencing (WES) based mutation screening strategy. The tar- submitted to our laboratory for genetic testing. Clinical diagnosis included get sequencing system enabled us to screen 284 genes associated with neu- Spastic Paraplegia (17), Motor/Sensitive Hereditary Neuropathy (12), Ata- rodevelopmental disorders. Unresolved patients were studied by proband- xia (6), Parkinson (4), Miastenia (3), Joubert Syndrome (2), Frontotempo- parent trio approach using WES. ral Dementia (2), Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis (1) and SMA (1). Coding Materials and Methods exons and splice-site regions of the genes associated with each pathology Forty seven patients were included in the study. Fourteen patients were stu- were analysed. Enrichment and sequencing were carried out using Sure- died by WES. They were analyzed under the approval by our institutional Select Enrichment System (Agilent) and SOLiD 5500/MiSeq (Life Technolo- ethics committee. To capture the exonic DNAs, we used SureSelectXT Cu- gies/Illumina). Mean depth was established at 200x. stom capture library for neuronal genes capture. We performed sequencing In 7 out of 48 samples (14%), a genetic cause that justifies the clinical dia- using Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencer and obtained paired-end sequence gnosis was found. Taking into account all the samples, 63 variants (confir- reads. We excluded known variants found in dbSNP, 1000 Genomes Project, med by Sanger sequencing) were identified and classified into pathogenic ES P6500
 and our control samples, and narrowed the candidates to missen- (7), probably pathogenic (2), Unknown (53) and probably benign (1). Accor- se, nonsense SNVs and frameshFifOt XinGd1e, lAsH. I1, PTPN11, DYRK1A, ACTB, CASK, ding to their effect, missense (29), synonymous (21), splice-site (8), frames- GRAesBuRltDs hift (3) and nonsense (2) mutations were found. In 21 out of 48 samples, no Fourteen mutations including CREBBP, KIF1A, GRIN2A ALDH18A1. variants (pathogenic/unknown) were identified. Despite being moderate, HNRNP Hw2e re id AeMntMifiEeCdR b1y target screening and conventional sequencing. 14% of genetically diagnosed patients suggests that NGS is effective for the WES revealed de novo mutations in and diagnosis of neurological diseases. A better understanding of unknown va- and mutations were noted in X-linked pattern. None riants, that allow classifying them into SNPs or pathogenic mutations, could of these mutations were recorded in database. Some other mutations have significantly increase the diagnosis rate. unknown pathogenic significance.  P09
.098-M Discussion Individual cMRI based genetic testing algorithms for neuronal NGS method could clarify a consistent percentage of patients with neuro- migration disorders increase mutation detection rates developmental disorders. NGS method would be an alternative to current U. Hehr1, T. Geis2, J. Proepper1, G. von Gersdorff3, B. Propf3, G. Schuierer4, S. M. Herbst1; technologies for identifying the multiple genetic causes of neurodevelop- 1Zentrum und Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Regensburg, Germany, mental disorders.  P09
.096-M 3LISS – Anlaufstelle für Eltern und Angehörige an Lissenzephalie leidender Kinder e.V., Seven novel neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) gene mutations identified in Hamburg, Germany, 4Zentrum für Neuroradiologie, Universitätsklinikum Regensburg, Spanish pediatric patients Regensburg, Germany. P. Santibañez1, C. Cervera-Acedo1, M. Lopez1, J. Aguirre-Lamban1, A. Garcia-Oguiza2, M. Background Poch-Olive2, J. Revorio-Gonzalez2, E. Dominguez-Garrido1; 1Fundacion Rioja Salud - CIBIR, Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain. Introduction: Neuronal migration disorders are an important cause of severe psychomo- tor retardation and seizures, frequently resistant to antiepileptic medica- Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most com- tion. Based on cerebral MR imaging (cMRI) neuronal migration disorders mon human autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated incidence of (MNeMthDo)d c an be subdivided into various radiological forms including classic 1:3500. This is a neurodermal dysplasia characterized by café-au-lait spots, and cobblestone lissencephaly. axillary freckling, dermal neurofibromas, andN F L1
isch nodules of the iris. The conditionS ius bfujlelyct pse annedtr aMnet tahnodd hsa: s a highly variable expression. It is caused Genetic testing was performed for 1034 index patients either (1) individual- by mutations in the neurofibromNinF 1gene ( ) located on chromosome ly after in-house cMRI reevaluation (n=214) or (2) as assigned by the refer- 17q11.2. Seven children suspected of having NF1 ring doctor (n=820). Individual testing strategies included MLPA analysis, were tested for mutations in the gene. Some of them only have café- Sanger sequencing and massive parallel sequencing. In an ongoing study we au-lait spots and two presented other clinical features. Single and multie- aRsesseuslst slong-term development and genotype dependent response to antie- xon deletioRne/sduulptsli:c ation were tested by MLPA assay. PCR and sequencing pileptic and supportive therapies. analysis in RNA was performed. Segregation of the mutations was checked in 3 cases. Seven pathogenic not previously reported mutations in 119 NMD patients of study arm 1 were genetically analyzed leading to the NF1 gdeen neo wvoe.r De iisdceunstsifiioend :i n heterozygous (Table 1). Only 1 sample showed identification of the underlying genetic alterations in 35.3% of the analy- a deletion of the exon 23 by MLPA. In one case the mutation was considered zed samples incl. classic lissencephaly 65.4%, subcortical band heterotopia to be Mutational NF1 analysis is considered to be a dif- 83.3%, polymicrogyria 10.0%, cobblestone lissencephaly 14.3%, periven- ficult task owing to the size of the gene, the absence of clear mutational hot tricular nodular heterotopia 37.5% and complex cortical malformations spots and the presence of pseudogenes. RNA and MLPA-based techniques 20.0%. In comparison, the overall mutation detection rate in study arm 2 sThaobuleld 1 be used in conjunction to provided reliable and accurate molecular without in-hLIoSu1se cMRDI CreXe valuatAioRnX was onTlUyB 1A81.5A% (p<T0U.0B0B025B) . GPR56 g Ce an seetic testing. Mutation Familiar study OveraFllL, NpAathogenPiOc MmTu1tationsP wOeMreG nidTe1ntified FinK T1N8.9% oFfK iRnPdepenIdSePnDt pa- LtiAenRtGsE incl. D (A3G4), (47), (10), (4), (4), 1 c.4009C>T, p.R1337W (dyee snovo) (10), (30), ( L2
I2S)1, (15), (3), (9), (1), 2 c.2894T>G, p.I965R yes Conclu (s2io) nand (1). Our preliminary data suggest a genotype dependant 3 c.3639_3640insA yes antiepileptic response in associated classic lissencephaly. 4 c. 3935C>T, p. S1312
F ND 5 c.23505_3508insAAGT ND 6 c. 36086_6087insG ND Genome wide genetic testing strategies will further improve the number of N7D: not determined c.3611G>T, p.R1204L ND identified genes and genetic alterations, but continue to require their criti- cal interpretation in the context of clinical findings and cerebral imaging. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 185ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.099-S In a consanguineous family with two patients showing a novel autosomal recessive inherited syndrome another patient with an probably not accidental, because intron 27b of the the NF1 gene contains unlinked autosomal nonsyndromic form of mental retardation was OMGP gene (OMIM * 164 345 ), which acts in myelination processes and identified seems to be involved in immunopathogenesis of MS. Moreover, NF-1 and P. M. Kroisel1, V. Rupp1, R. Birnbacher2, C. Liechtenstein2, E. Petek1, K. Wagner1, M. R. MS may share a common influence from genes on chromosome 17 affec- Speicher1, C. Windpassinger1; ting cell proliferation and inflammation processes. We report our 12 years 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital experience in the follow up of NF1 adult patients. The cohort is composed Villach, Villach, Austria. by 301 patients, with an age range of 18-72 years, and Males/Females ratio of 111/190. A multidisciplinary equipe evaluates patients yearly, thus allo- wing a precise knowledge about the natural history of the condition. Over We previously characterized in a large family of Turkish origin a male and a the years, MS has been diagnosed in four of our patients (3 women and 1 female patient showing a new syndrome, that includes following symptoms: man). This observational study enables us to define for the first time MS severe mental retardation, corpus callosum agenesis, ataxia, moderate mi- prevalence in a large cohort of NF1 adult patients (1.3%). Detailed clinical crocephaly, square face, hypertelorism, bilateral ptosis, arched eyebrows, features of each MS-NF1 patient, together with review of literature and cur- epicanthal folds, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, amblyopia, rent aetiopathogenetic hypothesis will be provided.  P09
.102-M broad nasal bridge, low set ears, short philtrum and downturned corners An NGS gene panel for the genetic diagnosis of rare autosomal of the mouth. Since mothers of both patients are first degree cousins and recessive cerebellar ataxias both fathers are second degree cousins, pedigree analysis makes an auto- S. Magri1, D. Di Bella1, E. Sarto1, S. M. Caldarazzo1, L. Nanetti1, C. Mariotti1, C. Gellera1, M. somal recessive mode of inheritance of this particular syndromic disorder Koenig2, M. Schulze3, P. Bauer3, F. Taroni1; very likely. Homozygosity mapping by 250 k Affymetrixs SNP array analysis 1Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Disease, Fondazione IRCCS allowed reducing homozygous genomic regions shared by both patients to Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire only 4 segments ranging from 3.05 Mb to 8.84 Mb in size. Recently a brother et Unité INSERM UMR_S 827, IURC, Montpellier, France, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, of the male patient was diagnosed with nonsyndromic mental retardation University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (NSMR). Affymetrix CytoScan ® HD analysis of his DNA was performed, in- dicating his NSMR is not linked to the new syndrome. Because the number of potential candidate genes in these genomic regions according to obtained Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias (ARCA) are a genetically highly he- RS-loci on chromosome 1 (1p36.22), 2 (2q22.3), 3 (3p14.1) and 9 (9q21.13) terogeneous group of neurological disorders involving both central and pe- is considerable, whole exome next generation sequencing will be applied to ripheral nervous system. One of the goal of the E-Rare EUROSCAR project is search for homozygous mutations in both patients especially in those seg- to establish an NGS-based targeted genotyping for the diagnosis of known ments. Although the phenotype of our patients shows similarities with To- ARCA genes. One-hundred-forty-two ataxic patients referred from different riello-Carey syndrome and Charlevoix disease, it clearly does not resemble European partners were analyzed using a HaloPlex-based gene panel targe- these syndromes, so we think that our patients exhibit a new syndromic dis- ting the coding regions of 127 genes involved in recessive and dominant ata- order and another NSMR form could be mapped in this family as well.<br xia. Patient inclusion criteria for analysis were: progressive ataxia, exclusion  P09
.100-M of nongenetic causes, family history suggestive of autosomal recessive ata- Next-generation analysis of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis / xia (AR) or sporadic (S) patients with onset before age 40. We contributed Parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam with 34 Italian patients (14AR and 20S) previoulsy tested for FRDA, AVED, I. Guella1, C. Thompson1, C. Szu-Tu1, D. M. Evans1, F. T. Pishotta1, H. E. Sherman1, C. Vilarino-Guell1, P. McGeer2, H. Morris3, K. Gwinn4, T. Siddique5, D. W. Dickson6, J. Steele7, or APTX, as appropriate. This approach allowed us to identify homozygous M. J. Farrer1; or compound heterozygous pathogenic mutations in ADCK3 and 2 challen- 1Djavad Mowafhagian Centre for Brain Heath, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, ging genes (SYN E1
 and SACS) in 6 patients (4S and 2AR). Moreover, diffe- BC, Canada, 2Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British rent missense variants of uncertain pathogenicity were identified in genes Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, University responsible for dominant ataxia (PDYN, SPTBN2, CACNA1A). Finally, several College London, London, United Kingdom, 4NIH/NINDS, Neuroscience Center, Bethesda, heterozygous mutations were identified in recessive genes. For 6 patients, MD, United States, 5Neurology and Clinical Neurosciences, Northwestern University, analysis revealed no candidate variants in screened genes. All high-quality Chicago, IL, United States, 6Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United States, 7Guam Memorial Hospital, Tamuning, Guam. variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing indicating reliability of this approach. Further analyses are required for the validation of uncertain vari- ants and the evaluation of large in/del mutations in recessive genes in which The amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/ Parkinsonism-dementia complex heterozygous mutations have been identified. In conclusion, NGS gene panel (PDC) is a progressive, age-associated neurodegenerative disorder descri- represents a necessary tool for genetic diagnosis of highly heterogeneous bed in Guam, Western Papua and the Kii peninsula of Japan. Despite decades d Pi 0s 9ea .1s 0es 3 -s Such as ataxia. (E-Rare grant to MK, PB, and FT) of research the excess incidence and pathogenesis of ALS-PDC on Guam re- Complete recovery from psychosis upon miglustat treatment in a mains enigmatic and mutations underlying disease have yet to be elucidated juvenile Niemann-Pick C patient by genome-wide linkage analysis of multi-incident pedigrees. In this study K. Szakszon, I. Szegedi, Á. Magyar, É. Oláh, M. Andrejkovics, P. Balla, A. Lengyel, E. we have used next-generation targeted resequencing to evaluate the contri- Berényi, I. Balogh; bution of genetic variability in the pathogenesis of Guamanian neurodege- University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. neration. A target-capture panel covering the exonic regions of 116 major genes previously linked and/or associated with parkinsonism, dementia, ALS and related syndromes has been developed. Ninety-three indigenous Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is a rare recessive lipid trafficking dis- Chamorro Islanders, including patients with ALS, parkinsonism and/or order characterized by the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol and dementia, as well as neurologically normal subjects, were longitudinally glycosphingolipids in the brain and viscera. In the juvenile form, patients examined and comprehensively assessed. We report putatively pathogenic in their early years are symptom free, but present with neurodegeneration variants in HTT, PINK1, DCTN1, CHM P2
B, DNAJ C13
, FUS, GRN and AL S2
, later in their lives. These include clumsiness, seizures, ataxia, and motor and identified in patients with parkinsonism and/or dementia, that explain mul- intellectual decline. Psychiatric manifestations (schizophrenia, presenile ti-incident disease in several pedigrees. dementia, psychosis or depression) may occur at any stage of the disease.  P09
.101-S Recently, miglustat was approved for the therapy of NPC. We present a case Multiple sclerosis and NF1: it’s time to think about it of a patient with juvenile NPC disease whose psychosis was reversed com- G. Melloni1, C. Cesaretti1, M. De Riz2, L. Ghezzi2, M. Sciacco3, F. Lalatta1, E. A. Scarpini2, F. pletely by miglustat treatment. At age 14 of the patient, slurred speech and Natacci1; 1Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, coordination problems, frequent falls and loss of balance were observed. Milano, Italy, 2Neurodegenerative Disease Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Later, dyslexia and dysgraphia developed. Fine motor skills started to decli- Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 3Neuromuscular Disease Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ ne more rapidly at age 17, and dysphagia developed. Vertical supranuclear Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, Milano, Italy. gaze palsy when looking downwards, a hallmark of NPC was observed. La- boratory diagnosis of NPC was established by sequencing of the NP C1
 gene. Genotype of the patient was [c.3019C>G] + [c.3182T>C] . Both pathogenic Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a rare genetic condition, with a frequency mutations were described previously in the literature. Brain MRI was per- of 1/2500-1/3000, caused by mutations in the NF1 gene ( OMIM * 613 113). formed at age 17, 20.5, and 23. At age 17 no signs of atrophy could be detec- Since the first description in the literature, knowledge about the clinical pic- ted. Moderate degree atrophy developed between ages 17 and 20.5 years. ture and the possible associated conditions is gradually increased. In the Miglustat therapy was introduced at age 20.5. Between ages 20.5 and 23, past, cases of multiple sclerosis (MS) in patients with NF1 have been spora- atrophy showed no progress. In conclusion, the introduction of miglustat in 186 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG dically described . The association between these two diseases is rare, but NPC patients even in the most advanced cases, with respect to psychiatricABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index illness might be beneficial. recent study, however, illustrated that FAME may be caused by mutation in  P09
.104-M NO L3
 gene. VEGF-mediated sphingosine kinase activity decreases in Niemann- Here we wished to screen families with FAME for mutations of NO L3
. Since Pick Type C neurons and contributes to pathology in NP-C mice H. Jin1, J. Bae2,3; there is growing evidence of an overlap between FAME and essential tremor 1College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea, Republic (ET), we also included families with ET to screen for mutations of NO L3
. of, 2School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea, Republic of, 3BK21 We analyzed 10 probands of families that originated from Southern of Italy. Plus KNU Biomedical Convergence Program, Daegu, Korea, Republic of. Four families had FAME, and six ET. After obtaining the informed consent, the DNA was extracted according to standard procedures and analyzed by direct sequencing with the Sanger method. Sphingosine is a major storage compound in Niemann-Pick type C disease No causative mutations have been identified in all patients analyzed for (NP-C), although the pathological role(s) of this accumulation have not been NO L3
 gene. However, three polymorphic rare variants have been identified: fully characterized. Here we show that sphingosine kinase (SphK) activity one in the encoded region, one in 5’ UTR region and one in 3’ UTR region of is reduced in NP-C patient fibroblasts and NP-C mouse Purkinje neurons NO L3
 gene in three different patients. (PNs) due to defective VEGF levels related to deficiency of NP C1
. VEGF re- Exclusion of mutations in NO L3
 gene in our families further illustrates the leased from bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells also activated SphK by great genetic heterogeneity of FAME/ET and suggests the involvement of binding to VEGFR2, resulting in decreased sphingosine storage as well as other genes. Role of the polymorphic variants in our population remains to improved PN survival and clinical outcomes in NP-C cells and mice. Similar be clarified.  P09
.107-S effects were noted after genetic and pharmacologic replenishment of VEGF Analysis of RIT1, a novel gene for Noonan syndrome, in patients with in NP-C mice. Further, iPSC-derived human NP-C neurons were generated suspected Noonan syndrome and negative for other known Noonan for the first time and the sphingosine accumulation caused by SphK inac- syndrome gene mutations tivity in these cells was corrected by replenishment of VEGF. Overall, these S. Chahrokh-Zadeh, I. Vogl, S. H. Eck, S. Datter, S. Küçük, S. Scherer, M. Scholz, I. Rost; results reveal a novel pathogenic mechanism in NP-C PNs where defective Zentrum fuer Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, Martinsried, Germany. SphK activity is due to impaired VEGF.  P09
.105-S The role of the NR2A and NR2B subunits of the NMDA receptor in epileptogenesis Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder J. Lemke1, K. Geider2, B. Laube2, D. Lal3, E. M. Reinthaler4, S. Weckhuysen5, S. Biskup6, (1/2,000 live births) caused by mutations in genes dysregulating the RAS- EuroEPINOMICS-RES Consortium, S. von Spiczak7; MAPK pathway. The syndrome belongs to the RASopathies that includes 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Department Costello syndrome (CS), Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), Neurofi- of Neurophysiology and Neurosensory Systems, Technical University Darmstadt, bromatosis type 1 (NF1) and other syndromes sharing a common pattern Darmstadt, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, of congenital anomalies. Recently the RIT1 gene encoding for a new mem- Germany, 4Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 5Neurogenetics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, ber of the RAS subfamily was functionally characterized. Moreover, gain-of- 6CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 7Department of Neuropediatrics, University Medical function mutations in RIT1 gene were found in 9% of the individuals with Center Schleswig-Holstein and Christian-Albrecht University Kiel, Kiel, Germany. Noonan syndrome or a related condition without detectable mutations in known Noonan-related genes. In order to confirm these findings, we exami- ned 11 patients suspicious of Noonan syndrome/RASopathies including one NMDA receptors are tetrameric ligand-gated ion channels composed of two abortion with Hydrops fetalis and one prenatal case presenting with nuchal glycine-binding NR1 subunits and two glutamaGteR-IbNin2dAing NGRR2I Ns2uBbunits translucency > 97th pct and a normal karyotype. In an initial study, all 11 pa- (NR2A, NR2B, NR2C, NR2D) regulating synaptic plasticity. Mutations in the tients were screened for mutations in the known genes for Noonan syndro- NR2A and NRG2RBI Nsu2bAunits encoded by the genes and have me or RASopathies using a panel of 12 genes (PTPN11, SO S1
, RAF1, KRAS, been associated with different phenotypes of intellectual disabiliGtyR I(NID2B). BRAF, NRAS, MA P2
K1, CBL, SHO C2
, MA P2
K2, HRAS, NF1). DNA sequence Mutations in were known to cause unspecific ID and epilepsy as analysis was carried out on the Illumina MiSeq Next-Generation Sequencing well as other neurodevelopmental disorders, whereas mutations in platform. Data analysis was performed using the CLCbio workbench (v6.5) have mainly been associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) but not and custom developed Perl scripts. Target regions with a coverage of less seizures. We show for the first time that mutations of NR2 subunits of the than 20X were reanalyzed by Sanger sequencing in order to ensure com- NMDA receptor cause different and specific epilepsy phenotypes. NR2 muta- plete coverage of all coding regions and adjacent splice sites (-20/+10). No tions are involved in benign Rolandic epilepsy, the most frequent childhood causal mutations could be identified using the 12 gene panel. In a second epilepsy as well as in a variety of rare infantile epileptic encephalopathi- step all patients were screened for mutations in RIT1 gene using Sanger se- es, such as Landau-Kleffner and West syndrome. Furthermore, we demon- q Pu 0e 9n .1ci 0n 8g -. M sGtRraINte2 Adistinct genotype-phenotype correlations. Severe encephalopathic Novel sequence variations in the human NP C1
 gene phenotypes are significantly moGrReI No2ftBen caused by truncating mutations in M. L. Saraiva-Pereira1,2,3, M. Polese-Bonatto1,4, H. Bock1,4, M. C. Matte1, R. Mergener1, M. , whereas missense mutations are by far more common in benign S. Gil1, F. T. S. Souza2,3, R. Gus2, R. Giugliani1,2; Rolandic epilepsy patients. For , the majority of ASD individuals pre- 1Laboratório de Identificação Genética – Centro de Pesquisa Experimental – Hospital sent with truncating mutations, whereas all epilepsy cases appear to have de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Serviço de Genética Médica – Hospital gain-of-function mutations. The severity of phenotypes depends on the af- de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Depto. de Bioquímica – Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4PPG em Ciências Biológicas: fected domain and the extent of receptor activation. Our observations high- Bioquímica – Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. light the so far underestimated role of dysregulated NMDA signalling in both frequent and rare epilepsy disorders and reveal promising pharmacologic targets for novel therapeutic approaches.  P09
.106-M The NP C1
 gene spans more than 47 kb, located at locus 18q11, and encodes No evidence for a role of NO L3
 gene in Italian families with familial for an 1278-amino-acid protein located primarily into late endosomes. Mu- adult myoclonic epilepsy or essential tremor tations in this gene are associated to Niemann-Pick type C (NP-C) disease, P. Tarantino1, M. Gagliardi1,2, G. Iannello1,2, A. Labate3, E. Ferlazzo4,5, U. Aguglia4,5, A. which is a fatal autosomal recessive lysosomal disorder characterized by Quattrone1,4, A. Gambardella4, G. Annesi1; storage of unesterified glycolipids and cholesterol that leads to progressive 1Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, Section of Neuroimaging, National neurodegeneration. The aim of this work was to define pathogenic variati- Research Council, Germaneto, Catanzaro, Italy, 2University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, ons in patients with clinical suspicion of NP-C. In total, 244 DNA samples Italy, 3Institute of Neurology University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 4Institute were included. DNA was isolated from peripheral blood by standard me- of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 5Epilepsy Center, Ospedale thods. The whole coding region of the gene was amplified by PCR and se- Riuniti, Reggio Calabria, Italy. quenced by Sanger sequencing followed by electrophoresis in the genetic analyzer ABI3130xl. Sequence variations were compared to data in the NP-C database (http://npc.fzk.de/) and in silico analyses were performed when Cortical tremor (CT) is characterized by fast, small-amplitude, focal or mul- necessary. Fourteen new variations were identified in 20 DNA samples that tifocal jerks. It is commonly induced by movement or somatosensory stimu- were classified as pathogenic. From those, 4 (28,57%) mutations (p. P434
S, lation. CT may have different etiologies: metabolic abnormalities, various p. S667
L, p.G911S, p.V1115F) are responsible for change in amino acid po- neurodegenerative disorders and posthypoxic myoclonus. CT may also be larity, and two of those are located within transmembrane regions. Additio- present in familial adult myoclonic epilepsy (FAME) defined by an autoso- nal changes were observed in other functional domains, such as in disulfide mal dominant inheritance, but despite the locus has been mapped to chro- bond (p. C238
R), and in cholesterol binding and transfer (p.A183T) regions. mosomes 8, 2 and 5, no causative mutatioEnsS hHavGe b2e0en1 4id e|n MtifIieLdA tNo d, aItTeA. AL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 187 Same of them (p. C238
R, p. P434
S, p.R615H, p. S667
L) were shown to be loca-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.111-S Polymorphisms and mutations in a specific population of Central ted in conserved regions based on gene alignment among different species. Europe (South-Eastern Moravia, Czech Republic) with autosomal- We can predict that alterations reported here can affect protein conforma- dominant Parkinsonism tion structure and/or protein function. These findings can contribute to the R. Vodicka1, K. Mensikova2, P. Kanovsky2, I. Sakmaryova3, R. Vrtel1, M. Godava1, P. understanding of important functional domains in the human NP C1
 gene. Otruba2, L. Mikulicova2, M. Kaiserova2, M. Vastik2, S. Kurcova2, T. Bartonikova2, P.  P09
.109-S Dudova2; PARK2 deletions in patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) 1Dept of Medical Genetics and Fetal Medicine University Hospital and Palacky University and other neurodevelopmental pathologies Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Department of Neurology University Hospital and I. C. Conceição1,2,3, M. M. Rama1, B. Oliveira1,2,3, C. Café4, J. Almeida4, S. Mouga4, G. Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3The Institute for Nanomaterials, Oliveira4,5,6, A. M. Vicente1,2,3; Advanced Technology and Innovation Technical University of Liberec, Liberec, Czech 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Center for Republic. Biodiversity, Functional & Integrative Genomics, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 4Unidade Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo, Centro de Desenvolvimento, Hospital Pediátrico (HP), Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra (CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal, 5Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Background: In an epidemiological study carried out in an isolated popu- Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Centro de Investigação e Formação Clinica do HP-CHUC, lation of South-Eastern Moravia in the Czech Republic, a surprisingly high Coimbra, Portugal. prevalence of parkinsonism was found, differing from the published preva- lence rates in other European countries. Objective: To determine the type of mutation in families with autosomal-dominant parkinsonism with demen- The PARK2 gene encodes Parkin, a component of a multiprotein  E3
 ubiquitin tia. Methods: On the basis of a detailed genealogical examination of all the ligase complex that targets misfolded proteins for proteasomal degradation, individuals with confirmed parkinsonism, the pedigrees were compiled and such as dopamine transporters, synaptotagmin and ?-synuclein. PARK2 ge- a DNA analysis of probands from each pedigree was subsequently initiated. netic mutations are associated with Parkinson Disease, while Copy Number A massive parallel sequencing method using Ion Torrent technology was Variants (CNV) have been found in patients with developmental delay (DD), used; the DNA sequence analysis was focused on the gene loci in which the Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and ASD. causal mutations related to Parkinson’s disease (PD) have been described. We identified 5 male patients with inherited PARK2 deletions in 342 ASD indi- Results: Three large pedigrees with an autosomal-dominant inheritance viduals, screened for CNVs using Illumina 1M SNP arrays (frequency=1.5%). pattern with reduced penetration of parkinsonism were identified. None Three patients had a 45Kb deletion of intron 9, and two patients had a deleti- of the previously described pathogenic mutations associated with PD were on of either 29Kb in intron 6 or 266Kb encompassing exons 5 and 6. Clinical found; rare variants or yet-undescribed mutations were also found. In 5 of presentation was heterogeneous in these ASD patients. A literature search 10 examined probands, a novel missense Q230H mutation of the MAPT gene showed recurrent deletions of introns 2 and 3 (N=15 ADHD, N=7 ASD), as was detected. Polyphene and SIFT in silico predictors indicate this mutati- well as exons 1 (N=1 ASD) and 2 (N=2 ASD and DD), while DECIPHER re- on as “probably damaging”. Conclusion: Confirmation sequencing using an ported one ASD individual with an exon 5-6 deletion. In available control independent method is underway to examine the targeted MAPT mutation databases, deletions of segments from exons 1 to intron 4 as well as intron in other individuals from all three pedigrees and to compare it with healthy 9 were recurrent, but only 1/4139 controls had a CNV overlapping exon 6, controls. Supported by grants: IGA MZ ČR NT - 14407-3/2013 and IGA LFUP suggesting a pathogenic role of deletions in this region. The smaller exon 2013-024  P09
.112-M 6 CNVs deleted a functional domain SYT11 binding site, compromising the HOMER1 promoter analysis in Parkinson‘s disease: association with attachment of synaptotagmin and ubiquitination. levo-dopa dosage These results support a role of PARK2 structural variants in ASD. However, V. De Luca1, G. Annesi2, A. Quattrone2; certain PARK2 regions are also frequently deleted in control subjects, and 1CAMH, Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Istituto therefore rigorous analysis is mandatory before assuming a pathogenic role di Scienze Neurologiche, CNR, Cosenza, Italy. for identified CNVs.  P09
.110-M GBA mutations are a major genetic risk factor for Parkinson Disease and Dementia with Lewy Bodies in the Italian population. AIMS: HOMER1 gene expression has been linked to abnormal movements R. Asselta1, V. Rimoldi1, C. Siri2, I. Guella1, G. Soldà1, C. Baccin1, R. Cilia2, N. Meucci2, G. in animals receiving chronic administration of antipsychotics. The continu- Pezzoli2, S. Duga1, S. Goldwurm2; ing neurodegeneration of Parkinson‘s disease (PD) and the prolonged use 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli Studi of L-dopa are associated with motor complications, such as dyskinesia, and di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, psychotic side effects, including hallucinations and paranoid delusions. Italy. Approximately 25-40% of patients with idiopathic PD experience hallucina- tions. Genetic variability within different candidate genes has been implica- ted in the clinical severity of sporadic PD in many populations. Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene increase risk of Parkinson METHODS: We investigated 3 polymorphisms located in the 5‘ flanking Disease (PD). We determined the frequency and relative risk of the two region of the HOMER1 gene within a sample of 131 sporadic PD patients most frequent GBA mutations in a large series of Italian patients with PD or from southern Italy, using a 3-SNP genotype and haplotype combination other parkinsonisms. We studied 2,766 unrelated consecutive patients with (rs4704559, rs10942891, rs4704560). RESULTS: Our study implicates the diagnosis of primary degenerative parkinsonism (including 2,350 PD), and effects of allele A of the rs4704559 marker in high dosage levo-dopa treat- 1,111 controls, who contributed to the Parkinson Institute Biobank (www. ment in PD (p <0.05). CONCLUSION: Even though our results are prelimina- parkinsonbiobank.com). The entire cohort was screened for mutations in ry, this HOMER1 gene variant may represent a genetic variant for personali- GBA exons 9 (containing p.N370S) and 10 (containing p. L444
P), covering zed treatment in PD patients.  P09
.114-M approximately 50% of GBA mutations. Five mutations were identified in PCDH19 mutations in girls with infantil epilepsy: four novel the heterozygous state: 4 missense (p.N370S, p. L444
P, p. E388
K, p.D443N), mutations and prediction of their functional impact and the splicing mutation IV S10
+1G>T, which we showed to result in the E. Leonardi1, L. De Palma2, M. Vecchi2, E. Bettella1, S. Sartori3, C. Boniver2, A. Murgia1; in-frame exon-10 skipping. GBA mutations were significantly more frequent 1Laboratory of molecular genetics of neurodevelopment, Department of Women‘s in PD (4.5%, RR=7.2) and Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) (13.8%, RR= and Children‘s Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2Pediatric Neurophysiology 21.9), compared to controls (0.63%), but not in the other form of parkinso- Unit, Department of Women‘s and Children‘s Health,University of Padua, Padua, Italy, nisms, such as Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP)(2%), Corticobasal De- 3Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of generation (CBD)(0%), and Multiple System Atrophy (MSA)(0.85%). Consi- Padua, Padua, Italy. dering only the PD group (2,350), GBA carriers had an earlier onset (51±10 PCDH19 vs. 56±10, p<0.0001) and were more likely to have a positive family history for PD (34% vs. 20%, p<0.001). GBA mutations in the Italian population The gene encodes for protocadherin 19, a transmembrane protein resulted one of the major genetic factor predisposing to synucleinopathies with six extracellular cadherin (EC) domains containing adhesive interfaces (parkinsonisms due to alpha-synuclein deposition: PD and DLB), but not to involved in neuronal connection. Over a hundred mutations in PCDH19 gene tauopathies (parkinsonisms due to tau deposition, PSP and CBD), with the have been identified in girls with epilepsy, with or without cognitive impair- exception of MSA, another synucleinopathy. This suggests a different patho- ment. While some mutations are recurrent, many new variants remain pri- genic mechanism for MSA compared to PD. vate. Furthermore, transmitting hemizygous males are devoid of seizures or cognitive impairment, making it difficult to establish the pathogenic nature of newly identified variants. Here, we propose an approach to evaluate the pathogenicity of four novel 188 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, PITCADHLY19 | mWutWatiWon.sE fSouHnGd .iOn gRirGls with epilepsy and variable degree of de-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in silico velopmental delay. Segregation analysis is complemented with an direct binding between calmodulin and filaminA. Although the exact patho- analysis of mutation effects on the protein structure and function. Using genic status of this variant has yet to be corroborated by a second individual, sequence information, we compared different computational prediction this illustrative case demonstrates that functional genetic relationships can methods. We also used homology modelling to build structural models of contribute to the implication of extremely heterogeneous disorders such as two PCDH19 EC-domains containing the novel missense mutations. Wild- PH.  P09
.117-S type and mutant models were compared to identify the differences in the PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN): long-term follow- presence and type of residue interactions or in the biochemical properties up, genotype-phenotype correlates and identification of a founder (conservation, electrostatic charge, hydrophobicity) of the model surfaces. mutation in a large North-African cohort This analysis revealed that these novel mutations exert their pathogenic role A. Micalizzi1,2, M. Romani1, I. Kraoua3, H. Klaa3, H. Benrhouma3, I. Turki3, S. Castellana1, using different molecular mechanisms. Two of them interfere with or alter T. Mazza1, E. Valente1,4, N. Gouider-Khouja3; functional residues predicted to mediate ligand or protein binding, another 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Mendel Laboratory, San Giovanni Rotondo, alters the EC-domain folding stability, and the frame-shift mutation produ- San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Department of Medical and Surgical Pediatric Sciences, ces a truncated protein lacking the intracellular domain. University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Research Unit 06/11 and Department of Child and Adolescent Neurology, National Institute Mongi Ben Hmida of Neurology, Tunis, Tunis, We also observed that the two girls with severe neurological impairment Tunisia, 4Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy. carry mutations predicted to have the worst effects on the protein struc- ture. PLA2G6  P09
.115-S Molecular genetic background of patients with PEHO-like features Mutations in the gene are causative of PLAN, a spectrum of neurode- A. Laari1,2,3, M. Muona4,1, A. Anttonen5,1,6, M. Somer7, A. Palotie4,8, A. Lehesjoki1,2,3; generative conditions including infantile, childhood and adult oPnLsAet2 Gfo6rms. 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Research Seventeen North African patients with a clinical suspicion of infantile-onset Programs unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Institute for Molecular PLAN underwent clinical and instrumental examinations andP LA2G6 se- Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Clinical quencing. Haplotype analysis was performed to date the identified founder Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Medical Genetics, mutation. All patients carried pathogenic biallelic mutations in . Six- University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7Norio Centre, Rinnekoti Foundation, Helsinki, teen children had the commonest form of infantile-onset PLAN, with early Finland, 8Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and onset of psychomotor regression, hypotonia, cerebellar signs and abnormal Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States. ocular movements. The phenotype was highly homogeneous, with rapid de- velopment of severe spastic tetraparesis, cognitive impairment, optic atro- phy, and cerebellar atrophy at brain MRI. Motor neuropathy and EEG fast PEHO syndrome (Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsarrhyth- rhythms were also frequent. Nine patients from six families shared the same mia and Optic atrophy; MIM 260565) is an autosomal recessive inherited founder mutation (p.V691del) which likely arose in the late seventeenth progressive infantile encephalopathy. The main features of PEHO syndrome century. Only one patient fits the diagnosis of the much rarer childhood- are hypotonia, infantile spasms and/or hypsarrhythmia, psychomotor retar- onset PLAN. Despite the early onset (18 months), progression of cerebellar dation, absence or early loss of visual fixation, edema of the face and limbs, and pyramidal signs was slower, with behavioral disturbances and dystonia. and typical dysmorphic features. Brain atrophy is progressive and most pro- Typical features of infantile-onset PLAN such as hypotonia, nystagmus/stra- minent in the cerebellum, where the molecular layer is strongly reduced, bismus, optic atrophy, EEG fast rhythms and motor neuropathy were absent. Purkinje cells are deformed and misaligned, and the cells of the granule cell Besides cerebellar atrophy, MRI showed iron deposition in the basal ganglia. layer are significantly reduced in number. In addition, the optic nerves show This patient carried a missense mutation predicted to be less deleterious.  P09
.118-M varying degrees of loss of myelinated axons and gliosis, and the retinal ner- Identification and functional characterisation of a new KCNJ2 ve fiber and ganglion cell layers are atrophic. A number of patients present mutation with many of these clinical features, but lack typical neuroradiological and I. Rivolta1, L. Sala2, M. Rocchetti3, R. Giovannoni4, C. M. Cornaggia4, R. Combi4; neuropathological findings or progression of brain atrophy and do not have 1Dept. Health Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 2Dept. Biotechnology the PEHO founder mutation. These patients are classified as having PEHO- and biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy, 3Dept. Biotechnology and like syndrome. This group is clinically heterogeneous and therefore it is li- Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy, 4Dept. Surgery and Translational kely that there are multiple underlying genes. To characterize the genetic Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. background of patients showing PEHO-like features, we performed exome sequencing of 33 Finnish patients, and parents of six of them. We identified likely pathogenic mutations in known disease genes (CDK L5
, ABAT, SPTAN1, Autism is a genetic disorder, with an estimated heritability greater than SCN2A, MT-CYB, WDR45 and KCNQ2) in nine individuals. Analysis of muta- 90%. Over the past years, the convergence of genomic technologies has led tions in novel disease genes is ongoing. Our preliminary findings imply that to the identification of several susceptibility loci by means of linkage stu- patients with PEHO-like features are genetically highly heterogeneous and dies. Autism is associated with epilepsy in early childhood and epilepsy t Ph 0a 9t .t 1h 1e 6 e -n Mtity overlaps with early-infantile epileptic encephalopathies. occurs in 10-30% of autism patients. Recently, a role of potassium inward De novo mutations in periventricular heterotopia: an exome rectifying channels in the pathogenesis of autism disease has been postu- sequencing study lated due to the identification in patients affected by autism and epilepsy A. C. O‘Neill1, D. Markie1, R. Newbury-Ecob2, S. Robertson1; of two mutations in the KCNJ10 gene. The gene encodes the Kir4.1 channel 1University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2University Hospitals NHS Foundation which is expressed in astrocytes and neurons.We then searched for mutati- Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom. on in the KNCJ10 gene, as well as in two genes (KCNJ2 and KCNJ16) coding for additional Kir channels with reported expression in astrocytes and neu- rons, in two unrelated patients. We detected a new mutation in the KCNJ2 Disorders involving neuron mispositioning encompass a heterogeneous gene in a boy affected by autism. The mutation has been detected also in group of phenotypes affecting neuronal development. Periventricular he- the healthy father and in the paternal grandmother who reported a case of terotopia (PH) is one such disorder characterised by failure of neurons to SIDS (Sudden Infant death Syndrome) in her family. A functional analysis of mFLiNgrAate to the outer cortex of the brain, resulting in ectopic positioning the mutation effects was performed using an electrophysiological approach along their sites of origin – the lateral ventricles. Although mutations in based on whole cell patch clamp.  P09
.119-S account for an estimated 80% of familial PH cases, mutations at this A novel 2p21 deletion isolated to the PREPL gene locus account for only 25% of sporadic cases, leaving the vast majority with E. Mårtensson1, A. Mattsson1, E. Danefur1, M. Olsson Engman2, M. Soller1, T. Jonson1; no genetic diagnosis. Here we describe a project intended to characterise 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Region Skåne and Lund University, Lund, Sweden, the mutational heterogeneity underlying PH and gain insight into the mole- 2Department of Pediatrics, Blekinge Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden. cular networks that when defective underpin this disorder. We describe an approach involving careful phenotyping of each proband and employ a trio design to exome sequence characterise causative mutations. This study Hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome (HCS) is an autosomal recessive disease will encompass both non-syndromic and syndromic cases of PH and seek characterized by hypotonia at birth, failure to thrive, growth retardation, cy- to map candidate causative variants into gene interaction networks. Similar stinuria type I and, in somSeL cCa3sAe1s, hypePrRgEoPnLadotropic hypogonadismS. LTCh3eAs1e adpe pnroovaoches have proved successful for other neurological disorders such as symptomes are attributed to a homozygous deletion on chromosome 2p21, autism. Illustrating the legitimacy of our approach we describe an identified encompassing the genes and . Since loss-of-function mutation in a gene encoding a calmodulin isoform. The mutation re- mutations cause isolated cystinuria, the other HCS symptoms haveP RbEePenL sides in one of four highly conserved calcium binding pockets of this protein considered to be caused by PREPL deficiency. Using a high-density whole where it is predicted to alter function. SuEbSstHanGtia 2l e0v1id4e n|c Me dIeLmAoNns, tIrTatAesL Y | g W enoW mW e a. rE rS ayH , wG e. O idR enG tified an 11 kb homozygous deletion in the 189ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Carlsen1, R. Helle1, M. Fannemel1, P. Strømme2, E. Frengen1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, gene in a patient presenting with symptoms characteristic of HCS, but wi- Norway, 2Women and Children‘s Division, Department of Clinical Neurosciences for thout cystinuria. Children, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway. Immediately after birth, the patient presented with severe muscular hypo- tonia and feeding problems, followed by growth hormone deficiency and hypergonPaRdEoPtrLopic hypogonadism. Initial molecular analyses excluded a Progressive encephalopathies (PE) are defined as progressive diseases of number of syndromes, including Prader-Willi (PWS). The homozygous de- the Central Nervous System often accompanied by decline of cognitive and/ letion in identified by array analysis corresponded to heterozygous or motor functions and include a number of different disorders. PE can pri- deletions in each of the nonconsanguineous parents. qPPRCERP aLnalysis confir- marily be divided into neurodegenerative and metabolic, the latter defined med these findings and pinpointed thee te xatlent of the deletion to exons 5-10. by defects in subcellular organelles or in the intermediary metabolism of An isolated homozygous microdeletion inPvRoElvPiLng only has not been macromolecules. In the neurodegenerative disorders, progressive loss of previously descrSibLCed3A, h1owevPerR, ERPéLgal ., (in press) recently identified a neural tissue is often detected by cerebral MRI or markers in the cerebro- patient carrying a nonsense mutation in combined with a microde- spinal fluid. PE is associated with high morbidity and mortality rate, but letion involving and , resulting in a similar phenotype to the treatment options are available for some PE disorders. Genetic explanations cPaRsEeP pLresented here. These findings may contribute to further delineate the lack for about 20% of PE disorders, which are classified according to MRI normal function of PREPL, as well as support thee nt oatlion that homozygous findings and phenotype. inactivation should be considered in the diagnosis of patients with a Our aim is to characterize novel mutations causing PE. We have collected PWS phenotype, but no PWS genotype (Maartens ., Biol Chem 387;879- more than 60 PE-patients in 45 families. In all patients, we ruled out CNS in- 883,2006). fection, trauma, vascular accidents and sequelae after prematurity. Evalua-  P09
.121-S tion of all patients by biochemical examinations and neuroimaging revealed Compound heterozygous mutations in two known MCPH genes in cortical atrophy, cerebellar degeneration or basal ganglia abnormalities in autosomal recssesive primary microcephaly the majority of the patients. Congenital anomalies, also those outside the R. Kadir1, S. Shalev2, J. Zlotogora3; 1Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion nervous system, were evaluated using the London Medical Database for syn- University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Genetics Institute, HaEmek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, drome identification. 3Department of Community Genetics, Ministry of Health, Israel, Jerusalem, Israel. Karyotyping, aCGH and analysis of candidate genes by MLPA and/or se- quencing revealed no relevant findings. We have initiated Whole Exome Se- quencing (WES) on DNA from 43 family trios. Among the 16 trios finalized Autosomal recessive microcephaly with severe mental retardation with no through the bioinformatics pipeline, a putative disease causing mutation dysmorphism or other anomalies was diagnosed in seven individuals of an has been identified in eight. Functional studies are currently being perfor- Arab Israeli family. Brain CT scan of affected individuals showed no structu- m  P0
e 9d . 1to 2 c 4h -Maracterize their clinical implications. ral anomalies. Whole exome sequencing of an affected individual identified OTX2, PRRX1 and PRRX2 gene: molecular characterization of two four mutations in two known MCPH genes: compound heterozygous muta- cases of agnathia-otocephaly foetus tions both in STIL and in ASPM. Of 100 ethnically matched controls, none A. Sanchis1, G. Pi2, I. Aleixandre3, M. Ortiz4, A. Zuñiga4; had more than one of the 4 mutations, and only in a heterozygous state. 1Servicio de pediatria. Hospital dr. Peset., Valencia, Spain, 2Servicio de pediatria, Hospital Segregation analysis and functional assays are underway to unravel which Univ. De La Ribera, Alzira/Valencia, Spain, 3Servicio de genética. Hospital Univ. De la of the above variations are the causative mutations for microcephaly in the Ribera, Alzira/Valencia, Spain, 4Servicio de genética. Hospital univ. De la ribera, Alzira/ Valencia, Spain. affected individuals within this family.  P09
.122-M VP S53
 compound novel mutations cause progressive cerebello- cerebral atrophy type 2 (PCCA2) Agnathia-otocephaly is a rare, sporadic and lethal malformation with an M. Feinstein1, H. Flusser2, T. Lerman-Sagie3, B. Ben-Zeev4, D. Lev3, I. Cohen1, R. Kadir1, E. estimated incidence of less than 1 in 70000 births. Otocephaly is considered Leshinsky-Silver3, O. Agamy1, B. Marcus1, S. Sivan1, O. S. Birk1,5; 1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at Ben-Gurion university in the negev, a defect of blastogenesis and it can further result in the mal-development of Beer-sheva, Israel, 2Zussman child development center, Soroka Medical Center, Faculty the craniofacial midline, extracephalic and axial body structures. This mal- of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurzion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 3Institute of formation spectrum is usually lethal, because is associated severe respira- Medical Genetics and Pediatric Neurology Unit, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, tory distress. 4Pediatric Neurology Unit, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 5Genetics Institute, We screened 2 agnathia cases for orthodenticle homeobox 2 (OTX2), paired Soroka Medical Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, related homeobox 1 (PRRX1) genes and for the homeobox 2 (PRRX2) gene Beer-sheva, Israel. by sequencing in a ABIPRISM 3130xl genetic analyzer. In the first case, a full autopsy in the fetus proband of 12+6 weeks, revealed agnathia, holoprosencephaly, cyclopia, microstomia, malformed pinnae Progressive cerebello-cerebral atrophy (PCCA) leading to profound mental (misplaced toward the angle of the mandible), omphalocele and shortening retardation, progressive microcephaly, spasticity and early onset epilepsy, of the long bones. The cytogenetic analysis showed a partial trisomy 13 and was diagnosed in four non-consanguineous apparently unrelated families of partial monions osimlicyo 18. Screening for the OTX2, PRRX1 and PRRX2 gene in Jewish Moroccan ancestry. None of the known SepSecs (MIM613009) muta- foetal tissues, identified a heterozygous  S144
N in the exon 2 of PRRX2 gene. tions were found in the investigated families. Common founder mutation(s) An analysis with Polyphen v2.0 and Shift Mutation showed this mu- were assumed. Genome wide linkage analysis and whole exome sequencing tation as a high probability of altering protein function. were done, followed by realtime PCR and immunofluorescent microsco- In the second case, the proband was a foetus of 14+3 weeks. The autopsy re- py. Genome wide linkage analysis mapped the disease-associated gene to vealed agnathia and omphalocele. Screening for these tihnr esieli gcoenes identified 0.5Mb on chromosome 17p13.3. Whole exome sequencing identified two a heterozygous  P181
L in the exon 3 of PRRX1 gene, mutation with a high mutations within this locus, which were common to the affected individuals: probability of altering the protein function as analysis shows. compound heterozygous mutations in VP S53
, segregating as expected for In summary, we report novel mutations in PRRX1 and PRRX2 gene implica- autosomal recessive heredity within all four families, and common in Mo- ted in two case of agnathia. roccan Jews (~1:37 carrier rate). The Golgi-associated retrograde protein  P09
.125-S (GARP) complex is involved in the retrograde pathway recycling endocytic Study of FOXG1 gene in Spanish patients: review of clinical vesicles to Golgi. Both c.2084A>G and c.1556+5G>A VP S53
 founder muta- presentation tions are predicted to affect the C-terminal domain of VP S53
, known to be J. Armstrong Morón1, M. O’Callaghan1, N. Brandi1, E. Gerotina2, E. Quandt1, M. Rabaza1, C. Elisenda1, A. Roche3, À. Garcia-Cazorla1, M. Pineda2; critical to its role as part of the GARP complex. In fact, mRNA studies sho- 1Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, wed detrimental effects of the mutations on VP S53
 transcripts, and immu- Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 3Consorci Sanitari Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain. nofluorescent microscopy demonstrated swollen and abnormally numerous Introduction: MEC P2
 CD63 positive vesicular bodies, likely intermediate recycling endosomes, in fibroblasts of affected individuals. Thus, VP S53
 mutations cause autosomal Since ,mutations in gene were described as cau- recessive PCCA type 2.  P09
.123-S sinCg DRKeLtt5 syndrome (RTT, OMIM#312750) in 19F9O9X, Go1ther genes have also Clinical and molecular characterization of progressive appeared to be responsible of RTT: X-linked cyclin-dependent kinase-like encephalopathies in children 5 ( ) lying in Xp22 and forkhead box G1 ( ) in 14q12. We pre- D. Misceo1, T. H. Gamage1, T. Barøy1, C. Ramane1, A. Holmgren1, T. Hughes1, M. D. sMeantte oruiarl se xapnedri emnceet hino dcsli:n ical and molecular diaFgOnXoGsi1s of congenital form Vigeland1, S. Thirukeswaran1, S. S. Amundsen1, A. Torgersbråten1, N. Skauli1, E. Ø. of RTT. We have studied the gene by direct se- 190 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG quencing and MLPA (Probemix- P075
, MC-Holland) in patients RTT-withoutABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index MEC P2
 Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States. Results m: utation and in patients with mental retardation and Rett-like cli- nical features.FOXG1 e MEC P2
 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 is a dominantly inherited ataxia, mainly oc- We analyzed 211 patients with clinical presentation likely to have curring in adulthood, caused by a CTG.CAG tract expansion in the ATXN8OS mutations in gen : 143 RTT (classic and congenital form - gene, an untranslated antisense RNA partially overlapping the KLH L1
 gene, negative), 39 male patients with severe mental retardation and hypotonia and the complementary CAG repeat in the ATXN8 gene. and 29 patients with RTT like features. We detected 9 mutations:5/23 girl We report a father (59 years) and his daughter (10 years) carrying a geno- patients with congenital form and 4/39 male patients with severe mental mic deletion (800 kb) completely overlapping ATXN8OS gene and part of retardaFtiOoXnG. 1. KLH L1
 (from 70,345,271 to 71,196,665 - NCBI Build 37/hg19 - Array-CGH NCoonncel uofs icolansss:i cal form or girls with RTT-like clinical features carried muta- 60K) and a 4 Mb duplication in 8q13.33q21.11 (72,268,801-76,311,849) tion in FOXG1 segregating in an unaffected brother. The girl was evaluated for dysarthria, Genetic etiologies of variant Rett syndrome are heteroge- difficulties in sentence structuring, short attention span and mild intellectu- neous; screening the gene should be done not only in females, but al deficit. No other neurological signs were reported. Brain MRI was normal. aFlOsXoG in1 male patients with severe hypotonia and acquired microcephaly sin- Neurological examination of the father revealed short attention span; coor- ce the first months of life. MEC P2
 CDK L5
 dination, sensitivity, reflexes and cranial nerves were normal; no abnormal is not an X-linked gene and therefore there can be a higher incidence gait or dysarthria. Brain MRI revealed several areas of gliosis in the frontal o Pf 0 m 9.u 1t 2a 6ti -o Mn detection in RTT-like males than in and genes. white matter. Modifiers of age at onset in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: a Databases mining showed a partially overlapping 357 kb deletion involving preliminary study in a Brazilian population only KLH L1
 and ATXN8OS (chr 13:70,486,026-70,843,210) in a patient with F. S. Pereira1, T. L. Monte2, L. D. Locks-Coelho3, A. S. P. Silva1, A. L. Silva1, O. Barsottini4, J. L. mild speech delay (Decipher 278559), inherited from a healthy mother. Pedroso4, F. R. Vargas5, M. F. D. Lima6, H. v. L. Junior7, R. M. Castilhos8, M. Saraiva-Pereira9, In contrast with the KLH L1
/ATX8OS knockout mouse model, our data sug- L. B. Jardim10; gest that heterozygous deletion of KLH L1
/ATX8OS is not associated with 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Laboratório de Identificação Genética , Hospital de ataxia/cerebellar involvement in humans. Clínicas de Porto Alegre, UFRGS e INAGEMP, Brazil, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2Programa  P09
.128-M de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Médicas, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Serviço de Genetics of Schizophrenia: preliminary results of an Italian Genética Médica, Laboratório de Identificação Genética , Hospital de Clínicas de multicenter study Porto Alegre, UFRGS e Instituto Nacional de Genética Médica Populacional, Brazil, G. Piluso1, T. Giugliano1, M. Savarese1, C. Pisano1, A. Torella1, S. Galderisi2, V. Nigro1; Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Setor de Neurologia Geral e Ataxias. Disciplina de Neurologia 1Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Patologia Generale, Seconda Universita‘ degli Clínica da UNIFESP - Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Salute Mentale e Fisica e Medicina Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 5Laboratório de Epidemiologia de Malformações Congênitas, Preventiva, Seconda Universita‘ degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy. Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and Departamento de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 6Laboratório de Epidemiologia de Malformações Congênitas, Fundação Oswaldo Schizophrenia (SCZD) is a major psychiatric disease causing severe disabi- Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 7Centro de Reabilitação Dr. Henrique Santillo, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil, Goiânia, Brazil, 8Serviço de Genética Médica, Laboratório lity and with a prevalence of 1% worldwide. Genetic factors play a key role de Identificação Genética , Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, UFRGS e INAGEMP, in the etiology of schizophrenia but its genetic bases are complex and not Brazil and Programa de Pós-graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular, UFRGS, Porto yet clarified. In the last few years, innovative technologies have been widely Alegre, Brazil, 9Serviço de Genética Médica, Laboratório de Identificação Genética , applied to the genetic study of schizophrenia. This multicenter study aims to Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, UFRGS e INAGEMP, Brazil and Departamento de apply aCGH and NGS technologies to investigate genetic risk factors for spe- Bioquímica, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 10Serviço de Genética Médica, Laboratório de cific SCZD-related endophendoe tnyopveos that greatly affect real-life functioning of Identificação Genética , Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, UFRGS e INAGEMP, Brazil; people with schizophrenia or vParLioaSb lOens es t2r0o1n2g;l7y( a1s2s)o:ec5ia2t2e6d4 with it. To inve- Departamento de Medicina Interna; PPG em Ciências Médicas e PPG Genética e Biologia Molecular, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil. stigate the contribution of CNVs to schizophrenia vulnerability, we have used the Enhancer Chip ( ), a customized aCGH recently developed by our group, which is able to examine CNVs in The spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is caused by CAGn expansion at the whole human genome as well as testing over 1,250 enhancers for their ATXN2 gene, which account for 50% of the variability in age at onset (AO). potential pathogenic rodlee . nColvinoical research units have provided us DNAs Previous reports pointed to CAGn variations and polymorphisms at other from 60 sporadic SCZD patients and their parents (familyM EtrTios). To date, genes as responsible for the remaining AO variance. Aims: to address a con- we have identified two partially-overlapping deletioAnms aJt P 7sqyc3h1i.a2t riny firmation study of other polyglutamine tracts and of a mitochondrial DNA unrelated SCZD patients. Interestingly, both CNVs includdee novo. This proto- polymorphism as modifiers of AO in SCA2 patients. Methods: symptomatic oncogene has been previously associated to schizophrenia ( individuals with a molecular diagnosis of SCA2 were recruited from Bra- 2010;167(4):436). Another SCZDDe pnaotvieont presented a duplication zil. Capillary electrophoresis was performed to detect CAG lengths at SCA1, at 19p13.3. A similar rearrangement is reported in Decipher, possibly asso- SCA2, SCA3/MJD, SCA6, SCA7 and RAI1 associated genes; the mitochondrial ciated to intellectual disability. protein-altering mutations will be complex I gene polymorphism (10398G) was determined by PCR followed also invdees ntiogvaoted by NGS-based exome sequencing of all family trios recrui- by restriction endonuclease analysis. Pearson correlations with AO were ted (now in progress). These preliminary data may help to strengthen the tested against each CAGn for each individual; the 10398G polymorphism r Po 0le 9 .o 1f 2 9-S variants in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. of one person per maternal lineage was analysed by t test; all followed by Genome-wide methylation profiling of schizophrenia a step-wise linear regression. Results: 57 individuals (33 families and 42 B. B. Rukova1, R. Staneva1, S. Hadjidekova1, G. Stamenov2, V. Milanova3, D. Toncheva1; maternal lineages) were studied. Mean (range) AO and CAGn at normal 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Woman and expanded ATXN2 alleles were 32.9 (3-76) years and 23 (22-33) and 42 Health Hospital „Nadezhda“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Psychiatry, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. (34-67) repeats. At first, AO correlated with the large alleles at ATXN2 and ATXN3 genes, and with small allele at RAI1. 10398G was not associated with Background: AO. On step-wise regression, the unique correlation maintained was with ATXN2 expanded allele (r = -0.78; r2 = 0.61; p < 0.0001). Discussion: our Schizophrenia is one of the major psychiatric disorders. It is a preliminary data did not support previous published results; they should be disorder of complex inheritance, involving both heritable and environmen- confirmed with an outlier sampling strategy, in the future. tal factors. DNA methylation is a fundamental inheritable epigenetic modi-  P09
.127-S fication that stably alters the gene expression levels. We reasoned that ge- Heterozygous deletion of KLH L1
/ATXN8OS at the SCA8 locus are nMeattice rmiaoldsi faicnadti oMnest, hreosdusl:ting from environmental stimuli could also make a likely not associated with cerebellar impairment in humans contribution to the disease development. G. Mandrile1,2, E. Di Gregorio3,4, H. Goel5, D. F. Giachino1,2, S. De Mercanti1,6, M. Iudicello6, We have performed 26 high-resolution genome- S. Losa7, M. Rolando7, L. Ranum8, M. De Marchi1,2, A. Brusco3,4; wide methylation array analyses to determine the methylation status of 1University of Torino - Dept. Clinical and Biological Sciences, Orbassano (TO), Italy, 2Medical Genetics - San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano (TO), Italy, 3University of 27,627 CpG islands and compared the data between patients and healthy Torino - Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, 4S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Città controls. Methylation profiles of DNAs were analyzed in six pools (220 schi- della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 5Faculty of Health and Medicine, University zophrenia patients; 220 age-matched healthy controls; 110 female schizo- of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia, 6Neurology Unit - San Luigi University Hospital, phrenia patients; 110 age-matched healthy females; 110 male schizophre- Orbassano (TO), Italy, 7S.C. Neuropsichiatria Infantile - ASLTO3, Collegno-Pinerolo (TO), nRieas uplattsi:ents; 110 age-matched healthy males) and 20 individual patient Italy, 8Center for NeuroGenetics, Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, DNA samples (7 females and 13 males). Department of Neurology, and Genetics Institute, College of Medicine, University of We find significant differences in the methylation profile between ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |s WchiWzopWhr.eEnSiaH aGnd. OcoRntGrol DNA pools. New candidate genes that princi1p9al1lyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.132-M GABRA2, LIN7B, CAS P3
 Whole exome sequencing of schizophrenia patients with high level of participate in apoptosis, synaptic transmission and nervous system deve- autozygosity lopment ( ) were discoveredX. IMAeP,t hGyAlaBtRioDn, OprXoTf, ilKeRsT d7if- C. Magri1, E. Giacopuzzi1, P. Valsecchi2,3, M. Traversa1, R. Gardella1, G. Borsani1, S. fered betweenD tHheX 3g7e,n MdeArPs2. KA2m, oFnNgD fCe4m, aGlIePsC t1h e most important genes par- Barlati1, E. Sacchetti2,3, M. Gennarelli1,4; ticipate in apoptosis and .synaptic transmission ( ). 1Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, AComnocnlug smioanle:s genes represent the most si- Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 3Department of Mental Health, Brescia Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 4Genetic Unit, gnificant candidate-genes IRCCS San Giovanni di Dio, Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. Our data revealed substantial differences in methylation pro- files between schizophrenia patients and controls and between male and female patients. Dysregulated activity of these candidate genes could play a Schizophrenia (SZ) has a high heritability (about 80%), but the genetic ar- role in schizophrenia pathogenesis.  P09
.130-M chitecture of the disease is still unclear. The numerous genome wide asso- De novo mutations identified in sporadic cases of Childhood Onset ciation studies and the recent next generation sequencing analyses indicated Schizophrenia that about 32% of the genetic variability of SZ is due to the additive effect A. Ambalavanan1, S. Girard1, K. Ahn2, S. Zhou3, C. V. Bourassa3, A. Dionne-Laporte3, of a high number of susceptibility alleles with a modest effect size and/or D. Spiegelman3, S. Dobrezniecka3, L. Xiong3, P. A. Dion3, R. Joober1, J. Rapoport2, G. A. to the presence of rare deleterious copy number variants (CNVs) or coding Rouleau1,3,4; single nucleotide variants (SNVs). To evaluate the contribution of rare reces- 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Child Psychiatry branch, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, sive homozygous SNVs in SZ, we initially identified, with SNP-array analysis 3Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, of 180 unrelated SZ patients, the offspring of mates that are closely related 4Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada. (inbreeding) and therefore have an increased prior probability to carry po- tentially deleterious recessive mutations; subsequently, we performed who- le exome sequencing analysis of these patients. Childhood Onset Schizophrenia (COS) is a severe neurodevelodpem neonvtoal dis- An average of 269 (min-max: 196-384) functional (frameshift, missense and order, for which the genetic etiology remains largely unknown. Recently, nonsense) homozygous SNVs has been observed in the autozygous regions whole exome sequencing studies have identified severe rare vari- of the 7 sequenced patients. About 8 SNVs per individual are novel (not in adne tnso ivno sporadic cases of adult onset schizophrenia and autism. Idne t nhoisv sotudy, dbSNP, 1000G and dbES P6500
) and have a high phyloP conservation score. we performed exome sequencing of 17 COS trios withd teh en oavimo of identifying Among these, we identified, in three patients, three different SNVs represen- variants in the COS affected children. We identified 20 mu- ting good candidate SZ mutations, since they are predicted to be damaging tatiodnes nino v1o7 probands, which is consistent with the mutation rate and map in genes mainly expressed in brain and previously associated with thus far identified in adult form of schizophrenia. Our findings adlseo n souvgogest SZ. that missense variants identified in our study have a high likelihood Our data suggest that rare homozygous SNVs could be involved in the clini- for pathogenicity. In fact, the pool of genes we found to present va- cal phenotype of SZ, at least in patients with high level of autozygosity.  P09
.133-S riants appears to be enriched for genes that are less likely to tolerate such Copy number variants analysis and targeted resequencing of the alterations. Among the genes found to be disrupted in our study, there is schizophrenia candidate gene RB1C C1
 evidence suggesting that some of them are involved in neuronal functions. F. Degenhardt1,2, M. Pfohl1,2, J. Strohmaier3, I. Giegling4, D. Rujescu4, F. Streit3, A. Moreover some of these genes were previously reported to be associated Forstner1,5, T. Schulze6, P. Hoffmann1,2, R. Mössner7, M. Rietschel8, M. Nöthen1,2; with neurodevelopmental disorders. Hence this list of genes should be con- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain sidered to represent genuine COS candidate genes. We believe that insights Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genetic Epidemiology from the identification of COS genes may help to develop diagnostic tools, in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim / Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany, 4Department of Psychiatry, University of which in turn may help to intervene before the onset of symptoms. Even- Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany, 5Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, tually, knowing the genetic etiology may lead to the identification of thera- University of Bonn, Bonn, Austria, 6Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, p Pe 0u 9t .i 1c 3 a 1v -e Snues for better treatment. Göttingen, Germany, 7Department of Psychiatry, Bonn, Germany, 8Department of Systematic association analysis of human microRNAs with Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim / Heidelberg University, Bonn, Germany. schizophrenia A. Hofmann1, F. Degenhardt1, A. Forstner1, G. Schratt2, M. M. Nöthen1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. Schizophrenia is a severe neuropsychiatric disorder with heritability esti- mates of ~80%. Xu et al. (2011) published the first exome-sequencing study focusing on de novo mutations in patients with schizophrenia. To provide Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a severe neuropsychiatric disorder. SCZ genome- additional genetic evidence for any of the genes suggested by the exome- wide association studies (GWAS) have identified common single nucleotide sequencing study, we performed a follow-up study focusing on copy number polymorphisms (SNPs) and a large polygenic contribution to illness risk, variants (CNVs). We screened 1,637 patients and 1,627 controls for CNVs in but biological mechanisms remain unclear. The known role of microRNAs any of the genes suggested by the exome-sequencing study. Duplications in (miRNAs) as potent disease modifiers in neuropsychiatric disorders raises RB1C C1
 on chromosome 8 were overrepresented in patients. The duplica- the question of whether genetic variation in miRNAs plays a critical role in tions were followed-up in independent European samples. In the combined SCZ etiology. analysis, comprising of 8,461 patients and 112,871 controls, duplications Therefore, we implemented a systematic set-based test for all miRNAs de- in RB1C C1
 were associated with schizophrenia (P = 1.29 x 10-5; odds ratio fined in the miRBase based on test statistics from GWAS data. Results from = 8.58). The aim of the present study was to further explore RB1C C1
 as a the largest SCZ meta-analyses to date [Ripke et al., 2013] provided the basis candidate gene for schizophrenia. The gene consists of 24 exons. We focused for this analysis. Alike the popular gene set testing tool VEGAS [Liu et al., our targeted resequencing on exon 15: (i) it contains >30% of the gene’s 2010], SNPs in within miRNAs were grouped together, corrected for linkage total protein-coding sequence, and (ii) Xu et al. (2011) identified a de novo disequilibrium and controlled for the number of SNPs within each miRNA to frameshift deletion in this exon. After quality control, the data from 1740 calculate a miRNA test statistic. patients were available. Among 22 patients, a total of 17 different variants From all analyzed miRNAs, 2.76% were significantly associated with SCZ were identified and verified by sequencing the complementary strand. Of after correction for multiple testing; further 18.90% were nominal signi- these, 10 were neither detected in the 1000 Genomes Project nor the Exo- ficant. As expected from the GWAS results, the strongest association was me Variant Server. Currently, we are analyzing whether these variants co- found for hsa-mir-137. Moreover, miRNAs involved in neural and synapse segregate with a psychiatric diagnosis within the families of the affected development such as mir-9 and let-7 as well as in miRNAs with yet unknown probands. Furthermore, detailed phenotypic description of the mutation function were identified. Further evaluation of targets from significantly as- carriers are being assembled.  P09
.134-M sociated miRNAs as well as their presence in brain QTLs will be presented. Combination of whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing, to Overall, our results give the first unbiased screening of miRNA association identify rare and de-novo variation in cases of schizophrenia and based on large SCZ GWAS data and might lead to the discovery of key players bipolar disorder from the Faroe Islands suitable for further functional studies. F. Lescai1, T. Als1, M. Nyegaard1, A. McQuillin2, D. Demontis1, A. Fiorentino2, N. O’Brien2, A. Jarra2, J. Grove1, G. Andorsdottir3, M. Biskopstø3, A. G. Wang4, O. Mors5, J. Wang6, A. Børglum1; 1Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 2University College London, London, United 192 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Kingdom, 3Genetic Biobank of the Faroes, Faroe Islands, Denmark, 4Mental Health Centre SCN10A Amager, Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark, 5Aarhus University Hospital, Risskov, Denmark, 6BGI - Beijing Genomics Institute, Beijing, China. and ) sodium channels in a small cohort of patients (n=92) meeting sStCrNic9tA criteria for idiopathic small fiberS nCeNu9rAopathy (I-SFN). In this study a cohorSt CoNf 1309A3 patients with I-SFN was tested for the presence of variants in Isolated populations represent an advantage to identify rare disease vari- . Patients that diSdC Nno9tA harbor a variant subsequently under- ants that may appear at higher frequencies compared to outbred popula- went analyses. Electrophysiology was used to test functional effects tions. In this work, we use the Faroese population to test this hypothesis, of variant channels. In , 17 different heterozygous variants classified and combine low-depth (6X) whole-genome (WGS) and high-depth (35X) as class 3 (unknown significance) or 4 (likely to be pathogenic) basSeCdN o1n0 iAn whole exome (WES) sequencing approaches to describe genomic variation, silico prediction were found in 34 patients (~9%). For two NaV1.7 variants, de-novo mutations and perform association mapping in patients with schi- electrophysiology did not provide evidence for pathogenicity. In , zophrenia (SZ) and bipolar disorder (BP). ten different heterozygous NaV1.8 variants classified as class 3 (unknown Our sample consists of 106 SZ cases, 28 BP and 214 controls (344 total): significance) or 4 (likely to be pathogenic) based on in silico prediction were together with unrelated individuals, it includes 54 complete trios. fSoCuNn9dA i n 1 S5
C pNa1t0ieAnts (~4%). For one Nav1.8 variant no evidence for patho- A total of 17,345,307 and 259,904 variants have been called in WGS and genicity was provided by electrophysiology. In conclusion, heterozygous WES respectively. We discovered 9,130 de-novo mutations in WGS and 417 or variants are present in a substantial proportion (~12%; in WES. Clear differences emerge between WGS and WES in identifying dif- 49 of 393) of our cohort of I-SFN patieSnCtNs.9 FAor maSnCyN v1a0rAiants electrophy- ferent types of variants. A specificity of this work is the combination of WGS siological analysis revealed gain-of-function attributes in mutant channels. and WES in the discovery of de-novo mutations: both approaches discover TSChNis9 iAmpliesS CthNa1t0 fAunctional variants in and may predispose the same number of de-novo loss-of-function mutations but high-depth carriers to the development of channelopathy-associated SFN. Analysis of WES is clearly more powerful in calling coding variants, mostly because of and should be considered for patients with I-SFN.  P09
.137-S depth filtering criteria. In the association mapping we identified 6 genome- The CD45+ blood cells alpha-synuclein level in Parkinson’s disease wide significant loci, which are currently being replicated in 3,300 BP and A. K. Emelyanov1,2, P. Andoskin1,2, A. Yakimovskii2, A. Timofeeva2, S. Pchelina1,2; controls from UCL. The results of W th hi os l ea En xa oly ms eis (, 3t 5h Xe ) co Wn hco or led a Gn ence o mb ee t (w 6Xe )en 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Pavlov’s WES and WGS, and their perspectives will be presented and discussed. State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. count percent count percent Loss of Function 3,140 1.21% 5,753 0.03% Missense 65,785 25.31% 80,087 0.46% Impaired metabolism of alpha-synuclein and its aggregation are implicated All Variants Synonymous 41,904 16.12% 42,989 0.25% in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD). It was shown that L-DOPA Non coding 149,075 57.36% 17,216,478 99.26% treatment during the clinical course of the disease induces the alpha-syn- Total 259,904 17,345,307 Loss of Function 6 1.44% 6 0.07% uclein oligomerization. Several studies estimated alpha-synuclein level in Missense 89 21.34% 12 0.13% blood cells of PD patients. However the alpha-synuclein level in uncontami- De Novo Variants Synonymous 32 7.67% 6 0.07% Non coding 290 69.54% 9,106 99.74% nated fraction of the peripheral blood lymphocytes remains unknown. Here Total 417 9,130 we examined alterations in alpha-synuclein level in magneticaly separated  P09
.135-S CD45+ cells from the whole blood in 18 drug-naïve patients with sporadic Identification of a de novo 15q13.1-13.3 deletion in a reading and PD and in 23 controls without neurological disorders by ELISA method (Hu- language impaired cohort man alpha-synuclein ELISA kit, Invitrogen, USA). CD45+ MicroBeads and K. A. Pettigrew1, E. Reeves2, R. Leavett2, E. Hayiou-Thomas2, N. H. Simpson3, M. MACS Columns (Miltenyi Biotec, USA) are used for positive selection lym- Snowling4, D. F. Newbury3,4, S. Paracchini1; phocytes after Ficoll-Paque PLUS peripheral blood separation. All subjects 1School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom, 2Centre were residents of the North-Western region of Russia and ethnically mat- for Reading and Language, Department of Psychology, University of York, York, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford, United ched. The level of a total alpha-synuclein in peripheral blood CD45+ cells Kingdom, 4Department of Experimental Psychology & St John’s College Oxford, Oxford, was higher in patients with PD (median 9,59 (min - 2,23; max - 36,80), ng/ United Kingdom. ml ) than in the control subjects (median 4,81 (min - 1,21; max - 28,1), ng/ ml) (р=0,04). Taken together our findings suppose that the increased level of alpha-synuclein in blood CD45+ cells of PD patients can be used as dia- Dyslexia and specific language impairment (SLI) are developmental disor- g Pn 0o 9s .t 1i 3c 8m -a Mrker for PD. ders presenting deficits of written or spoken language respectively in indi- Linking amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy: viduals with normal intelligence and education, and without overt neurolo- analysis of the  C9
ORF72 gene in 162 SMA patients gical abnormalities. Copy number variations (CNVs) have been implicated in L. Alías1, S. Bernal2, M. J. Barceló1, E. Martínez2, R. Martínez-Hernández2, M. Baiget1, E. neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions, such as autism and schizo- F. Tizzano1; phrenia, but it is not clear to what extent they might contribute to reading 1Hospital Sant Pau, CIBERER U-705, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Pau, and language abilities. Using data from a longitudinal study investigating Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. the development of children between 3 and 7 years of age, we performed CNV analysis (n=94 children; 65% family risk of dyslexia, 23% language im- paired, 12% typically developing) and identified a large deletion on chro- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are mosome 15q13.1d-1e 3n.o3v ion an individual with an early age SLI diagnosis. This both motor neuron disorders. Several studies have tried to establish a link single copy deletion spanning B P3
-B P5
 (~3.2Mb) was validated by qPCR, betw C9
eeOnR Fth7e2 two diseases but the subject is still under debate. It has been and shown to be . Both parents and a sibling are non-carriers of this reported that large expansions of the hexanucleotide GGGGCC in intron 1 of deletion and do not display any reading or language deficits, suggesting this the genSeM aNr2e often responsible for familOiablj aencdti vsep:oradic ALS cases. deletion may be directly involved in the phenotype of dteh en opvrooband. This is On the other side, mutations in the SMN1 gene cause SMCA9 aOnRdF 7it2s highly ho- the first report of a B P3
-B P5
 deletion to be identified in an SLI cohort, in the mologous copy, , is a phenotypic modifieSrM. N2 We investigated absence of intellectual disability. The identification of a chromosome whether the nuMmebthero dosf :the hexanucleotide repeats in was asso- 15q CNV in this cohort provides further support for the implication of this ciated with the phenotype and the number of copies in a group of 162 locus in contributing to a wide range of neurodevelopmental phenotypes. SMA patients. Conventional PCR was used to determine values  P09
.136-M within the normal range (less than 30 repeats), while Repeat Primed-PCR Gain-of-function Na1.7 and Na1.8 mutations in patients with v v (RP-PCR) and RSoeusuthltesr:n blot methods were used to exclude the existence of idiopathic small fiber neuropathy large expansions that are out of the range to be amplifiedC b9yO cRoFn7v2entional M. M. Gerrits1, C. G. Faber1, J. G. J. Hoeijmakers1, D. M. L. Merckx1, L. K. M. Meekels1, H. J. M. Smeets1, S. D. Dib-Hajj2,3, S. G. Waxman2,3, I. S. J. Merkies1,4; methodology. No pathological (> 30 repeats) or premutated alleles 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Yale University School (20-30 repeats) were found. The allelic distribution of the gene in of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 3Center for Neuroscience and Regeneration SMA patients overlapped with the data obtained in our control population Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Centre, West Haven, CT, United States, 4Spaarne dSMiscNa2rding puCtaotnivcel urespioena:ts that may be associCa9teOdR wF7it2h the disease. No as- Hospital, Hoofddorp, Netherlands. sociation was either observed with the SMA phenotype or the number of copies. The involvement of as a genetic marker in SMA is unlikely. Current investigation of modifier genes in SMA should Small fiber neuropathy (SFN) is a relatively common disorder of thinly mye- consider other possible candidates (Supported by FIS 11-2606). linated and unmyelinated nerve fibers and is clinically characterized bSyC bNu9rA- ning pain and autonomic complaints. We have recently described the pres- ence of gain-of-function variants in Nav1.7E SanHdG N a2v10.81 (4e n| cModIeLdA bNy , ITAL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 193ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.139-S Spinocerenellar ataxia type 6(SCA6): clinical pilot trial with medicinal herbs cohort of TS patients without finding any deletions/duplications. T. Okabe; Through CNV screeningI MofM aP c2oLhort of 188 unrelated TS patients aIMndM 3 P126
L University of Tokyo Hospital, Bunnkyo-ku, Japan. controls from Denmark, we identified seven patients (3.7%) and 3 controls (0.9%) with intragenic deletions, thus, the frequency of deletionsI MwaMsP s2igLnificantly higher in patients than in controls (P= 0.0447). Spinocerebellar ataxia 6 (SCA6) is an autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia Four of the deleItMioMnPs 2iLdentified in the patients did not include any known associated with small polyglutamine-dependent expansions in the alpha 1A- exons of , but were within intron 3. These deletions were found to voltage calcium channel. At present, we have no effective therapeutic tools. affect a shorter mRNA species with two alternative 5’-exons, one of We report here six cases of spinocerebellar ataxia 6(SCA6)with typical sym- which included the ATG start codon. We showed that this short transcript ptoms. Genetic tests revealed expanded allele of 22~25 CAG repeats at the and the previously published long transcript were expresseIdM iMn Pse2vLeral brain spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 locus. Head MRI revealed a typical atrophic regions, with particularly high expression in cerebellum and hippocampus. image in cerebellum. For the systems therapy with medicinal herbs, the dif- The current findings give further evidence for the role of as a sus- ferential diagnosis by traditional herbal medicine was made according to ceptibility factor in TS and suggest that intronic changes in disease suscep- the guideline. Mixtures of 18~26 medicinal herbs were given according to tibility genes should be investigated further for presence of alternatively the differential diagnosis in each patient. The remedies used for the cases s Pp 0l 9ic .e 1d 4 3ex -Sons. consist of several different ingredients, which have well-established histo- Molecular diagnosis of TTR gene mutations in Italy: the experience of ries of use for treatment of vertigo, tremor, or ataxia and are expected to the Molecular Genetics Laboratory of Ferrara exert their specific effects. In 5 of 7 patients, ataxia of gait and stance was A. Ravani1, P. Rimessi1, M. Taddei Masieri1, B. Dolcini1, A. Venturoli1, C. Trabanelli1, M. significantly improved in 30~ 60 days of the herbal treatment. 34~85% Fabris1, A. Mazzeo2, F. Salvi3, C. Rapezzi4, F. Gualandi1, A. Ferlini1; reductuion were obtained on the 100-point semiquantitative International 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy, 2U.O.C. Neuropatologia Azienda Ospedaliera Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scales (ICARS) scores. The results imply the the- Universitaria Policlinico “G. Martino”, Messina, Italy, 3U.O.C. di Neurologia - IRCCS rapeutic potential of herbal medicine for spinocerebellar ataxia 6. Further Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche - Ospedale Bellaria, Bologna, Italy, 4Sezione di Cardiologia – Dipartimento di Medicina Specialistica, Diagnostica e Sperimentale – extensive investigations are required to clarify the mechanisms by which Università degli Studi, Bologna, Italy. the remission induction of this genetic disease of CAG repeat expansion mu- tation has been attained with the medicinal herbs.  P09
.140-M Mutant Ataxin-2 Induces Reactive Oxygen Species and Autophagy in Transthyretin (TTR), a plasma and cerebrospinal fluid protein secreted by transformed lymphoblastoid cells from patients with Spinocerebellar the liver and choroid plexus, is mainly known as the physiological carrier Ataxia Type 2 of thyroxine (T(4)) and retinol. Under pathological conditions, various TTR H. Tsai1, C. Wu2, J. Huang2, T. Yang2; missense mutations are known to destabilize the tetramer composed of 1Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 2CHUNG SHAN MEDICAL mutant and wild type subunits, causing misfolding of the protein and fibril UNIVERSITY, Taichung, Taiwan. aggregation. This condition is associated with the amyloid diseases: senile systemic amyloidosis, familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP), familial amy- loid cardiomyopathy (FAC). Direct sequencing of TTR gene detects more Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), an autosomal dominant neurodegene- than 99% of disease-causing mutations. rative disease, is caused by the expansion of a CAG triplet repeat located in In twelve years we analyzed 562 subjects, referred to our service by neu- the N-terminal coding region of the ATXN2 gene. Alleles of the ATXN2 gene rologists and cardiologists. About 47% of the exams were required for po- that carry 13-31 CAG-trinucleotide repeats are present in normal individu- lyneuropathy, 33% for cardiac impairment and 20% for familiarity for TTR als. Contrariwise, alleles with a CAG triplet repeat number of >31 and up to mutations. approximately 200 are present in patients with SCA2. Although the detail We found the causative mutation (index cases) in 80/428 subjects with no mechanism of pathogenesis is yet to be defined, neurotoxin, especially reac- familiarity for TTR-related diseases and in 78/134 subjects with a family tive oxygen species (ROS), released from aggregated mutant proteins, may history of the disorder. play a role in the pathogenic process. In this study, the lymphoblastoid cell The most frequent mutation in our cohort is Ile68Leu (31%), typically lines (LCLs) isolated from SCA2 patients were utilized to compare with the present in cases with cardiac involvement, followed by Phe64Leu (22%), wild-type lymphoblastoid cells. We investigated the crucial relationship bet- Val30Met (15%) , Glu89Gln (14%) and Thr49Ala (5%). A novel mutation ween the expression of p-ERK1/2 and autophagy. Results found the endo- has been identified in exon 2: Val14Leu. The subject was affected by cardiac genous p-ERK1/2 and autophagy marker protein, Atg8 (L C3
 class II) were amyloidosis. higher in SCA2 patients. Electron micrographs showed that only the cells The Detection Rate achieved is good, keeping in mind the complexity of cli- expressing expanded Ataxin-2 contained aggregated protein and autophagic nical diagnosis. The choice of the complete sequencing of TTR gene has pro- vacuoles. Based on the above observations we hypothesized that the aggre- ved successful, given the allelic heterogeneity of the disease. The molecular gated mutant Ataxin-2 proteins may generate ROS in mitochondria, which confirmation of the pathology is essential, also in order to offer an appropri- subsequently up-regulate Atg8 expression levels and ultimately lead to au- ate genetic counselling to the patient and his family. tophagy and cell death.  P09
.144-M  P09
.142-M Tuberous sclerosis complex phenotypes suggestive of TS C1
/TS C2
 Intragenic deletions affecting two alternative IMM P2
L transcripts in mosaicism patients with Tourette syndrome S. Boronat1,2, P. A. Caruso3, E. A. Thiele1; B. Bertelsen1, L. Melchior1, L. R. Jensen2, C. Groth3, B. Y. Glenthøj4, R. Rizzo5, N. Mol 1Pediatric Neurology. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Debes3, L. Skov3, K. Brøndum-Nielsen1, P. Paschou6, A. Silahtaroglu7, Z. Tümer1; 2Pediatric Neurology. Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neuroradiology. 1Applied Human Molecular Genetics, Kennedy Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Institute for Human Genetics, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt- University Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 3The Tourette Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 4Center for Neuropsychiatric Schizophrenia Research & Center for Clinical Intervention and Neuropsychiatric Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is due to mutations in TS C1
 or TS C2
 but Schizophrenia Research, Copenhagen University Hospital, Psychiatric Center Glostrup, 15% of patients have no mutation identified (NMI). A recent study suggests Glostrup, Denmark, 5Section of Child Neuropsychiatry, Department of Pediatrics, that NMI patients are mosaic TSC. A TS C1
/TS C2
 mutation in a neural crest University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 6Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, progenitor would explain NMI patients without tubers and subependymal Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupoli, Greece, 7Institute for Cellular and nodules (SENs), because neural crest is the origin of the majority of extrac- Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. ranial lesions in TSC. We performed 2 studies aiming to support this hy- pothesis. First, a review of the MRIs of 220 TSC patients was performed to assess the phenotype-genotype of patients with tubers or SENs but not both Tourette syndrome (TS) is a childhood onset neurodevelopmental disorder lesions. In our cohort, 6/220 (2.7%) patients, all with NMI, had tubers wi- characterized by involuntary movements and vocalizations, known as tics. thout SENs, and five of the 6 patients had 3 or fewer tubers. Patients with TIMhMe ePt2ioLlogy of TS is complex and largely unknown, but has a strong genetic SENs without tubers were not identified. This suggests that patients with component. NMI and absence of SENs had a first postzygotic mutation in neuroecto- (inner mitochondrial membrane peptidase, subuInMitM 2P)2 iLs one of the derm, which gives rise to neural crest progenitors harbouring the mutation. few genes that have been suggested to increase susceptibility to TS, after Second, we studied 19 patients with possible TSC who had brain MRI. Five of identification of chromosomal rearrangements affecting IMM P2
L in several the 19 patients had TS C1
/TS C2
 mutational analysis, which was NMI. None families with TS or tics. However, to date only a single study has investigated of the 19 had tubers or SENs. None of the patients with NMI in our studies t1h9e 4role of structural copy number variations (CNVEsS) Hof G 2014 i n| Ma sImLaAllN , hIT aA aL nY f| W miW mW e. mE bS eH wG it. hO TR SG d y a ly r C. These data suggest that patients with NMIABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P09
.147-S Severe presentation of WDR62 mutation: is there a role for modifying have a first postzygotic mutation in neuroectoderm or neural crest, explai- genetic factors? ning the negative mutational studies in leukocytes. They may present with 3 C. J. Poulton1,2, R. Schot1, K. Seufert3, M. H. Lequin1, A. Accogli4, G. D`Annunzio5, L. clinical recognizable phenotypes: a)possible TSC, b)TSC without tubers and Villard6, N. Phillips6, R. de Coo1, C. Catsman-Berrevoets1, U. Grasshoff7, A. Kattentidt- SENs and c)TSC with tubers and without SENS. Mouravieva1, H. Calf1, E. de Vreugt-Gronloh1, L. van Unen1, F. W. Verhiejen1, N. Galjart1, D.  P09
.145-S J. Morris-Rosendahl8, G. M. S. Mancini1; Novel compound heterozygous UB E3
B mutations in two sisters with a 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Princess Margaret Hospital, Perth, Australia, craniofacial-intellectual disability syndrome 3Albert-Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany, 4Gaslini Institue, Genova, Italy, 5Gaslini C. R. J. Pedurupillay1, A. Holmgren1, T. Barøy1, A. Blomhoff1, M. D. Vigeland1, Y. Sheng1, Institute, Genova, Italy, 6Aix Marseille University, Marseille, France, 7University Hospital E. Frengen1, P. Strømme2,3, D. Misceo1; Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 8Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, WDR62 Norway, 2Women and Children‘s Division, Department of Clinical Neurosciences for Children, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway, 3Faculty of Medicine, University Mutations in WarDeR a6s2sociated with primary microcephaly; however of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. they have been reported with wide phenotypic variability. We report six in- dividuals with novel mutations who illustrate this variability and describe three in greater detail. Of the three one lacks neuromotor develop- Ubiquitination is a fundamental post-translational modification pathway in- ment and has severe pachygyria on MRI, another has only delayed speech volved in a wide range of cellular activities. The substrate specificity of the and motor development and moderate polymicrogyria, and the third has Ubiquitination is mostly dependent on the  E3
 ubiquitin-protein ligase fami- an intermediate phenotype. We observed a rare copy number change of ly. Homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in the  E3
 ubiquitin- unknown significanTcBe,C aD 17q25qter duplication, in the first severely affected protein ligase UB E3
B were found to cause Kaufman Oculocerebrofacial Syn- individual. The 17q25 duplication included an inTteBrCesDting candidate gene, drome (OMIM 244450) or Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Intellectual Disability tubulin cofactor D ( ), crucial in microtubule assembly and disassembly. Syndroimn etr (aOnMsIM U6B1 E530
B57) in six patients from five families. Sequencing of the non-duplicatedW alDleRle6 2showed a missense mutation, We describe two affected sisters, carrying a compound heterozygous mu- predicted to cause a deleterious p.Phe1121Val substitution. Sequencing of tation in . They exhibited cranio-facial anomalies including a cohort of five individuals with mutations, including one with an microcephaly, microphthalmia, blepharophimosis, upslanting palpebral identical mutation and different phenotype, plus twelve TinBdCiDviduals with fissures, high-arched and interrupted eyebrows, and myopia. In addition, diagnosis of microlissencephaly and another individual with mild intellec- they had laryngomalacia, abnormal genitalia, severe intellectual disability, tual disability (ID) and a 17q25 duplication, did not reveal mutations. delayed motor development, hypotonia, failure to thrive, and growth delay. However, immunostaining with tubulin antibodies of cells from patients The younger sister had small kidneys and impaired hearing, and the older with both WDR62 and TBCD mutation showed abnormal tubulin network sister had corpus callosum hypoplasia. The facial dysmorphisms including when compared to controls and cells with only the WDR62 mutation. There- arched and interrupted eyebrows and long eyelashes overlap with Blepharo- fore we propose that genetic factors contribute to modify the severity of phimosUisB PEt3oBsis and Epicanthus inversus Syndrome and Kabuki Syndrome. the WDR62 phenotype and, although based on suggestive evidence , TBCD By exome sequencing, followed by Sanger sequencing, we found in both si- could function as one of such factors. sters a missense mutation in exon 1 (p.Met1Val) and a 1bp frameshift  P09
.148-M deletion (p.Phe591fs) in exon 17. The mutations were predicted to result in Serotonergic signaling as modulator of Machado-Joseph disease a truncated UB  E3
UBB pEr3oBtein and cause the disease. pathogenesis We compared the findings in our patients with the previously described A. Jalles*1,2, A. Teixeira-Castro*1,3, A. Miranda1,2, C. Bessa1,2, R. Morimoto3, P. Maciel1,2; patients. Lossof seems to result in a relatively homogeneous pheno- 1Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 2ICVS/3B’s - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/ type, recognizable by the distinct facial dysmorphisms of the ocular region Guimarães, Portugal, 3Department of Biosciences, Northwestern University Institute for in particular, and the severe psychomotor developmental delay.  P09
.146-M Neuroscience, Rice Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University Evanston, Exome Sequencing reveals a novel WDR45 Frameshift mutation and Chicago, IL, United States. POLR3A compound heterozygous variants in a female with complex phenotype and mixed brain MRI findings Introduction M. Khalifa1,2, L. Naffaa1; *these authors contribute equally for this work 1Akron Children‘s Hospital, Akron, OH, United States, 2Northeast Ohio Medical University, : Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is a neurodegenerative dis- Rootstown, OH, United States. order caused by the expansion of a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract within the WDR45 POLR3A C-terminal of the ataxin-3 (ATXN3) protein. The lack of therapeutic strate- . WDR45 gies that effectively prevent neurodegeneration in MJD patients prompted and are newly recognized genes; each is associated with a us to search for compounds that modulatCea menuotrahnat bAdTitXisN e3l-ergealantsed pathoge- distinct neurodegenerative disease is an X-linked gene associated nesis. Recent data from our laCb. healevgea snhsown that many aspects of MJD can with a dominant form of Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation be properly modeled in the round worm . This study (NBIA), manifested by progressive dPisOaLbRil3itAies, dystonia, cognitive decline, is based on the idea that our MJD model is amenable for large- spastic paraplegia, neuropsychiatric abnormalities and iron deposition in scale drug screenings, in which the identification of effective drugs can be the basal ganglia on brain imaging. on the other hand is an auto- accomplis. hMede tbhyo dloso:king simultaneously at protein aggregation in the live somal gene and its mutations cause a recessive form of a hypomyelination neuronal cells, and on its impact on neuron-regulated behavior of the who- with Leukodystrophy disease, also known as 4H syndrome, characterized by le-animal We used our C. elegans MJD model to screen a library congenital Hypomyelination with thinning of corpus callosum, Hypodontia of ~1200 mainly FDA-approved compounds for their ability to prevent or and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism. We report a female child with seve- delay the formation of mutant ATXN3 aggregates and neurological dysfunc- re intellectual disability, aphasia, short stature, ataxia, failure to thrive and tion. Results: We excluded the small molecules that were found to be toxic structural brain abnormalities. MRI of the brain obtained in late infancy sho- or cause developmental delay to theD Cis. ceulesgsaionns :a t the concentrations tested. wed hypomylelation involving the central periventricular white matter and Of the remaining, ten percent of the compounds signifiCc.a enltelgya rnesduced the corpus callosum with no evidence of iron accumulation. MRIs of the brain locomotion deficits of the animals. We found that one group of obtained in childhood showed stable hypomyelination, with progressive the newly identified compounds exert their function in by incre- iWroDnR a4c5cumulation in the basal ganglia in particular in the globus pallidus asing serotonin signaling. Rescue of MJD pathogenesis seems to be depen- and subsPtaOnLiRa 3nAigra. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) identified a novel dent on the serotonin receptors. We should be able to identify efficacious frameshift deleterious mutation in Exon 9 (c.587-588del). WES also compounds that can be tested in higher organisms, including our transgenic revealed 3 missence heterozygous variants. The first is a novel mis- mouse model, and eventually enter clinical development.  P09
.149-S sence variant in exon 4 which is maternally inherited (c.346A>G). Exon13 In vitro neurogenesis of human OPHN1 mutated iPS cells: carried 2 heterozygous missence variants; a maternally inherited variant morphological and biochemical analysis and phenotypic rescue with (c.1724A>T) and a paternally inherited variant (1745G>A). These variants a ROCK inhibitor are considered likely damaging. The patient’s complex clinical phenotype C. Compagnucci1, S. Barresi1, S. Petrini2, E. Bertini1, G. Zanni1; and mixed brain MRI findings might be attributed to the confounding effects 1Department of Neurosciences, Unit of Molecular Medicine for Neuromuscular and of the expression of these 2 genes. Neurodegenerative disorders, Bambino Gesù Childrens‘ Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Confocal Microscopy Core facility, Research Laboratory, Bambino Gesù Childrens‘ Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 195 The X-linked gene Oligophrenin-1 (OPHN1) encodes a RhoGTPase activatingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ABHD11 ABHD13 protein (Rho-GAP) which is mutated in a syndromic form of intellectual of this study was to investigate the association of SNPs from genes disability associated with cerebellar hypoplasia. In vitro and in vivo studies (rs2293484 and rs10279013) and (rs17060) with haplotype ana- on hippocampal neurons of ophn1 deficient mice have shown defects in syn- lysis in South African autistic population. A total of 435 individuals were aptic morphology and function. The administration of Y-27632, an inhibitor recruited including 197 autistic and 213 control subjects. The Taqman ®Re- of the ROCK signaling pathway, specifically hyperactivated in ophn1 loss of al-Time PCR and genotyping assay was used to determine the genotypes. A function, fully rescues the cellular and biochemical phenotype. We have de- significant association of SNP rs10279013 with autism in the South African veloped a cellular model based on human induced pluripotent stem cells population is observed. Haplotype analysis with three SNPs revealed that (iPSCs) technology and in vitro neurogenesis to analyze the morphological the frequency of CGC, TGT and TCT haplotypes is significantly higher in con- and biochemical properties of OPHN1 loss of function in patients cells. The trols than cases (p<0.05). The haplotypes TGC and TCC presented a signi- neurogenic potential of the OPHN1-defective iPS cells has been assessed ficantly higher frequency in cases and the odds documented nearly 3-3.47 and compared with those of control iPS cells following the protocols for fold higher risk to the disease in carriers of the haplotypes [OR=3.0 (1.16- differentiation into different neuronal cell lineages. The results obtained 7.79), OR=3.47 (0.95-12.63), respectively]. In conclusion there is a role of show that human OPHN1-defective neurons have altered morphology, with various haplotypes of these SNPs in increasing susceptibility to autism for shorter neurites and decreased branching level, when compared with con- South African populations. The present study represents the first report on trol neurons. We also confirmed the hyperactivation of the ROCK signaling haplotype analysis on these SNPs in a SA population.  P09
.153-S pathway in OPHN1-defective iPSCs through Western blot and immunofluo- Mutations in XRC C4
 associated with a complex ataxic syndrome rescence assays of the Myosin Phosphatase Target Subunit 1 (MYPT1) and D. Ghezzi1, L. Bee2, A. Nasca1, L. Melchionda1, L. Celotti2, R. Costa2, C. Lamperti1, M. its phosphorylated state on Thr-853. We treated control iPS cells with ROCK Zeviani1,3; inhibitors and observed a phenotypic rescue in terms of ROCK activity and 1The Foundation “Carlo Besta” Institute of Neurology, Milan, Italy, 2University of Padua, neuronal morphology. We are currently exploring the molecular mecha- Padua, Italy, 3MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom. nisms underlying these processes and analyzing in detail the phenotype of OPHN1 defective cells at different stages of neuronal differentiation, before and after treatment. We studied two monozygotic twins (II-1 and II-2), born to first cousin  P09
.150-M parents (I-1 and I-2), affected by a multisystem disease. Since birth they Rett syndrom:current situation in Algéria presented with cryptorchidism, dysmorphism (short arms, hypotelorism) B. Imessaoudene, S. Hallal, Zahra Chami- Meriem Ghouali- Meriem Djeddou- Meriem Nebbache- Benchaib- Bennadji-Arezki Berhoune; and short stature. In the adulthood they suffered of an ataxic syndrome with Laboratory Of Biochemistry Chu Mustappha, Algiers, Algeria. cognitive decline, pyramidal signs and depression; dilatative cardiomyopa- thy was also observed. We performed an exome-sequencing analysis on one proband (II-1) and his unaffected sister (II-3). First we filtered out common Rett syndrome is a progressive neurological disease that affects mainly girls. variants (>0.1% in public databases); then we selected non-synonymous It is characterized by severe developmental disorder of the central nervous variants that were homozygous only in II-1, based on a hypothesized re- system. It is caused by mutations in the MEC P2
 (methyl CpG-binding protein cessive trait and on the known consanguinity of the parents. The remaining 2) in Xq28, comprising four exons, the first of which is non-coding. 28 gene variants were prioritized according to the predXicRteCdC 4deleterious In this study, we analyzed the entire coding sequence of the MEC P2
 gene outcome of the corresponding amino acid substitutions. The most severe in 55 patients Algerians. 8 differents mutations were identified in exon 4, variant was the nucleotide change c.673C>T in the gene , predicted 2 missens mutations (p.E 394 K, p.K 135 E), 3 nonsense mutations (R255X, to create a stop codon (p.R225*) causing the synthesXisR CoCf 4a truncated pro- R294X), and 4 frameshift mutations (a deletion of one base pair: c.Del 806 tein; this variant segregated within the family. Quantitative PCR on cDNA G, c.Del 750 C). extracted from patients’ fibroblasts revealed that the transcript level  P09
.151-S was strongly reduced, probably due to mRNA decay. FunctXioRnCaCl4 assays after The association analysis of CDH10 gene (rs4307059 and rs4327572) gamma-ray irradiation demonstrated a reduction in DNA repair efficiency with autism in a South African population in mutant cells. These are the first patients reported with mutations. J. R. Sharma, Z. Arieff, F. October; Department of Biotechnology, University of Western Cape, Bellville, South Africa. XRC C4
 protein has a role in double-strand DNA repair processes; mutations affecting other proteins with a role on DNA repair (SCAN1, AOA1, ATM) have been associated with peculiar forms of ataxia, suggesting an important role for DNA repair in the nervous system, in particular in the cerebellum. Autism spectrum disorders encompass a group of childhood neurodevelop-  P09
.154-M mental and neuropsychiatric disorders characterized by deficits in verbal Screening for  C9
ORF72 repeat expansion in amyotrophic lateral communication and impairment of social interaction. Numerous researches sclerosis have pointed out that sCtrDoHn1g0 genetics components are involved in suscepti- L. Mosca, C. Tarlarini, C. Lunetta, V. Sansone, S. Penco; bility to autism. Genome wide association studies have revealed out strong Niguarda Ca‘ Granda Hospital, MIlano, Italy. association signal for gene with SNP rs4307059 and rs4327572. This gene had not been investigated for its associatCioDnH w10ith Autism in South African population. Aim: In this study we aimed to investigate the associa- Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder tion of two SNPs (rs4307059 and rs4327572) of gene of autism in characterized by a degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons, lea- the South African (SA) population. For SNPS rs4307059, the present study ding to a progressive muscle weakness, wasting and paralysis that results in group was comprised of typed cases (188, unrelated autistic children) and death within a few years from disease onset. Moreover, evidences of ALS as a typed controls (212, unrelated healthy children) where the respective figu- multisystem disorder also compromising frontotemporal functions in up to res for rs4327572 were 72 and 209 respectively. The Taqman ®Real-Time 50% of patients are reported. Recently, a hexanucleotide repeat expansion PCR and genotyping assay was utilized to determine the genotypes. Results: (GGGGCC) in the first intron of  C9
ORF72 gene was identified as the most There was no significant association of SNP rs4307059 and4327572 with common genetic cause of familial ALS, frontotemporal dementia and ALS- autism in the South African (SA) population. Conclusion: There might be a FTD. Aim of the present study was to determine the prevalence of  C9
ORF72 possible role of CDH1 C0
D iHn 1a0utism but we need to validate it with a larger repeat expansion in our cohort of 753 ALS patients.  C9
ORF72 expansion sample number. The present study represents the first report on study of was analyzed by using the repeat primed PCR: this method can detect re- genetic association of gene in SA population. peat numbers of approximately maximum 60 and it is able to discriminate  P09
.152-M the repeat range detected in the normal population (0-20) from the higher The Haplotype analysis to test for the association of three SNPs with mutated range (≥30). The expansion, in the pathogenic range (≥30), was autism in a South African Population identified in 34 ALS patients (4.5%); moreover, 4 cases (0.5%) resulted to Z. Arieff1, J. R. Sharma1, M. Davids1, M. Kaur2; 1Department of Biotechnology, University of Western Cape, Bellville, South Africa, be carriers of an intermediate number of reapets (20-30). Interestingly, 2 of 2Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and the  C9
ORF72 expansion carriers also carried a causative mutations in one Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. of other known causative genes of ALS (TARDBP and FUS). Our findings, in agreement with literature, suggest that  C9
ORF72 repeat expansion is the major genetic cause of ALS. Further efforts are needed to implement, in Autism spectrum disorder is a neuropsychiatric deAvBeHloDp1m1ental disorder terms of intra- and inter-laboratory reproducibility, the method used for characterized by communication difficulties andA iBmCpAa1i3red social interac-  C9
ORF72 analysis for using it in diagnostics. tion. The anhydrolase domain containing 11 gene ( ) is located on 7q11.23 which is a hotspot region for autism and maps to chromo- s1o9m6e 7p12.3 in which multiple rare coding variantEs SaHre Gob 2se0rv1e4d . |T MheI aLiAmN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.01-S Analysis of the c9orf72 GC- rich low complexity sequence in ALS cases carrying GGGGCC expansion We investigated the percentage of patients sharing mutations in the rod do- L. Corrado1, A. Bagarotti1, N. Barizzone1, L. Mazzini2, S. D‘Alfonso1; main in a cohort of 160 BMD patients with gene deletions, followed at the 1University A.Avogadro, Dept of Health Sciences, Novara, Italy, 2Department of Cardiomyology and Medical Genetics of Naples Second University. We found Neurology, A. Avogadro University and Maggiore della Carita` Hospital, Novara, Italy. that 20 of them (12.5%) shared a deletion involving exons from 45 to 57, at the 17-22 repeats level. From a clinical point of view, based on muscular, cardiac and respiratory as- Large expansions of a noncoding hexanucleotide G4 C2
 repeat in the  C9
orf72 sessment, 8 (40%) were asymptomatic, 11 (55%) had a mild phenotype and gene have been identified as the main cause of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclero- only 1 (5%) had dilated cardiomyopathy, as the first manifestation. sis (ALS) accounting for about 40% of the familial and 7% of the sporadic Compared with data reported by Kaspar et al. (2009), the percentage of cases. The c9orf72 G4 C2
 repeat is contiguous with another GC-rich region asymptomatic patients in our cohort was higher (40 vs 8%) while that of with imperfect repeats. A recent study observed heterozygous deletions of patients with mild phenotype was lower (89 vs 11%). The difference pro- variable size (from 5 to 23 bp) in patients carrying a G4 C2
 expansion (about bably lies in a younger mean age of our patients in both groups (30.5 vs 20.2 37% in a Belgian cohort and 24% in an European cohort). These deletions and 24.3 vs 30.5, respectively). are contiguous to the G4 C2
 repeat and create one long imperfect G4 C2
 re- Data here reported confirm that mutations involving repeats 17-22 of the peat that could make this sequence prone to replication slippage. To confirm rod domain result in a late-onset mild Becker Dystrophinopathy.  P10
.04-M the role of these deletions, as a possible trigger event of the instability of Mutations in the Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease‒associated GDA P1
 gene G4 C2
 repeats, we sequenced the adjacent GC-rich region in 28 Italian ALS leads to calcium homeostasis dysfunction and endoplasmic reticulum patients carrying c9orf72 expansion, , as described by the original study. We stress did not observe any deletion of the GC-rich region adjacent to G4 C2
 repeat D. Pla-Martin, E. L. Calpena, F. Palau; in the Italian c9orf72 expanded cohort, although we expected at least 7 de- Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe and CIBERER, Valencia, Spain. leted cases since the deletion frequency in the European cohort was 24% (Fisher‘s exact test, two-tailed P value = 0.0102). We cannot exclude that our data could be population specific or due to technical artefacts. Further Charcot-MarGieD-TAoPo1th (CMT) disease is the most common inherited neuro- studies will be necessary to confirm the role of these deletions in c9orf72 muscular disorder and is characterized by large locus heterogeneity. Muta- g Pe 1n 0o .0m 2ic -M instability. tions in the gene show phenotypic and Mendelian heterogeneity in ANO5 mutations in Spanish LGMD patients CMT patients. GDA P1
 is a mitochondrial outer membrane protein related L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, M. Rodriguez1, R. Rojas2, J. Díaz Manera2, M. Ramos3, N. Julià4, J. to mitochondrial dynamics network and different effects on the fission and Barcena5, A. Lopez Aríztegui6, M. Baiget1, M. Olivé7, P. Gallano1; fusion pathways have been reported for recessive and dominant mutations, 1Genetics Dpt,CIBERER U705, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurology Dpt respectively. Recently we have described the role of GDA P1
 in the regula- CIBERNED, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Clinical Genetics, Hospital V.Camino, tion of store-operated calcium entry (SO2+CE), a complex process needed to Pamplona, Spain, 4Neurology Dpt,Hospital Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, fill endoplasmic reticulum (ER) after Ca release. DysreguGlDatAioPn1 of calcium 5Clinical Genetics, Hospital de Cruces, Barcelona, Spain, 6Clinical Genetics, Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 7Neuropathology Inst, Path Dpt, Neuromusc Unit, IDIBELL processes and ER stress represent a common pathway in neurodegenerati- Hospital Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. ve diseases. Here we present how missense mutations of expressed in the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells also affect calcium homeostasis ANO5 depending of their mode of inheritance and its relative position in the pro- Recessive mutations in gene have been reported in patients suffe- tein. Rece2s+sive mutations within the protein int2e+raction domain of GDA P1
 ring from limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) 2L, distal myopathy re- blocks Ca influx during SOCE avoid2+i ng ER-Ca refilling, while d2o+minant sAeNmOb5ling Miyoshi myopathy and patients manifesting with mialgia and high mutations show an exacerbated Ca influx with high resting Ca levels. CK levels. These mechanisms may affect the proper function of ER, which produce ER gene, located on chromosome 11p14, is composed of 22 exons. To s Pt 1re 0s .0s 5th -Sat eventually could lead to neurodegeneration. date, forty different mutations have been described in the literature, AbNeiOn5g Diagnostic time trend and genetic analysis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth c.191dupA the most frequent mutation. Interestingly, previous studies show Disease in Denmark considerable geographical differences regarding the prevalence of S. Vaeth1, H. Andersen2, R. Christensen1, M. Duno3, U. B. Jensen1; mutations. LGMD2L is the second most common form of LGMD in Northern 1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Dept. of Europe, in contrast to the AloNwO 5prevalence (2%) that has been reported in the Neurology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Dept. Clinical Genetics, Italian cohort of LGMD patients. Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. We present data from an gene molecular study in 27 Spanish patients Aim manifesting the three different phenotypes: 1) LGMD 2L, 2) distal myopathy resembling Miyoshi myopathy, 3) mialgia and high CK levels. We identified Back: gTroo uclnadss:i fy Danish patients diagnosed with CMT in the period 1977- six different mutations, two of them not previously described, in ten indivi- 2012 according to genetic analysis, sex, and age at diagnosis. duals (8 males and 2 females). Six patients presented 2 mutations and 4 only: Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (CMT) is the most common in- 1, suggesting symptomatic carrier status. herited neurological disease. More than 70 genes associate with a CMT phe- Among patients presenting two mutations, six of them carried the c.191dupA nMoattyeprei,a bl uatn md uMtaettihoonds sin: only four genes accounts for the vast majority of three in homozygous state, 2 inA cNomO5pound heterozygous state and one as a cases. Little is known about the epidemiology of CMT in Denmark. single mutation. In our cohort of patients, c.191dupA is, as iAnN thOe5 majority of Records with diagnostic codes ICD8 33009 (atro- populations, the most frequent mutation. phia mm. neuropathica, Charcot-Marie-Tooth) and ICD10 G60.0 (hereditary Our mutational screening reveals a higher prevalence of mutations motor sensory neuropathy) from 1977 to 2012 were retrieved from The Da- in Spanish population compared to the Italy cohort of patients previously nish National Patient Register (DNPR). These data were linked with data on reported. gReenseutlitcs a: nalysis for CMT between 1990 and 2012 at Department of Clinical  P10
.03-S Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital and Copenhagen University Hospital. Deletions involving the 17-22 repeats in the rod domain of dystrophin A total of 2084 patients with a CMT diagnosis were identified in gene result in a late-onset Becker Dystrophinopathy DNPR. Of these 712 patients (34%) had genetic testing, a genetically con- A. Taglia1, E. Picillo2, A. Torella3, P. D‘Ambrosio1, R. Petillo1, E. Manuela1, L. Passamano1, A. firmed CMT diagnosis was obtained in 50%. In total, 17% of the patients Palladino1, V. Nigro3, L. Politano1; 1Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 2Second University of Naples - Cardiomyology clinically diagnosed with CMT since 1977 had a genetically confirmed CMT and medical Genetics, Naples, Italy, 3Second University of Naples - Dept. of General diagnosis. This percentage was largest in the 0-9 years age group (35%). In Pathology, Naples, Italy. the 2008-12 cohort, 573 patients received a CMT diagnosis, 246(43%) had a genetic analysis for CMT, of which 124 (50%) confirmed the diagnosis. TCohne cmluasjoiornit:y of confirmed CMT cases where caused by duplication of the Dystrophin, the protein product of DMD gene is a rod-shaped protein consi- PM P22
 gene (58%). sting of 3684 amino acids composed by four domains: actin binding domain; Only half of the newly clinically diagnosed CMT patients have central rod domain; cysteine-rich domain and carboxy-terminal domain. been genetically tested. Fifty percent of the tested patients had a genetically Mutations in DMD gene cause phenotypes ranging from severe (DMD) to confirmed diagnosis. mild (BMD) myopathic form or X-linked cardiomyopathy (XLCM). Mutations causing premature translation termination result in a total absence of the protein that leads to DMD, while mutations derived from in-frame deletions result in a reduced protein expression leadEinSgH toG B 2M0D1 o4r X |L MCMIL. AN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 197ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.06-M Combined 12q24.3del and 17p12dup in a patient with truncal hypotonia and psychomotor delay lyses of quadriceps muscle biopsies were performed. Western Blotting re- K. Kosma1, M. Tzetis1, K. Kekou1, A. Gika2, V. Oikonomakis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, E. vealed elevated desmin level in the patients‘ muscles. The increased expres- Kanavakis1; sion was confirmed using immunostaining. Abnormal localization of desmin 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, with aggregates within the fibers was also observed. Additional staining for 21st Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. M-cadherin, α-actinin and MHCs confirmed severe disruption of myofibril- lar organization. Abnormalities were more prominent for the Q348P muscle which additionina lslyil idciosplayse nx uvmiveorous centrally localized nuclei in the aber- The use of substantially improves the diagnosis of chromosomal abnorma- rant muscle fibers. lities that are not evident by conventional karyotype. We report the clinical Based on the and analyses, Q348P and A357_ E359
del mu- and molecular findings of a 2 year old boy presented with truncal hypotonia, tations may be assumed pathogenic. It could be speculated that abnormal absent deep tendon reflexes and psychomot oSrM dNe1lay, but no major malfor- structure of mutated desmin results in aberrant folding and aggregation, mations or dysmorphic features. Cytogenetic analysis was normal and DNA triggering myofibril disruption.  P10
.09-S analysis for SMA revealed a triplication of . Subsequently an array Haplotype analysis and age of mutation in DMPK gene in Yakutia. CGH analysis with high resolution 4X180K Agilent arrays (> 236.000 pro- M. Swarovskaia1,2, S. Stepanova3, A. Marusin1, A. Suhomiasova3, N. Maksimova3, V. bes, average resolution of 8F.9B RKSbL)1 s, hPo2wReXd2 , aP cOoLmE,b PinXaMtiPo2n, PoGf AthMe5 f,o AllNoKwLinEg2:, Stepanov1; G1)O  L1
G2Aq32, 4C.3H3F Rd, eZlNetFi6o0n5 ,[ dZeNl1F226q,2 Z4N.3F38, 41, .Z5N FM1b4;0 ,1 Z3N2F,31002, ,Z3N25F-216383 ,733,528; 1Institut of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical hg19] containing the genes University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Yakut Scientific Center complex medical 2) 17p12 problems, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. duplicaPtMioPn2[d2up 17p12,1.3Mb; 14,111,772-15,379,208; hg19] involving the Charcot Marie Tooth syndrome type 1A (CMT1A) critical region within which gene is contained. To our knowledge this is the first report We studied the genetic variability DMPK locus in patients with MD and of combined 12q24.3 deletion/ 17p12 duplication in a patient whose phe- healthy population of Yakutia. The objectives of the study included the esti- notype is not typical of either the described 12q24.3 deletion or CMT1A, mate of age mutation in the Yakuts. In this work we used six SNP-markers in perhaps the combination of dosage sensitive OMIM genes in the aberrant DMPK gene and six STR-markers which flanking DMPK locus.It was shown regions contribute to the specific phenotype. Niyazov et al., 2007; Kehrer et significant differences from patients MD and Yakut’s population. The fre- al., 2013; Choi et al., 2011; quencies of alleles in three loci: rs572634, rs527221, rs915915 were si-  P10
.07-S gnificantly different. 29 haplotypes were found in patients with MD, and 37 Whole exome sequencing in patients with congenital myopathies I. Zaharieva1, I. Colombo1,2, M. Sframeli1, J. Sigurðsson3, L. Feng1, R. Phadke1, C. A. Sewry1, haplotypes were found in Yakut’s population. Major haplotype TTTCTC had J. E. Morgan1, F. Muntoni1; 40% patients. Haplotype GTCCTT was typical only for patients Yakuts. The 1UCL, London, United Kingdom, 2Neuromuscular and Rare Disorders Unit, Milan haplotype analysis by microsatellite markers of MD patients was identified University, Milan, Italy, 3deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. 14 alleles and 114 haplotype (frequencies from 0.6 to 8.6%). It was found the founder haplotype. Average number of generations were found 158.95 ± 192.51. The age of mutation was estimated 3179 years. This period before Congenital myopathies (CM) are a group of disorders presenting at birth the formation of ethnic Yakuts.  P10
.10-M or early infancy, characterised by muscle weakness and specific changes in Mutational analysis of DMD gene reveals two novel small deletions in the muscle biopsy. During the recent decade a number of genes have been patients bearing no large deletions or duplications discovered, however, additional novel genes are yet to be identify as genetic Z. Fattahi1,2, G. Zamani3, M. Fadaee1,2, M. Akbari4, H. Najmabadi1,2; diagnosis cannot be currently established in many CM patients. With the 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, aim to reveal the genetic defect in 30 CM patients, in whom mutations in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad - Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics suspected genes have been previously excluded, we carried out whole exo- Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children‘s me sequencing. Recently, a homozygous missense mutation in STA C3
 gene Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, was identified in patients with Native American myopathy. Analysis of WES 4Women’s College Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. data in our cases identified a homozygous STA C3
 mutation in a patient with King-Denborough syndrome and core-like changes on muscle biopsy. A se- cond patient with a severe phenotype and muscle biopsy changes suggestive Dystrinopathies are inherited muscular dystrophies with mutations in DMD of nemaline myopathy, carried a homozygous missense mutation in KLH L40
. gene which contains 79 exons and is the largest human gene. DMD encodes Mutations in KLH L40
 have been very recently identified as a frequent cause Dystrophin protein and is the only gene responsible for the spectrum of dys- of severe nemaline myopathy. Two heterozygous truncating TTN mutations trinopathies.Genotype analysis has indicated that deletions of one or more were detected in a patient with severe cardiomyopathy and muscle biopsy exon account for ~65% of all cases, while 5-10% are in-frame or out-frame suggestive of a centronuclear myopathy (CNM), supporting the emerging duplications and the remaining 30% of affected individuals may have point data that TTN mutations should be investigated as causative in cases with mutations, small deletions or insertions within the gene. In the present stu- unresolved CNM. The remaining cases carried mutations in potentially no- dy, two patients diagnosed with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) are vel genes which are under investigation. investigated. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) ana-  P10
.08-M lysis which detects up to 98% of all deletions and duplications in DMD gene Desmin mutations associated with myofibrillar myopathy in the did not reveal any large rearrangement in these patients. Further investi- Polish population. gation with application of two different techniques led to identification of J. P. Fichna1, J. Karolczak2, M. Berdyński1, A. Sikorska2, M. J. Rędowicz2, A. M. Kamińska3, two novel small deletions in DMD gene. In the first patient, all coding as well C. Żekanowski1; 1Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, as flanking intronic regions of the dystrophin gene were PCR-amplified fol- Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, lowed by sequencing and a hemizygous novel deletion, c.650-16_653del20 Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, (p.D217V fs11X), was detected. Next, whole exome sequencing was applied Poland. to investigate the causative variant in the second patient that revealed another novel homozygous deletion defined as c.8297delT (p.Leu2766Arg fsX17). The identified variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing in the Desmin is a muscle-specific intermediate filament protein, which forms a proband as well as other family members. This result extends the muta- network connecting sarcomere, T tubules, sarcolemma, nuclear membrane, tional spectrum of the disease by introducing two novel mutations in DMD mitochondria and other organelles. DES mutations cause myofibrillar myo- gene and is another indication that the advent of recent technologies such as pathies, cardiomyopathies and related phenotypes. Molecular mechanisms whole exome sequencing has made the diagnostic approaches much easier.  P10
.11-S of the changes leading to the disease remain ambiguous. Here we describe Next Generation Sequencing in facioscapulohumeral muscular DES mutations found in the Polish population. dystrophy patients supports the idea that FSHD is a complex genetic The study group comprised 22 individuals representing 7 families with cli- disease nical diagnosis of desminopathy. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood E. Attico1, M. Savarese2,3, G. Ricci1,4, A. Nikolic1, J. Daolio1, F. Mele1, M. Govi1, G. Vattemi5, using standard methods. Sanger sequencing identified oneP onloyvPehle mn-u2taStIiFoTn L. Vercelli6, L. Villa7, L. Ruggiero8, M. Filosto9, M. Sciacco7, C. Rodolico10, L. Morandi11, (Q34 P8
RPO)V aEnAdN one previously described (A357_ E359
del) in the Polish popu- G. Siciliano4, C. Angelini12, Italian Network for FSHD, A. Di Muzio13, A. Berardinelli14, G. lation. Both mutations were predicted pathogenic using , D‘Angelo15, M. A. Maioli16, L. Santoro8, M. Moggio7, T. Mongini6, G. Tomelleri5, V. Nigro2,3, and software. A common ancestry of A357_ E359
del fionu vnitdr oin the R. Tupler1; novel and previously reported families was confirmed. To test whether the m1u9t8ations affect DES expression and intracellular dE iS stH ribG u t2 io0 n1 4 | M I aL nA a-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita, Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia,  P10
.13-S Modena, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Patologia Generale, Seconda HPS E2
, mutated in human urofacial syndrome (UFS), directs Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 3Telethon Institute of Genetics and neuromuscular differentiation Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 4Dipartmento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Università di N. A. Roberts1, H. M. Stuart1, R. Thuret2, E. A. McKenzie2, W. G. Newman1, E. N. Hilton1, A. Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Neuropsicologiche Morfologiche S. Woolf1; e del Movimento, Università di Verona, Verona, Italy, 6S.S. Malattie Neuromuscolari, 1Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy, 7Unità Neuromuscolare, Ospedale United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, Maggiore Policlinico, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 8Dipartimento United Kingdom. di Scienze Neurologiche, Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 9Neurologia Clinica, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 10Dipartimento di Background: Neuroscienze, Università degli Studi di Messina, Messina, Italy, 11Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Istituto Besta, Milano, Italy, 12Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università Homozygous mutations in HPS E2
, encoding heparanase 2, di Padova, Padova, Italy, 13Centro per le malattie neuromuscolari, Università „G. cause UFS, characterised by congenital bladder dysfunctiMone,t hcoondsst:ipation, d‘Annunzio“, Chieti, Italy, 14Unità di Neuropsichiatria Infantile, IRCCS “C.Mondino” and inability to smile. We investigated the developmental roles of this gene Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 15IRCCS Medea, Bosisio Parini (Lecco), Italy, 16Dipartimento in an animal model to further clarify UFS pathogenesis. Hpse2 Ospedale Binaghi Centro Sclerosi Multipla, Cagliari, Italy. transcripts were measured by qPCR during X. tropicalis development. Single cell embryos were injected with morpholinos to knockdown hpse2. Immu- nostaining was performed uRseinsgu latns :antibody raised to Xenopus heparanase Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy has been associated with reduc- 2 and imaged by laser confocal micrsoscopy, and protein levels were as- tion of the number of D4Z4 repetitive elements at 4q35. FSHD is characteri- sessed by western blotting. Frog embryos showed increased hpse2 zed by great clinical variability within families in which D4Z4 reduced allele soon after gastrulation, with expression maintained through organogene- (DRA) segregates. An increasing number of cases are sporadic with no other sis. Using hspe2 morpholinos caused a phenotype comprising a bent tail, affected relatives and several findings suggest that additional factors (gene- proctodeal/cloacal protrusion and impaired swim response. In wildtypes tic modifiers) might modulate FSHD expression. Thus molecular diagnosis, heparanase 2 localised in nascent skeletal muscle, and morphants had im- prognosis and genetic counseling have become more challenging. To gain paired muscularisation. Heparanase 2 was also expressed in the neural tube additional information on the complexity of FSHD, we tested 40 FSHD pati- and hindbrain, and morphants showed compromised neural outgrowths ents belonging to families with reduced penetrance by testing, a broad core from these structures. Intruigingly heparanase 2 was found to co-localise panel of 93 genes involved in myopathies (Motorplex). This Next Generation with activated ERK (pERK) in the embryonic nCeounracll utusiboen, :and analysis of Sequencing-based workflow permit the analysis of 2,544 exons. We studied the morphants by western blot showed increased levels of pERK, suggesting 40 samples from FSHD patients belonging to families in which other DRA altered regulation of key signalling pathways. Heparanase 2 carries are healthy. In all subjects we found putative pathogenic variations plays a key role in vertebrate neuromuscular development. A role has been in genes causing different myopathies. In addition to DRA, all patients car- elucidated in ERK signalling, suggesting potential targets for experimental ried at least one damaging variations in other disease genes. These variants, therapies. if they had been detected alone in the context of a single gene testing, would  P10
.14-M have been considered as causative. The high number of damaging mutati- Exome sequencing as a highly efficient diagnostic approach in ons identified in each sample support the hypothesis of “multiple factors” muscular weakness in newborns and early infancy S. Papuc1, P. Joset1, M. Zweier1, L. Gogoll1, M. Papik1, A. Klein2, B. Plecko2, K. Steindl1, A. leading to the FSHD phenotype. In conclusion, the use of a reliable, sensitive Rauch1; and specific method has been able to identify putative pathogenic mutations 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Division of that can explain the variable penetrance of DRA. Importantly these large set Pediatric Neurology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. of mutations observed in FSHD patients highlight the genetic complexity that might contribute to the disease expression.  P10
.12-M Clinical and molecular characterization of FSHD cases with 1-3 DRA Muscular weakness in newborns and early infancy is a challenging clinical :data from the Italian National Registry of FSHD feature which may reflect either a neuromuscular disorder or only a se- A. Nikolic1, G. Ricci1,2, F. Sera3, E. Bucci4, J. Daolio1, M. Govi1, F. Mele1, M. Rossi5, L. Vercelli6, condary feature associated with a primary disorder for example of the cen- L. Villa7, L. Ruggiero8, C. Angelini9, G. Antonini4, G. Brisca10, C. Bruno10, M. Cao9, A. Di tral nervous system. Although the first signs may be present in first days Muzio11, G. D‘Angelo12, L. Maggi13, M. Moggio7, L. Morandi13, T. Mongini6, C. Rodolico14, L. of life, the full clinical picture might not be evident in newborns. An earlier Santoro8, G. Siliano2, G. Tomelleri15, A. Berardinelli5, R. Tupler1; and accurate diagnosis in those cases currently depends on a careful clinical 1University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 2University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, assessment followed by the appropriate investigations. Recently developed 3UCL Institute of Child Health London, London, United Kingdom, 4University „Sapienza“ of Rome, Rome, Italy, 5IRCCS “C.Mondino” Foundation Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6University of research tools as next generation sequencing provide a distinct advantage Turin, Turin, Italy, 7University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 8University Federico II of Naples, over candidate gene sequencing to discover the underlying genetic defect in Naples, Italy, 9University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 10“G. Gaslini” Institute of Genoa, Genoa, a timely manner. In this study, a clinical exome sequencing approach using Italy, 11University of Chieti, Chieti, Italy, 12IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, the Illumina TruSight Rapid Capture Kit was used to investigate the disease- Italy, 13IRCCS Foundation “C. Besta” Institute Milan, Milan, Italy, 14University of Messina, related mutations in 11 infants with unknown conditions presenting with Messina, Italy, 15University of Verona, Verona, Italy. muscle involvement. With a mean average coverage of 394 and at least 20-fold coverage in 98% of the targeted region, we have identified genetic defects in 3 of 7 patients analyzed so far (43%): a previously reported ho- Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy has been genetically linked to mozygous splice site mutation in the IGHMB P2
 gene known to be altered in reduced numbers (≤8) of D4Z4 repeats at 4q35. Typically a rough inverse spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress 1, a novel compound he- correlation between the number of repetitive elements and disease severity terozygous mutations in the MUSK gene recently associated with congenital is accepted. Particularly severe FSHD cases have been associated with D4Z4 myasthenic syndrome, and novel de novo missense mutation in the TPM3 reduced alleles with 1-3 repeats (1-3 DRA) with some presenting ancillary gene involved in congenital fibre-type disproportion myopathy. features such as Coats-like retinopathy, facial diplegia, hypoacusia, epilepsy Our data suggest that clinical exome sequencing is an efficient tool for timely and cognitive impairment. Out of 110 probands from the INRF carrying 1-3 and accurate diagnosis of clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders DRA, we identified 40 index cases carrying a de novo DRA and 26 with at in infants with undiagnosed muscular weakness. least one relative carried the same DRA. In order to investigate the earliest  P10
.15-S signs of disease and access the information about addition clinical conditi- Interaction among folat/homocysteine metabolism genes and on, we designed an Anamnestic Infantile Form (AIF). Thirty-six probands endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms predicts the (54.6%) showed an early disease onset (within 10 years): among them, 26 severity of Duchenne muscular dystrophy in Moldavian patients V. C. Sacara1, V. Scurtu1, E. Mocan2, S. Groppa2, M. Duca3; cases (72.2%) were de novo and 10 (27.8%) were familial. Collectively our 1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 2the State University study reveals that congenital form is not present in the group of 1-3 DRA of Medicine and Pharmacy “Nicolae Testemitanu”, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, carriers and infantile disease onset is more common among de novo cases. 3University of AS RM, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. Importantly we observed that earliest onset is not always associated with a more severe clinical progression of disease. Interestingly, out of 76 carriers of 1-3 DRA we detected complex phenotype with extramuscular features in Introduction. We try to modeling gene-gene interaction between 5 muta- only 14 subjects, 10 de novo and 4 familial cases. tions in 4 genes, involved in folat/homocysteine metabolism (FHMG) and eNOS- play a pivotal role in vascular homeostasis and endothelial function, that may be alter the severity (in our case on the age at wheelchair depen- dency- 9 or 12 years) of this genetically simple disease. Methods: A retrospective single institution long-term follow-up study was ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | c W arrW iedW o. uE t S inH 1G 4. 8O cR orG ticosteroids-free DMD patients. The genotypi1ng9 9ofABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.18-M Exome sequencing identifies mutations in a gene coding for the LIM- dystrophin gene were performed by the MPCR to detect the deletion in domain protein N-RAP in a BAG3 myofibrillar myopathy-affected DMD gene and the PCR-RFLP to identify the MTHFR C677
Tand A1298C, patient MTRA2756G, MTRRA66G, eNOS polymorphisms. Gene-gene interactions F. D‘Avila1, M. Barcella1, M. Meregalli1, S. Lupoli1, C. Sitzia1, S. Erratico2, D. Cusi1, C. were analyzed using entropy-based multifactor dimensionality reduction Barlassina1, Y. Torrente1; (MDR). 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2YStem s.r.l., Milan, Italy. Results: We evaluated single-site allelic and genotypic associations, geno- type equilibrium and multilocus genotype associations, using MDR, which failed to show a genetic model of severity of myopathic process. Have been Myofibrillar myopathies are neuromuscular disorders with disorganized adopted the MDR method to explore the synergistic effects of the studied myofibril structures at the Z-disk and accumulation of protein aggregates. polymorphisms on modifying to myopathic process. We selected the best BAG3-related myopathy represents a subgroup of myopathies caused by model, which included the. MTHFR C677
T and A1298C, MTRA2756G, eNOS a mutation in the Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3), a co-chaperone polymorphisms, cross-validation consistency is 9/10 (χ2 =54.22, p<0.0001) with no direct role in muscle function. In order to investigate the possible for case of wheelchair up to 12yrs). Since the selected polymorphisms were involvement of other genes in BAG3 myopathy, we performed whole exo- not associated with DMD there is evidence for the existence of epistasis bet- me sequencing in an Italian family: a BAG3 myopathy proband affected by ween the two polymorphisms MTHFR C677
T and eNOS (CV C10
/10, χ2=5.3, muscle weakness, respiratory insufficiency, cardiac arrhythmia, rigid spine, p=0.02) in case of wheelchair up to 9yrs. her unaffected parents and brother. Genomic DNAs from peripheral blood Conclusion: Our results indicate that the MTHFR, MTR and eNOS genes are were exome enriched using Agilent SureSelectXT Human All Exon 50Mb kit. modifying loci and presence of the high-risk alleles may associate with an All samples were sequenced in paired-end with 72 bp length reads on Il- increase in the severity of DMD. lumina Genome Analyser IIX. In accordance to a compound heterozygous  P10
.16-M model of inheritance, we identified in the proband three non-synonymous Limb girdle muscular dystrophy in the Czech Republic heterozygous variants in N-RAP gene: one predicted extremely damaging K. Stehlikova1,2, D. Skalova1,2, L. Fajkusova1,2; 1The Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno, was inherited from her father and the other two less damaging from her mo- Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic. ther. The mutation inherited from her father is very rare (MAF=0.0005) and causes an aminoacidic substitution in a domain essential for organizing ac- tin filaments during myofibrillar assembly. The mutations from her mother Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is defined as a muscular dystrophy cause aminoacidic substitutions in a domain critical for the Z-line assembly. with predominantly proximal distribution of muscle weakness. It includes Immunohistochemistry showed reduced N-RAP expression in the proband’s a number of disorders with heterogeneous etiology. We determined the muscle biopsy compared to a control. The muscle specific N-RAP protein frequency of recessiCvAeP LNG3MD subtypes (LGMD2A, LGFMKRD P2
D, LGMD2I and scaffolds I-Z-I assembly during myofibrillogenesis and has a LIM-domain. LSGGMCDA2L) within a cohortA oNf O C5
zech LGMD2 patients using mutation analy- This is the first exome approach to a BAG3 myopathy and suggests a contri- sis of the calpain3 ( ), fukutin-related protein ( ), α-sarcoglycan b Pu 1t 0io .1n 9 o -Sf a LIM-domain protein to the complex phenotype of the proband. ( ), and anoctamin5 ( ) genes. Last year we introduced next gene- A large NGS screening of myopathic patients reveals a great genetic ration sequencing to accelerate patient diagnosis and to widen spectrum heterogeneity and supports the hypothesis of “multiple troubles” of analysed genes. We designed capture library to target the coding exons M. Savarese1,2, G. Di Fruscio1,2, A. Torella1,2, A. Garofalo1, T. Giugliano1,2, C. Fiorillo3, G. of genes responsiCbAleP Nfo3r all known types of LGMD and genes responsible Tasca4, C. Pisano1, F. Del Vecchio Blanco1, G. Piluso1, O. Musumeci5, M. Mora6, L. Morandi6, for muscular dystrophy with similar phenotype to LGMD. We observed that E. Ricci4, T. Mongini7, L. Politano8, C. Angelini9, Italian Network for LGMD, Italian mutations of the gene are the most common cause of LGMD2. The Network for Congenital Myopathies, G. Comi10, C. Bruno3, V. Nigro1,2; 1Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli frequency of particular forms of LGMD2 was 32.6% for LGMD2A, 4.1% for Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, LGMD2I, 2D.8Y%SF for LGMD2D, and 1.4% for LGMD2L. Using next-generation Italy, 3U.O.C. Neurologia Pediatrica e Malattie Muscolari, IRCCS Istituto Giannina sequencing, we identSiGfiCeBd two patients with mutations in the gene encoding Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 4Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, dysferlin ( ) - LGMD2B and a patient with mutations in the gene enco- Roma, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università degli Studi di Messina, ding β-sarcoglycan ( ) - LGMD2E. In total, we determined mutations in Messina, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Istituto Besta, Milano, Italy, 7S.S. 41 % of Czech LGMD2 patients. Malattie Neuromuscolari, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy, 8Servizio di This work was supported by research grants CEITEC - CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068, Cardiomiologia e Genetica Medica, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 9Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy, 10Dipartimento SuPReMMe - CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0045  P10
.17-S di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano, Missense variations in ACADVL catalytic domain identified by the next Milano, Italy. generation sequencing of nonspecific LGMD patients A. Torella1,2, F. Del Vecchio Blanco1, M. Savarese1,2, G. Piluso1, L. Politano1, S. Sacconi3, O. Musumeci4, V. Nigro1,2; In myopathic patients molecular diagnosis is hampered by the genetic he- 1Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics terogeneity and the clinical interpretation of molecular findings are further and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 3Nice University Hospital, Nice, France, 4Università di hindered by the presence of low penetrant variations and by the effect of Messina, Messina, Italy. modifier genes. To gain a comprehensive view of all sequence variants in patients, we developed a broad core panel of 93 genes involved in myopa- thies. To analyze their 2,544 exons, we have developed a Next Generation About one third of autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy pa- Sequencing-based workflow, based on a Haloplex custom enrichment stra- tients show no mutations in the ARLGMD genes so far identified. The possib- tegy (Motorplex). We studied 200 samples from myopathic patients with le explanations are that several genetic cause of LGMD cannot be discovered prevalent limb-girdle muscle involvement and 150 samples with congenital by traditional DNA sequencing tests, or that the genetic heterogeneity is myopathies. In about 20% of patients we found typical causative mutations, greater than expected with many other genes that should be analyzed. Ho- while in an additional 30% other putative pathogenic variations were de- wever, the present genetic testing is long, expensive and ineffective to cope tected. In addition to the causes of monogenic disorders, we also discovered with this second possibility. New powerful approaches for DNA analysis, like more than 35% of patients showing damaging variations in other disease next-generation sequencing (NGS) and array CGH are revolutionizing the genes. These variants, if they had been detected alone in the context of a sin- field, with the entire human genome that can be properly analyzed. gle gene testing, would have been considered as causative. The high number We combined SNP array-based linkage analysis and NGS technology to dis- of damaging mutations identified in each sample support the hypothesis of cover “orphan” LGMD mutations. “multiple troubles” leading to a such complex phenotype. In conclusion, in a The patients to be studied were selected according to the following criteria: large cohort of patients with non-specific symptoms, our reliable, sensitive a) clinical diagnosis of LGMD; b) inconclusive molecular testing after the and specific method has been able to identify pathogenic mutations, despi- complete study of the known LGMD genes c) severity of disease. te of the heterogeneous conditions, improving significantly the diagnostic A number of mutations were identified. In particular in a LGMD family with yield. Finally, intrafamilial and interfamilial phenotypic variability of pati- an autosomal recessive inheritance, we have recently identified a new homo- ents sharing the same pathogenic mutations must be reevaluated conside- zygous mutation in the ACADVL gene, Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase- Very Long ring the comprehensive view of all sequence variants. Chain, that is shared by all the affected famACilAyD mVLembers and by another patient from the same town. In other two family a heterozygous compound mutatiAoCnAs DanVdL homozygous mutation in the gene was also found. This demonstrates that specific amino acid changes in the catalytic domain o 2f 0th 0e Very gene may be associated with aEnS LHGMGD 2-l0ik1e 4ph |e MnoItLypAeN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG and this should be considered in the differential diagnosis.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.20-M Childhood onset tubular aggregate myopathy associated with de novo SCN4A STIM1 mutations. de variations (SNVs) were identified. A missense vCaLrCiaNti1on p. S524
G in the M. Niceta1,2, C. Hedberg3, F. Fattori1, B. Lindvall4, A. Ciolfi2, A. D‘Amico1, G. Tasca1, S. gene (mutations of the gene are associated with paramyotonia con- Petrini1, M. Tulinius5, M. Tartaglia2, A. Oldfors3, E. Bertini1; genita) and a missense variation p.G118W in the gene (mutations 1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesu’ Children’s Research Hospital, Rome, of the gene are associated with myotonia congenita) were found to be mi- Italy, 2Physiopathology of Genetic Diseases, Section, Department Hematology, Oncology stakenly identified as variations, since according to the HapMap and 1000 and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Genomes Project data, the alleles harboured by our patient are in both ca- Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4Muscle Centre, Department ses the most common alleles and the reference sequence contains the rare of Neurology, Örebro University Hospital, Örebro, Sweden, 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Gothenburg, The Queen Silvia Children’s, Hospital, Sahlgrenska University variants (MAF=0,059 and MAF=0,009, respectively). The third SNV was a Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. homozygous nonsenseC mLCuNta1tion p. P894
* which is a known pathogenic mu- tation leading to myotonia congenita (Thomsen‘s disease). Identification of a known homozygous mutation found by targeted resequencing led We investigated on three unrelated patients with tubular-aggregate myopa- to conclusion that the previously identified possible DM2 grey zone allele is thy and slowly progressive muscle weakness manifesting in the first years of not a disease causing allele in the case of the reported patient with conse- life. All patients showed type 1 mdeu nscolveo fiber predominance and hypotrophy q Pu 1e 0n .2ce 3 -i Sn the genetic testing in this family. of type 2 fibers. Tubular aggregates of the sarcopSlTaIsMm1a.tic reticulum were Rapid High-Sensitivity Single-Step Screen for CTG Repeat Expansion abundant. In all three patients, heterozygous mutations were iden- Mutations in Myotonic Dystrophy Type I tified in the Stromal Interaction Molecule 1 gene, In one of the pati- S. S. Chong1,2, M. Mulias1, K. Singh1,3, I. Rajan-Babu1, H. Law4,5, C. G. Lee1,6,5; ents, the mutation was identified by exome analysis, coupled to a hypothe- 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University Hospital, sis-driven filtering strategy. Two patients harbored the previously described Singapore, Singapore, 3Manipal University, Manipal, India, 4KK Women‘s and Children‘s c.326A>G p.His109Arg change while the third patient carried a previously Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 5Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, 6National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore. unreported mutation (c.343A>T, p.Ile115Phe). All mutations affected the EF-hand motif, which is required for Ca2+ ions binding. Besides, the tubular aggregates, autophagic debris and myophosphorylase deficiency were do- DMPK Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), the most common adult muscular dys- cumented in patients’ muscle cells. Consistent with previous findings, the trophy, is caused by expansion of a CTG repeat in the 3’UTR of the c.326A>G change represent a recurrent mutation specifically related to ear- gene. Repeat size is correlated positively with phenotypic severity and nega- ly onset muscle weakness.  P10
.21-S tively with age-of-onset, with affected individuals classified as mild (50-150 Myotonia congenital type Becker in an endemic Bulgarian region CTGs), classic (100-1000 CTGs), or congenital (>1000 CTGs) DM1. Southern S. Tincheva1,2, A. Todorova1,2, T. Todorov2, I. Litvinenko3, V. Gergelcheva4, I. Tournev4, V. analysis reliably detects all expansions, but requires micrograms of DNA, Mitev1; yields approximate allele sizing, and is labor-intensive, time-consuming, 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department and costly. PCR across the repeat accurately sizes all normal and also expan- of Neurology, University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, ded alleles, although the upper limit of detection is unknown. Newer triplet- 4Department of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria. primed PCR (TP-PCR) assays will detect all normal and expanded alleles, but product analysis by capillary electrophoresis (CE) is still costly when applied in high throughput screening situations where a majority of tested Myotonia congenita type Becker is an autosomal recessive nondystrophic samples may be screen-negative. We have now adapted the 5’ and 3’ TP-PCR skeletal muscle disorder primarily affecting lower limb muscles and later assays for single-step detection of DM1 expansions by melting curve analy- progressing to the arms, neck, and facial muscles. The disease is characteri- sis (MCA), wherein melt peak profiles from normal samples were distinctly zed by muscle stiffness and an inability of the muscle to relax after voluntary different from samples carrying an expansion. In a blinded validation of 60 contraction. Sometimes muscle weakness may be transient. The autosomal clinical samples enriched for affected individuals, a 48-repeat plasmid clone recessive Becker type is caused by mutations in the CLCN1 gene, localized was used to establish a cut-off temperature separating normal from affected on chromosome 7q34 and encoding skeletal muscle chloride channel-1. samples, and 100% concordance with their known genotypes was achieved. Here we report 5 Bulgarian families genetically proved to carry muta- We conclude that TP-PCR MCA is an accurate yet simple, rapid and inex- tions in the CLCN1 gene. The following mutations were detected: non- pensive screen useful for identifying DM1 expansion mutations. Follow-up sense (p.Arg894*), splice-site (c.1471+1G>A), missense (p.Val273Met; confirmation and sizing can be accomplished by capillary electrophoresis p.Tyr524Cys). Two additional nucleotide changes were detected in an f Po 1ll 0o .w 24in -g M a quick 5-cycle extension-labeling of the positive TP-PCR product. asymptomatic individual (c.2284+5C>T possible splice-site change and Elevated miRNA levels in serum of myotonic dystrophy patients relate p.Phe167Leu). It was not possible to clarify, whether these changes are to disease progress located on a single allele or affect both alleles. Two of the detected muta- A. Koutsoulidou1, T. Kyriakides2, Y. Christou1, E. Zamba Papanicolaou1, L. Phylactou1; tions are interesting from population point of view. The missense substitu- 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Yale Center for tion p.Val273Met was detected in a large Roma family with a high propor- Analytical Sciences at Yale School of Public Health, University of Yale, New Haven, CT, tion of endogamous marriages. Secondly, the novel missense substitution United States. p.Tyr524Cys was detected in a large Bulgarian family with a number of affected individuals both in vertical and horizontal pedigree direction. The later family originates from a small Bulgarian village and the citizens tradi- Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common form of adult-onset tionally marry within the village, which is very surprising for the Bulgarian muscular dystrophy. Clinically, DM1 is a highly variable multisystemic disor- habits. Most probably there is an endemic region for myotonia congenital der that primarily affects skeletal muscle and is characterized by progressi- type Becker in Bulgaria, caused by the missense mutation p.Tyr524Cys. ve skeletal muscle weakness, wasting and myotonia. DM1 patients are dia-  P10
.22-M gnosed using genetic tests and their muscle wasting progression is currently Targeted second generation resequencing reveals a homozygous monitored through electromyography and regular physical examinations. CLCN1 mutation in a patient with an ambiguous myotonic dystrophy Many scientific reports emphasize the importance for the discovery of non- type 2 grey zone allele invasive serum-based biomarkers for the diagnosis and therapy of diseases, J. Radvanszky1,2, E. Nagyova3, T. Szemes3,2, L. Kadasi1,3, G. Minarik3,2,4; 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, since they are easily accessible and convenient. The identification of blood- Slovakia, 2Geneton s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty based biomarkers for DM1 would provide added value for the monitoring of of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Institute of Molecular the progressive muscle wasting. Scientific reports showed that circulating BioMedicine, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. miRNAs are stably present within blood circulation and have the potential to be used as clinical biomarkers for many diseases. The aim of this pilot stu- CNBP dy was to detect and evaluate the usefulness of miRNAs as biomarkers for In our previous study focused on the analysis of variability of the repetitive DM1. DM1 patients and healthy participants were recruited and miRNA ana- CCTG tract in the gene in patients with myotonic dystrophy symptoms lysis was performed on RNA isolated from serum samples. Results show that and healthy population, we reported a patient harbouring an uninterrupted the levels of particular miRNAs are elevated in the serum from DM1 patients allele containing 34 CCTG repeats. Although there are several indications compared to controls, presumably, as a consequence of the degradation of that it is not a causative allele in that patient, it was not possible to exclude muscle tissue during muscle wasting. Moreover, the miRNA serum levels its causality, until other candidate genes were screened for causative muta- correlate with the progression of muscle wasting observed in the patients. tions. Therefore the patient’s DNA was sequenced by targeted resequencing Based on these results, we propose that miRNAs can be used as potential approach using a custom panel and Ion Torrent PGM. After alignment to serum-based molecular biomarkers for monitoring the progress of muscle ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 201 the GRCh37/hg19 reference sequence three homozygous single nucleoti- wasting in DM1 patients.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.25-S Large copy number variations in NEB are frequent in nemaline myopathy patients disease-associated genes in both sequencing approaches and found two K. Kiiski1, V. Lehtokari1, L. Laari1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson1, K. Pelin2; compound heterozygous non-synonymous substitutions in a gene that is 1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and the Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman involved in neuromuscular functioning. Extending the analysis to the whole Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences, Division exome did not provide any new candidate variants. Gene panel sequencing of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. yielded higher quality and coverage results compared to the WES, which showed a higher number of uncovered nucleotides within the clinical genes. NEB In addition, WES revealed many variants in genes which cannot be directed Recently, new large mutations have been identified in the nebulin gNeEnBe towards answering questions related to the medical conditions. As a diagno- ( ) causing nemaline myopathy (NM). NM conNsEtiBtutes a heterogeneous stic test, clinical gene panel sequencing including all relevant disease-asso- group of disorders among the congenital myopathies, and mutations in ciated genes was more efficient than WES by means of quality, costs, time are a main cause of the recessively inherited form. consists of 183 exons and reporting. Although WES might not always lead to a direct diagnosis and it includes a 32 kb triplicate region (TRI) where eight exons are repea- test, it is relevant for research to uncover new gene-disease associations.  P10
.28-M ted three times. We have designed a custom NM-CGH microarray to detect A pilot study using a targeted next-generation sequencing panel for copy number variations in the currently known NnEinBe NM genes and one un- diagnostic use in primary myopathies published gene. To date, 230 samples from 170 families have been run with A. Evilä1, P. Hackman1, B. Udd1,2,3; the NM-CGH microarray and we have identified TRI variation in appro- 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuromuscular Research Center, ximately 14% of the NM families in this study cohort. The results suggest University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 3Neurology that the adjacent intronic repeat elements may predispose to the recurrent Department, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland. TRI variations. The possible pathogenicity of the TRI variations warrants further stuNdEieBs and elucidation of the exact breakpoints in each family. Mo- reover, we have identified seven different, novel, large disease-causing aber- Myopathies are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disor- rations in in seven different families. The size of the aberrations varies ders, most of which are genetic and many cause progressive weakness and greatly, covering from only a part of one exon (0.9 kb) to more than half of atrophy of muscles. Mutations in more than 200 different genes are known the gene (133 kb). The NM-CGH microarray method is currently available to cause the disorders and several genes may have to be sequenced in order for mutation analysis in our laboratory. Additionally we have analyzed ten to identify the moleculDaMr dDe, fTeTctN i n a pNaEtiBent. The large number of possib- samples with exome sequencing and identified causative mutations for half le candidate genes, overlapping phenotypes as well as an enormous size of of the families. We believe that the combination of the NM-CGH microarray some of the genes e.g. and bring difficult challenges to dia- followed by exome sequencing will accelerate mutation detection and im- gnostics. Molecular characterization is nevertheless important for an accu- p Pr 1o 0v .e 2 6th -Me diagnostics of NM and related disorders. rate diagnosis and management of the diseases. Targeted next-generation A novel homozygous deletion in SGCB identified by a targeted next sequencing (NGS) is an efficient and cost-effective method to sequence seve- generation sequencing approach and the Motor Chip ral genes simultaneously. Our first targeted NGS custom panel was designed T. Giugliano1,2, M. Savarese1,2, G. Di Fruscio1,2, A. Garofalo1, M. Fanin3, C. Angelini3, G. for the coding exons and UTRs of 180 myopathy related genes with a total Piluso1, V. Nigro1,2; size of 1.3 Mb. For DNA capture a custom NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice Li- 1Seconda Univerisità degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics brary was designed. Sequencing was performed at Institute for Molecular and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 3Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria di Padova, Padova, Italy. Medicine Finland (FIMM) using Illumina MiSeq with sequencing depth of 100X, and files were processed with their Variant Calling Pipeline. In the pi- lot study DNA samples of 20 patients were sequenced, of which four served Different forms of muscular dystrophy are caused by mutation in genes as mutation controls with previously reported mutations. We were able to coding for proteins of sarcoglycan complex, resulting in severe childhood detect all the mutations in the control samples, except for one heterozygous autosomal recessive muscular dystrophies (SCARMD). Point mutations but 11-bp insertion/deletion mutation which was missed in the variant calling. also copy number variations (CNVs) have been found in sarcoglycan genes. Disease-causing mutations were detected in seven of the 16 patients, with Here we report one patient with SCARMD phenotype resulting from a new three of them having previously reported mutations and four showing novel homozygous deletion of the last 12 codons in the exon 6 and 3’UTR of beta- mutations.  P10
.29-S sarcoglycan gene (SGCB). For the genetic diagnosis of this heterogeneous Highly efficient genetic diagnostic testing in patients with condition, we have performed the next generation sequencing. In particu- neuromuscular disorders using Panel-based Next Generation lar, we have used the Motor Haloplex, a customized target enrichment of Sequencing regions related to muscular disease, recently developed by our group. We J. Mohr, N. Gloeckle, T. Grau, F. Battke, S. Biskup, K. Hoertnagel; targeted all the exons and the ten flanking bases of 89 genes involved in CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany. muscular dystrophies. At first, no point mutations or ins/del have been re- ported by bioinformatics analysis of the data, but a homozygous deletion in the exon 6 of SGCB has been identified by IGV analysis of sarcoglycan genes. Neuromuscular disorders (NMD) represent a genetically heterogeneous To confirm the result and map the breakpoint, we have used the Motor Chip group of diseases. Deciphering the causative molecular defect can be valu- (Clinical Chemistry, 2011 Nov;57(11):1584-96), a customized aCGH develo- able for diagnosis and in consequence for estimation of prognosis and re- ped by our group, which is able to investigate CNVs in 425 muscular genes. currence risk. Towards this aim we have developed a comprehensive dia- This data suggests that Motor Haloplex may be appropriate for routine dia- gnostic panel comprising genes known to cause spinal muscular atrophies, gnoses. It is able to investigate point mutations but also deletions and dupli- neuropathies, muscular dystrophies, myopathies, myasthenia and myotonia cations so that is easier, less time-consuming than traditional gene by gene to study their underlying genetic heterogeneity. 187 relevant genes asso- approach. Finally, the combination between Motor Haloplex and Motor Chip ciated with NMDs were subdivided according to their clinical phenotypes. is a strong strategy for the diagnosis of muscular dystrophies.  P10
.27-S MLPA was performed where appropriate, following customized target en- Trio-based study of neuromuscular dysfunction using next-generation richment and NGS. Identified mutations were validated using Sanger se- sequencing under a diagnostic setting quencing. All genes associated with the primary diagnosis were analyzed A. M. Nissen, A. Benet-Pages, C. Rapp, T. Neuhann, E. Holinski-Feder; first. In unsolved cases our approach allows to expand the analysis to all Medical Genetics Center - MGZ, Munich, Germany. remaining genes of the panel. In our study over 200 patients with NMD were analyzed. In 29% the underlying cause could be identified and in 20% likely pathoCgAePnNic3 b, uMtF uNn2clear vTaTrNiants were detected. 52% of the cases remained We evaluated the use of next-generation sequencing to provide genetic unsolved. We observed clearly pathogenic mutations in 34 different genes, diagnoses using a family trio consisting of healthy parents and an affected with and being the most frequently mutated genes, and fetus which died intrauterine. The phenotype of the fetus was consistent unclear variants in additional 27 genes. Interestingly, in 7% of solved ca- with early onset neuromuscular disease. Suspected seizures, arthrogryposis ses we could identify pathogenic mutations in genes not associated with multiplex congenita and suspected intrauterine epilepsy were detected in the original diagnosis. We have developed a comprehensive diagnostic NGS a sonography. We compared clinical gene panel analysis vs. whole exome panel to analyze the genetic basis of NMDs. As suspected, high genetic he- sequencing (WES) for the family trio in order to identify candidate varianTtMs terogeneity among patients could be shown in our cohort. Additionally, in a that account for the disease phenotype of the fetus. We used the TruSight significant amount of cases we found evidence for new genotype-phenotype One Sequencing Panel, which targets 4813 genes associated with known cli- correlations, emphasizing the usefulness of NGS panels for diagnostic pur- nical phenotypes, and the Nextera Exome Enrichment Kit (62Mb). Data was poses. a 2n 0al 2yzed using an in-house bioinformatics pipelineE. SWHe Gan 2al0yz1e4d t|h Me 4I8 L1
A3N , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.30-M Genetic testing of inherited muscular dystrophies and myopathies using Sequence capture and targeted resequencing lethargic and the clinical examination showed multiple abnormalities, such D. Skalova, K. Stehlikova, L. Fajkusova; as a severe brady-/hypopnea with apneas of up to 30 seconds, followed by Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech an arousal reaction, frequent yawning, axial hypotonia and hypertonia of the Republic. extremities. The cerebral magnetic resonance (MR) image revealed bilateral T2 signal hyper intensities of the white matter, especially in the temporal and parietal areas, which raised the question of perinatal asphyxia. In the The inherited muscular dystrophies and myopathies comprise a heteroge- spectroscopy the lactate was elevated and the n-acetylaspartate level was neous group of muscle diseases that share similar clinical features as pro- low. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed an immature activity with gressive skeletal muscle weakness and wasting. Mutations in several genes too many multifocal sharp transients. At discharge from the hospital, at the that encode proteins of extracellular matrix, endoplasmic reticulum, nuclear age of 1.5 months, the patient was more alert and was no longer dependent envelope, sarcolemmal proteins and glycosyltransferases are known to be on nasogastric feeding.  P10
.33-S responsible for muscular dystrophies and myopathies. The large overlap of Evaluation of AR genetic polymorphisms influencing spinal and phenotypic manifestations resulting from different gene mutations poses bulbar muscular atrophy phenotype a challenge for determination exact type muscular disease. Targeted rese- C. Bertolin1, G. Querin2, M. Pennuto2, F. Zoccarato1, E. Pegoraro1, C. Gellera3, G. Sorarù1; quencing using next-generation sequencing technology is a cost-effective 1University of Padova, Department of Neurosciences, Padova, Italy, 22 Dulbecco Telethon strategy to accelerate patient diagnosis. We designed capture library to tar- Institute Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Centre for Integrative Biology get the coding and all flanking intron regions of 42 genes associated with (CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy, 33 Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and group of disease as muscular dystrophies, congenital muscular dystrophies, Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico ‚Carlo Besta‘, Milan, Italy. congenital myopathies, distal myopathies and other myopathies. We per- formed targeted capture combined with next-generation sequencing using NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Choice library and Roche 454 sequencing platfoArCm- SApRinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is caused by a pathological ex- iTnA 13,3 C CAzPeNc3h, pCrOoLb6aAn1d,s C. OMLu6tAa3ti,o DnNs Mas2s,o DcYiaStFe,d L AwMitAh2 m, RuYsRcu1l,a SrG dCyBs trophSiEePs No1r pansion over 38 of a CAG repeat in the first exon of the androgen receptor myopathies were identified in 16 of them. Mutations were detected in ( ) gene on chromosome X, coding for a polyQ tract (La Spada et al, 1991). and SBMA is an androgen-dependent disorder, with males with full disease ma- gene. This work was supported by grants IGA MZ CR NT14574-3. nifestations, and females showing only mild symptoms even if homozygous  P10
.31-S for the mutation. While a correlation between expansion size of polyQ tract Swiss Cheese localization and function in the nervous system of and disease sevAeRrity has been reported, patients with the same number of Drosophila melanogaster third instar larvae CAG repeats have different age at onset and disease progression even if re- O. I. Trush1, G. Kislik2, N. Matiytsiv1, S. Sarantseva2; 1Ivan Franko National University of Lviv, Lviv, Ukraine, 2National Research Centre latives. Human exon 1 encodes furtherA sRhort aminoacidic stretches. The „Kurchatov Institute“ B.P. Konstantinov St. Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, effect of these sequences on SBMAA pRhenotype has not been studied yet. In Gatchina, Russian Federation. order to further characterize the effect of coding repeated sequences on SBMA phenotype, we genotyped exon1 polymorphisms in 132 mole- th cularly defined SBMA patients, referring to the Motor Neuron Clinic of the Neuropathy target esterase (NTE) is the 6 member of 9-proteins of patatin- University of Padua and to Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico “Carlo like phospholipase domain-containing proteins, PNPLA1-9. Mutation in the Besta”, Milan. Among AR exon-1 trinucleotide stretches, a polymorphic GGN catalytic domen of NTE (PNPLA6) can lead to the slowly developed diseases, sequence coding polyG showed a tendency to be higher in patients with known as organophosphorus compound-induced delayed neuropathy an earlier onsAeRt. Our study confirms that the length of SBMA-causing po- (OPIDN) aDndro hsoeprehdiliatary spastic paraplegia called NTE-related motor neu- lyQ tract does not fully explain the disease phenotype and point to a polyG ron dDirsoosrodpehri l(aNTswEs-MND). The Swiss Cheese (SWS) protein is an ortholog strech within exon 1 that is a potential disease modifier in SBMA: of NTE in and shares 39% sequence identify with human NTE. REFERENCES: DThroes ophilasws mutants are characterized by progressive degenerati- La Spada AR, Wilson EM, Lubahn DB, Harding AE, Fischbeck KH. Androgen on of adult nervous system, glial hyperwrapping, and neuronal apoptosis. receptor gene mutations in X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. mutant thus provides an experimental model for functional N  P1
at 0u .3re 4. -1 M991;352:77-9. studies of the SWS/NTE role in maintainingsw nseural inteDgrriotsyo. pThhielare is an evi- Mutation analysis of SCN1A gene in Slovak patients with various types dence of SWS role in the age-dependent brain changes. However, possible of childhood epilepsy distusrwbsance caused by point mutations in gene in larvae re- M. Surovy1, A. Soltysova1,2, M. Kolnikova3, P. Sykora3, D. Ilencikova4, A. Ficek1, L. Kadasi1,2; mained unknown. D.melanogaster 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, The -point mutants were used to investigate SWS localization and func- Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy tion in the nervous system of larvae. We were shown SWS of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3First Department of Pediatrics, Department of Child localization mainly in glial tissue of larvae brain as well as in glial cells, Neurology, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Comenius University Children‘s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 42nd Pediatric Department of the Comenius University, wrapped axons in all investigated lines. Presence of SWS was also obser- Medical School and University Children‘s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. ved in the postsynaptic membranes ofs wthse larval NMJ. SWS protein in small amount was also detected in larvae neurons. Quantitative and qualitative parameters of NMJ in all investigated -muDtraonstosp ahlislao were changed com- Mutations in SCN1A gene are by far the most frequent cause of Dravet syn- paring with wild type flies. D.melanogaster drome (DS) worldwide, with mutation prevalence approximately between Thus, SWS dysfunction in earlier stages of ontogenesis can be 70 and 80%. One of the main features of DS is the fact that many patients do important for nervous system development and aging in not respond well to the treatment with anticonvulsive drugs. Furthermore, adults.  P10
.32-M there have been observations that some drugs, which function as sodium Central bradypnoe and hypotonia as diagnostic feature for male Rett channel blockers, may induce aggravation of seizures in patient, thus wor- syndrome sening their symptoms. As most of the DS SCN1A mutation result in trunca- A. Baumer1, E. Wey1, D. Gubler2, A. Rauch1; tion of the protein, the use of antiepileptic drugs would further decrease the 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren, Switzerland, 2Children‘s Hospital, Zurich, inhibitory function in central nervous system. The aim of this study was to Switzerland. identify mutations in SCN1A gene in a broad testing group of patients with phenotypes raging from DS to milder phenotypes such as Genetic Epilepsy with Febrile Seizures Plus (GEFS+). Completing mutation screening in 37 Mutations in the MEC P2
 gene causing the X-linked dominant Rett syndro- unrelated patients, 4 causative mutations located in the coding region were me are a relatively common cause of intellectual disability in girls. Although identified. All mutations were found in DS patients and in accordance with MEC P2
 mutations in males are usually considered lethal, leading to the pre- previously identified disease variants, found mutations, of which three are natal loss of the fetuses, few observations of boys with severe congenital novel, result in creation of a premature stop codon, either by substitution or encephalopathy were reported. We present here a novel case of a newborn an insertion and thus to a possible loss of function of the altered protein. In boy with Rett syndrome caused by the de novo MEC P2
 frameshift mutation summary, our findings contribute to the broadening of the mutation spec- c.806delG. The clinical suspicion of male Rett syndrome was triggered by trum of the SCN1A gene and enrich the clinical data of DS. Genetic testing the rare combination of neonatal hypotonia and central bradypnoe. may prevent the need for unnecessary clinical examinations and provide At the age of four days the newborn was transferred to the neonatal unit of genetic counseling for families. a tertiary children’s hospital because of poor suck, dysregulation of muscle tone and a pathological breathing patternE. SOnH aGd m2i0ss1io4n ,| t Mhe InLeAonNa,t eI TwAasL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 203ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.35-S De-novo deletion or uniparental disomy as SMA determining cause: a case report SMA patients. The methylation level of CpG sites situated in regulatory re- G. Dubsky de Wittenau1, S. Radovic2, R. Pascolo1, F. Cesca1, A. Cifù1, F. Curcio1,3, R. gions of ARHGA P22
, CDK2A P1
, CHML, NCOR2, SL C23
A2, RP L9
 genes were Lonigro1,3; analyzed in 24 I type, 43 II type and 29 III-IV SMA patients using bisulfite 1Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Udine, Italy, sequencing. The methylation level of target CpG site and one nearby CpG site 2IGA Technology Services, Parco Tecnologico L. Danieli, Udine, Italy, 3Dipartimento di belonged to 5’UTR of SL C23
A2 was significantly lower by 11-15% in III-IV Medicina di Laboratorio, SOC Istituto di Patologia Clinica, A.O.U. di Udine, P.le S.M. della type comparing to I type SMA patients. Moreover, a significantly increased Misericordia, Udine, Italy. allele A frequency of polymorphism rs1279683 (g.G>A) situated in target CpG site was found in III-IV type SMA patients. III-IV type comparing to I type SMA patients demonstrated decreased methylation level by 9-16% of We report a 3-months old female with type I spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) target CpG site and nearest CpG site belonged to 5’UTR of NCOR2. Signi- born to a young and non-consanguineous couple. Molecular analysis confir- ficant difference in the methylation level between different types SMA pati- med the diagnosis of SMA with an homozygous deletion of SMN1. Parents ents was revealed for three CpG sites located in the region 1735-1398 bp of analysis revealed that only the mother was a carrier of the SMA causative TSS of CDK2A P1
. Thus this study confirms that DNA methylation changes of deletion. It is important to find out if the father, that carries two SMN1 co- SL C23
A2, NCOR2, and CDK2A P1
 might be associated with spinal muscular pies, has a CIS-duplication of the gene on one chromosome bearing to a 2/0 atrophy severity. genotype or the deletion occurred de-novo during gametogenesis. Indeed,  P10
.39-S the risk for future pregnancies could be reduced from 25%, usually estima- Molecular analysis of common mutation associated with SMA în ted for SMA couple, to residual risk arising from recurrent de-novo mutation Romanian population (2% of the affected individual). Alternatively, the uniparental disomy (UPD) M. L. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, S. Spandole1, N. Butoianu2, M. Budisteanu2, C. Iliescu2, D. Iancu3, L. Barbarii3, L. Barbarii3, A. Alexiu1, I. Radu1, D. Cimponeriu1; of the maternal-deleted-chromosome, with an estimated incidence of about 1Department of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical Psychiatric Hospital „Prof. Dr. 1:3500 live birth, must be taken into account. Gene dosage analysis of the Alexandru Obregia“, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute of Forensic Medicine „Prof. Dr. Mina father’s relatives does not support a paternal 2/0 genotype. To discriminate Minovici“, Bucharest, Romania. between a paternal de-novo mutation and a maternal isodisomy we analy- zed in the affected infant and parents a total of nine microsatellite markers in a region spanning 3.0 Mb at the SMN locus. Five microsatellites at 5’/3’- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by degeneration of motor ends of that region demonstrate a maternal and paternal inheritance but neurons that cause progressive muscle weakness and muscle atrophy. SMN1 could not definitively exclude the maternal segmental UPD. Finally, using a homogizot gene deletion is present in most patients with SMA (~95%). The NGS approach we identify three paternal and one maternal-inherited vari- objective of this study was to evaluate the SMN1, SMN2 and NAIP gene mu- ants in the SMN2 genes of the infant. All together our data support for a tational status in SMA Romanian patients. In this study, we analyzed by PCR- de-novo mutation of paternal chromosome 5 as could result by unequal RFLP 90 patients with suspected SMA and 52 relatives. We also performed c Pr 1o 0s .s 3in 7g -S-over during gametogenesis. three prenatal test fetal with DNA obtained by amniocentesis from mother, Prevalence of SMN1 gene duplication in different ethnic groups: who had prior history of another child diagnosed with SMA. We identified implication for carrier testing homozygous deletion of exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 and SMN2 genes in 35 pa- P. Rimessi, C. Trabanelli, M. Fabris, A. Venturoli, B. Dolcini, M. Taddei Masieri, R. tients, and only deletion of exon 7 at 2 patients. Homozygous deletion of Selvatici, A. Balboni, L. Melchiorri, A. Ravani, F. Gualandi, A. Ferlini; exon 7 and 8 of SMN2 gene was identified in 2 patients and one relative of U.O. Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria, Ferrara, Italy. a patient. NAIP gene deletion was identified in 8 patients and 3 relatives. For prenatal testing, we identified homozygous deletion of exon 7 and 8 of SMN1 gene. Molecular diagnosis of SMA by identifying of SMN1 gene dele- Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder, charac- tion is a useful tool for the diagnosis of SMA in Romania, being necessary terized by symmetrical muscular weakness and atrophy. The incidence is deermination of SMN copies for a better matching phenotype - genotype. variable from 1 in 6000 to 1 in 10000 live births in different geographic This work was supported by CNCSIS - UEFISCDI, project number PN II - IDEI areas. A homozygous deletion involving exon 7 in SMN1 gene is present in 2152/2008 and Program 8, the project „Intervention for diagnosis and ma- more than 95% of the cases. Carrier testing in parents and relatives of SMA nagement of spinal amiotrophy and muscular dystrophy type Duchenne and patients is complicated by the occurrence of SMN1 gene duplication (4-5 Baker, and the prevention of their hereditary transmission“ 2011.  P10
.40-M %). Exon skipping mutation in collagen VI detected in a patient from Here we report on the SMN1 genetic test results obtained in our lab in the Lithuania last two years. The most frequent clinical indication is represented by posi- E. Preikšaitienė, A. Utkus, V. Kučinskas; tive family history for SMN1 gene deletion or SMA, partner heterozygous for Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. the deletion and consanguinity with the partner. We calculated the frequency of different SMN1 genotypes in 326 tested sub- jects. We found a percentage of SMN1 gene duplications (subjects with 3 We report on a patient who presented with clinical features of Ullrich con- copies of SMN1) a bit higher than expected, ranging from 6 to 6.5%. The genital muscular dystrophy. The patient is a girl, four years of age, the first 55% of the subjects with the duplication is represented by North and West child of healthy non-consanguineous Lithuanian parents. The proband was Africans that have been tested because of consanguinity with the partner, born at 40 weeks gestation in normal delivery. Hip dysplasia was noted the remaining are Italians, 25% with SMA positive family history and 20% from birth. The girl has chronic constipation from 2 months of age. Her in- with partners heterozygous for the deletion. telligence is in normal range, but motor development is delayed. She could Our results highlight once again the importance of taking into account the sit at age of 6 months, stand up with support at age of 2 years, can walk occurrence of SMN1 gene duplication when performing carrier testing and only with support. Clinical examination at the age of 4 years revealed the suggest that the prevalence varies in different ethnic groups, therefore affec- contractures in elbows and knees but striking distal phalanx hyperlaxity. ting the recurrence risk assessment .  P10
.38-M The consentration of CK was mildly elevated (315 U/L). Spine CT and MRT Methylation level of SL C23
A2, NCOR2 and CDK2A P1
 genes’ regulatory investigatiCoOnLs6, Aca1rdCiOoLe6chAo2skopyC OwLe6rAe3 n ormal. The clinical diagnosis of Ull- regions correlates with spinal muscular atrophy severity rich congenital muscular dystrophy was suspecCtOeLd6 aAn3d molecular genetic G. Y. Zheleznyakova1,2,3, M. A. Maretina1,4, A. V. Kiselev3, E. Nilsson2, V. S. Baranov3, H. B. testing of , and genes was performedde. nTohveo mutation Schiöth2; c.6210+5G>A, IV S16
+5G>A, in intron 16 of the gene in a heterozy- 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Uppsala gous state was detected. The analysis of parents confirmed origin of University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the mutation. The protein immunohistochemistry analysis of the muscular Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Austria. biopsy concluded that the finding is compatible with dominant in frame de- letion in exon 16. The mutation c.6210+5G>A, IV S16
+5G>A, has already been described as Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a monogenic neurogenerative disorder causative for a dominant form of Ulrich congenital muscular dystrophy. The that is subdivided into four different types and caused by SMN1 gene dele- molecular and clinical characterization of our patient provides additional tion. Whole genome methylation analysis revealed about 40 CpG sites as- information for genotype-phenotype correlation and confirms dominant ac- sociated with genes which were significantly different methylated between ting mutation in collagen VI gene as a course of Ullrich disease. SMA patients and healthy individuals of the same age. To investigate the re- levance of discovered methylation changes for SMA severity, we compared t2h0e 4methylation level of target and nearest CpG sEiteSsH inG a 2 la0r1ge4r |g rMouIpL AofN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P10
.41-S Paternal germline mosaicism in COLVI related myopathies: a case report cardia and diarrhea. Blood test showed an hyperthyroidism An ultrasound C. Trabanelli1, A. Armaroli1, A. Venturoli1, C. Scotton1, A. Ravani1, L. Merlini2, C. Bruno3, A. scan of the thyroid showed the presence of a dishomogeneous pseudonodu- Ferlini1, F. Gualandi1; lar area, bilateral laterocervical lymphnodes The patient underwent thyroid 1U.O.Genetica Medica - Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Ferrara, Italy, 2Laboratory of fine-needle aspiration. The histology was compatible with a papillary carci- Musculoskeletal Cell Biology, Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 3Muscular and noma. Thyroidectomy was performed. In 2013, Buldrini et al reported the Neurodegenerative Diseases, G. Gaslini Institute, Università degli Studi, Genova, Italy. first patient with 14q32.2 microdeletion and thyroid carcinoma. We suggest that these patients have an increased cancer risk. We hypothesize that it is caused by haplo-insufficiency for one or more imprinted or dosage sensitive Mutations in the CO L6
A1, CO L6
A2 and CO L6
A3 genes cause collagen VI re- genes. The DLK1 gene plays a critical role in tumorigenic growth in 14q32 lated disorders, characterized by muscle wasting, weakness, joint contractu- deletions.  P11
.002-M res, distal laxity, serious respiratory dysfunction and cutaneous alterations. 15qter deletion/duplication and growth effects The severe Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD) can be due to A. Petracca1, S. Romano2, I. Sani2, M. Pantaleo2, G. Traficante1, S. Bargiacchi1, A. Gulino1, autosomal recessive mutations in one of thed teh nreoev ogenes of collagen VI with S. Guarducci2, E. Lapi2, S. Stagi3, S. Giglio1,2; a related 25% recurrence risk. In the majority of UCMD cases nevertheless, 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences, the underlying mutation is thought to arise and the recurrence risk University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s is considered as low. University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Department of Health’s Sciences, Paediatric Here we report a family with recurrence of UCMD in two sibs only by Endocrinology Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. father’s site. In both, the molecular analysis revealed heterozygosity for the c.896G>A mutation in CO L6
A1 exon 10 (Gly299Glu) and for the CO L6
A1 c.1823-8G>A variation within CO L6
A1 intron 29. The Gly299Glu mutation, We describe two cases with opposite rearrangements (deletion and duplica- despite not previously reported, is likely to be pathogenic, leading to the tion) in 15q region including Insulin-like Growth factor I receptor (IGF1R) disruption of the Gly-Xaa-Yaa motif in the triple-helix domain of collagen VI gene. The IGF1R is involved in growth, insulin-related phenotypes, and lon- alfa(1)-chain. The intronic variation was inherited from the father andde nRoNvAo gevity and is expressed equally from the maternal and paternal alleles. analysis in skin fibroblasts allowed to exclude its role in affecting CO L6
A1 Case 1: Girl of 11 years with unexplained intrauterine growth retardation transcript processing. The Gly299Glu mutation occurred apparently (IUGR), birth weight <-1.5 SD and persistent short stature (<-2.0 SD). She in the two sibs. displayed dysmorphic features suggestive of Silver-Russell Syndrome, with The described mutational segregation strongly suggests the occurrence of unspecific multiple hyperpigmented lesions on the body. She had a normal paternal germline mosaicism , to be confirmed by mutational analysis of the methylation study of the 11p15.5 region. Significant increases in IGF-I levels sperm. The reported family represents the first observation of gonadal mo- were observe during two IGF-I generation tests. SNP-array analysis identi- saicism in collagen-VI related myopathies and, similarly to other collagen fied a heterozygous de novo 4,92 Mb deletion in15q26.2 including IGF1R related diseases as osteogenesis imperfecta, this possibility deserve to be gene. considered in genetic counseling and recurrence risk estimation. Case 2: proband was first evaluated at the age of 4 months for overgrowth,  P10
.42-M hypotonia and some dysmorphic features (a prominent nasal bridge, deep Diagnosis of spinal muscular atrophy in Algeria B. Imessaoudene, S. Hallal, M. Ghouali - z. Chami - m. Djeddou- benchaib- a. Berhoune; set eyes, epicanthic folds and micrognathia). He delivered by C-section at Laboratory Of Biochemistry Chu Mustappha, Algiers, Algeria. 39 weeks of gestation for breech presentation, with a birth weight of 3600 g (50th centile), a birth length of 53 cm (75th centile) and an OFC of 35 cm (+1.7 SD). He had presented craniosynostosis, corrected at 3 months of age. The spinal muscular atrophy is neuromuscular diseases characterized by Array-CGH analysis showed a 17,3 Mb de novo duplication from 15q25.2 to degeneration of motor neurons and paralysis associated with muscular 26.3 encompassing the IGF1R gene. atrophy. Our two cases again demonstrate that overgrowth, craniosynostosis, ma- Depending on the age of onset and progression of the disease , there are crocephaly, and mild developmental delay in patients with trisomy 15q26.1 3 types of spinal muscular atrophy : the severe form or type 1 ( Werdnig result from dosage increase of IGF1R, whereas gene dosage decrease of IG- - Hoffman disease), intermediate or standard form II, and the least severe F1R can cause IGF1-resistance and underline IUGR with subsequent short form or type III ( Kugelberg - Welander disease of ) . The frequency of these s Pt 1a 1tu .0re 0. 3-S ASI is 1/10000 new borns. Two children with triplication of 16p11.2 associated with global Infantile spinal amyotrophy resulting in over 95 % of cases , a homozygous developmental delay and dysmorphic features deletion of exon 7 of SMN1 gene located in 5q13 . G. A. M. Nimmo1, A. Guerin1, R. Badilla-Porras1, D. J. Stavropolous2, G. Yoon1, M. Carter1; This deletion can be detected by a PCR - Digestion, by creating an artificial 1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of restriction site for the enzyme Dra I ( ACRS : artificial created restriction Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, site). This technique is now validated in our laboratory , which allowed us to The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. analyze 150 patients ( 128 childrens and 22 adults). The deletion was found in the homozygous state in 95 of them , representing a value of 53%. We report two patients with de novo triplication of 16p11.2. This region is While our series of patients tested from specialized services but it does not particularly prone to genomic disorders due to the large number of low copy explain all the high rate of positive cases, this shows that the disease is not repeats on the p-arm of chromosome 16. Patient 1. The proband is a 4 year as rare in our population. old male and a product of an uncomplicated pregnancy delivered at 35+2 Our vision for the future is to establish a genetic counseling for families. weeks to a non-consanguineous couple. A moderate ASD, peri-membranous  P11
.001-S defect of the tricuspid valve, and coarctation of the aorta was repaired at 14q32.2 Microdeletion and Thyroid carcinoma 6 weeks of age. He also had bilateral cryptorchidism, chronic constipation, S. Briuglia1, I. Loddo1, A. Capalbo2, L. Bernardini2, M. C. Cutrupi1, E. Moschella1, A. and developmental delay. Patient 2. The proband is a 12 year old female de- Novelli2, T. Arrigo1, D. C. Salpietro1; 1Dipartiment of Paediatric Science Messina, Messina, Italy, 2CSS-Mendel Institute, Roma, livered at 36 weeks gestational age to a non-consanguineous couple. Hydro- Italy. nephrosis was diagnosed antenatally with grade III reflux confirmed post- natally. Conjugated hyper-bilirubinaemia was found in early infancy and a liver biopsy demonstrated a paucity of bile ducts; genetic testing for Alagille We described a young man, the third son of healthy and non consanguineous syndrome was negative. There is a history of failure to thrive with delayed parents. He was born small for gestational age. He had delayed height grow- bone age and moderate developmental delay. Both children had microce- th and psychomotor development. Karyotype was 46,XY. At the age of 6, phaly and dysmorphic facial features. Deletions and duplications of 16p11.2 he developed precocious puberty At the age of 9 years, brain MRI showed are relatively well-characterized, and associated with global developmental partially empty saddle. At the age of 15, we evaluated him for microsomia, delay, behavioural problems, dysmorphic facial features, seizures, abnor- delayed psycomotor development, dysmorphisms. On physical examination, mal head size, and variable congenital anomalies. This is the first report of height and weight were below 3° centile, there was microcephaly, triangu- 1  P6
 1p 11 .01 0.2 4 t -r Miplications and the associated phenotypes. lar face, frizzy hair, laterally sparse eyebrows, strabismus, hypotelorims, Familial cases of 22q11.2 Deletion syndrome in Belarus: phenotype’s hypoplasia of midface, wide nasal bridge, short broad nose, large and low variability, genetic counseling, prenatal diagnostics set ears, poinàted chin, micrognatia, arched palate, scoliosis, kyphosis, long N. Rumiantsava, O. Khurs, N. Venchikova, V. Kulak, O. Zobikova, E. Trebka, L. Isakovich, hands with tapering fingers, hallux valgus bilaterally, clubfeet. An aCGH sho- L. Savenko, T. Plevako; wed 14q32.2 14q32.31 de novo microdelEetSioHnG of 21.011064 M | bMp. IALtA thNe ,a IgTeA oLf Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 205 20, he had enlargment of the thyroid gland, exophtalmos, weight loss, tachy-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Republican Medical Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. Previously we evaluated a group of 140 probands with phenotype typical The 22q11.2 Deletion syndrome (Del22S: #188400; #192430) manifested for 22q11.2DS. Forty three patients were diagnosed with 22q11.2 deletion by distinct phenotype is characterized high (~10%) incidence of inherited by FISH and MLPA techniques (31%). Three patients with highly suggesti- cases (InhC). Disorder is displayed variability of phenotype’s expression ve 22q11.2DS phenotype were found to have chromosomal abnormalities for heart defect (HD) and mental delay (MD). Adult’s del22q11.2 carriers and three patients in non-deleted group presented with other syndromes may demonstrate mild signs.We present InhC del22q11.2 (4 families, 9 detected afterwards. Thus patients with negative 22q11.2 deletion test re- patients) confirmed by FISH and the scheme of genetic counseling in Bela- sults showed quite a vast etiological heterogeneity and may have been un- rus. InhC incidence composes 10,5% (4/38). Two families (F1, F2) under- derdiagnosed for some genomic disorders. Array CGH should be advised in went through genetic counseling due to affected children aged 1,5 and 3,5 cases where discernibly suggestive phenotypes aren’t confirmed by FISH months with prenatal hypoplasia, dysmorphic signs, retardation, hypocal- a Pn 1d 1 .M 00LP 7A -S methods. cemia, thymus agenesia, immunodeficiency, HD (F1: multiple VSD+ASD; F2: 3p deletion syndrome: clinical presentation and molecular VSD+ASD+PDA). Birth weight was 1720g (F1) and 2100g (F2) at 36 and 37 description of array CGH week’s gestation accordingly. Affected parents showed borderline intellect, A. A. Syrmou1, M. Tzetis1, K. Kosma1, V. Oikonomakis1, P. Makrythanasis1,2, H. Fryssira1, S. facial dysmorphisms; HD: ASD (F1); hearing impairment, unilateral renal Kitsiou-Tzeli1, E. Kanavakis1; agenesis (F2). In F3, F4 Del22S was firstly revealed at pregnants counseled 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, «Aghia Sophia» Childrens due to fetus’s heart malformation. F3 presented 3 affected persons: pregnant Hospital,Greece, Athens, Greece, Greece, 2Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, Geneva, Switzerland. with dysmorphisms, cleft palate, hypertension; fetus with HD (VSD+aortic coarctation) and normal thymus was born at 35 weeks gestation (weigh 2400g), died in 2 days; 11 years old child with MD, VSD. F4: pregnant ope- Deletion 3p syndrome is a rare contiguous-gene disorder involving the loss rated for tetralogy Fallot (TF) with dysmorphisms, myopia, scoliosis, renal of 3p25-p26 delineated by array CGH and associated with characteristic hypoplasia; fetus with TF. Both couples refused pregnancy’s termination. dysmorphic features, microcephaly, developmental delay (DD) and growth Patient’s management: cardiac surgery; follow-up for heart, mentality, im- retardation. It was suggested that a 1,5 Mb minimal terminal deletion causes munological status, age-dependent assessment. Counseling del22q11.2 the syndrome, but there is a strong connection between the severity of the carriers: discussion for etiology, diagnostics, variability, impossibility to disease and the size of the deletion (Gunnarsson and Foyn Brunn 2010, Pel- predict phenotype impairment→genetic risk (50%)→prenatal del22q11.2 tekova et al 2012, Reiss et al 2012). We present three patients with normal testing (FISH)→discussion for pregnancy course. Our data illustrate wide karyotype and DD, various congenital anomalies and dysmorphic features. phenotype’s variability and importance of early Del22S carriers detection.  P11
.005-S For array CGH analysis Agilent arrays 4x180k and 1x244k (>170.000 and Phenotypic characterization of a recurrent 22q11.2 deletion spanning > 236.000 probes respectively, average resolution 8.9kCbR) BwNe,r CeN uTsNed4., ACnH Lin1-, low copy repeats (LCR)s C-E tLeRrRstNit1ia al n3dp  S2
R5G-pA2 P63
 microdeletion was detected in all patients, ranging in M. A. Ramos-Arroyo, A. Bengoa-Alonso, B. Hernandez-Charro, M. Moreno-Igoa, A. size from 1.9Mb to 11.3Mb and comprising the genes Valiente-Martin, C. Romero; (Ellery PM et al 2014). Additional pathogenetic aberra- Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. tions which were also observed in two of our patients (dup 8q24.23-q24.3, dup 22q11.21) might contribute to the severe phenotype, presumably ac- ting as modifiers of their clinical manifestations. Further studies of patients The well characterized 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is associated with a wide with application of array-CGH, will probably expand our knowledge on the range of clinical phenotypes including the velo-cardio-facial syndrome (MIM phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of 3p deletion syndrome. 1924300) or DiGeorge syndrome (MIM 188400). About 90% of patients have  P11
.008-M a common 3Mb deletion (typical deletion), between LCR22-A and LCR22-D, 3q27.1-q27.3 microdeletion syndrome: description of a pediatric case while a recurrent 2.1Mb deletion is found spanning LCR22-D and LCR22-H with previously undescribed features (distal deletion). We describe 2 patients (ages 4 and 2 years) with a 1,3Mb C. Catalli, A. Bengoa Alonso, B. Hernández Charro, M. Moreno Igoa, L. M. Morales 22q11 deletion (19362239 bp-20788469 bp, Hg18) detected by a-CGH, that Garofalo, J. R. Vílchez Gutiérrez, M. A. Ramos Arroyo; U. O. Genética Medica - Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. spans the distal end of the typical deletion and the proximal end of the distal deletion (between LCR22-C and LCR22-E). We compare their clinical findings with those described in patients with si- Here we describe a case of a 5 year old boy who came to our genetic ser- milar deletions in an attempt to further delineate the associated phenotype. vice due to small stature in association with hypospadias and psychomo- Patients present a quite homogeneous phenotype which seems to overlap tor retardation. Convenctional karyotype was normal, while a microarray- with those described in Russel-Silver and Goldenhar syndromes. It is charac- CGH detected a 2.8Mb deletion spanning from 3q27.1 to 3q27.3: 46,XY.arr terized by prematurity, pre and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, 3q27.1q27.3(185852379-188697676)x1[Hg18]. Recently a new 3q27.3 mi- cranio-facial dysmorphic features, heart defects, ear and renal anomalies, crodeletion syndrome has been described, overlapping molecular features and mild developmental delay. Cleft palateC, RsKkeLletal defects and behavioural with our case, but only partially concordant regarding clinical phenotype. problems were also present. Genotype-phenotype correlation supports the Our patient exhibit a genitourinary malformation previously unreported hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of the (Crk-like) gene is the major and a borderline IQ, opposed to reported severe mental impairment. IUGR candidate gene for the cardiac anomalies associated with the 22q11.2 dele- and subsequent small stature and peculiar dysmorphisms are also seen. It is tion involving LCRs C-E.  P11
.006-M remarkable that all cases described before are adults, and as we concern this MLPA reveals broader spectrum of abnormalities in patients with is the first case described at young age. This case expands the phenotype 22q11.2DS phenotype and clinical features of the 3q27.3 microdeletion syndrome and offers new Y. Kozlova, N. Shilova, M. Minzhenkova, V. Antonenko, V. Zabnenkova, T. Zolotukhina; insights about genotype-phenotype correlation. Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the  P11
.009-S Russian Academy of, Moscow, Russian Federation. A New Syndrome? Severe growth and develop mental delay associated with Bilateral Polycystic kidney Disease. S. Sakazume1, Y. Kido1, H. Numabe2; MLPA analysis is considered to be a reliable, accurate and cost-effective 1Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Koshigaya, Saitama, Japan, 2Ochanomizu Women‘s University, Tokyo, Japan. method with high sensitivity and specificity for detecting 22q11.2 micro- deletion, both typical and distal. MLPA analysis with SALSA MLPA  P250
-B1 DiGeorge (MRC-Holland) kit was performed on the group of 78 probands In this report, we describe two girls with severe growth and developmental with phenotype suggestive of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) delay with polycystic kidney disease. Long arm of chromosome 4was con- (CHD, facial anomalies, cleft palate, hypocalcemia). Different-sized deletion sistently deleted in almost same posisions. The common locus in the chro- 22q11.2 was revealed in 28 cases. Most patients had common recurrent 3 mosome is 4q21-22. One patient had a simple 4q contiguous gene deletion, Mb 22q11.2 deletion (79%). In our study MLPA test didn’t reveal deletions whereas the other patient had a complicated chromosomal rearrangement. in 49 patients. One patient was found to have deletions of probes within In the first patient, a smaller part of the 4q was inserted to 3p. In both pa- 4q34.2 region included in the probe set. The phenotype of patient presen- tients, abdominal ultrasonography revealed renal cysts. In the deletions ted with double outlet right ventricle, hypotrophy, brachycephaly, narrow PKD2, which causes autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (MIM fontanelles, dysplastic ears, anteverted nares, broad face, small lower jaw, 613095) was mapped. , The common 52 genes deleted in both patients. Ty- double-sided cryptorchidism, chiasm of hand digits, seizures, cleft of soft pical phenotypes, were severe growth and developmental retardations, and palate. The patient’s karyotype showed derivate 4q terminal deletion of ma- t2er0n6al origin (46,XY,der(4)t(4;8)(q35;q22)mat). ESHG 2014 | MILAN, aIT cAhaLrYac |t eWrisWticW fa.cEiaSl HapGpe.OaraRnGce consisting of frontal bossing, thin broadABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical Unversity, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University eyebrows, epicanthus fold, missing, missing teeth. And mild hand and foot Hospital of Pediatrics, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of anomalies. Although these patients carry different chromosomal aberration, Medical Chemistry and Biochemitry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. the common deletion causes the quite similar phenotype, suggesting a new syndrome due to 4q21-q22 deletion.  P11
.010-M Triple A (Achalasia-Addisonianism-Alacrima, Allgrove) syndrome is an in- 9p deletion syndrome-like in a girl with a 9p insertion on herited condition characterized by three specific features: achalasia, Addi- chromosome 2 without 9p deletion son disease, and alacrima. Allgrove syndrome is inherited in an autosomal D. Carli1,2, G. Mandrile1,2, E. Savin3, G. Rivalta4, M. Rolando4, D. F. Giachino1,2, E. Di Gregorio3,5, A. Brusco3,5; recessive pattern and is caused by mutations in the AAAS gene localized at 1University of Torino, Dept. Clinical & Biological Sciences, Torino, Italy, 2Medical 12q13.13. The gene encodes a protein called ALADIN. It localizes to nuclear Genetics, San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano (TO), Italy, 3S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, pore complexes, large multiprotein assemblies that are the sole sites of nu- Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, Italy, 4S.C. Neuropsichiatria Infantile ASLTO3, cleocytoplasmic transport. Achalasia-Addisonianism-Alacrima syndrome is Collegno-Pinerolo (TO), Italy, 5University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, a rare condition, incidence is unknown, and only scattered family and case Torino, Italy. reports are noted in the literature. Here we report a female patient with Triple A syndrome born to non-consanguineous parents from Bulgarian ori- gin. She was diagnosed as Triple A at the age of 17. The patient express a Partial deletions of 9p have been reported as a clinically recognizable syn- typical phenotype: achalasia, Addison disease, and alacrima. The affected drome characterised by the variable association of intellectual disability, patient also has muscle weakness, peripheral neuropathy, skin hyperpig- speech delay, hypotonia, cardiac anomalies and dysmorphisms. mentation, optic atrophy and papillae atrophy. Many of the features of triple We report a 3 years old girl with midface hypoplasia, downslanting palpe- A syndrome are caused by dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system bral fissures, teeth agenesis and teeth fusions. Language was not acquired. and the neurological symptoms have worsen over time. Molecular genetic At birth, severe neonatal hypotonia and patent ductus arteriosus were pre- testing of the patient showed 2 heterozygous mutations in the AAAS-gene: sent. Phenotype was consistent with the clinical diagnosis of “9p deletion an already reported nonsense mutation c.1024C>T, p.(Arg342*) and a novel syndrome” (OMIM#158170), with uncommon features such as bilateral ca- splice site mutation c.1331+2dupT. The one basepair duplication, located 2 taract (diagnosed at 5 months), chronic constipation, high pain threshold basepairs upstream exon 14, disrupts the donor splice site of intron 14 of and poor temperature control. the AAAS-gene. Based on Alamut software prediction, it is very likely that Karyotype analysis showed an apparent 9p deletion. Array-CGH (60K the mutation leads to skipping of exon 14.  P11
.013-S Agilent) demonstrated a 2q microdeletion (600 Kb, from 166,993,501 to Acrocallosal syndrome caused by novel mutations in the KIF7 gene_a 167,602,904, NCBI Build 37/hg19) with normal dosage of chromosome 9. report on a Polish family and review on KIF7 syndromology Subsequent FISHS CaNna9lAysis reSvCeNa7leAd a 9p22.1p24.3 insertion in chromosome M. Krajewska-Walasek1, M. Kugaudo1,2, M. Jędrzejowska1,3, T. Attié-Bitach4, A. Jezela- 2SCqN [94A6,XX,ins(2;9)(q24.3;p22.1p24.3)dn]. The 2q microdeletion SinCvNo7lAved Stanek1; only two genes: and . 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, recessive mutations cause congeSnCitNa9l Ainsensitivity to pain. is Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, not associated with human disease, and in mouse is likely to be a sodium- Warsaw, Poland, 3Neuromuscular Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish level sensor of body fluids in the brain. haploinsufficiency may sup- Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, 4Département de Génétique et INSERM U781, IHU port the clinical observation of the patient high pain threshold and the poor IMAGINE et Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. temperature control. We are verifying the presence of a second mutation on the remaining allele. Assuming that the 2q deletion cannot account for the whole phenotype, we speculate that a critical gene/regulatory region key Acrocallosal syndrome (ALCS) is a multiple congenital anomaly disorder for the “9p deletion syndrome” is located in the 9p breakpoint(s). This pati- characterized by postaxial and/or preaxial polydactyly, cutaneous syndac- ent deserves future studies that may help to refine 9p critical region. tyly, macrocephaly, widely spaced eyes, absence of the corpus callosum, and  P11
.011-S intellectual disability. It was first described by Albert Schinzel in 1979, but Identification of de novo 2,62Mb deletion in chromosome 15q26.1 in the diagnosis of this syndrome still remains challenging. This may be due a boy with stigmata dysplastica, developmental delay, short stature, tKoI Fb7oth non-specific clinical symptoms, as well as to a heterogeneous and microcrania, nasal polyposis, hypermetropia difficult to clKeIaFr7ly define molecular background. In 2011 mutations in the S. Bertok1, U. Grošelj1, M. Jekovec-Vrhovšek1, L. Lovrečič2, V. Marija2; 1University Children‘s Hospital, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Clinical Institute of Medical gene were identified for the first time in patients with acrocallosal syn- Genetics, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. drome. The gene encodes a cilia-associated protein belonging to the kinesin family that plays a role in the hedgehog signaling (SHH) pathway through the regulation of GLI transcription factors; it also regulates acetyla- We report a 14 years old boy with developmental delay, stigmata dysplastica tion and stabilization of microtubules. KIF7 and multiple organ involvement. History: no familiar congenital anomalies or We report on a family with 2 children (a girl and a boy) affected with acro- consanguinity; born on 38th gestational week. IUGR. Developmental delay: callosal syndrome caused by novel mutations in . The presented sibs sitting at the age of 8 months, walking at 16 months; at the age of three years met the clinical criteria of acrocallosal syndrome, i.e.: polydactyly, corpus speech with only some words. Short stature, microcrania, stigmata dyspla- callosum anomalies, facial dysmorphism (frontal bossing and hypertelo- stica, nasal polyposis and hypermetropia. Head MR showed suspect hypo- rism) and hypotonia/developmental delay. Despite the same spectrum of physeal calcinations. Normal feeding and voiding. Dry skin. Normal hearing. congenital malformations noted in the presented patients, their psychomo- No cerebral paroxysms. Postnatal microarray analysis (Agilent, Human CGH toric development is quite different. The boy is much more delayed, with Microarray Kit 8x60k): de novo interstitial microdeletion of 2620±70kb poor contact, cannot sit unsKupIFp7orted. He has hyperventilation and, as his in chromosome 15, region 15q26.1 (arr[hg19] 15q26.1(90,971,047-93- sister, sleep disorders (frequent awakening). On the basis of this family, we ,586,680)x1 dn)1. The deleted region contained 18 RefSeq genes, encom- discuss the heterogeneity of -associated disorders. passing CHD2, ST8SIA2 and RGMA, among others. Background: So far, there The study was partially financed by NCN Project Harmonia 4 no. UMO-2013- has been no case with similar 15q26.1 deletion submitted to the publicly /  P0
 18 1/ .0M 1/ 4N -Z M5/00978. available databases1. CHD2 gene belongs to the CHD family of proteins, cha- A new locus for syndromic acroosteolysis with intellectual disability, racterized by the presence of chromo (chromatin organization modifier) sensory neuropathy and enhanced osteoclast function domains and SNF2-related helicase/ATPase domains. Moreover, ST8SIA2 P. Chiurazzi1, S. Swagemakers2,3,4, B. C. van der Eerden5, F. Pirozzi1,6, M. Schreuders- and RGMA genes play an important role in developing and adult central ner- Koedam5, D. Heijsman2, M. Moscarda1, G. Zampino7, C. Carrozza8, P. Belli9, P. Caradonna10, vous system. Conclusion: Taking into consideration the de novo origin of the L. Padua11,12, E. Tacconelli13, A. Kremer2, J. Goos2,14, D. Pirolli15, M. De Rosa15, G. Neri1, J. P. T. van Leeuwen5, P. J. van der Spek2; 15q26.1 deletion, its size and functional characteristics of the encompassed 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Department of genes, the deletion is most likely associated with the developmental delay, Bioinformatics, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of dysplastic signs and multiple organ involvement. We believe phenotype is Genetics, Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Cancer Genomics Centre, predominantly the consequence of CHD2 haploinsufficiency. Further stu- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University MC, dies are required to determine the role of CHD2 gene in the characteristic Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western phenotype. 1Data generated by the ECARUCA, DECIPHER, ISCA Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 7Department of Pediatrics, Catholic  P11
.012-M University, Rome, Italy, 8Institute of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Catholic A novel mutation in the AAAS-gene in a Bulgarian patient with University, Rome, Italy, 98Department of Bio-Imaging and Radiological Sciences, Catholic Triple-A syndrome University, Rome, Italy, 10Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University, Rome, M. Lukova1,2, E. Stefanova3, A. Todorova4,2, T. Todorov2, V. Mitev1; Italy, 11Institute of Neurology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 12Fondazione Don Carlo ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 207ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Gnocchi, Milan, Italy, 13Department of Infectious Diseases, Catholic University, Rome, NOTCH2 Italy, 14Department of Plastic and reconstructive Surgery and Handsurgery, Erasmus In University MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 15Istituto di Chimica del Riconoscimento osifl ico established heterozygosity for the novel synonymous variant Molecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Rome, Italy. c.2817G>A (p. P939
P) (NM_024408.2) both in the child and his father. analysis predicted introduction of a novel splice-site. cDNA sequen- cing confirmed the presence of a splice-site causing skipping of the 5’-end We describe an inbred family with three individuals affected by syndromic of exon 18 (r.2753_2818del). The deletion maintained the reading framteh acroosteolysis, inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. This condition is (p.Asn918-Gly940delinsSer), resulting in a protein lacking most of the 24 characterized by intellectual disability, hypogonadism, sensory neuropa- EGF-like domain (pN.O9T1 C1
H-9247). Amplification of the correctly spliced mRNA thy and recurrent infections. FurthermorNe,O dTeCcHre2asMeMd Pb2onWe mNKin1erFaAl Mde1n3s4iBty revealed monoallelic expression of the normal allele (c.2817G), confirming and low levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 were detected. Mutations in genes that c.2817G>A in iNs OliTkeClHy 2the cause of the variable Alagille syndro- previously associated to acroosteolysis ( , , , ) me phenotype in this family. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case were excluded by Whole Genome Sequencing. This same techniquTeM, iEnM co4m1B- of a synonymous variant in causing Alagille syndrome.  P11
.017-S binaDtiEonN NwDit5hA SNP haplotyping of the pedigree, allowed the identification A new mutation in the CO L4
A3 gene associated to autosomal of two homozygous missense mutations in neighbouring genes dominant alport syndrome with hearing disorders as sole clinical and on 11p15.4. These genes have not been implicated in human manifestation disease yet and encode distinct Golgi proteins. Different bioinformatic ana- M. Fernández-Prieto1,2, C. Rosado-Rubio1,3, E. Bueno-Martínez1,2, P. Fraile1,3, P. García- lyses suggest that both mutations in the neighbouring genes may underlie Cosmes3, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; the pathogenesis. Messenger RNA levels of both genes are upregulated in 1Medicine Unit. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, osteoclast cell cultures obtained from normal controls. Functional studies 2IBSAL and IBMCC. University of Salamanca, CSIC and SACYL., Salamanca, Spain, show that significantly more osteoclasts are derived from patients’ blood 3Department of Nephrology. University Hospital. SACYL., Salamanca, Spain. mononuclear cells compared to heterozygous individuals and normal con- trols; finally, patients’ osteoclasts exhibit an enhanced bone resorption acti- vity compared to controls. Further genetic studies in animal or cellular mo- The autosomal dominant Alport syndrome accounts for 5% of cases of Alport dels are needed to sort out the role of each gene in the new locus in causing syndrome and, unlike the recesive and sex-linked forms, clinical expression this rare recessive disorder. is benign and appears in the later stages of life. Autosomal dominant Alport  P11
.015-S syndrome generates a form of late-onset mild sensorineural hipoacusia. Ho- Acromegaloid Facial Appearance Syndrome should not be forgotten in wever, as in the other forms of Alport syndrome, this is always accompanied the differencial diagnosis of pseudoacromegaly B. Pereira1, A. Fortuna2; by renal failure, the rate of hearing loss being directly linked to the progres- 1Serviço Endocrinologia e Diabetes,Hospital Garcia da Orta, Almada, Portugal, 2Centro sion of renal failure, and its progression suggests a poor prognosis of kidney Genética Medica Jacinto Magalhães,CHP, Porto, Portugal. disease. We have studied the CO L4
A3 and CO L4
A4 genes by PCR, CSGE and automatic sequencing of the full coding region and the exon-intron bounda- ries in a Spanish family with autosomal dominant Alport syndrome, in which Acromegaloid facial appearance (AFA) syndrome is a very rare inherited most of its members are suffering from hearing loss only, one member suf- cause of pseudoacromegaly characterized by progressive coarsening of fa- fers lenticonus, and only two suffer renal disease. We found a heterozygous cial features, overgrowth of oral mucosa and large, doughy hands. Six case c.345DelG/p.G115GFSX37 mutation in the CO L4
A3 gene, which generates reports have been described. Herein we describe a further family with AFA a truncated protein. This mutation was found in all family members with syndrome. symptoms but was absent in the healthy members of the family. Thus, we Probands were a 31 years female and his 37 years brother who were re- describe a new mutation in CO L4
A3 gene mainly associated to hearing loss ferred to our department due to suspected acromegaly. Both siblings had a and for the first time we describe a case of autosomal dominant Alport syn- previous history of oral surgery 13 and 20 years before due to hypertrophic drome that presents lenticonus. Furthermore, we report that deafness and intraoral tissue. Additionally, the male proband had mild learning difficul- renal impairment could not be associated in the same individual, this being ties, uncontrolled hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy and a paroxy- the first case of a family in which deafness occurs amongst several members stic atrial fluter. He was medicated with lisinopril, amiodarone and clobaz- w  P1
h 1o . 0d 1o 8n -o Mt show any alteration in the kidney. am. Family history was remarkable for their mother, who was remembered Prenatal diagnosis using array CGH in 163 cases by both siblings as having “rough facial features”. At physical examination A. Saberi1,2, g. Shariati1,2, M. Hamid3,2, H. Galehdari4,2, N. Abdorasouli2; both patients were hypertensive, obese and had a raised cephalic perimeter. 1Ahvaz Jundishapour university of medical sciences, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, Their facial appearance was coarse with thickened lips and superior eyelids, 2Narges Med. Genetics & PND Laboratory, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3pasteur enlarged nose and gingival hypertrophy. Biochemical surveys were normal. Institute,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ahvaz Shahid Chamran university, Ahvaz, At follow-up both patients underwent repeated oral surgeries due to their Islamic Republic of Iran. evolving extensive gingival hypertrophy. AFA syndrome was considered the final diagnosis of this somatic overgrowth disease. We highlight the importance of a careful family history and physical exami- Karyotype analysis has been the standard procedure for prenatal cytoge- nation of a kindred with AFA syndrome to collect the striking features of netic diagnosis since the 1970s. However, the major limitation remains each disorder associated with an acromegaloid phenotype and achieve an requirement for cell culture, resulting in a delay of as much as 14 days to accurate diagnosis. The phenothype includes a progressively coarse acrome- get the test results. FISH and QF-PCR do not provide a genome screen for galoid-like facial appearance with thickened lips/gums, with learning diffi- unexpected imbalances. CGH array technology has proven to be useful in culties in two consecutive generations, suggesting AD inheritance. postnatal diagnosis of mental retardation, development delay, and conge-  P11
.016-M nital malformation syndrome. We evaluated the use of array comparative A novel splice-site mutation in NOTCH2 in a Norwegian family with genomic hybridization (aCGH) for prenatal diagnosis including assessment Alagille syndrome of variants of uncertain significance, and the ability to detect abnormalities Y. Sejersted1, H. H. Mørk1, A. B. Østensen2, M. Kulseth1, R. Almaas2; not detected by karyotype. Women undergoing amniocentesis or chorio- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, N-0424 Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, N-0424 Oslo, Norway. nic villus sampling (CVS) for karyotype were offered aCGH analysis using a targeted cytochip ISCA 4x44K v1.0 oligonucleotide array. Parental samples were obtained at the same time to exclude maternal cell contamination and determine if copy number variants (CNVs) were de novo, or inherited.We The index patient, a boy, presented neonatally with conjugated hyperbili- analyzed 163 samples, most were CVS (75.5%) and amniotic fluid (19.6%). rubinemia which resolved in 2-3 months. He was born five days post term The most common indication were advanced maternal age (N=74), abnor- (birthweight 2840 g, length 50 cm, occipitofrontal head circumference 34 mal ultrasound finding (N=46) and a previous child with multiple congeni- cm) after an uneventful pregnancy. His healthy non-consanguineous parents tal abnormalities (N=40).We detected 27 CNVs (16.7%). Of these 16 (9.8%) are of Norwegian descent. Of note is that his father was icteric for the first were interpreted as likely benign, 9(5.5%) were of defined pathological si- 2-4 months of life. In the non-dysmorphic index patient, hepatic ultrasound gnificance, while 2(1.2%) were of uncertain significance. We concluded that and scintigraphy were normal neonatally. Bile duct paucity, giant cell trans- array CGH identified clinically significant abnormalities in approximately formation and intracanalicular cholestasis was evident histologically. Se- 5.5% of fetuses with ultrasonographic abnormalities and normal conventio- rum cholesterol was <5mmol/L. His proteinuria improved over the first 12 nal karyotype. This study demonstrate the potential for array CGH to replace months. Additional findings included posterior embryotoxon and bilaJtAeGra1l conventional cytogenetic in the great majority of prenatal diagnosis cases. mild peripheraAl BpCuBlm4o naryC FaTrtRery stenosis. Butterfly vertebrae were not de- monstrated. No sequence or copy number variants were detected in .  S2
e0qu8encing of and revealed no pathogEenSiHc vGar i2an0t1.  S4
e q|u MenIcLinAgN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.019-S Deletion of 9q22.3-33.1 in a child with corpus callosum hypoplasia and thymus asymmetry The father‘s karyotype was normal 46,XY while the mother‘s karyotype was M. Czakó, B. Duga, K. Hadzsiev, K. M. Komlósi, P. Kisfali, G. Kosztolányi, B. Melegh; 46,XX,t(5;14)(p13;q22) identical with her son’s rearrangement. The per- University of Pécs, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary. formed array-CGH of the patient identified a heterozygous deletion in 5p12 chromosome with 489 kb size, including only one mapped gene: FGF10 (fibroblast growth factor 10) gene. Mutations in FGF10 gene may under- Interstitial deletion of chromosome 9q is reported in context of many types lie autosomal dominant conditions such as lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital of cancer but congenital cases are rarely published. The authors report on a (LADD) syndrome and aplasia of lacrimal and salivary glands (ALSG). The child presenting with multiplex congenital anomalies, muscle hypotonia and main features of lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD) syndrome are ab- characteristic facial features. Because ofd teh neo svyomptoms suggesting primarily normal tear production, malformed ears with hearing loss, decreased sali- chromosomal disease, high resolution array CGH was indicated among a se- va production, small teeth, and hand deformities. The haploinsufficiency of ries of examinations, which detected a 15,8 Mb interstitial deletion FGF10 gene caused by heterozygous loss of on gene copy may explain the of 9q (ch9:102,589,027-118,400,548x1). The genotype-phenotype analysis phenotype in our patient. This rare case of a cytogenetically balanced fami- made it clear that there are many symptoms in the clinical picture which are lial translocation causing abnormal phenotype demonstrates the diagnostic not included in the description of similar cases as heart anomalies (patent importance of genome analysis in patients with chromosomal rearrange- foramen ovale and vitium), brain malformation (corpus callosum hypopla- m  P1
e 1n .t 0s 2 d 2e -t Mected on routine karyotype. sia), and many minor anomalies. An excessive sweating and frequent falling Whole exome sequencing identifies a vertically transmitted novel asleep are alNsoR 4chAa3racterCiTstRic1s not reported at known 9q deletion patients. ACTB mutation in a mother-son pair presenting with atypical The analysisC oTfN tNheA Lp1o ssibleR AroDl2e3 of the genes affected by deletion drew our Baraitser-Winter syndrome attention to and which may be related to brain malformation. D. Dyment1, N. Leonard2, J. L. Marcadier1, J. Schwartzentruber3, FORGE Consortium, C. Two genes ( and ) involved iTnN DCNA repair and cell cycle re- Beaulieu1, D. E. Bulman1, J. Majewski3, K. Boycott1, O. Lehmann4, M. Innes5; gulation may have also impact on the growth retardation and dysmorphic 1Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2Department of Medical faciaMl UfeSaKtures observed in 9q deletion. The may be a candidate i nK LdFe4- Genetics, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 3McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation velopment of the heart defects, and in the background of muscle hypotonia, Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 5Alberta Children‘s Hospital Research Institute for Child and the gene may be significant. Probably the haploinsufficiency of Maternal Health, Calgary, AB, Canada. might be associated with excessive sweating being present in our patient. The authors provide a detailed clinical report, and the possible pathogenic role of individual genes involved in the deletion will also be discussed.  P11
.020-M Baraitser-Windtee nr osvyondrome is a rare, congenital AdCisToBrder AcChTaGra1cterized by Novel mutations in GNAI3 in patients with Auriculocondylar distinctive facial features, brain malformations and intellectual disability. It Syndrome suggest a dominant negative effect with disruption of GTP/ is caused by dominant mutations in the or genes. We GDP binding present the first case of a motAhCeTr-Bs on pair concordant for Baraitser-Winter V. Romanelli Tavares1, C. T. Gordon2, T. Torres3, N. Voisin2, D. Bertola1, R. Zechi-Ceide4, syndrome. Both had the facial gestalt of Baraitser-Winter syndrome and T. Y. Tan5, A. A. C. Heggie6, E. Propst7, B. C. Papsin7, N. M. Kokitsu-Nakata4, M. L. Guion- were found to carry a novel mutation by whole exome sequencing. Almeida4, S. Vendramini-Pittoli4, S. Lyonnet8, J. Amiel8, M. R. Passos-Bueno1; The mutation, c.593A>C (p. S199
R), occurs in a conserved amino acid and is 1Human Genome Center, Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2INSERM U1163, Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes– situated near a recurrent substitution (p.R196H) commonly seen in other Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut ImagineVictorian Clinical Genetics Services, Paris, France, cases of Baraitser-Winter syndrome. The observation of transmission from 3Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 4Department of parent to child broadens the clinical spectrum of Baraitser-Winter syndro- Clinical Genetics, Hospital of Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of me to include a relatively milder form that includes additional features such São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, 5Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Melbourne, as a severe, early onset glaucoma. Australia, 6Royal Children‘s Hospital, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 7Department of  P11
.023-S Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, A new compound heterozygous mutation in the BB S7
 gene in a Korean Canada, 8INSERM U1163, Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes– family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France. S. Lee1, S. Shin2, M. Kim3,4, A. Kwon4, H. Chae3,4, Y. Kim3,4; 1Laboratory Medicine, Incheon St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea,, Incheon, Korea, Republic of, 2Internal Medicine, Incheon St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Incheon, Korea, Republic of, 3Laboratory Medicine, The Catholic Auriculocondylar syndrome is a rare craniofacial disorder comprising core University of Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 4Catholic Genetic Laboratory Center, Seoul features of micrognathia, condyle dysplasia and question mark ear. Causa- St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. tive mutations have been identified in PLCB4, GNAI3 and EDN1, which are predicted to function within the EDN1-EDNRA pathway during early pha- ryngeal arch patterning. To date, two GNAI3 mutations in three families Background: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) (OMIM 209900) is a rare auto- have been reported. Here we report an Australian patient with ACS with somal recessive, pleiotropic ciliopathy. To date, at least fifteen genes causing a novel de novo GNAI3 mutation. We also present two other novel GNAI3 BBS have been reported. mutations, one segregating with affected members in a family previously Case: A 26-year-old Korean male from non-consanguineous Korean parents linked to 1p21.1-q23.3 and a de novo mutation in an unrelated simplex case. presented with rod-cone dystrophy, truncal obesity, mental retardation and The mutations occur in known functional motifs common to G proteins and end stage of renal disease. A 28-year old his brother showed rod-cone dys- RAS family members. Structural modeling shows that all five mutated GNAI3 trophy, truncal obesity, mental retardation and deep vein thrombosis. To residues cluster in a region involved in GDP/GTP binding. Two of the five re- rule out the BBS, geBnBoSm ic DNAs were obtained from the peripheral blood sidues lead to dominant negative proteins when mutated in related proteins. leukocytes of all the family membeBrBsS. 7All the exons and intron flanking re- We hypothesize that all GNAI3 mutations lead to dominant negative effects.  P11
.021-S gions of the fifteen genes were analyzed by direct sequencing. A com- A case of a microscopically balanced familial translocation t(5;14) pound heterozygous mutation of gene (NM_176824) was identified (p13;q22) and phenotype of lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD) in both brothers; onBeB w S7
as a novel acceptor splice site c.103-1G>A muta- syndrome tion (IV S2
-1G>A) altering the splicing recognition site at the intron 2 and I. Bradinova1, R. Vazharova2, S. Andonova1, A. Savov1; exon 3 boundary of gene. The other was a novel missense mutation 1National genetic laboratory UHOG „Maichin dom“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia University St. of c.728G>A changing codon 243 from cysteine to tyrosine. The father was Kliment Ohridski, Faculty of medicine, Sofia, Bulgaria. a heterozygous carrier for c.103-1G>A, and the mother was a heterozygous carrier for c.728G>A. Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis re- vealed a normal hybridization pattern with no evidence of significant chro- We report a 15 years old male patient with clinical presentation of MCA mosome imbalance. BBS 7 syndrome including facial dysmorphism with micrognatia and small dyspla- Conclusion: This is the first BBS case in Korean family genetically confirmed stic ears, absent lacrimal glands and limb anomalies (muscle hypotrophy that had a compound heterozygous mutation in gene. Considering and contractures of upper limbs, bilateral pes varus deformity). The boy’s that the BBS is genetically heterogeneous and the prevalence differs among intellectual and growth development was in normal age ranges. The child ethnic group, our clinical experience would be helpful to diagnose these pa- was born from a second pregnancy of young and healthy couple. The first tients accurately and understand the genetic events in BBS. pregnancy in the family ended with birth of a baby with diaphragmatic her- nia which died after three days. The performed cytogenetic analysis of the patient at one month revealed a microscopically balanced chromosomal translocation between chromosomes 5p aEndS H14Gq: 2460, 1XY4, t|( 5M;1I4L)A(pN13,; qIT2A2)L. Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 209ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.024-M Genotype-Phenotype correlation for BB S1
 gene in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome patients mative data (norms). S. Castro-Sánchez, M. Alvarez-Satta, D. Valverde; Results: Significant weaknesses (p<.001) in verbal andt hperceprtdual intellec- University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain. tual reasoning emergednd comrdpared to norms (mean= 8 and 3 percentiles respectively; ratnhge <th 2 -53 percentiles). More individuals displayed Ave- rage ability (25 -74 percentile) on verbal (33.3%) than visuanl d(15.4%) do- Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, #209900) is a rare genetic disorder characte- mains. More individuals displayed Extremely-Low ability (<2 percentile) rized by highly variable phenotype and genetic heterogeneityB. BBSB1S belongs on visual (53.9%) than verbal (11.1%) domains. Significant weaknesses in to a group of diseases known as ciliopathies, which show partial overlapping auditory attention span (p<.01), and auditory and visual working memo- phenotypes that further complicates the molecular diagnosis. gene ac- ry (p<.001) emerged. Informant ratings indicated significant patient chal- counts for 25% of total mutations described in BBS, of BwBhSich p.M390R is lenges, relative to norms, in depression (p=.004), withdrawal (p<.001), the most frequent mutation in European population. Many efforts have been atypical-behaviour (p=.029), social-communication (p=.001), unusual- done to establish a genotypBeB-Sp1henotype correlation for genes in order behaviours (p<.001), aspects of executive functions (p< .01), anndd adaptive to facilitate diagnosis confirmation. In this sense, thBeB So1bjective of this study independence (p<.001); most patients (81.3%) fell below tnhde 2th percentile was to correlate different mutations with some clinical features. We in functional independence; the remainder fell from the 2 -5 percentiles. selected 36 patients from 22 families for whom a mutation had been Verbal reasoning was correlated with independence (p=.001). identified. Clinical features of these patients were analysed by SPSS v.19. Conclusion: BBS impacts cognitive, behavioral, and adaptive functioning to p.M390R mutation was the predominant mutation identified in 33 patients various degrees. Assessment of these patients on a larger scale will allow (92%), 20 of them BhaBrSb1oured this mutation in homozygous state (56%) and f Pu 1r 1th .0e 2r 7d -e Sfinition of the neurocognitive phenotype. 13 were compound heterozygous (36%). Only 3 patients (8%) had two mu- Beckwith Wiedemann Syndrome in 9 Tunisian patients : From typical tated alleles with mutations different from p.M390R. By comparing sporadic presentation to unusual familial isolated adrenocortical all clinical features of these three groups of patients, we found statistically tumor significant differences between these groups: while homozygous p.M390R M. Haddaji Mastouri1, D. H’mida Ben Brahim1, N. Sonia2, F. Chioukh3, S. Hamami4, S. showed more frequently high blood pressure, compound heterozygous Trabelsi1, M. Chourabi1, S. Sassi1, S. Mougou1, M. Gribaa1, A. Zakhama5, M. T. Yacoubi6, N. manifested more secondary features, especially psychomotor impairment/ Gueddiche4, H. Seboui2, K. Monastiri3, A. Saad1; retardation, hearing loss and worse visual defects. In conclusion, we con- 1Department of cytogenetics and reproductive biology Farhat Hached university firm the important role of p.M390R mutation in the diagnosis of BBS, and hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of neonatology Farhat Hached university hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of neonatology Fattouma Bourguiba university it seems that homozygous patients have a milder phenotype. This will be hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 4Department of pediatrics, Fattouma Bourguiba university important for genetic counselling purposes in these families.  P11
.025-S hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 5Department of cytopathology Fattouma Bourguiba Potential impact on splicing of BB S12
 variations found in Bardet-Biedl university hospital, Monastir, Tunisia, 6Department of cytopathology Farhat Hached syndrome Spanish patients university hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. M. Alvarez-Satta, S. Castro-Sánchez, D. Valverde; University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a pediatric overgrowth disorder expressed through a highly variable clinical presentation involving a predis- Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, #209900) is a multisystem rare disease which position to tumor development, exomphalos, macroglossia, and gigantism. belongs to the emerging group of diseases called ciliopathies, and is inheri- In addition to this clinical heterogeneity, BWS also exhibits etiologic mole- ted within an autosomal recessive pattern. However, little is known about cular heterogeneity involving a variety of genetic and/or epigenetic alterati- other molecular mechanisms which may be involved in BBS development. ons in growth regulatory genes on chromosome 11p15. The clinical hetero- For example, it is well established that synonymous (sSNPs) and non- geneity turns out to be insufficient in diagnosis and prognosis of BWS, thus synonymous (nsSNPs) changes can affect the conformation and stability the need of genetic analysis of 11p15 region. of mRNA, the splicing process, the accuracy of translation and the protein We conducted a study of 9 patients who underwent molecular analysis of structure. The former would lead to the disruption of the highly conserved chromosome 11p15 region. Reasons of referral vary from sporadic typical network of cellular pathways for maintaining proteostasis. In addition, tho- presentation encompassing abdominal wall defects, macroglossia and gi- se exonic mutations predicted as pathogenic could affect splicing process gantism to atypical mild familial BWS revealed by isolated benign adreno- via the creation and/or elimination of Exonic Splicing Enhancer/Silencer cortical tumor. Molecular analysis using methylation specific multiplex liga- seqBuBeSn1c2e s (ESEs/ESSs). tion-dependent probe amplification revealed different methylation patterns In this regard, we have sequenced the coding region and intron boundaries along the BWS critical region. of gene in fifty BBS patients. Then, we have used specific software 6 patients showed complete KvDMR hypomethylation, one paternal unipa- tools to predict the potential effect at protein level (PolyPhen, PMut and rental disomy at 11p15 case with both H19DMR hypermethylation/ KvDMR SIFT) or on the splicing process (NetGene2, NNsplice, SpliceView, Human hypomethylation confirmed by STR analysis, one patient ; the youngest; Splicing Finder and Rescue ESE) of all variants identified. with mosaic paternal isodisomie and one patient; the eldest; with KvDMR We have found two pathogenic mutations in six patients and found at least methylation mosaic pattern. This mosaicism was associated in adrenocor- one sequence variation in twenty-nine of them. Eight out of twenty changes tical tumoral tissue to a complete KvDMR loss of methylation, however skin were selected as putative to affect the splicing process since at least two tissue analysis showed a normal methylation profile. software tools predicted this effect. These results have allowed us to offer our patients adapted management As these results are only computational predictions, further functional stu- and genetic counseling. BWS illustrates the complexity of the mechanisms dies will have to confirm this effect on mRNA processing. Thus, minigenes involved and the need for collaboration between geneticists, pediatricians, and RNA assays will be performed in order to elucidate the role of these n Pe 1o 1n .0a 2to 8lo -Mgists and pediatric surgeons. c Ph 1a 1n .0ge 2s 6. -M A novel IGF2/H19 domain triplication in the 11p15.5 imprinting Cognitive, behavioural, and adaptive functioning of patients affected region - new insights into the pathogenesis of Beckwith-Wiedemann with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) and Silver-Russell syndromes E. N. Kerr, A. Bhan, E. Heon; D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Kugaudo1,2, R. Śmigiel3,4, E. Ciara1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. Pelc1, J. Trubicka1, S. Łuczak1, P. Kowalski1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Bardet-Biedl syndrome is a rare genetically heterogeneous multisystem dis- Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics and Rare Disorders, Wroclaw Medical University, order characterized by retinal degeneration, genital and kidney malforma- Wroclaw, Poland, 4Genetic Counseling Unit, Foundation of Wroclaw Medical University, tion/function, and other features. Variability in cognitive, social, and emo- Wroclaw, Poland. tional impairment is reported; however, studies were small and completed IGF2/H19 KCN- prior to availability of molecular characterization. Our aim is to define neu- Q1OT1/CDKN1C ropsychological function in a group of patients with molecular diagnosis of The imprinted 11p15.5 region contains two domains( and BBS to better understand phenotypic variability. ), each of them under control of its own imprinting control Methods: Eighteen patients (12 females; mean age: 20.95 years; range 6.4- region. Defects of 11p15 imprinting result in two growth disorders with op- 38 years) completed standardized measures of cognition. Magnification was posite phenotypes: Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) and Silver-Russell (SRS) available. Standardized informant-proxy questionnaires were completed to syndromes. Various 11p15.5 genetic and epigenetic aberrations have been a2s1se0ss behavioural and adaptive functioning. ResultE s S wH erG e c 2 om0 p1 a4 re | d M to I nL oA r-N, rIT evA eaL lY ed | , aW mW ongW th.E emSH mG icr.O odR upG lications and microdeletions.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index IGF2/H19 We report a novel domain triplication in the 11p15.5 region iden- inherited missense change in KCNJ8 (NM_004982.3:c.34T>C (p.Tyr12His) tified in a girl with BWS and her father with symptomIsG oFf2 S/RH S1
.9 Methylation was identified. In silico prediction and segregation (4 affected, 1 unaffected) specific multiplex ligation-depenHd1e9nt probe amplification (MS-MLPA) per- indicated the mutation is most likely pathogenic. The phenotype in the fami- formed in the patient’s DNA revealed triplication of H19 domain as ly is indistinguishable from typical Cantu syndrome caused by mutation in well as increased methylation of region. The same genetic change in the ABC C9
, although fetal demise was never reported before. Mutation in KCNJ8 father’s DNA was associaIGteFd2 /wHi1th9 reduced methylation of region. The in families with Cantu syndrome may represent increased risk for sudden presence of triplication was confirImGFe2d/ bHy1 a9CGH. d Pe 1a 1t .h 0. 31-S This is the first report of domain triplication associated with BWS De novo mutations associated with sporadic cases of Caudal regresion or SRS. A few BWS patients with domain duplication of paternal syndrome copy have been described so far. Duplications of maternal copy of this do- R. M. Porsch1, E. Merello2, P. De Marco2, M. So3, P. Sham1, P. Tam3, S. S. Cherny1, V. Capra2, main have been reported in three individuals and were not associated with M. Garcia-Barcelo3, D. Campbell1; an abnormal phenotype (i.e. Silver-Russell syndrome). The clinical outcome 1Department of Psychiatry of the Li Ka Sing Faculty of Medicine, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, of 11p15.5 copy number variations depends on their size, localization and 2U.O. Neurochirurgia, Ist. G.Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 3Department of Surgery of the Li Ka Sing the parental inheritance. These aberrations may influence chromatin orga- Faculty of Medicine, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. nization affecting the regulation of imprinted genes. Our findings bring new insights into the regulation of genomic imprinting at 11p5.5 region and un- derline difficulties of genetic counseling in patients with 11p15 defects. Aim: The identification of de novo disease causing mutations in three Cauca- The study was financed by National Science Centre, project 1149/B/ sian patients with sporadic Caudal Regression Syndrome (CRS). CRS is a rare  P01
/2011/40 (NN407114940) and EU Structural Funds, POIG.02.01.00-14 and diverse congenital disorder which is characterised by different degrees -059/09. of agenesis of the caudal spine. Known genetic mutations are only able to  P11
.029-S explain a fraction of cases and are not accounting for sporadic occurrences Uniparental disomy in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome: new insights or the diversity of the disorder. Methods: Exome sequencing assay was con- from genotype-phenotype correlations ducted of the three sporadic cases and their biological parents. We targe- F. Cerrato1, A. Freschi1, A. De Crescenzo1, A. Sparago2, P. Palumbo3, O. Palumbo3, M. Carella3, A. Riccio1,2; ted rare genetic variants as the underlying cause of CRS as well as de novo 1DISTABIF, Second University of Napoli, Caserta, Italy, 2Istituto di Genetica e Biofisica mutations. Further we investigated de novo indels, copy number variations „Adriano Buzzati Traverso“ – CNR, Napoli, Italy, 33IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, (CNV) and compound heterozygosity. Identified mutations were ranked and Unità di Genetica Medica, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. filtered based on genomic, genetic and statistical features. Results: Sanger sequencing confirmed two different de novo mutations in two cases (de- tailed results will be presented). In addition, our analysis revealed several Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is the most common overgrowth potentially causal compound heterozygous mutations which are also un- syndrome, with a prevalence of about 1:10,000 live birth. Clinical findings der investigation. Conclusion: CRS may be caused by de novo or compound include macrosomia, macroglossia, abdominal wall defects and other less heterozy mutations thus, i) the diversity of the disorder is mirrored in the frequent features, the most severe of which is predisposition to embryonal underlying genetic architecture and its mutations; ii) ranking of compound tumors. heterozygous mutations enables identification of candidate genes.  P11
.032-M The molecular etiology of BWS is complex, involving alterations in the ex- A de novo microdeletion of chromosome 18q11.2q12.2 causes a new pression of multiple imprinted growth regulatory genes on chromosome distinct clinical phenotype with coarctation of aorta and intellectual 11p15.5. Genes that are imprinted are expressed predominantly from one disability. allele in a parent of origin-specific manner. Epigenetic and/or genetic al- M. C. Cutrupi1, I. Loddo1, M. G. Giuffrida2, L. Bernardini2, E. Moschella1, C. Pidone1, M. R. terations in the 11p15.5 imprinted gene cluster have been associated with Pizzino1, M. Crapanzano1, A. Novelli2, S. Briuglia1; BWS in approximately 80% of patients. One of the major categories of BWS 1Dipartiment of Paediatric Science, Messina, Italy, 2CSS-Mendel Institute, Roma, Italy. molecular alteration (20% of cases) is represented by mosaic paternal uniparental disomy (pUPD), namely patients with two paternally derived copies of chromosome 11p15 and no maternal contribution. pUPD is also Cardiac abnomalities are diagnosed in 25-30% of the patients with 18q syn- the molecular alteration associated with the most severe BWS phenotype drome and the most common heart abnormalities are reported in patients because of the highest tumor risk. with terminal 18q deletion (18q22): atrial septal defect, ventricular septal Here we report a fine analysis of patients with BWS and pUPD from our co- defect, polmonary valve anomalies and total anomalous polmonary venus hort. By SNP array and microsatellite analysis we could distinguish three dif- return. We report on one girl with coarctation of the aorta, moderate deve- ferent categories of pUPD: whole genome, whole chromosome 11 and chro- lopment delay, behavioral problems, with an interstitial de novo deletion mosome 11short arm.The three UPD subgroups show differences in some within chromosomal band 18q11.2 of 13.4Mb. The propositus was born at clinical features (hemihyperplasia, hypoglycemia, umbilical hernia, hepato/ 37 weeks via caesarian section after a pregnancy complicated by gestosis. splenomegalia) and similarities in others (macrosomia, polyhydramnios). Her birth weight was 2400g (<10th centile), birth length was 45cm (3-10th Our results highlight the importance of a fine molecular analysis of the UPD centile) and occipital frontal circumference (OFC) 34 cm (5thcentile). Fami- cases for a more accurate prognostic prediction to facilitate management ly history revealed no abnormalities or congenital heart diseases. At the age a Pn 1d 1 .s 0u 3r 0ve -Millance of patients. of one month, cardiac echo revealed tight istmic coarctation of the aorta and KCNJ8 mutation in a spanish family with Cantú syndrome including a the patient underwent surgery. Clinical evaluation showed a distinctive cra- case of fetal demise niofacial apparence characterized by brachicephaly, plagiocephaly, telecan- M. Del Campo1,2, P. Fernández Álvarez1, A. Sánchez3, E. García Arumí1,2; thus, strabismus, low nasal bridge, smooth philtrum, thin lips, high arched 1Genetics Dept, Hospital Vall D´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Research Network for Rare palate, low set ears with hypoplastic lobule, proximally placed thumbs. The Disorders (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3Genetics Dept, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. development milestones were delayed and the propositus developed beha- vioral problems: poor concentration, hyperactivity and distractibility. CGH analysis showed an interstitial proximal microdeletion of chromosome 18 Cantú syndrome, (MIM 239850) is an autosomal dominant disorder causing of 13,4Mb [arr 18q11.2(22,032,122-35,430,900)x1]. In this region some ge- severe hypertrichosis, congenital and progressive coarseness of the facial nes are present that are involved in development of the heart, DS C2
 ,DSG2, features, thick skin with deep palmar and plantar creases, cardiomypathy TTR, DTNA, FHOD3. This is the first report of aortic coarctation mapping to a and lymphedema. Polyhydramnios and macrosomia can be present in the proximal microdeletion involving the chromosome 18q11.2q12.2 segment. affected fetus. ABC C9
, a multimeric subunit of a ATP sensitive potassium The report also expands the spectrum of clinical phenotype associated with channel K(ATP) has been the causal gene in most cases, but not all. A second 18q11.2q12.2 deletion.  P11
.033-S gene KCNJ8, also a subunit of the same K(ATP) channel, was proposed to A further case of pure 15q deletion: Clinical and molecular be causal after a de novo mutation (p.V65M) was found in a sporadic case cytogenetic findings with unusual cardiovascular findings. Another mutation in KCNJ8 (p. S422
L) A. Ece Solmaz1, B. Durmaz1, M. De Braekeleer2, Ö. Çoğulu1, F. Özkınay1; has been reported in at least 9 individuals with Brugada sudden death syn- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, drome. A 30 week old fetus was followed due to macrosomia and polyhy- İzmir, Turkey, 2Departments of Cytology, Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology, CHRU dramnios, unexplained fetal demise occurred at 34 weeks. Evaluation of the Brest, Brest, France, Brest, France. family identified the fetus, the father, the paternal grandmother and the aunt of the fetus had clinical features of Cantú syndrome. No cardiomyopathy or other potential causes for the fetal demiseE wSeHreG id 2en0t1ifi4ed |. MSeqILueAnNcin, gI TaAndL Y |A W deWletWion.E oSf HthGe .dOisRtaGl long arm of chromosome 15 is generally rep 2or 1te 1d MLPA for ABC C9
 did not detect any pathogenic changes. Subsequently, an with the formation of ring chromosome 15, whereas an isolated 15q deleti-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.036-M Haploinsufficiency of MEI S2
 is associated with orofacial clefting and on is rarely described. Here we report an 11 year-old girl, from non-consan- learning disability guineous parents, was referred to the Pediatric Genetics Department with G. Houge1, S. Berland1, G. A. Gradek1, E. Bongers2, N. de Leeuw2, M. Fannemel3, O. growth retardation and multiple congenital abnormalities. In her medical Rødningen3, R. Pfundt2, A. Brendehaug1, B. Haukanes1, R. Hovland1, S. Johansson1; history, she was born at-term after an uncomplicated pregnancy. Her birth 1Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Radboud University Medical Centre, weight was 2200 g. She had a cleft palate, hip dislocation and crossed re- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. nal ectopia. On physical exardmination, her weight, height and head circum- ference were below the 3 percentile. Dysmorphological evaluation re- vealed a triangular face, low-set ears, fissured cleft tongue, micrognathia, MEI S2
 is a homeodomain-containing transcription factor of the TALE su- proximally placed hypoplasic thumbs, genu valgus, 2-3 toe skin syndactyly, perfamily that has been proven important for development. We confirm and clinodactyly and nail hypoplasia. Speech problems were also noticed. The extend a recent single case report stating that deletions in MEI S2
 can cause complete blood count, basic biochemical parameters and dheo rnmovoones profi- cleft palate (Crowley et al, Am J Med Genet 2010, 152A:1326-7). Here we re- le were within the normal range. The karyotype was normal. Subtelomeric port five additional cases with 15q14 deletions of sizes 0.6, 0.6, 1.0, 1.9 and fluorescene in-situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis showed a terminal 4.8 Mb, respectively, all involving MEI S2
. In addition, we present a family deletion of chromosome 15. BAC FISH anCaHlySsYis1 of the patient indicated that with four affected individuals and an intragenic 58 kb direct duplication dis- the deletion breakpoint was at 15q26.3 and the deletion comprised 700- rupting MEI S2
. In total, 7/9 cases had clefting, from mild (submucous cleft 870 kb. The deleted region includes the gene that is responsible for palate) to severe (cleft lip and palate), and 3/9 cases had ventricular septal Temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome which shares clinical features defects. All cases had delayed motor development and most had learning with 15qter deletion syndrome. To the best of our knowledge, this deletion disability, at worst in the mild intellectual disability range. Our results show is the smallest among reported cases. It is considered that the case presen- that MEI S2
 clearly is a gene needed for palate closure. In syndromic cases of ted here significant contribution to phenotype-genotype correlation in 15q cleft palate, MEI S2
 should be considered among the candidate genes, e.g. in d Pe 1l 1e .t 0io 3n 4 p -Matients. c Pa 1s 1e .s 0 w 37it -h Sout 22q11.2 deletions. Association between HLA-G and non-syndromic Oral Cleft Familial Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome: Follow up F. Conte1, R. Brusati2, G. Garattini2, O. Calabrese3, A. Franchella4, M. Rubini1; M. A. Aceves-Aceves1, I. M. Salazar-Dávalos1, M. G. González-Mercado2,3, R. E. Jiménez- 1University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Smile House, Hosp. San Paolo, Milano, Italy, 3AOU Arredondo2,3, S. A. Alonso-Barragán2,3, M. Salazar-Páramo4,5, N. O. Dávalos-Rodríguez2, D. Imola, Imola, Italy, 4AOU Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. García-Cruz2, C. Roa6, I. P. Dávalos-Rodríguez2,3; 1Instituto de Genética Humana, DGH, Facultad de Medicina, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 2Doctorado Genética Humana, IGH, CUCS, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica Non-syndromic oral clefts (nsOCs) affect 1 per 1,000 live births worldwide. de Occidente, IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico, 4Depto. Fisiología, CUCS, Universidad de There is some evidence suggesting that embryo-maternal interaction can Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Mexico, 5Div. Investigación, UMAE, HE, CMNO, IMSS, play a relevant role in the etiology of nsOCs. HLA-G has a protective function Guadalajara, Mexico, 6UMAE, Hospital de Pediatría, CMNO, IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico. at the maternal-embryo interface, protecting the embryo from destruction Introduction: by mother’s immune system. In this study we investigated the association between a functional variant in Beckwith- Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS)(OMIM 130650) is a HLAG gene and the risk of nsOCs. A 14 nt insertion in the 3’UTR of HLAG was genetic disorder, caused by mutation or deletion of imprinted genes within genotyped in a group of 222 Italian nsOC trios, including affected children the chromosome 11p15.5 region; with a prevalence of 1 in O1b3,j7e0c0ti vbei:rths and their parents. and characterized by overgrowth, macrCoagsloes Rsieap, oorrgt:anomegaly, exompha- The analysis of transmission disequilibrium resulted in no evidence of asso- los and predisposition to embryonal tumor development. To ciation in nsCL/P (p=0.16) nor in nsCP trios (p=1.00). However, when con- present a BWS familial case follow up. Family data: Mother sidering the length of pregnancy, a significant overtransmission of the inser- with 4 pregnancies, she presents ear pits. Case 1: 9 years 7 months female, tion was observed in the trios with pregnancy length >38 weeks (p=0.005). product of the 2nd pregnancy term, obtained by caesarian section from non- In trios with affected children born after 38 weeks or less, the transmission consanguineous parents, with 28 years (he) and 29 years (she) at birth time. of minor allele was reverse (p=0.031), so that in the effect of the asymme- Apgar 9-10, weight and height >pc97, macroglossia, depressed nasal bridge, tric segregation was canceled when the two groups were pooled. In children posterior helical ear pits and exomphalos surgically corrected, presented born after more than 38 weeks of pregnancy the ins/ins genotype resulted neonatal hypoglycemia. At first year of age presented overgrowth, renal ul- specifically associated with a three-fold increased risk of the more severe trasonography reported right pyelic duplication. At 3 years was performed phenotype (cleft lip and palate, CLP) (p<0.0001). transversal and anteroposterior reduction glossectomy. At 8 years hemihy- This results suggests the existence of a link between HLA-G genotype, length pertrophy was detected. At present she has no complications. Case 2: 3 years of pregnancy and chance of developing CLP. We hypothesize that HLA-G 9 months female, product of the 4th pregnancy, obtained by cesarian section could be involved in prenatal loss of abnormal embryos (teratothanasia) at 30 weeks, weight at birth 2500g. Physical examination: weight and height a Pn 1d 1 .d 0r 3iv 5e - Sselection against those which fail to fuse lip and palate. > pct 97, posterior helical ear pits, macroCgolnocslsuias,i ounm:bilical hernia; has not Association between chromosome 8q24.21 and susceptibility for required surgical procedure. Renal ultrasonography without abnormalities. nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate in Iraqi population Actually with weight and height > pct 97. Clinical findings meet F. Mattioli1, F. Abenavoli2, A. Franchella3, F. Pacelli2, C. Baluardo1, V. Aiello1, G. Astolfi1, D. criteria diagnosis for BWS. In case 1 treatment consisted of surgical reduc- Balestra1, F. Conte1, A. Edris1, E. Bonomo Roversi1, P. Franceschelli1, M. Rubini1; tion of exomphalos and anterior-transversal reduction glossectomy and 1University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Emergenza Sorrisi ONG, Roma, Italy, 3Pediatric case 2 not required surgical intervention. The opportune diagnosis allows a Surgery Unit, S. Anna Hospital, Ferrara, Italy. complete treatment, genetic counselling and appropriate follow up.  P11
.038-M Detection of PIK3CA somatic mutations in CLOVES syndrome S. Boppudi1, I. Wieland1, D. Emmrich2, M. Kolanczyk2, M. Zenker1, S. Tinschert2,3,4; Cleft lip without or without cleft palate (CL/P) are the most common cra- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, niofacial congenital malformations. Most of CL/P cases are non-syndromic 2Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-University Medicine, Berlin, (nsCL/P), with a multifactorial etiology. Recent genome-wide association Germany, 3Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, studies (GWAS) have identified susceptibility loci for nsCL/P, among which 4Institute of Clinical Genetics TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. one of the most relevant is located in 8q24.21. In particular, the polymor- phism rs987525 has been shown to be highly associated with nsCL/P in population of European origin, while yielding only marginal significance in CLOVES syndrome (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malforma- Oriental populations. tions, epidermal nevi, and skeletal abnormalities (MIM 612918) is a non- We present the result of case-control study of a sample of Iraqi populati- hereditary regional overgrowth disorder distinct from Proteus syndrome. on from Nasiryiah: 418 affected children, and 273 unaffected controls. The Gain-of-function mutations in PIK3CA have been identified in affected tissu- rs987525 C>A variant was genotyped using TaqMan assay. The frequency of es demonstrating somatic mosaicism of varying degrees. Activating PIK3CA minor allele (A) resulted significantly higher among cases compared to con- somatic mutations have also been shown in further regional overgrowth trols. Odd Ratio (OR) for carriers of heterozygous (C/A) genotype was 1.69 conditions predominantly affecting the limbs like in isolated macrodactyly (95% C.I. 1.24-2.31), while OR for homozygotes (A/A) was 1.95 (95% C.I. and fibrolipomatous gigantism. In the current study, hot spot mutations of 1.16-3.29). In the studied Iraqi sample the rs987525 variant acts in a dose PIK3CA were identified in six patients presenting with CLOVES syndrome. dependent fashion, in agreement to what resulted from association studies Analysed tissues included epidermal nevi, skin, fatty tissues, and connective in population of European origin, suggesting that 8q24.21 locus confers risk tissue. Blood was available from five patients. Molecular analysis was per- f2or1 n2sCL/P also in Middle-East population. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, fIoTrAmLeYd f|o Wr alWl siWx p.EatSieHntGs .bOy RSaGnger sequencing. Mutant allele ratios of 30-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index VP S13
B 50% were observed in scrapings from epidermal nevi or affected fatty tis- from CS patients. RNA interference against confirmed these glyco- sue samples. In none of the blood samples PIK3CA mutations were detected. sylation defects. Experiments with Brefeldin A demonstrated that intracel- Because detection levels and quantification of mutant alleles were limited lular retrograde cell trafficking was normal in CS fibroblasts. Furthermore, to 10-15% by Sanger sequencing, fragment analysis and amplicon-deep se- early endosomes were almost absent in these cells and lysosomes were quencing on a GS Junior platform (Roche) were applied. This increased the abnormally enlarged, suggesting a crucial role of VP S13
B in endosomal- mutant allele detection to 1-5%. In blood samples mutant allele ratios were lysosomal trafficking. Our work provides evidence that CS is associated to a 2% or less. Our data confirm that cells from affected tissue are essential for tissue-specific major defect of glycosylation and endosomal-lysosomal traf- mutation analysis in CLOVES syndrome whereas blood is an inappropriate ficking defect, suggesting that this could be a new key element to decipher source. Improved detection methods may be required for other tissues with the mechanisms of CS physiopathology.  P11
.041-S low level somatic mosaicism.  P11
.039-S A Novel Frameshift mutation in the PIEZO2 gene in a Turkish Endocrinological study in a new case of Coffin Siris syndrome due to pediatric patient with Distal Arthrogryposis 5A ARID1B gene deletion S. G. Temel1,2, E. Evke1, M. J. McMillin3, M. J. Bamshad4; E. Lapi1, S. Stagi2, M. Pantaleo1, S. Romano1, S. Bargiacchi3, S. R. Giglio1,3; 1University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology & Embryology, 1Medical Genetic Unit, Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Department of Health BURSA, Turkey, 2Near East University, Faculty of Medicine,Histology & Embryology Sciences, Paediatric Endocrinolgy Unit , University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 3Medical Department, Lefkosia-North Cyprus, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Genetic Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences, University Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Department of Genome Sciences, University of of Florence, Florence, Italy. Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. Coffin Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare congenital anomaly syndrome The distal arthrogryposis (DA) are characterized by congenital contractu- (MIM135900), characterized by developmental delay with severe speech res of two or more different body areas without a main neurological and/ impairment, growth deficiency , coarse facial features, hypertrichosis, hy- or muscle disease. Currently, DAs are subdivided into 10 types, depending poplastic/absent fifth fingernails or toenails. Some CSS patients have mild on the number and nature of additional features. DA5 is unique among microcephaly and hypoplasia/agenesis of the corpus callosum. DAs because, in addition to contractures, affected individuals have ocular In 2012 Santen et al. showed that haploinsufficieny of ARID1B gene cau- abnormalities. These abnormalities include ptosis, ophtalmoplegia, and/or ses CSS and Tsurusaki et al. demonstrated that CSS can be due to de novo strabismus. Recently, it has been shown that a subtype of DA5 that includes germline heterozygous mutations in one of five SWI/SNF subunit genes restrictive pulmonary disease is caused by gain-of-function mutations in the SMARCB1,SMARCA4, SMARC E1
, ARID1A and ARID1B. mechanically activated cation channel PIEZO2. We report 14 years old boy We describe a girl of four years of age, first daughter of healthy unrelated with DA5 who initially presented with multiple contractures at the age of parents. She was born by caesarean section for IUGR, at 39 wks of preg- 2 months. The main clinical findings included pitosis, ophtalmoplegia, mi- nancy. Out first examination at the age of 18 months showed psycho-motor crognathia, clinodactyly, pectus excavatum, recurrant pulmonary infections, delay with absent language. Her weight, length and OFC were between 25th operated inguinal hernia/midpenil hypospadias, elbow extansion/bilatera- and 50th centile for age, but her facial and extremities features were sugge- ly wrist supination restriction, knees lightly in flexion moode and pes val- stive of CSS. She had marked body hypertrichosis and moderate, non fami- gus. Sequencing of the PIEZO2 gene in the proband revealed a de novo one lial, joint laxity, usually not described in CSS phenotype. base-pair deletion in Exon 52 of PIEZO2, which results in a frameshift muta- Array-CGH analysis revealed a de novo 1,3 Mb interstitial deletion in 6q25.3, tion (c.8208delA). The mutation leads to a p.Y2737Ifs*7 change within the C including ARID1B gene, terminal domain of PIEZO2. Recently electrophysiologic studies of  E2727
del Because few hormonal data in CSS have been reported so far, we performed variant showed that mechanically activated current inactivation were clearl- an extensive endocrinological study. Biochemical measurements showed ly slower and  E2727
del channels spend about two fold less time in an inacti- normal values of electrolytes, venous blood gas, creatinine, glucose, fT4,TSH, vated state following mechanical stimulation than in wild channels, thus can aldosterone, renin activity,1-OH progesterone, DHEAS, cortisol, ACTH and be reactivated quicker. Therefore because our pathologic variant is at the normal slow response of cortisol and 17-OH progesterone to ACTH test. same domain as  E2727
del, it can be speculated that increased response to These results suggest that pituitary-adrenal axis anomalies are not respon- m  P1
e 1ch .0a 4n 2ic -a Ml force may explain the phenotype of our patient also. s Pi 1b 1le . 0fo 4r 0 h -Mypertrichosis in CSS. The contribution of discrepant DNA variations in discordant Cohen syndrome is associated with major glycosylation defects monozygotic twins with Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH) or L. Duplomb1,2, S. Duvet3, D. Picot1, G. Jego4, S. El Chehadeh-Djebbar1,2, N. Marle1,2, Esophageal Atresia/ Tracheoesophageal Fistula (EA/TEF). N. Gigot1,2, B. Aral1,2, V. Carmignac1, J. Thevenon1,2, E. Lopez1, J. Rivière1,2, A. Klein5, C. E. Brosens1, R. W. W. Brouwer2, D. C. M. Veenma1, B. Eussen3, T. Brands3, R. M. H. Wijnen4, Philippe6, N. Droin7, E. Blair8, F. Girodon9, J. Donadieu10, C. Bellanné-Chantelot11, L. Delva4, D. Tibboel4, W. F. J. van Ijcken2, A. de Klein3; J. Michalski12, E. Solary7, L. Faivre1,2, F. Foulquier3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2; 1Clinical Genetics & Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia Children’s 1GAD, Dijon, France, 2FHU TRANSLAD, Département de Génétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Centre for Biomics, Department of Cell biology, France, 3Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, UMR/CNRS 8576, IFR147, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Villeneuve d’Ascq, France, 4Université de Bourgogne, Inserm UMR 866, Dijon, France, Centre – Sophia Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Pediatric Surgery, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, UAM de glycopathologies, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Centre de, Lille, France, 6Département de Génétique, CHU Nancy, Nancy, France, 7Institut Gustave Roussy, Inserm UMR1009, Villejuif, France, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Laboratoire Congenital Hernia of the Diaphragm (CDH) and Esophageal Atresia with/ d’Hématologie, Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 10French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry, Hôpital Trousseau,, Dijon, France, 11Département de or without Trachea-esophageal Fistula (EA/TEF) are congenital anomalies Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, Université Paris VI Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, that can either be present as isolated anomaly or in association with other France, 12Université des Sciences et Technologies de Lille, UMR/CNRS 8576, IFR147, birth defects. Both anomalies likely have a multifactor etiology, are asso- Villeneuve d‘Ascq, France. ciated with known (genetic) syndromes and can occur in combination with specific chromosomal aberrations, Copy Number Variations (CNV) or mu- VP S13
B tations. When evaluating the genetic component of a disease twin studies Cohen syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with multisy- help to elucidate potential causal or predisposing genetic facdtoer nso. vMoonozy- temic clinical features due to mutations in the gene, which has re- gotic (MZ) twins are believed to have the same genetic content and share the cently been described encoding a mandatory membrane protein involved same environment during development. We hypothesize that muta- in Golgi integrity. As the Golgi complex is the place where glycosylation of tions arisen early in embryonic development could explain the phenotypi- newly synthesized proteins occurs, we hypothesized that VP S13
B defici- cal differences in discordant MZ twins. In total of six EA/TEF and four CDH ency, responsible of Golgi apparatus disturbance, could lead to glycosyla- discordant MZ twins are characterized with SNP-arrays and exome-NGS in tion defects and/or mysfunction of this organelle, and thus be a cause of order to detect, complete or mosaic, DNA discrepancies. We could not detect the main clinical manifestations of CS. The glycosylation status of CS serum any CNV (mosaicism) differences in these twins. Both SNP-array genotyping proteins showed a very unusual pattern of glycosylation characterized by a and exome-NGS variant calling with the Genome Analysis ToolKit revealed significant accumulation of agalactosylated fucosylated structures as well numerous discrepant SNPs and InDels. Visual inspection of hundreds events as asialylated fucosylated structures demonstrating a major defect of glycan with Illumina’s Genomestudio and the Broad institute’s IGV indicated that maturation in CS. However, CS transferrin and α1-AT profiles, two liver de- most discrepancies were actually false positive differences due to techni- rived proteins, were normal. We also showed that ICAM-1 and LAMP-2, two cal limitations, analysis settings (thresholding) or limitations of the variant highly glycosylated cellular proteins, presented an altered migration profile calling. Therefore, we compared different exome capturing and alignment on SDS-polyacrylamide gels in peripheral bEloSoHd Gm o2n0on1u4cl e| aMr cIeLllAs (NPB, MITCAs)L Y |t eWchWniqWue.sE iSnH adGdi.tOioRn Gto various variant callers, statistics and analysis2 s1tr3a-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Netherlands, 9Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Pediatric Urology Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Department of Pediatric Surgery, Campus tegies to determine if we could distinguish false positive differences from Virchow Clinic, Berlin, Germany, 12Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical actual ones. Currently, we are evaluating with whether these remaining dis- Pharmacology, Bonn, Germany, 13Department of Neonatology, Bonn, Germany. crepancies are true differences.  P11
.043-S Associated noncardiac congenital anomalies among infants with The clinical presentation of the bladder-exstrophy-epispadias complex congenital heart defects (BEEC) ranges from epispadias (E) and classical bladder exstrophy (CBE), C. Stoll, Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. Roth; to the most severe form, cloacal exstrophy (CE), often referred to as the OEIS Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. complex. The birth prevalence for the complete spectrum has been reported to be 1 in 10,000 live births, with a male-to-female ratio of 2.4:1. Although the etiology for the majority of cases remains elusive, there are several lines BACKGROUND: Although the majority of congenital heart defects (CHD) of evidence, that de novo copy number variations (CNVs) represent a major occur in isolation, a significant number varying in previous reports from 6 genetic contributor. to 66% occur with noncardiac anomalies. The purpose of this investigation Here we array-based molecular karyotyping in a large cohort of 174 BEEC was to assess the prevalence and the types of associated anomalies in in- patients, aiming to identify disease related de novo CNVs. For array-based fants with CHD in a defined population. METHODS: The associated anoma- molecular karyotyping we used the Illumina HumanOmniExpress-12v1.1 lies in CHD were collected during 26 years in 346,831 consecutive births of bead-chip, comprising a total number of 719,665 markers. All genotype known outcome. RESULTS: Of the 4005 infants with CHD (116 per 10,000), data were analyzed by QuantiSNP using an Objective-Bayes Hidden-Markov 1055(26.3 %) had associated anomalies. There were 354 (8.8%) patients model. To narrow down the computed number of 13,828 putative CNVs, we with chromosomal abnormalities including 253 trisomies 21, and 99 (2.5%) used different filter criteria and implemented various procedures for data nonchromosomal recognized dysmorphic conditions. There were no predo- analysis. minant recognised dysmorphic conditions, but VA(C)TER(L) association. In total, 17 putative disease related CNVs ranging from 2,52 kb to 6,08 Mb However, other recognised dysmorphic conditions were registered inclu- in size, including one duplication in the Cat eye syndrome relevant region ding Di George and Noonan syndromes. 15.0 % of the patients had multiple (22pter-22q11.21) remained. Validation of the CNVs and testing for their de congenital anomalies, non syndromic, non chromosomal (MCA). Anomalies novo occurrence with parallel investigation of the parents using quantitative in the musculoskeletal, the urinary tract, the digestive, and the central ner- PCR and MLPA is currently performed. Array-based molecular karyotyping vous systems were the most common other anomalies. CONCLUSIONS: The furthermore identified triple X syndrome in an isolated CBE patient. overall prevalence of associated anomalies, which was one in four infants,  P11
.046-M emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation of infants with CHD. The New point mutations in the HDA C8
 gene: Cornelia de Lange syndrome most commonly associated major noncardiac anomalies involved the mus- and beyond culoskeletal system, followed by the urinary, the digestive, and the central I. Parenti1,2, D. Braunholz2, M. Gil-Rodriguez3, C. Gervasini1, J. Azzollini1, A. Cereda4, D. nervous systems. A routine screening for other anomalies may be conside- Cittaro5, H. J. Lübecke6, M. Masciadri7, B. Puisac3, F. J. Ramos3, S. Russo7, A. Selicorni4, T. M. Strom8, G. Zampino9, J. Wierzba10, D. Wieczorek6, J. Pié3, F. J. Kaiser2, L. Larizza1,7; red in infants and in fetuses with CHD. One should be aware that the ano- 1Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Sektion malies associated with CHD can be classified into a recognizable anomaly für Funktionelle Genetik am Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 3Unit of s Py 1n 1d .0ro 4m 4e -M or pattern in one out of nine infants with CHD. Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Departments of Pharmacology-Physiology Informational-analytical system of registration, systematisation and and Pediatrics, Zaragoza, Spain, 4Pediatric Department at Monza Brianza per il Bambino e la sua Mamma (MBBM) Foundation, Pediatric Genetic Unit, S. Gerardo counting of congenital and hereditary diseases Hospital, Monza, Italy, 5Centre for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, San D. Zhanatayeva, L. Nazarova, A. Nagimtaeva, G. Abildinova; Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy, 6Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, National Research Center Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. 7Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 8Institut für Humangenetik, Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany, 9Istituto di Pediatria, Policlinico “A. Gemelli”, Università Cattolica Creation of an informational system of congenital and hereditary diseases’s del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy, 10Department of Pediatry, Hematology Oncology, Medical registration is very acute in today‘s world, which provides the ability to University Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland. schedule medical - diagnostically and preventive measures to reduce infant morbidity and mortality. Primary source of information is the patient’s electronic registration card, Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder which includes personal data, life history and disease, genealogical infor- caused by mutations in either regulators (NIPBL, HDA C8
) or structural ele- mation, a description of the phenotype, the results of research. Information ments (SM C1
A, SM C3
, RAD21) of the cohesin complex. As regards X-linked system consists of four main sections: congenital malformations, prenatal CdLS, a higher prevalence of females is described for both SM C1
A, partially diagnosis, chromosomal abnormality, monogenic pathology. escaping X-inactivation, and HDA C8
, which is instead subject to X-inactivati- The database contains information about 2685 cases of patients and fetuses on. At present, 26 different mutations in 41 individuals with features partial- with congenital and hereditary disorders. The structure is dominated by pa- ly overlapping with CdLS have been reported in the HDA C8
 gene, confirming thology congenital malformations - 1323 (49.3%) cases. The most frequent the key role of this lysine deacetylase in the proper functioning of the cohe- defects of congenital malformations: the nervous system’s - 236 (17.8%), sin complex. We analyzed a group of NIPBL- and SM C1
A-negative patients multiple malformations - 191 (14.4%), the genitourinary system’s - 183 with CdLS by classical sequencing approaches and exome/gene panel next (13.8%), the circulatory system’s genitourinary system’s - 169 (12.7%). generation technology. Thus we identified eight de novo HDA C8
-mutations. Chromosomal abnormality was 744 (27.7%) cases. Monogenic pathology Interestingly, one of which is shared by two siblings. The R166* nonsense was defined in 618 (23.0%) cases. Most frequent are osteogenesis imperfec- mutation, the frameshift deletion F207Nfs*2 as well as all six missense mu- ta - 43 (6.9%), chondrodystrophy - 36 (5.8%), congenital adrenal syndrome tations  C153
R, N156K,  P257
L, T280I,  C287
Y, G320R all affect highly con- - 28 (4.5%), congenital hypothyroidism - 23 (3.7%), mucopolysaccharidosis served residues and were predicted to be damaging by four bioinformatics - 22 (3.5%), spinal muscular amyotrophy - 17 (2.7%), Duchenne myopathy algorithms. All patients show a mild to severe phenotype overlapping with - 11 (1.7%). CdLS; the craniofacial appearance is similar but with some distinctions like Thus, the informational registration system of congenital malformations a broader nose, dental anomalies and delayed anterior fontanelle closure. and hereditary pathology’s spectrum helps to improve health system of me- Moreover, postnatal growth retardation is less severe, and limb malfor- dical genetic counseling and allows setting the frequency and structure of mations have not yet been observed. Given the high percentage of HDA C8
 congenital and hereditary diseases. mutations identified in our cohort, we suggest the HDA C8
 screening as an  P11
.045-S essential part of the routine molecular diagnostics for patients with CdLS- CNV analysis in a cohort of 174 patients with bladder-exstrophy- overlapping features. epispadias complex  P11
.047-S M. Draaken1,2, C. von Lowtzow1,2, A. Ebert3, A. Hofmann1,2, H. Engels1, W. Rösch4, R. Stein5, A new prognostic index of severity of intellectual disabilities in T. Boemers6, B. Utsch7, I. A. L. M. van Rooij8, C. Marcelis9, W. F. J. Feitz10, D. Schmidt1,11, M. Cornelia de Lange syndrome M. Nöthen1,2, M. Ludwig12, H. Reutter1,13; A. Cereda1,2, M. Mariani2, P. Rebora3, L. Bettini2, C. Gervasini4, S. Russo5, M. G. Valsecchi3, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics Life & Brain L. Larizza4, A. Selicorni2; Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, Ulm, Germany, 1Department of Pediatrics, Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, 2Pediatric 4Department of Pediatric Urology, Regensburg, Germany, 5Department of Urology, Genetic Unit, Pediatric Department of Monza Brianza per il Bambino e la sua Mamma Mainz, Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, Cologne, (MBBM) Foundation, S.Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 3Center of Biostatistics for Germany, 7Department of General Pediatrics and Neonatology, Center for Pediatrics Clinical Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, and Adolescence Care, Gießen, Germany, 8Department for Health Evidence, Nijmegen, Monza, Italy, 4Department of Health Sciences, Medical Genetics, Università degli Studi 214 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index di Milano, Milano, Italy, 5Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy. group of disorders occurring both in syndromic and non-syndromic forms, associated with approximately 180 different syndromes. The identifica- Cornelia de Lange syndrome is a well-known multiple congenital anomalies/ tion of the responsible gene largely depends on the fact if it is syndromic mental retardation syndrome with genetic heterogeneity and wide clinical or non-syndromic. Although 85% of the cases are reported to be non-syn- variability, regarding the severity of both the intellectual disabilities and the dromic with unknown etiology, syndromic forms arise from chromosomal physical features, not completely explained by the genotype-phenotype cor- anormalies or single gene defects of Mendelian inheritance, both together relations known to date. comprising the etiopathogenesis only in 40% of the cases and single gene The aim of the study was the identification of prognostic features, ascertai- defects contributing to three/fourth. Noteworthy genes in this group are nable precociously, of a better intellectual outcome and the development of FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, TWIST1, EFNB1, MSX2, RAB23 and FREM1. EFNB1 a new prognostic index of severity of intellectual disabilities in CdLS pati- can be excluded from this group due to its association with Craniofrontona- ents. sal Syndrome. Thirty syndromic CS patients with normal karyotype were In 66 italian CdLS patients aged 8 years or more, we evaluated the associa- included in the study cohort. Stepwise screening algorithm was applied, in- tion of the degree of mental retardation with various clinical parameters itial step being the sequencing of FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR1, followed by full ascertainable before 6 months of life and with the molecular data by the gene sequencing of FGFR2 and FGFR3. Samples with unidentified etiology application of cumulative regression logistic model. Based on these results were further screened for deletion/duplication by craniofrontonasal MLPA and on the previously known genotype-phenotype correlations, we selected kit ( P080
). The last step consisted of sequencing of FGFR1, MSX2, TWIST1, 7 parameters to be used in a multivariate cumulative regression logistic mo- RAB23 and FREM1 genes, when the cases showed distinct related clinical del to develop a prognostic index of severity of intellectual disability. phenotype. Parameter Score In the table the parameters selected and their relative scores. We highly suggest that our ongoing research will lead to better insight for the clinical diagnosis, molecular diagnostic flow charts in CS and will contri- Small for gestationa age 1,5 bute to the genotype-phenotype correlation. Length <50° centile on CdLS growth charts 2  P11
.050-M Heart malformation 1 Craniosynostosis and Heart defects: Possibly a new autosomal Limb reduction 1 Moderate-severe sensorineural hypoacusia 3,5 recessive syndrome due to ZDHH C13
 mutations NIPBL truncating mutation 0 S. A. Boyadjiev1, M. Zwienenberg-Lee2, J. Boggan2, C. Senders3; TSMheC 1pAro mbuabtaitliiotyn of a mild MR increases with the reducing final score le1ss,5 than 1Section of Genetics, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2Department of Neurosurgery, UC 2, the probability of a severe MR increases with the increasing final score more Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, UC Davis, than 3. Sacramento, CA, United States. This prognostic index allows to define, precociously in the life of a baby, the probability of a better or worse intellectual outcome in CdLS patients. We report two sisters with congenital craniosynostosis, heart anomalies  P11
.048-M and minor digital defects. They were born to non-consanguineous Hispanic SNP arrays in the diagnostic strategy of corpus callosum agenesis parents. The mother is macrocephalic, but without other dysmorphisms. associated with intellectual disability (an update) The first child was born with complex craniosynostosis involving the meto- B. Keren1,2, M. Moutard3, S. Chantot-Bastaraud4, A. Jacquette1, C. Mignot1, E. Fonteneau1, pic, left coronal, and left lambdoidal sutures requiring two craniotomies and E. Lejeune1, I. Marey1, S. Whalen5, D. Lacombe6, S. Naudion6, C. Rooryck-Thambo6, A. leading to significant cranial deformity despite the surgeries. In addition Toutain7, C. Le Caignec8,9, J. Fabre-Teste10, L. Olivier-Faivre11, A. Masurel11, C. Thauvin- she had truncus areriosus with interrupted aortic arch that was successfully Robinet11, A. Faudet1, D. Ville12, V. Desportes12, T. Billette3, D. Héron1; repaired. The second girl presented with metopic craniosynostosis and lar- 1APHP - Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2ICM ge atrial septal defect, both requiring surgeries. Both girls have apparently UPMC, Inserm UMR_ S1127
/CNRS UMR 7225, Paris, France, 3APHP - Hôpital Armand- normal development at 6 and 4 years of age, respectively, but no formal eva- Trousseau, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Paris, France, 4APHP - Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, luation has been performed. In addition, the older child has minor digital Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Paris, France, 5APHP - Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Service de Génétique Médicale, Paris, France, 6CHU Bordeaux - Hôpital Pellegrin, Service anomalies and mild pectus excavatum and the younger child has mild en- de génétique médicale, Bordeaux, France, 7CHRU Tours - Hôpital Bretonneau, Service amel hypoplasia. Their older brother has severe pectus excavatum, but no de génétique médicale, Tours, France, 8CHU Nantes - Institut de Biologie, Service de other anomalies. Chromosomal microarray and sequencing analyses of the Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 9Inserm UMR 915/CNRS ER L3147
, Nantes, France, hot-spot regions in FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, and the TWIST gene were nor- 10APHP - Hôpital Robert-Debré, Service de génétique médicale, Paris, France, 11CHU Dijon mal for both girls. There were no detectable metabolic abnormalities. Who- - Hôpital d‘enfants, FHU-TRANSLAD - Centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 12Hospices le exome sequencing documented rare compound heterozygous variants in civils de Lyon - GH Est, Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Bron, France. the ZDHH C13
 genes in both children - c.629A>T (Asn219Ile, maternal in- heritance) and c.1135A>G (Ser379Gly, paternal inheritance). The ZDHH C13
 (zinc finger, DHHC-type containing 13) gene is located on ch.11p.15.1 and Corpus callosum agenesis is the most common cerebral malformation in has palmitoyltransferase activity with possible role in the FGFR/RAS/MAPK patients with intellectual disability (CCA-ID) with a prevalence of 2-3% of pathway. The functional significance of these variants is under investigation. cases. Known genetic causes are heterogeneous and in the majority of ca- We propose that this condition represents a novel autosomal recessive syn- ses, no etiologies have been found. In order to achieve a genetic diagnosis, drome, possibly due to mutations of ZDHH C13
. we performed chromosome analyses on microarrays (CMA) on 81 patients  P11
.051-S with CCA-ID and no known causes. We found 34 different CNVs (42%) which Deletions in 14q24.1q24.3 are associated with congenital heart were not carried in control subjects of the Database of Genomic Variants disease, brachydactyly and mild intellectual disability (DGV). Among these CNVs, 14 (17%) were de novo and considered to be B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz1, O. Vanakker2, A. De Paepe2, B. Menten2, T. Martin1, G. Weber1, A. Christmann1, R. Krier3, S. Scheid3, S. E. McNerlan4, S. McKee4, A. Tzschach5; likely pathogenic, with sizes varying from 1,3Mb to 24Mb, including 13 de- 1Practice of Human Genetics, Homburg (Saar), Germany, 2Ghent University Hospital, letions and one inverted duplication with terminal deletion. Moreover, 12 Ghent, Belgium, 3Practice of Pediatrics, Wittlich, Germany, 4Northern Ireland Regional CNVs (4 deletions and 9 duplications) were also carried by healthy parents, Genetics Service, Belfast, United Kingdom, 5University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. and therefore, could not be considered as the main causes of the phenotype. We were not able to recover blood samples of the parents to verify the 8 remaining CNVs. Thus, CMA seems to be a powerful tool in the diagnostic Interstitial deletions of chromosome band 14q24.1q24.3 are rare. We report strategy of patients with CCA-ID and no etiologies. However, most of the on three unrelated patients with overlapping de novo deletions of sizes 5.4 tested patients still remain with no identified genetic causes. In the near Mb, 2.8 Mb and 2.3 Mb in this region. While some clinical problems such future, new techniques such as exome sequencing, or massively parallel se- as intestinal malrotation, cryptorchidism and ectopic kidney were only ob- quencing on selected genes panels, could improve the detection rate of the served in single patients, all three patients had mild intellectual disability, genetic causes of CCA-ID.  P11
.049-S congenital heart disease, brachydactyly, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, Molecular Diagnostic Algorithm of Syndromic Craniosynostosis and thin upper lips. It appears likely that haploinsufficiency of one or seve- V. Karaman, G. Toksoy, S. Avcı, B. Karaman, U. Altunoglu, S. Basaran, H. Kayserili, Z. O. ral of the 19 genes in the common deleted interval (ACTN1, DCAF5, EXD2, Uyguner; GALNT L1
, ERH, SL C39
A9, PLEKHD1, CCD C177
, KIAA0247, LO C100289511
, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey. SRSF5, SL C10
A1, SMO C1
, SL C8
A3, ADAM21 P1
, COX16, SYNJ2BP, SYNJ2BP- COX16, ADAM21) was responsible for these problems, but apart from SMO C1
, mutations in which cause autosomal recessive Waardenburg an- Craniosynostosis(CS) is a birth defect, with a prevalence of 1/2100-1/2500, ophthalmia syndrome, no disease associations have so far been reported for caused by the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures leading to the other genes. Functional studies and a systematic search for mutations or specific cranial base and vault abnormaliE tieS sH . IG t i s2 a0 h1 i4 gh | ly M heI tL eA roN ge, n I eT oA usL Y | c W hroW moW so. mES e H abG er. rO atR ioG ns in this region will elucidate the role of indiv2 id1 u5 alABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Paris, France, 2de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Paris, genes in the clinical manifestations and will provide insight into the under- France, 4Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Paris, lying biological mechanisms. France, 5Service de Radiologie, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 6Service  P11
.052-M d’Anatomie Pathologique, Unité de Neuropathologie, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, APHP, Non-mosaic 4p16.3 deletion concomitant with low-level mosaicism Paris, France, 7Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Centre de Référence des for deletion at 21q11.1q21.2 Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, V. Y. Voinova1,2,3, T. Liehr4, A. D. Kolotii1,2, Y. B. 8Groupe de Recherche Clinique (GRC) ‘déficience intellectuelle et autisme’, Inserm, UMR Yurov1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,5;  S975
, CRICM, Team Molecular Bases, Paris, France. 1Institute of Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Mental Health Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Chromosome 19 is one of the densest chromosomes in genes. Consequently, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 5Department of rearrangements occurring in this chromosome, even small in size, can be Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation. lethal. This might explain why only a few cases of chromosome 19 rearran- gements have been reported so far. 19p13.12 microdeletions of different sizes and partially overlapping, detected by Array Comparative Genomic Multiple chromosome abnormalities are occasionally detected in live-born Hybridization (Array CGH), have been described in nine patients. The asso- children. Furthermore, concomitant non-mosaic and mosaic chromosome ciated phenotypes include a mild to moderate intellectual disability in seven aberrations are even less frequent. In the resent report, we describe a case patients. Among these patients, four of them have been reported with ce- of autism, moderate intellectual disability, epilepsy, cerebral palsy, osteopo- rebral malformations (corpus callosum hypoplasia with vermis hypoplasia, rosis, strabismus, speech delay, cardiac defect, enlargement of the left brain pontocerebellar hypoplasia). Microcephaly, neurosensorial deafness, ear ventricle and kidney abnormalities in a 9 year old girl. Cytogenetic analysis abnormalities, hypertrichosis or facial dysmorphism including synophrys has demonstrated a mosaic deletion of chromosome 21: 46,XX,?mos del(21) have also been reported. All of them were diagnosed in postnatal, from the (q21q21)[5]/ 46,XX[15]. Molecular cytogenetic analysis using oligonu- first months of life up to late childhood No prenatal case has been reported cleotide array CGH has confirmed the presence of mosaic deletion spanning so far. We present the first case of a de novo 1.1 Mb 19p13.12 deletion inclu- 21q11.1q21.2 chromosome region (11.423 Mb). Additionally, a non-mosaic ding 29 genes in a fetus which has been interrupted at 38 weeks of gestati- deletion at 4p16.3 (size: 3.712 Mb) affecting 83 genes, 40 of which are listed on because of severe microcephaly associated with benign paraventricular in OMIM was found. Mosaic 21q11.1q21.2 was also confirmed using multi- cysts. Among the deleted genes, NOTCH3 seems to be a good candidate gene color chromosome banding (MCB), which has shown this deletion to affect for cerebral abnormalities. NOTCH3 mutations are associated with CADA- 19% of cells. It is to note, that the index case has demonstrated a phenotype SIL (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts atypical for 4p16 deletions. Nevertheless, the main phenotypic outcome and Leucoencephalopathy). It has been suggested that the mechanism in- was likely to result from non-mosaic 4p16.3 according to bioinformatics volved in CADASIL was a gain-of-function of the mutated protein. The con- analysis, whereas mosaic 21q11.1q21.2 was concluded to be an additional sequences of NOTCH3 haploinsuffisiency are poorly known. Considering its co-factor modulating the phenotype. Thus, one can conclude that phenoty- role in neurodegeneration, NOTCH3 haploinsuffisiency may contribute to pic heterogeneity of recurrent chromosome aberrations can be produced cerebral malformations and to intellectual disabitility as observed in dele- by concomitant genomic rearrangements. In this instance, multiple mole- t Pe 1d 1 p .0a 5ti 5en -Sts. cular cytogenetic techniques are warranted for the appropriate molecular Molecular cytogenetic characterization of a 2q35-q37 duplication diagnosis. Supported by the Russian Federation President Grant (MD-4401 and a 4q35.1-q35.2 deletion in two cousins: a genotype-phenotype .  P2
 10 11 .3 0. 57) 3. -S analysis Juvenile polyposis associated to hereditary hemorrhagic L. Ronzoni1, A. Peron1, V. Bianchi1, M. Baccarin2, E. Cattaneo1, S. Guerneri2, M. F. Bedeschi1; telangiectasia in an adolescent with complex chromosomal 1Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Medical Genetics Unit, rearrangement and intellectual disability Milan, Italy, 2Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Laboratory of M. M. Oliveira1, V. A. Meloni1, R. Seidler2, S. S. Takeno1, A. Bortolai1, C. B. de Mello1, F. T. medical genetics, Milan, Italy. Lima1, M. I. Melaragno1; 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Hospital do Servidor Público do Estado de Sâo Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Derivative chromosomes usually display variable phenotypes and clinical expression. SMAD4 We report two patients: a 37-year-old man (proband-1) and a 17-year-old Juvenile polyposis can be associated to heSrMedAiDta4r y hemorrhagic telangiecta- girl (proband-2), two second-degree cousins, with a derivative chromosome sia (HHT) due to gene mutations. We describe the first case of juve- leading to a 4q3 deletion-2q3 duplication. nile polyposis and HHT in a patient with gene loss due to a chromo- Conventional karyotype revealed in both the patients the same rearrange- somal deletion. The male patient presents moderated intellectual disability, ment derived from unbalanced segregation of parental reciprocal transloca- limited verbal language repertoire, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, tion involving the long arms of chromosome 2 and 4. Proband-1 father and corpus callosum agenesis and brain arteriovenous malformation. Colono- proband-2 mother were detected to be carrier of a balanced translocation scopy revealed inflammatory intestinal polyposis, with typical juvenile polyp t(2;4)(q35;q35). histology, fulfilling juvenile polyposis syndrome clinical criteria. Three small Array-CGH analysis, performed to characterize the rearrangement, docu- haemangiomas in scalp and bilateral telangiectasias ind eK ineosvsoe lbach area were mented in both the probands the presence of a 26Mb duplication of 2q35- found. The patient presents a 46,XY,t(6;18)(q13;q21)dn karyotype. Chro- q37.3 region of chromosome 2 and a 6.3Mb deletion of 4q35.1-q35.2 region mosomal microarray detected two non-continuous microdeletions of chromosome 4. encompassing 2.7 Mb and 0,4 Mb as follows: arr 18q21.1q21.2(47,553,468- The 2q3 duplication and 4q3 deletion are two distinct conditions with va- 50,257,792)×1,18q21.2(50,644,595-51,052,896)×1. FISH with BAC probes riable phenotypes including developmental delay, intellectual disability, confirmed both deletions and the presence of a segment between them. This Pierre-Robin sequence and cardiovascular, craniofacial, digital and skeletal is the fSiMrsAt DcaAs4e of juvenile polyposis and HHT in a patient with a chSrMoAmDo4- anomalies. somal rearrangement that resulted in interstitial deletions of 18q and loss Both the patients showed developmental delay, minor facial and non-facial of the gene, among others. The loss of a copy of the entire anomalies, hearing, ocular and genitourinary problems. In particular, pro- gene, added to the fact that the patient had intestinal polyps at a young age, band-1 showed a severe bilateral hypoacusia and hypergonadotropic hypo- prompted us to look for telangiecStMasAiaD.4 T hus, we showed the importance of gonadism secondary to bilateral orchiectomy for testicular seminoma. Pro- the detailed screening for these phenotypes in patients in whom cytomole- band-2 displayed principally ocular (microphtalmia, coloboma and visual cular studies indicate deletion of gene. Additionally, we demonstrate loss) and urinary problems (nephrotic syndrome). The clinical phenotypes the relevance of cytogenomic investigation in patients with juvenile poly- were similar to that reported by Rashidi-Nezhad, who first described a pati- posis, dysmorphisms and intellectual disability. Financial support: FAPESP, ent with a combination of 2q duplication-4q deletion, and to those reported Brazil.  P11
.054-M in other cases of 2q3 duplication or 4q3 deletion. Our study contributes to Microdeletion 19p13.12 in a fetus with severe microcephaly and further delineate the genotype-phenotype correlation and the combined ef- paraventricular cysts: case report and review of the literature fect of partial 2q duplication and 4q deletion syndromes in adulthood. S. Heide-Guihard1, S. Chantot-Bastaraud1, B. Keren2, C. Hyon1, N. Joyé1, M. Moutard3, J. Jouannic4, C. Garel5, A. Gelot6, R. Grigorescu1, J. Siffroi1, I. Marey7, D. Héron7,8; 1Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie médicales, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, APHP, 216 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.056-M  P11
.059-S A novel micro-deletion 7p14.3 associated with complex Oxidative stress a Phenotypic Hallmark of Fanconi anemia and Down neurocognitive phenotypes and distinct Cardiac malformations syndrome: The effect of antioxidants S. Huang1, M. Speevek2, L. Schultz3, C. Li3; H. T. El-Bassyouni1, H. H. Afifi1, M. M. Eid1, R. M. Kamal2, H. H. El-Gebali2, G. S. M. El- 1Mcmaster University Medical School, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 2Trillium Health Partner, Saeed1, M. M. Thomas1, S. A. Abdel Maksoud1; Mississauga, ON, Canada, 3Mcmaster University Medical Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada. 1National Research Center, Guiza, Egypt, 2Institute of Postgraduate Childhood Studies, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. We report a 20 year old male with global developmental delay and a novel microarray finding. His past medical history included a diagnosis of supra- Oxidative stress plays a major role in the pathogenesis of leukemia-prone di- valvular mitral ring moderate endocardial fibroelastosis at age two, follo- seases such as Fanconi anemia and Down syndrome. Objectives: To explore wing recurrent pneumonia and congestive heart failure. His neurocogniti- the oxidative stress state in children with Down syndrome and Fanconi ane- ve history, in addition to global delay, also included a diagnosis of autism, mia by estimating the levels of antioxidants (e.g., malondialdehyde, total an- attention deficit disorder and bipolar disorder with episodes of psychoses tioxidant capacity and superoxide dismutase [SOD] activity) and DNA dama- that required admission. Other medical issues included moderate bilateral ge, and to evaluate of the effect of antioxidant treatment on these patients. hearing loss, eosinophilic esophagitis and sleep apnea. He had minor dys- Methods: The study included 32 children clinically diagnosed with Down morphic craniofacial features, a narrow palate and a bifid uvula, as well syndrome (15 patients) and Fanconi anemia (17 patients) in addition to 17 as hypoplastic nails. Psoriasis and striae were noted on skin exam. Chro- controls matched for age and sex. Malondialdehyde, total antioxidant capa- mosomal microarray analysis revealed a de novo deletion at 7p14.3p14.2 city, superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and DNA damage were measured. (chr7:33,453,828-36,924,450), confirmed by fluorescence in-situ hybri- Antioxidants including vitamin A, E and C were given to the patients accor- dization. The genes in the deleted segment include BB S9
, BMPER, NPSR1, ding to the recommended daily allowance (RDA) for 6 months. Clinical fol- DPY19 L1
, TBX20, HERPUD2, SEPT7, EEPD1, KIAA0895, ANLN, AOAH and low-up and re-evaluation were conducted for all patients. Laboratory tests ELMO1. BMPER mutations are thought to be associated with craniofacial including complete blood count, karyotyping, DNA damage and oxidative dysmorphism. TBX20 is a transcription factor involved in the formation of stress were re-evaluated. Results: Children with Fanconi Anemia and Down cardiac chambers and valves. Other components within this 7p14.3 deletion syndrome had elevated levels of oxidative stress and more DNA damage than with features of cardiac malformations and learning disabilities may also be controls. Oxidative stress parameters and DNA damage improved in Fanconi implicated and will be discussed. By sharing these novel findings we hope anemia and Down syndrome patients after antioxidant administration. Con- to aid other healthcare providers in the care and management of similar clusions: Early administration of antioxidants to Fanconi anemia and Down patients. syndrome patients is recommended for slowing of the disease course with  P11
.057-S symptoms amelioration and improvement of general health. A futher case of de novo 10p14-pter deletion detected by multiplex  P11
.060-M ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay in a newborn Report of the first case of robertsonian translocation in Down-Turner M. R. Piemontese, A. I. Croce, L. Bisceglia, P. Stanziale, L. Zelante; mosaicism (mos 45, X / 46,XX, + 21, rob (21;21)(q10;q10)) Servizio di Genetica Medica, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, M. D. F. Carvalho1, E. D. F. Carvalho2, M. Montenegro3, K. M. Carvalho4; Italy. 1UECE/Unichristus/APAE-Fortaleza CE, Fortaleza, Brazil, 2Unichristus/USP, Fortaleza, Brazil, 3USP, São Paulo, Brazil, 4UECE, Fortaleza, Brazil. Chromosome 10p terminal deletion accounts for a rare subset of patients presenting DiGeorge syndrome, and is designated as DiGeorge2 syndrome. Double aneuploidy involving both autosomal and sex chromosomes is very We report on a neonate female with DiGeorge like phenotype, facial dys- rare. Down‘s/Turner‘s mosaic, occurs in about 1 in 2 000 000. We report morphism and hypocalcemia in which a de novo deletion of distal 10p (p14- the first case of Down‘s/Turner‘s mosaic with robertsonian translocation. pter) was found by MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplifica- The patient was the first child of non consanguineous parents. It was a fe- tion) analysis. male whom born a term, by uneventful cesarean section, weighting 2,220g Additional FISH study of the proband with locus specific probes confirmed and with length of 46 cm, without neonatal complications. At birth, the pe- the presence of only one 10pter signal. Further microsatellite marckers ana- diatrician made the diagnosis of Down syndrome. At 3 months, in consulta- lysis in the patient and in both parents revealed a de novo deletion occurring tion with routine pediatric a heart murmur was heard, so the patient was on the paternal allele. referred to a cardiologist. There were performed two surgeries to repair In conclusion, we suggest MLPA analysis as a rapid test to confirm a clinical the heart defect, one with 6 months of life and another with 2 years. She suspect of DiGeorge syndrome associated to HDR syndrome (hypoparathy- also had mild developmental delay. At 3 years old she was examined at our roidier, deafness, renal dysplasia) in newborns. outpatient Genetic unit. The patient showed more clinical findings of Down  P11
.058-M syndrome than Turner syndrome: low weight and height for age, microce- Distal 10q26.3 monosomy; three new cases and review of the phaly, flat facial profile, upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, short literature nose with depressed nasal bridge, hypotonia with tendency to keep month C. L. Goldsmith1, J. Majewski2, M. Srour3, J. Michaud4, K. Boycott1; 1Children‘s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2McGill University, open and protrude the tongue, short neck, single palmar creases, and pro- Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Montreal Children‘s Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4CHU Ste minent ears. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood preparations using Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada. G-banding revealed mosaicism with 2 cell lines (mos 45, X [21] / 46,XX, + 21, rob (21;21)(q10;q10)[9]). Additional genetic studies (karyotypes) were made to define the cause which probably originated this double aneuploidy Pure distal monosomy of the long arm of chromosome 10 is a rare cytoge- with this translocation. So we present the first case related of Down-Turner netic abnormality; the location and size of the deletions described in this mosaicism with robertsonian translocation and we review all the previous region are variable. The associated phenotype associated with this deletion r Pe 1p 1o .r 0t 6s. 1-S is also variable but reported features include developmental delay/learning Trying to define the phenotype of 16p12.2-p11.2 duplication disability/mild to moderate intellectual disability, speech and language de- syndrome lay, poor attention, strabismus and distinctive facial features. We report two A. Scatigno, A. Pansa, B. Facchinetti, G. Cassina, U. Giussani; siblings; a male aged 15 and a female aged 21 years, with intellectual disa- A.O. Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. bility, microcephaly, motor impairment and ataxia. MRIs showed mild dila- tation of the lateral ventricles and a prominent cisterna magna. Karyotype was normal. We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) and they were The short arm of chromosome 16 is rich in segmental duplications rende- found to have a 5.5 Mb terminal chromosome 10q26.3 deletion using the ring this region susceptible to rearrengement through non-allelic homo- program FishingCNV. The deletion was confirmed by FISH and the mother logous recombination. Several syndromes resulting from microdeletions was found to carry a pericentric inversion. A third child, age 6 years, presen- or microduplications in this region have been reported. The chromosome ted in early childhood with global developmental delay, poor coordination 16p12.2-p11.2 deletion syndrome, 7.1-to 8.7-Mb [OMIM#613604] is cha- and ataxia. MRI showed no abnormality of the posterior fossa. A high-reso- racterized phenotypically by dysmorphic facial features, feeding difficulties, lution (105 K) comparative genomic hybridization microarray identified a recurrent ear infections, developmental delay and cognitive impairement. deletion of the terminal 4.6 Mb of the long arm of chromosome 10, within Reciprocal duplication of 16p12.2-p11.2 has been observed in few patients cytogenetic band 10q26.3. This finding was confirmed by FISH analysis. The with dysmorphic features, short stature, developmental delay and intellec- parents were tested and this is a de novo change. Our findings add three new tual disability but a specific phenotype hasn‘t been established and more cases of 10q26.3 monosomy to the literature; we summarize the previous cases are needed. cases and highlight the features of this emEerSgiHngG c y2to0g1en4e t|i cM syILndArNom, eI.TALY |W We WrepWor.tE tSwHo Gne.wO uRnGrelated cases of chromosome 16p12.2-p11.2 d2u1pl7i-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Nicchia1, S. Caruso4, F. Bagnasco4, C. Greco3, C. Dufour2, A. Savoia1; 1Department of Medical, Surgical and Health sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, cation analysed by 180K oligonucleotide arrayCGH (Agilent Technologies). Italy, 2Clinical and Experimental Hematology Unit, G. Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genoa, Both children showed a de novo 7.8 Mb duplication extending from 21.5 Mb Italy, 3Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 4Epidemiology and Statistics Unit, G. Gaslini Childrens Hospital, Genoa, Italy. to 29.3 Mb, comprising the same region involved in the deletion syndrome. We discuss the phenotype and molecular findings of our cases with respect to previous reported ones to further define the syndrome.  P11
.062-M Fanconi anemia (FA) is an inherited disease characterized by congeni- Redefining the contiguous gene syndrome in the era of high- tal malformations, pancitopenia, cancer predisposition, and sensitivity to throughput sequencing cross-linking agents. The molecular diagnosis of FA is relatively complex, J. Amiel1, M. Langouët1, K. Siquier-Pernet1, S. Sanquer2, C. Bole-Feysot3, P. Nitschke4, A. due to several aspects including genetic heterogeneity with mutations in at Munnich1, R. Barouki2, L. Colleaux1; 1Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 2Metabolic and Proteomic biochemistry service, least 16 different genes. In this study, we report the mutations identified in Necker-Enfants Malades hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Genomic platform, Imagine 100 unrelated FA probands enrolled into the National Network of the Ita- Institute, Paris, France, 4Bioinformatic platform, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. lian Association of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. We identified 108 distinct variants of FANCA, FANCG, FANCC, FANCD2, and FANCB genes in 85, 9, 3, 2, and 1 families, respectively. Particularly, in FANCA we found main- We ascertained an Algerian consanguineous family in which two sibs pre- ly private mutations of all different categories (large intragenic deletions, sent with psychomotor delay, progressive microcephaly, spasticity, thin cor- nonsense, frameshift, splicing and missense mutations). Expression level of pus callosum, and severe and early onset obesity. Exome sequencinAg Pid4eMn1- FANCA protein was studied in 32 lymphoblastoid cell lines of complemen- tified two homozygous substitutions cosegregating with the phenotype and tation group FA-A and a correlation between the type of mutation and the locatingA 1ZG70P 1kb apart on 7q22.1: a c.1137+1G>T splice mutation in expression level of FANCA was observed. In case of nonsense or frame-shift previously described in a MAPo4roMc1can family and a c.595A>T misense varia- mutations FANCA is not detectable whereas it is expressed at the same le- tion in which encodes zinc-aAlpZhGa P21
-glycoprotein (ZAG). Haplotyping vels as in controls when alleles are hit by missense or in frame mutations. analysis indicated that the mutation was a founder mutation shared Since it will be interesting to determine whether there is a correlation bet- between bothA fPa4mMil1ie s, whereas the mutation is secondarily and uni- ween stable expression of mutant FANCA and phenotype, we have been eva- que in our family. luated a series of different aspects at both clinical and cellular levels in order Mutations in cause A P4
-deficiency syndrome, a condition characte- to provide insights into potential residual activities of altered but expressed rized by severe intellectual disability, progressive microcephaly and spasti- p Pr 1o 1t .e 0in 6s 5. -S city. Notably, none of the 25 previously reported cases with A P4
-deficiency A familial case of Fanconi anemia-related VACTERL-H association syndrome exhibited obesity. On the other hand, ZAG is an adipokine stimu- due to a mutation of FANCF gene, identified using a next generation lating lipolysis in adipocytes; ZAG likely regulates body weight since admi- sequencing approach nistration of human ZAG to ob/AoPb4 mMi1ce resAuZltGePd1 in progressive weight loss. F. Benedicenti1, E. Nicchia2, D. De Rocco2, E. Cappelli3, C. Dufour3, F. Stanzial1, F. Inzana1, We propose that the phenotype of our patients resulted from the additional A. Savoia2,4; effects of the two mutations in and accounting for the neuro- 1Genetic Counseling Service, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, logical signs and the precocious morbid obesity, respectively. Bolzano, Italy, Bolzano, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, 3Clinical and Experimental Hematology Unit, G. The contiguous gene syndrome was proposed in 1986 to explain the as- Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genoa, Italy, Genoa, Italy, 4Department of Medical Sciences, sociation of multiple and unrelated clinical features due to the deletion of University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy. multiple adjacent genes: the phenotype results from the combination of the endophenotypes of each contiguous gene sensitive to haploinsufficiency. Today, high-throughput sequencing allows us to enlarge this concept to de- VACTERL-H association is a rare and etiologically heterogeneous condition, scribe simultaneous transmission of independent mutations that are gene- characterized by a variable combination of many birth defects. It can repre- tically linked.  P11
.063-S sent a severe phenotype of Fanconi anemia (FA), a rare disease characteri- Insight into genetic heterogeneity of complex diseases by exome zed by birth defects, bone marrow failure, cancer predispositions and in- sequencing creased chromosomal instability due to mutations in at least 16 genes. The M. Sana, C. Lodrini, L. Pezzoli, D. Marchetti, A. Lincesso, K. Migliorati, M. Iascone; genetic heterogeneity together with the wide spectrum of mutations make Ao Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. the molecular genetic testing in FA a complex and tiered task, which could benefit from application of next generation sequencing strategies (NGS). We describe a family with 3 aborted fetuses affected with hydrocephalia and Exome sequencing has become a successful strategy for genetic diagnosis, radial ray defects, variously associated with cardiac, renal and other skel- particularly for largely heterogeneous diseases. We report 4 cases of examp- etal anomalies. Both healthy parents originate from the same alpine val- le, presenting complex diseases, for which it was possible to reach rapidly a ley. A genetic counseling leading to a presumptive diagnosis of FA-related correct diagnosis only by exome sequencing. VACTERL-H was performed only after the second termination. Thus, a FA Patient 1 was a one month-old female presenting dilated aortic root, exten- diagnostic diepoxybutane test could be performed only on cultured cells of sive arterial tortuosity, mild dysmorphisms and several musculoskeletal fea- the third fetus. The results confirmed the suspicion and complementation tures (joint laxity, arachnodactyly and pectus excavatum). Patient 2 (female, analysis excluded mutations FinA NthCeFT Mtwo more frequent groups (FA-A and 3 years-old) presented absent pulmonary valve, ectasia of the pulmonary FA-G). We hence used the Ion PGM System and identified a homozygous trunk and aorta, motor developmental delay, joint laxity, strabismus, hy- c.484_48F5AdNeClFCT mutation of gene. The same finding was found in permetropia and mental retardation. Patient 3 was a 3 years-old male re- DNA extracted from the first two fetuses. Only 1% of FA patienFtAs NhaCvFe muta- ferred for low-set ears, micrognathia, generalized hypotonia, clubfeet and tions in and, to the best of our knowledge, the 3 fetuses represent the tricuspid regurgitation. Finally, Patient 4 (female, 3 years-old) presented first cases of VACTERL-H association caused by mutations of . Appli- Marfanoid habitus, with aortic dilation. Because these features overlap with cation of NGS is suitable for a comprehensive molecular screening of FA and several neonatal rare disorders, we performed on patients’ (and parents’) identification of rare disease-causing genes.  P11
.066-M genomic DNA, Illumina TruSight Exome sequencing, generating a mean tar- Unique frontonasal dysplasia case with anencephaly with possible get coverage of 98.6% at >20X and a mean read depth of 257X. In Patient 1 link to a novel gene we identifiedde an ohvoomozygous mutation in fibulin-4 gene, associated with au- U. Altunoglu1, C. Bonnard2, S. Avcı1, B. Karaman1, B. Reversade2, H. Kayserili1; tosomal recessive cutis laxa syndrome. Sequencing of Patient 2 surprisingly 1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, revealed a missense mutation in ITdPeR n1o vgoene, which causes conge- Turkey, 2Institute of Medical Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research nital non-progressive spinocerebellar ataxia, resulting in altered develop- (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore. ment of cerebellum. Patient 3 and 4 carry mutations in genes that cause Loeys-Dietz syndrome, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 respectively. In conclu- sion, these examples are significative for stressing that exome sequencing Frontonasal dysplasia is a well-known developmental abnormality of the represents a helpful approach for differential diagnosis and for more closely anterior neurocranium and viscerocranium, characterized by findings in- s Pp 1e 1c .i 0fy 6 4th -e Mrapeutic approach for individual patients. volving the craniofacial midline, such as anterior cranium bifidum, hyper- Stable expression of mutant FANCA: is there any correlation with mild telorism, and clefting of alae nasi. While the genetic etiology for a number Fanconi anemia clinical? of different syndromes described within the FND spectrum is identified, no R. Bottega1, E. Cappelli2, M. Zweyer1, D. De Rocco1, E. Valencic3, J. Svahn2, R. Bortul1, E. gene is known to cause classical FND. Recently, paAtLieXn1ts with autosomal re- cessive FND were linked to homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the 218 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, AITLAX LhYom |e WobWox Wgen.Ee SfaHmGily..O BiRalGlelic mutations in are associated with aABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.069-S Unusual presentation of Goltz syndrome with minimal ectodermal severe frontofacionasal dysApLlaXs1ia phenotype with extreme microphthalmia involvement in a 3-year-old Iranian girl and oblique facial clefts. It is shown that mice homozygous for deficiency in A. Rajaee, A. Rajaee; Cart1, the mice homolog to are born with acrania and meroanencepha- employee in genetics center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ly. In the limited number of ALX1-related FND patients, neural tube closure defects have not been reported. We report a unique FND case, a 20-week-old male fetus terminated due to Goltz syndrome (MIM 305600) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by anencephaly. Postmortem examination showed severe hypertelorism, clini- distinctive skin abnormalities and a range of defects affecting the eyes, teeth, cal anophthalmia, bifid nose and midline upper lip cleft. The parents were limbs, skeletal, urinary, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular and central nervous first degree cousins, and their first pregnancy was also terminated due to system. It is inherited in an X-linked dominant mode with lethality in ma- anencephaly. ALX1 les. One of the main features in this syndrome is the skin changes which Array-comparative genomic hybridization using the NimbleGen CGX-3 1.4M are usually present at birth. Ectodermal features include symmetric linear DNA oligoarray set revealed normal results. Molecular analysis of did reticulated thin skin, linear hyperpigmentation, ulcerations, telangiectasias, not reveal any mutations. Trio exome sequencing revealed a homozygous inflammation, hernialike outpouchings of fatty tissue, and papillomas. Here mutation in a candidate gene, linked to a human phenotype for the first time. we report on a 3-year-old girl, with asymmetric involvement, greater se- While the mouse model for this gene is well described, further studies are verity of findings on the right side. She had, sparse hair, hyperkeratosis on n Pe 1e 1d .0ed 6 7to -S establish its role in human development. 2/3 of the right side of the forehead, lacrimal duct stenosis, hypoplastic alae High throughput analysis in Goldenhar syndrome nasi, hyperkeratosis of the nose, simple ear, narrow auditory canal and hy- S. Dipresa1, A. D‘eustacchio2, A. Morgan1, P. Gasparini2,1; poplastic tragus,, partial cleft of upper lip and pitting on lower lip and slight 1Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. defect on tongue, hypoplastic nipple, ectrodactyly of hand and foot (on the right side). thShe has bilateral dysplastic nails on feet, scoliosis, syndactyly of third and 4 toes on the left side. We only had a chest X-ray from our patient Goldenhar syndrome (GS) is a developmental disorder involving first and which did not show striated bones. Initially Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dys- second pharyngeal arches during blastogenesis. It is characterized by cra- plasia was suspected and genetic testing for T P73
L did not reveal any patho- niofacial anomalies (oculoauriculo vertebral (OAV) dysplasia, hemifacial genic mutation. We then sequenced PORCN gene and identified c.611T>C microsomia, facioauriculo vertebral sequence), epibulbar tumours, ear mal- (p.Leu204Pro) mutation. In conclusion we present a patient with Goltz syn- formation and vertebral anomalies; cardiac, pulmonary, renal, skeletal, and drome with unusual findings. Our patient did not have any of the common central nervous system anomalies have also been described. The etiology of e Pc 1t 1od .0e 7r 0m -a Ml, skeletal or ocular findings seen in such patients. GS is not fully understood, it seems related to vascular disruption, predomi- Xq26.2q26.3 microduplication in a boy with developmental delay, nantly of the stapedial and the external carotid artery, which alters the mor- distinct facial appearance and genitourinary abnormalities phogenesis of structures derived from the first and second branchial arches. K. Writzl1, N. Teran1, A. Liedén2, B. Peterlin1; Although most affected individuals are isolated cases in otherwise normal 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, families, some familial cases suggest that GS might have a genetic basis. Lin- 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center for Molecular Medicine, kage and array-CGH analysis have detected several candidate loci for this Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. genetically heterogeneous condition (including deletions in 1p22.2-p31.1, 2q11, 5p14, 12p13.33, 14q31.1q31.3, 15q24.1q24.2, 18p, 22q11.2, 22qter; duplications in 14q23.1, 22q11q13, unbalanced translocations, trisomies Microduplications involving the long arm of chromosome X are rare and of chromosomes 7,8,9,10p, 22). No recurrent chromosomal abnormalities the phenotypic consequences of functional disomy of X-chromosome ge- were identified. In our study genotyping by High Density SNP-array (Huma- nes in men remain mostly unknown. We here report on a 4-year-old boy nOmniExpress BeadChip, Illumina, CA) was performed on five GS unrelated with a Xq26.2q26.3 microduplication. The boy was born at 41 weeks after cases. No specific CNVs were detected (the data were analyzed by Genome- an uneventful pregnancy, with birth weight 2580g (<1st centile), length 48 Studio software Illumina, CA, and compared to the Database of Genomic Va- cm (3rd centile), head circumference (HC) 36 cm (75th centile). He sat at riants http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/). Whole exome sequencing is now 13 months and walked at 18 months. At the age of 4.5 years he spoke no in progress to identify possible single gene mutations potentially involved in words and showed some autistic-like behaviour. He had normal growth pa- the disease pathogenesis. Updated data will be presented and discussed. rameters (75th centile). Examination revealed hypertelorism, small, low-set  P11
.068-M ears, small mouth, clinodactyly of toes, micropenis, hypoplastic scrotum, A case of Goldenhar syndrome and microrearrangements of right-sided duplicated collecting system and bilateral ventriculomegaly. chromosome 12 Chromosomal microarray analysis (180K oligo) showed a 0.77 Mb duplica- I. Loddo1, A. Capalbo2, L. Bernardini2, M. R. Pizzino1, E. Moschella1, S. Meduri1, M. tion of Xq26.2q26.3, encompassing the whole coding sequence of the PHF6, Crapanzano1, D. Pompili2, M. C. Cutrupi1, S. Briuglia1; 1Dipartiment of Paediatric Science, Messina, Italy, 2CSS-Mendel Institute, Roma, Italy. HPRT1, PLA C1
 genes and the first exon of the GP C3
 gene. The result from the array was confirmed by MLPA analysis The duplication was inherited from the phenotypically normal mother and not detected in two healthy maternal We report a case of a 10 months boy. During pregnancy, the amniocentesis brothers. The phenotype of the reported patient shares some features with was performed after the detection of congenital heart disease, with a normal recently reported microduplication syndrome of Xq25q26 (Møller et al., fetal karyotypel. The heart defect was characterized by situs ambiguous in 2014), like prenatal growth retardation, genital abnormalities, digital mal- destrocardia, left atrial isomerism, muscular apical ventricular septal defect, formations and intellectual disability, but not the short stature, microcepha- atrial septal defect in fossa ovalis. He was also affected by bilateral severe ly, and facial features. The smaller size of duplication with only partial du- hearing loss, iris and chorioretinal coloboma in the right eye, dermoid cyst plication of the GP C3
 gene is a possible cause of phenotypic discrepancies. in the left eye, two preauricular tags on the left ear and one tag on the left These observations suggest that the Xq26.2q26.3 duplication represents a cheek, facial asymmetry and growth retardation. SNP-array release hg19 d Pi 1s 1ti .n 0c 7t 1 c -l Sinical entity. showed a microdeletion of chromosome 12q13.3 [(57,160,163-57,317,932) Three new patients with Hamamy syndrome: expanding the x1 pat] and a microduplication of chromosome 12q22.33 [(90,562,016-91- phenotype ,612,832)x3 mat]. In the duplicated region there are two genes, KERA and H. Kayserili1, U. Altunoglu1, C. Bonnard2, A. Ayaz3, Y. Guven4, B. Reversade2; DCN. The protein encoded by KERA gene is a Keratan Sulfate Proteoglycan 1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, that is involved in corneal transparency. It may be important in developing Turkey, 2Institute of Medical Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore, 3Pamukkale University Medical Faculty, Medical and maintaining corneal transparency and for the structure of the stromal Genetics Department, Denizli, Turkey, 4Department of Pedodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, matrix. The protein encoded by DCN gene is Decorine, a component of the Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. extracellular matrix, involved in the organization of collagens. Collagens play an important role in the cornea, which is the clear outer covering of the eye. Bundles of collagen called fibrils must be strictly organized for the Hamamy syndrome is a very rare, autosomal recessively inherited mal- cornea to be transparent. Decorin ensures that these collagen fibrils are formation syndrome characterized by craniofacial findings, bone fragility, uniformly sized and regularly spaced. The clinical features are indicative of conductive heart defects and sensorineural hearing impairment. Patients Goldenhar Syndrome and the involvement of these microrearrangements as have common dysmorphic features such as severe telecanthus with hyper- a contributory cause of the disease cannot be ruled out. telorism, sparse lateral eyebrows, thin upper vermilion border, flat philtrum and dysplastic, protruding ears. High myopia with retinal changes, absent or dysfunctional nasolacrimal structures, teeth anomalies, mycrocytic hypo- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 219 chromic anemia and mild intellectual deficit may also be present.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The syndrome was clinically described as a new syndrome by Hamamy et Considering the high tumor risk, a careful clinical surveillance, regardless al. in 2007, in two brothers born to double first cousin parents of Jordanian- the different methylation patterns is mandatory in these individuals.  P11
.074-M Arabic origin. Identification of two further patients from a Turkish family Hepatoblastoma and severe neurodevelopmental phenotype in led to the localization of the causative IgReXn5e to 16q12.2-q21, using homo- neurofibromatosis type I: a case report and review of the literature zygosity mapping. By locus re-IsReXq5uencing, two different homozygous mis- E. M. M. Burkitt Wright1,2, S. Holden3, S. Williams1, M. Zenker4, G. C. M. Black1,2, B. sense mutations were identified in the gene. A member of the Iroquis Kerr1,2; family of transcription factors, plays an active role in face, heart, blood, 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Institute brain, bone and gonad development. IRX5 of Human Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, We report here a clinical and molecular evaluation of three new patients 3East Anglia Regional Genetics Service, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany. carrying two novel homozygous mutations in , along with previously unreported clinical findings, including acute myeloid leukemia with matu- ration. The phenotypic and molecular features of the Hamamy syndrome patients will be reviewed to further delineate the clinical and mutational A male patient presented with severe neonatal hypotonia including bulbar spectrum. muscle involvement, necessitating tracheostomy. Severe feeding difficulties  P11
.072-M and gastro-oesophageal reflux led to gastrostomy placement. Hepatoblasto- Novel de novo heterozygous FGFR1 mutation in two siblings with ma was diagnosed at 5 months, and successfully treated with surgery and Hartsfield syndrome: suggesting gonadal mosaicism chemotherapy. Clinical genetic examination revealed features suggestive of R. Dhamija, S. Kirmani, X. Wang, D. Babovic; a Ras-MAPK pathway disorder: relative macrocephaly, ptosis, downslanting Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. palpebral fissures, curly hair, thickened ear helices, short stature and mode- rate to severe developmental delay. Cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) syndrome FGFR1 was suggested as the most BliRkeAlFy, dKiRaAgSn,o MsiAs,P d2uKe1 to theM sAePv2eKri2ty of develop- We describe two siblings with Hartsfield syndrome(association of holo- mental delay and oHnReA pSrevious report of hepatoblastoma in CFC syndrome. prosencephaly, ectrodactyly, cleft lip and palate) and a novel de novo Genetic testing of exons of and was normal, mutation suggesting gonadal mosaicism. The proband presented at age 6 as was testing of and Noonan syndrome associated genes. Features years for genetic evaluation.He was a product of a non-consanguineous uni- of neurofibromatosis type I developed in later childhood: skinfold freckling on.Multiple congenital anomalies were detected at birth.His phenotype was and café au lait patches were present, and a plexiform dnee unorovfoibroma was consistent with Hartsfield syndrome (global developmental delay with spa- identified inN hFi1s left arm at 10 years of age. The SureSelect 50Mb exome en- stic quadriplegia due to holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly of bilateral hand richment kit and Illumina HiSeq were used to reveal a 4 basepair and feet and bilateral cleft lip and pSaHlaHte, )S.IPXr3e,v ZioIu C2
s , gTeGnIeFtic evaluation in- deletion in , with no other known pathogenic variants being identified cluded normal karyotype, oligonucleotide array and sinagtle gen,e H toeustsitnogn ,fToXr in this analysis. non-sydned nroovmo ic holoprosencephaly ( FGFR).1A t the age of 6 The degree of neurodevelopmental delay in this patient was highly atypical years, exome sequencing was performed on the patient BCM for NF1. There has been only one previous report of hepatoblastoma in NF1, and a novel missense variant was identified in (coding for fi- suggesting that this too is a rare association. These two highly atypical phe- broblast growth factor-1) on chromosome 8p12:c.1880G>C (p.R627T).This notypic aspects led to difficulties in making the diagnosis. This patient’s pre- variant affects a highly evolutionarily conserved area of the gene, replacing sentation emphasises the related nature of Ras-MAPK pathway disorders arginine with theorine.Online prediction programs suggest this variant is and the potential of massively parallel sequencing for effective diagnosis of a deleterious mutation.Subsequently a younger FsGibFlRin1g was born with the these conditions. same phenotype (holoprosencephaly, ectrodacFtGyFlyR o1f bilateral hand and feet  P11
.075-S and bilateral cleft lip and palate).Sequencing of revealed the identi- 13q14.2 duplication in a patient with alobar HPE phenotype cal variant. We report a novel heterozygous mutation in Hartsfield associated with large ears synFdGrFoRm1e in two siblings, making this as the first case of familial recurrence B. F. Gamba1, A. Richieri-Costa2, S. Costa3, S. L. Lucas2, C. Rosenberg3, L. A. Ribeiro- Bicudo1; of this rare syndrome. Both parents were negative for the sequence vFaGriFaRn1t 1Universidade Estadual Paulista - Unesp/Brazil, Botucatu, Brazil, 2Hospital of in , thus suggesting gonadal mosaicism. This report also expands the Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, Bauru, Brazil, 3Institute of Biosciences, phenotypic spectrum associated with loss of function mutations in University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. gene to include Hartsfield syndrome and confirms autosomal dominant in- heritance of this condition.  P11
.073-S Clinical and molecular dissection of two novel cases of Holoprosencephaly is a common developmental defect; affecting both the hemihyperplasia forebrain and the face and presenting a high mortality rate with only the M. Magliozzi1, G. Pascolini1,2, S. Loddo1,2, F. Restaldi1,2, C. Martinez3, R. Ottaviani4, A. minority of patients surviving after 1 year. The etiology of HPE is complex, Pizzuti2, A. De Luca1, L. Sinibaldi1,4; with both environmental and genetic factors being implicated. Here we 1“Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza“, San Giovanni Rotondo, presented a girl with a classic alobar HPE phenotype associated with large Italy, 2Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza ears. Investigation of copy numberTM changes was performed by array-CGH University, Rome, Italy, 3“Pediatric unit, Belcolle Hospital, AUSL Viterbo“, Viterbo, Italy, 4“Cytology and Cytogenetic laboratory, Belcolle Hospital, AUSL Viterbo“, Viterbo, Italy. using the whole genome Cytosure , ISCA V2 array 4X180K (Oxford Gene Techology, OGT, UK) containing ~180.000 oligonucleotides. Result showed ~14Kb duplication at 13q14.2 (47.948.518-47.963.274pb) with partial- ly duplication of RB1 gene (based on UCSC Genome Bioinformatis, Hg18, Hemihyperplasia (HH) term describes an asymmetric body overgrowth, http://genome.ucsc.edu). Reports on partial 13q duplication are unusual generally due to an increased or unregulated cell proliferation, which can and the phenotype resulting is very heterogeneous. Duplication of the 13q involve one or both sides of the body, a single limb or a half of the face. There distal chromosomal region has been also reported in a fetus that showed is clinical overlap between HH and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Both dysmorphic features such as postaxial polydactyly of the right hand and left conditions have been associated with molecular abnormalities of the im- foot with short fingers, malformatation of the gut, and a micropenis with printed cluster of genes at 11p15. We report on two pediatric patients with hypospadias. Cerebellar hypoplasia had been noticed at ultrasound exami- typical features of asymmetric body overgrowth. The first subject is an 8 nation in the 14-week of gestation. The main purpose of the present report month-old baby having only one body side manifesting HH and left asymme- is to stress the importance of array CGH in patients with midline defects, tric macroglossia. Polyhydramnios, umbilical hernia and omphalocele were since it represents a paramount point concerning genetic counseling and also noted during pregnancy. Molecular testing conducted using MS-MLPA management to families. analysis identified a mosaic hypermetilation of the imprinting center I C1
-  P11
.076-M H19 and hypometilation of the imprinting center I C2
-KVDMR1. Uniparental Holt-Oram syndrome: new TBX5 exonic deletion leading to extreme disomy testing with microsatellite markers and SNP-array analysis confir- variability among affected family members med mosaic uniparental isodisomy of 11p15 region. The second patient, a V. López-González1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas2, M. J. Ballesta-Martínez1, M. Martínez-García3, 10-year-old girl, presented a crossed asymmetry in the length of upper and J. A. Ortega-García4, J. L. Delgado-Marín5, E. Guillén-Navarro6; 1Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Clínico Universitario lower limbs. At one year of age, she developed a left hypochondrial lipobla- Virgen de la Arrixaca. Grupo Clínico Vinculado al CIBERER-ISCIII (Madrid), Murcia, stoma. In this patient, MS-MLPA analysis of 11p15 region identified a mosaic Spain, 2Servicio de Genética. Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 3Departamento KVDMR1 hypomethylation in both blood and saliva. To our knowledge, this de Genética IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz. Current affiliation: Departmento de Biología is the first description of a lipoblastoma in a HH patient with a chromosome Celular y Molecular. Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC). Campus de 11p15 region-imprinting defect. Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain, 4Unidad de Salud Medioambiental Pediátrica. Servicio de T 2h 2e 0 present results highlight the importance of peErfSorHmGin g2 g0e1n4et i|c MtesItLinAgN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG for 11p15 region imprinting defects in subjects with clinical diagnosis of HH.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Pediatría. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5Unidad de Medicina Fetal. Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 6Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. deletion is said to predispose to DBA because it contains the gene RP S17
, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. Grupo Clínico Vinculado al encoding for a ribosomal protein, responsible for 2% of DBA. Until now, ho- CIBERER-ISCIII (Madrid). Cátedra de Genética Médica. Universidad Católica San Antonio wever, DBA has been diagnosed with certainty in only one case of 15q25 de Murcia, Murcia, Spain. proximal deletion. The additional case reported here had a history of intra- Introduction: uterine growth retardation. Aged 18 months, the patient had a moderate developmental delay, dysmorphic features and musculoskeletal anomalies. Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant disor- He had a normochromic macrocytic aregenerative anemia with elevated der characterized by upper-limbT mBXa5lformation in combination with conge- erythrocyte adenosine deaminase activity and elevated HbF (3.2%) highly nCiltianli chaela rrte dpeofretc:t . More than 70% of patients who meet diagnostic criteria suggestive of DBA. A 15q25.2 microdeletion of 2.2Mb including RP S17
 was have an identifiable mutation in . identified using SNP array. The deletion of RP S17
 was confirmed by FISH 32-year-old woman. Second gestation. Abortion at 20 using a specific probe. The deletion was absent in the patient’s father and weeks because of bilateral upper-limb amelia in a male fetus. Normal ka- was impossible to test in his mother. To date, only a few mutations in RS P17
 ryotype. No necropsy. have been reported in patients with DBA. Anemia was mentioned in 4 cases The patient had a healthy son. Her partner had required surgery to correct among the 8 previous reported cases of 15q25.2 proximal deletion but the atrial septal defect in childhood. He displayed low-set thumbs with no major definite diagnosis of DBA was made in only 1 case. The present report con- upper-limb anomalies. firms that patients with 15q25.2 deletion involving RS P17
 are at risk of DBA In a further gestation, ultrasound detected again bilateral upper-limb amelia and possibly DBA-associated malignancies. in a male fetus at 12 weeks. Karyotype and heterochromatic repulsion ana-  P11
.079-S lysis were normal. The patient underwent abortion. Post-mortem examina- Moderate intellectual disability, speech delay, strabism, pseudo tion didn´t reveal heart defects. No environmental hazards were identified. Hirschprung disease and mild abnormalities of extremities in a girl A new pregnancy was followed closely by high-resolution ultrasound, wit- with a 2q24.3q31.2 duplication.A new syndrome ? hout detecting anomalies in a female fetus. At birth, triphalangeal thumbs M. Miguet1, Y. Alembik2, J. Rebeuh2, M. Dexheimer3, V. Kremer1, F. Girard1, E. Flori1; 1Service de Cytogénétique, Strasbourg, France, 2Service de génétique médicale, and atrial septal defect were present. TBX5 gene sequencing analysis re- Strasbourg, France, 3Service de Cytogénétique, Nancy, France. vealed no mutations. MLPA showed a deletion in exon 9, not previously de- sDcirsicbuesds. iTohne: same deletion was detected in the second affected fetus and the father, co-segregating with the disease. strabism We report on a 15-year-old gHirilr psrcehssepnrtuinngg with moderate intellectual disa- Upper-extremities abnormalities are variably expressed, even bility, delays in speech and language acquisition, and severe chro- within families. Although phocomelia has been described in HOS, there are nic constipation looking like disease in spite of the presence few reports of frank amelia. TBX5 analysis should be therefore considered of ganglion cells. Her parents are not consanguineous and in good health in such finding, even in the absence of heart defect. We report on a new but her paternal half-brother presents speech difficulties and moderate exonic deletion in TBX5. Upcoming expression and exome analysis will help intellectual disability. Conventional chromosome analysis was considered elucidate the mechanisms and modifying factors underlying its remarkable as normal, but array CGH showed a 10,2Mb interstitial duplication of the variable expressivity.  P11
.077-S 2q24.3q31.2 region. In situ hybridizatio2nq o3f1 p.a2ternal metaphases revealed a Three TBX5 gene mutations resulting in Holt-Oram syndrome direct intrachromosomal insertion of the long segment of chromosome 2 at J. Pilch1, A. Sowińska-Seidler2, A. Jamsheer2,3; band q32.3 between bands 2q24.3 and . The duplication observed in 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, the patient results from an abnormal meiotic recombination of the father’s 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Center insertion. Given its risk of recurrence for another child, an abnormality for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland. of the same chromosomal region has now to be searched in the girl’s half brother. The function of several duplicated genes can explain the phenotype of the patient. As it is, to our knowledge, the first 2q24.3q31.2 duplication Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is characterized by the congenital malformati- reported, additional patients are needed to improve the description of the ons of the heart, limbs, often accompanied with variable skeletal abnormali- phenotype. ties. HOS-associated limb malformations usually involve absent or hypopla-  P11
.080-M stic radial bone(s) and often abnormal thumb(s), which may be digitalised, Comprehensive sequencing of all known Joubert genes in a large absent, hypoplastic, triphalangeal or bifid. In a subset of patients, the syn- Joubert syndrome cohort in search of oligogenicity drome results from TBX5 mutations. To date, about 60 different TBX5 gene R. Bachmann-Gagescu1, I. Phelps2, B. O‘Roak3, C. Isabella2, D. O‘Day2, J. Dempsey2, I. lesions resulting in HOS have been identified. In this report, we describe Glass2, J. Shendure3, D. Doherty2; 1University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland, 2University of Washington- three index cases of Polish ethnicity suspected of HOS, in whom we perfor- Dept of Pediatrics, Seattle, WA, United States, 3University of Washington-Dept of Genome med TBX5 Sanger sequencing. In all three probands we identified hetero- Sciences, Seattle, WA, United States. zygous TBX5 causative mutations: c.255-256delCA(p. P85
fs94X), c. C524
T(p.  S175
F), c. C668
T(p.T223M). The first two mutations were novel, whereas the latter one represented previously identified variant. In the first two Joubert syndrome (JS) is a ciliopathy characterized by a distinctive hind- probands we observed severe bilateral hypoplasia of the radial bones and brain malformation, ataxia and cognitive dysfunction. It is typically inheri- absent thumbs. Both probands presented with complex congenital heart ted in an autosomal recessive manner caused by biallelic mutations in one defect composed of ventricular septal defect and persistent foramen ovale. of >20 genes, but despite the large number of causal genes, the underlying The third patient was born with inborn heart defect in the form of atrial cause remains unknown in more than one third of affected individuals. Af- septum defect with patent ductus arteriosus and skin syndactyly of thumbs fected individuals carrying multiple heterozygous rare deleterious variants with second fingers. Upon MRI of the head, hypoplasia of corpus callosum (RDVs) in known JS-associated genes raise the possibility of more complex was noted. Similar hand anomaly was observed in her father without heart genetics. To search for evidence of oligogenicity (defined as disease cau- involvement. Although based on a small sample, our study shows that TBX5 sation through combined effects of two or more heterozygous RDVs) and mutations may account for a significant proportion of HOS causative alte- genetic modifiers, we used a novel molecular inversion probe-based (MIP) rations and points to the importance of TBX5 mutational screening in the capture technology to sequence all known JS-associated genes in a large JS- patients clinically suspected of this syndrome.  P11
.078-M cohort. Using a recessive model where biallelic RDVs in any of the known Diamond-Blackfan anemia and intellectual disability: a new JS-associated genes were considered causal, we were able to determine the contiguous gene syndrome at 15q25.2 cause in less than two thirds of our subjects. In the remaining subjects, only A. Guichet1, E. Colin1, M. Gorce1, A. Donzeau2, A. Ziegler1, M. Barth1, I. Pellier2, D. a small number carried heterozygous RDVs in two or more JS-associated ge- Bonneau1; nes, and this proportion was not significantly different from that observed 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, CHU ANGERS, ANGERS, France, 2Department in a control population. Moreover, Sanger sequencing identified a second of Pediatrics, CHU ANGERS, ANGERS, France. RDV that had been missed by MIP sequencing in several subjects, thereby establishing a recessive cause in these individuals. Thus, our data do not support the hypothesis that a significant proportion of JS cases are due to 15q25.2 microdeletion is an emergent CNV locus for intellectual disability, oligogenicity involving RDVs in the known JS genes. Current analyses focus dysmorphic features and congenital anomalies. Two distinct microdeletions on determining whether genetic burden correlates with disease severity. have been described at this locus: 1) a distal deletion (11 cases) responsib- le for neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders and 2) a proxi- mal deletion (8 cases) which is a susceptibility locus for cognitive deficit, diaphragmatic hernia and Diamond-BlackE faS nH anG e m2 i0 a 1 (D4 B | A )M . TI hL iA s pN ro, xI iT mA aL l Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 221ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.081-S Multi-gene-panel diagnostics detects MK S1
- gene mutations in a boy ML L2
 KDM6A with Joubert-Syndrome drome were unknown. At present, two causative genes for KS have been I. M. Bader1, O. Rittinger1, G. Sander1, G. Kronberger1, S. Wieser1, J. Koch2, P. Pietsch3, M. identified, the and the genes. In this study we analyzed the Cohen3, M. Jakobeit3, B. Ertl-Wagner4, E. Decker5, H. Bolz5, C. Bergmann5,6; prevalence of CHD, cardiac anatomMicL tLy2pes anKdD mMo6lAec ular c haracteristics of 1Clinical Genetics Unit; Children’s Hospital; Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, 41 patients with KS from a single institution. All patients underwent car- Austria, 2Children’s Hospital; Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria, diological evaluation. Analysis of and MgeLnLe2swas performed 3Kinderzentrum München, Munich, Germany, 4Institute for Clinical Radiology, Ludwig- through targeted resequencing, using MiSeq® sequencing platform. All mu- Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 5Bioscientia; Center for Human Genetics, tations were validated through Sanger sequeKnDciMn6g.A mutations were Ingelheim, Germany, 6Center for Clinical Research and Department of Nephrology; University Hospital, Freiburg, Germany. found in 34/41 (83%), including nonsense, frameshift, in-frMamLLe2 duplicati- on, and missense variants. Two/41 (5%) had mutations. Additional chromosome rearrangements were detected in 3. CHDs in mutated patients (23/34=68%) included LVOTOs (bicuspid aortic valve, aortic coarc- Mutations in the MK S1
 gene are known to be a major cause for Meckel-Gru- tation, Shone complex) in 11/23 (48%), subaortic ventricular septal defect ber-Syndrome, a genetically heterogeneous condition and the most common in 5/23 (22%), atrial septal dKeDfeMct6 iAn 4/23 (17%), abnormal pulmonary ve- form of syndromic neural tube defect . The MK S1
 gene also accounts for a nous return (APVR) in 2/23 (9%), double outlet right ventricle (DORV) in minor fraction of the total mutational load in Bardet-Biedl-Syndrome. one (4%). The patients with mutation had normal heart. In conclu- We report the phenotype of a five year old boy from Austria with episodes sion, the high proportion of left-sided obstructions and the cardiac overlap of apnoe during the first 7 months of life, severe hypotonia, psychomotor re- with Turner syndrome (LVOTOs anMdL A L2
PVR) have been confirmed. No speci- tardation, congenital nystagmus and a molar tooth sign detected in the MRI fic hot spots for CHD have been identified, but mutations are preferentially of the brain, which suggested the diagnosis of Joubert syndrome. located in proximal and terminal . Unusual CHD (DORV) is diagnosed Next-Generation sequencing based multi-gene-panel diagnostics from a in association with an additional chromosomal rearrangement. blood sample revealed two mutations located in the MK S1
 gene: The first  P11
.084-M mutation, c.1407-7_1408_35del29, is known to be a major cause for Meckel- Hypermobility in Individuals with Kabuki Syndrome Gruber-Syndrome in homozygous state. The second mutation is a missense- C. Stumpel, M. Klaassens, P. Staps, N. Schott; mutation that has not yet been reported. Five bioinformatic tools predict an Academic Hospital Maastricht, 6202AZ Maastricht, Netherlands. alteration of protein function caused by the mutation. We therefore assume that these two mutations in the MK S1
 gene in compound heterozygous state are causative for the phenotype. Kabuki Syndrome (KS; OMIM 147920) is a well-known congenital anomaly/ Mutations in the MK S1
 gene are primarily reported in patients with Mec- intellectual disability syndrome caused by a mutation in the KMT2D gene kel-Gruber-Syndrome, a phenotype which denotes the most severe (usual- (OMIM 602113). Hypermobility has been described as one of the major fea- ly lethal) end of the spectrum of ciliopathies with occipital encephalocele tures of KS. However, no prevalence of hypermobility is known within the and other early embryonic malformations. Here we describe a patient with population of children with KS. On assessment of KS children in our clinic, classical Joubert syndrome which underlines the genetic heterogeneity in we noticed that the degree and the pattern of hypermobility varies greatly Joubert syndrome and illustrates the pleiotropy of MK S1
 mutations. amongst patients. Therefore, we aimed to assess the degree and pattern of  P11
.082-M hypermobility in the KS individuals. Kabuki syndrome: clinical and molecular diagnosis in the first year of Twenty individuals (age 3-30 years old) with KS and a known KMT2D mu- Life tation were assessed. The persons were evaluated using two systems: the M. Dentici, A. Di Pede, F. Lepri, M. Gnazzo, M. Lombardi, C. Auriti, S. Petrocchi, E. Pisaneschi, R. Capolino, A. Braguglia, A. Angiorni, A. Dotta, M. Digilio, B. Dallapiccola; Beighton and the Bulbena score. Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. The prevalence of hypermobility in this cohort was 25% using the Beighton score, and 45% using the Bulbena score. The difference between these two percentages is due to the items within each system and the pattern of hy- Objective: To review the clinical and molecular characteristics of 18 patients permobility in the KS patients. These patients have a non-generalized pat- presenting a suspected diagnosis of Kabuki Syndrome (KS) in the first year tern of hypermobility with the small joints of the hands and feet, hips and of life, in order to outline the clinical handles leading to a prompt diagnosis knees most affected. In contrast with the general population, boys with KS of KS in newborns. Clinical diagnosis of KS can be challenging during the have a higher degree of hypermobility than girls with KS. first year of life, as many diagnostic features become evident only in subse- We present the data in a graphical way. quent years. In conclusion, persons with KS have a specific non-generalized pattern of Methods: All patients were clinically investigated by trained clinical geneti- hypermobility with hips, patellae and the small joints of the hands most af- cists. A literature review was performed using the Pubmed online database f Pe 1c 1te .0d. 8 F 5u -r Sthermore, boys are more severely affected than girls. and Diagnostic criteria suggested by DYSCERNE_ Kabuki Syndrome Guide- Novel KDM6A (UTX) point mutations and a review of the X-linked lines (2010) were used. Molecular analysis of the known causative-genes of Kabuki syndrome (K S2
) KS, ML L2
 and KDM6A, was performed through targeted resequencing, using S. Banka1, D. Lederer2, V. Benoit2, E. Jenkins3, E. Howard3, S. Bunstone3, B. Kerr1, S. MiSeq® sequencing platform. All mutations identified were validated by McKee4, I. C. Lloyd5, D. Shears6, H. Stewart6, S. M. White7, R. Savarirayan7, G. M. S. Sanger sequencing standard protocols. Mancini8, D. Beysen9, R. D. Cohn10, B. Grisart2, I. Maystadt2, D. Donnai1; Results: Facial dysmorphisms (94%), feeding difficulties (100%) and hypo- 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Centre de Génétique Humaine, Charleroi, Belgium, 3St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Belfast City tonia (100%) suggested the clinical diagnosis of KS. Notably, long palpebral Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 5Manchester Royal Eye Hospital, Manchester, United fissures and large anteverted ears were present in 94% and 100% of the Kingdom, 6Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7University of Melbourne, cohort, respectively. Other abnormalities such as brachydactyly, joint laxity Melbourne, Australia, 8Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, and nail dysplasia were present in 15 (83%) patients. Congenital heart di- 9Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 10The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. seases occurred in 14 (77%) cases, the most common defects being septal de novoKMT2D defects (11/18;61%) and left-sided obstructive lesions (4/18; 22%). Mu- tations in ML L2
 gene were identified in 16/18 (89%) of the patients, while Autosomal dominant or (ML L2
)mutationKs DacMc6oAunt for ne- none of the patients had KDM6A mutations. arly one-third cases of Kabuki syndrome (K S1
, MIM 147920). Large deleti- Conclusions: We present an overview of patients with KS diagnosed during ons and nonsense or frameshift point mutadteio nnosv ionKvoDlMvi6nAg (UTX) on the first year of life. Early diagnosis is serviceable in terms of clinical ma- Xp11.3 are another very rare cause of this condition (K S2
, MIM 300867). n Pa 1g 1e .m 08e 3n -t S and for targeted genetic counselling. Here, we describe seven new patients with K mDMut6aAtions, which Congenital heart defects in Kabuki syndrome, revisited after new doubles the number of reported cases with point mutations in K S2
. We re- molecular knowledges port, for the first time, germline missense and splice-site mutations M. Digilio1, M. Gnazzo1, F. Lepri1, M. Dentici1, A. Baban1, E. Pisaneschi1, R. Capolino1, P. and confirm thKeDiMr p6Aathogenicity via multiple lines of evidence. Combined Sirleto1, A. Angioni1, B. Marino2, B. Dallapiccola1; analysis from two centres shows that less than 5% cases of Kabuki syndro- 1Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2University Sapienza of Rome, Rome, me are due to mutations. Italy. Our findings enable a detailed review of the clinical features of K S2
. We demonstrate that the developmental delay and learning disability in K S2
 is generally mKDodMe6rAate-severe in boys and mild-moderate in girls. Speech and Kabuki syndrome (KS) is associated with CHD in 28%-80% of the cases, cognition tend to be more severely affected than motor development. Some including left-sided obstructive lesions (LVOTOs), septal defects, and co- girls with mutations may have a normal developmental profile. Si- notruncal anomalies. Our group has performed a clinical review of CHDs milar to the commoner K S1
, K S2
 patients are characterized by hypotonia d2ia2g2nosed in patients with KS in 2001, when molEeScuHlaGr b 2a0sis1 4of |t hMe IsLyAn-N, aIT nA d fL eY ed | i nW g dW iffW icu. lE tiS esH dG ur. iO ngR inG fancy and poor postnatal growth and shortABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.088-M Familial case of KBG syndrome caused by a novel ANKRD11 gene stature. Increased susceptibility to infections, join laxity, heart, dental and mutation ophthalmological anomalies are common. Hypoglycaemia is moKrDe Mco6mAmon P. Louro1, A. Beleza-Meireles1, L. Ramos1, S. Maia1, J. Pereira2, J. M. Saraiva1,3; in K S2
 than in K S1
. Importantly, diagnosis on facial gestalt alone may be 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de difficult in many patients because the facial dyKsDmMor6pAhism with mu- Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Molecular Hematology Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, tations is highly variable. Hypertrichosis, long halluces and large central Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3University Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. incisors may be useful clues to an underlying mutation in some pa- tients. 1  P11
.086-M Background: KBG syndrome is an autosomal dominant dAisNeKasReD c1h1aracteri- Examining Kabuki syndrome causing mutations in Czech population zed by intellectual disability, seizures, short stature, skeletal anomalies and J. Paderova1, A. Holubova1, M. Simandlova1, A. Puchmajerova1, M. Vlckova1, M. distinct craniofacial features. It is caused by mutations in gene. Malikova1, R. Pourova1, S. Vejvalkova1, M. Havlovicova1, M. Senkerikova2, N. Ptakova1, A. Methods: We report the cases of a 19-year-old woman and her 41-year-old Krepelova1, M. Macek Jr.1; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - 2nd Faculty of mother presenting with intellectual disability, short stature and short 5th Medicine and Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical fingers. While the mother had already lost most of her teeth, we observed Genetics, Charles University - Faculty of Medicine and Faculty Hospital Hradec Kralove, that her daughter had macrodontia oAfN tKhRe Du1p1per central incisors. The dia- Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic. gnosis of AKNBKGR sDy1n1drome was suspected. Hence, we proceeded with mutati- on screen of the coding region of the gene. de-novo Results: gene sequencing revealed a heterozygous pathogenic Kabuki (make-up) syndrome (KS) is an autosomally dKoMmTin2Dant disorder nonsense mutation, c.1318C>T [p.(Arg440*)], previously not described in caused by mutations and has an MesLtLim2ated prevalence of 1:32 000 the literature. ANKRD11 newborns. K S1
 is caused KbyD Mm6uAtations or deletions in (lysine/K/ Conclusion: Our patients showed clinical features of KBG syndrome. The specific MethylTransferase 2D) (formerly ) gene, while K S2
 is due to si- molecular analysis of gene confirmed our clinical hypothesis, milar molecular defects in (lysine/K/specific DeMethylase 6A) gene. which allows a more precise genetic counselling for our patients and their Here wKeM pTre2sDent mKolDeMcu6lAar genetic analysis in a cohort of 14 Czech patients f Pa 1m 1i .l 0y. 89-S with clinical symptoms indicative of KS bKyM DTN2AD sequencing ofK cModTi2nDg regi- X chromosome-linked copy number variations in Klinefelter ons of and genes, including MLPA-based analysis (kit  P389
- syndrome A1) of intragenic rearrangements within . Mutations in were M. S. Rocca1, V. Pecile2, R. Selice1, N. Caretta1, C. Foresta1, A. Ferlin1; detected in 6/14 (43%) of patients. All detected mutations were truncating, 1University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy. thereby predicting haploinsufficiency. Three mutations were previously pu- blished (c.16371_16K3D74Md6eAl, c.8743C>T, c.5627_5630del) and three are no- vel (c.248K8MG>TT2,D c.4549_4549delG, c.6349K_6D3M560AdelinsA). No mutations were Klinefelter syndrome 47,XXY (KS) is the most common sex-chromosome detected within the , as well as intragenic rearraKngMeTm2eDnts were not aneuploidy in men, characterized by at least one supernumerary X chro- found in gene (KMMLT P2
AD assay for is not available, thus far). mosome. The wide spectrum of clinical manifestations in KS often varies Our results substantiated the disease association with gene. Since in severity. The clinical features of KS commonly include hypergonadotro- the clinical features of “ mutation-positive” cases did not differ from pic hypogonadism, gynecomastia, small testes and azoospermia, with a va- those, where aforementioned methods did not detect any DNA alterations, rying degree of androgen deficiency, gynecomastia, cognitive dysfunction, we plan to utilize next generation sequencing in an attempt to identify other increased central adiposity, increased height with eunuchoid proportions, loci that are potentially contributing to the genetic heterogeneity in KS. and increased frequency of diabetes, metabolic syndrome, osteoporosis, au- S Pu 1p 1p .0o 8rt 7e -d S by CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022OPPK and 00064203. toimmune disorders and psychosocial/behavioural abnormalities. The me- A novel mutation in KAT6B in a patient with genitopatellar syndrome chanism by which the supernumerary X-chromosome determines the clini- and some features of SBBYSS cal phenotypes in KS is poorly understood, although genetic background in M. Vlckova1, M. Simandlova1, V. Stranecky2, H. Hartmannova2, K. Hodanova2, M. conjunction with the parental origin of the supernumerary X chromosome Havlovicova1, Z. Sedlacek1, S. Kmoch2; and consequently with gene-dosage effects may contribute to the variability 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of of the phenotype and increase risk of certain diseases in KS. Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Inherited In order to understand the role of X-linked Copy Number Variations (CNVs) Metabolic Disorders, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University in Klinefelter subjects, we recruited 93 patients having non-mosaic KS and Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. 85 healthy controls. We performed SNP array analyses using the Human OmniExpress-12 Bead Chip (Illumina Inc.). By the analysis of the X chro- mosome, we observed CNVs patient-specific not reported in Database of Genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) and Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson Genomic Variants (DGV). Furthermore the total length of duplications and syndrome (SBBYSS) are two clinically overlapping syndromes. Recently de deletions, and the length of duplications and deletions per patient were si- novo heterozygous truncating mutations in KAT6B have been identified in gnificantly different from controls. SBBYSS, and independently also in GPS. This is the first study that shows CNVs on X-chromosome in KS patients and KAT6B encodes lysine acetyltransferase 6B, a part of histone H3 acetyltrans- represents an important step forward a better understanding of clinical fea- ferase complex. KAT6B is highly conserved and expressed in adult neural tures of this syndrome. stem cells. Most mutations are in exon 18 encoding the acidic (A) and tran-  P11
.090-M scriptional activation (TA) domains of KAT6B. Genotype-phenotype correla- KMT2D and KDM6A mutations in Kabuki syndrome tion showed that patients with mutations in the 5´ region of exon 18 leading N. Miyake1, E. Koshimuzu1, N. Matsumoto1, N. Niikawa2; to loss of both domains suffer from GPS, while patients with mutations in 1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2Health Science University of Hokkaido, Hokkaido, Japan. the 3´ region leading to loss of the TA domain suffer from SBBYSS. We present an 8-year-old girl with intellectual disability, autism and multip- le developmental anomalies. She has corpus callosum agenesis, flexion con- Kabuki syndrome (KS; MIM 147920) is a congenital anomaly syndrome tractures, hypoplastic patella, renal cysts and tracheomalacia (symptoms characterized by developmental delay, intellectual disability, specific facial frequent in GPS but rare in SBBYSS), as well as blepharophimosis, lacrimal features including long palKpMebTr2aDl fissurKeDs Man6dA ectropion of the lateral third ducts stenosis, long toes, hypotonia and normal head circumference (fre- of the lower eyelids, prominent digit pads, and skeletal and visceral abnor- quent in SYBBYSS but rare in GPS) and atrial septal defect, feeding difficul- malities. As mutantions in and are knownn to cause KS, we ties and bulbous nose (common to both syndromes). screened 81 individunals with KS for mutations in theseK gMenTe2sD by cKoDnMve6nA- Karyotyping and aCGH analysis of the patient yielded normal results. Who- tional methods ( = 58) and/or targeted resequencing ( = K4M5)T 2oDr whole le exome and Sanger sequencing of the family trio showed de novo hetero- exome sequencKinDgM (6A = 5). We id entified a mutation in or zygous truncating mutation KAT6B:NM_001256469:exon18:c.3295G>T:p. KinM 5T02 (D61.7%) and five (6.2%) cases, respectively. Thirty-five muta-  E1099
X located in the 5´ region of exon 18, which should cause GPS. Howe- tions and two mutationswere novel. Non-protein truncating-type ver, our patient manifests also many features of SBBYSS. Therefore this case mutations were mainly locaKtMedT 2aDround functional domains, while demonstrates that the phenotypic overlap between GPS and SBBYSS could truncating-type mutations were scattered through the entire coding region. be broader than expected previously. The facial features of patients in the truncating-type mutation group Supported by 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.100/24022 and NT/14200. were typical based on those of the ten originally reported patients with Ka- ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |b WukWi syWnd.EroSmHe;G t.hOosRe Gof the other groups were less typical. High ar 2c 2he 3dABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.093-S KMT2D KDM6A Phenotype of two patients with mandibulofacial dysostosis with eyebrows, short fifth finger, and hypotonia in infancy were more frequent microcephaly (MFDM) associated with esophageal atresia and in theK DM6A mutation group than in the mutaKtMioTn2 gDroup. Short choanal atresia caused by EFTUD2 mutations stature and postnatal growth retardation were observed in all individuals R. Smigiel1, A. Jakubiak2, D. Patkowski3, M. M. Sasiadek2; with mutations, but in only half of the groupwith mutations. 1Department of Paediatrics and Rare Disorders, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, The genetic basis of the patients who tested mutation-negative (20-45%) Wroclaw, Poland, 2Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, remains elusive. Further studies are necessary to understand the whole pic- Poland, 3Department of Paediatric Surgery and Urology, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland. ture of the genetic aspects of KS and its genotype-phenotype relationships.  P11
.091-S Large cryptic genomic rearrangements with apparently normal karyotypes detected by array-CGH Mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) causes malar and mandibular hypoplasia, E. Savin1, E. Di Gregorio1,2, F. Fiocchi1, V. G. Naretto1, E. Biamino3, E. Belligni3, C. Mancini2, cleft palate and hearing loss. Several distinct MFD syndromes are recogni- S. Cavalieri1, E. Pozzi2, E. Giorgio2, E. Colombo1, F. Talarico1, P. Pappi1, E. Grosso1, M. Cirillo zed, one of them is MFD with microcephaly (MFDM), sometimes associated Silengo3, G. B. Ferrero3, A. Brusco1,2; 1S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin, Italy, 2University with major defect: choanal atresia (CA), esophageal atresia (EA), kidney and of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Turin, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, heart defects. We present two unrelated patients with MFDM confirmed by University of Turin, Turin, Italy. EFTUD2 mutations and associated with EA and CA. 1. Female, 36hbd, birth weight-1720g. EA, cleft palate and hearing loss were diagnosed. Facial dysmorphism includes microcephaly, asymmetric face, Chromosomal abnormalities that result in genomic imbalances, such as hyperplastic supraorbital ridges, broad base of nose, retromicrognatia, mi- numerical or structural changes, are one of the most common causes of crotia, preauricular tags. The patient had gastrostomy and tracheostomy. congenital and developmental anomalies. Conventional karyotyping with Psychomotor, somatic and speech development is delayed but social deve- a resolution of at least 550 bands should be able to identify chromosomal lopment is correct. CHARGE, facio-auriculo-vertebral spectrum and syndro- aberrations down to 5-10 Mb. In contrast, a-CGH analysis is known to detect me described by Megabrane et al. were considered after birth. submicroscopic imbalances increasing the diagnostic yield to 15-20% in pa- 2. Female, 37hbd, birth weight-2400g. Respiratory distress due to CA and tients with an cognitive impairment and/or multiple congenital anomalies. hearing loss were diagnosed. Facial dysmorphism includes microcepha- Here we report a subgroup of patients referred for multiple malformations, ly, microtia, asymmetry, preauricular tags, hypertelorism, narrow palate, developmental delay / cognitive impairment, and an apparent normal stan- micrognathia. Psychomotor and speech development is delayed but social dard karyotype. Whole genome array-CGH analysis (60 K, Agilent Techno- contact with child is correct. CHARGE and Bohring-Opitz syndromes were logies) identified six patients with large terminal complex rearrangements, considered after birth.. all beyond the threshold of 5Mb (6 to 18 Mb). Results were suggestive for MFDM in both patients was suspected. EFTUD2 gene was sequenced. The the presence of an unbalanced translocation derivative, confirmed by FISH mutation c.1435dup was identified in patient 1 and c1859A>T in patient 2. analysis. Five were inherited from a parent with a balanced translocation, The full clinical spectrum of MFDM is heterogeneous. Facial phenotype with and one was apparently de novo. ear abnormalities and microcephaly of presented patients was distinctive, Comparison of the karyotype and array-CGH showed that cytogenetic re- but observed major defects in neonatal period were considered as leading arrangements were all almost indistinguishable from a normal karyotype, symptoms and correct diagnosis was delayed. We suggest that MFDM should swapping similar band patterns. be taken in the differential diagnosis of child with craniofacial malformati- Only one case was recurrent in an affected brother with the same rearran- ons accompanied by EA or CA.  P11
.094-M gement and an identical phenotype. Miscarriages were reported in two fa- A new case of MDP syndrome caused by recurrent single-codon milies. deletion in the POLD1 gene In conclusions, large complex rearrangements involving chromosomal regi- M. Murdocca1, C. Fiorillo2, F. Trucco2, M. Pedemonte2, M. D‘Apice3, F. Sangiuolo1, G. ons with similar size and band appearance may be missed by conventional Novelli1, C. Minetti2; karyotype and detected by array CGH to allow a precise chromosomal dia- 1University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 2G.Gaslini Hospital, Genoa, Italy, 3Tor Vergata gnosis and recurrence risk definition. Hospital, Rome, Italy.  P11
.092-M Family cases of Leopard syndrome S. I. Iurian1,2, H. Brunner3, H. Yntema3, S. Iurian4, A. Vidrighin2, B. I. Mehedintu4; 1Pediatric Clinical Hospital, Sibiu, Romania, 2Lucian Blaga University, Sibiu, Romania, Progeroid features with concomitant cardiac, skeletal, and muscular ano- 3Radboud University, Human Genetic Department, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Pediatric malies, lipodystrophy and insuline resistance define rare genetic diseases Clinic Hospital, Sibiu, Romania. named laminopathies, caused by mutations in genes encoding nuclear pro- teins. Here, we report a case of a 13-yr-old girl, second-born of non consan- Background. LEOPARD syndrome is a complex disorder characterized by guineous parents, who showed retarded growth, anemia and xerotic skin multiple dysmorphogenetic features. According to molecular studies, LEO- at age 1. She showed triangular facies, micrognathia, low-set and small PARD syndrome and Noonan syndrome are caused by different mutations ears and sensorineural deafness at age 8. Other clinical features included in PTPN11 gene. Aims. Authors emphasize diagnosis peculiarities in two hypertrichosis, a notable subcutaneous fat loss from her extremities with relatives with facial dysmorphism. Methods. Authors presents a 10 year-old accumulation at abdomen level and insuline-resistance. She also presented boy admitted for airway infection symptoms. Family history: non-consan- generalized hypotonia, severe muscular hypotrophy and joint contractures. guineous parents; father and sister with face dysmorphism. Clinical exam: Given that the clinical overlapping with progeroid disorders, genetic analy- short stature, impaired nutritional status, axillary freckles, widespread café- sis of known mutated genes was performed. We identified an in frame single au-lait spots, face dysmorphism (hipertelorism, mandibular prognathism, codon deletion (c.1812_1814delCTC, p. S605
del) in POLD1 gene, encoding broad nasal root, high arched palate, large and posteriorly rotated ears, DNA polymerase δ, has been recently associated to a multisystem disorder down slanted palpebral fissures), webbed neck, skeletal anomalies (thorax named MDP syndrome, characterized by Mandibular hypoplasia, Deafness anomalies, bilateral wide hallux with exostosis), interdigital webs between and Progeroid features, detected in other four MDP patients. hallux and 2nd toe, mental retardation. Results. Blood investigations didn’t The case underlines the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of patients with reveal anomalies. Cardiac ultrasound exam: no pulmonary stenosis. Diffe- adipose tissue, skeletal and muscular anomalies, associated to progeroid rential diagnosis includes Noonan syndrome (see webbed neck, short statu- features.  P11
.095-S re), Greig syndrome (due to wide hallux, feet cutaneous sindactily), type 1 Loss-of-function mutations in MED13L cause a distinctive clinical neurofibromatosis (because of café-au-lait spots, axillary freckles), Albright phenotype mimicking the 1p36 deletion syndrome syndrome (see skin pigmentation). The patient was evaluated from genetic G. Marangi1, C. Cafiero1, D. Orteschi1, A. Moncada1, V. Leuzzi2, G. Mancano1, D. Battaglia3, point of view: normal karyotype. Suspicion for Noonan syndrome has justi- I. Contaldo3, M. Stefanini3, E. Mercuri3, M. Zollino1; fied DNA sequencing that revealed mutation in PTPN11 gene (c.1403C>T, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics p.Met468Thr) suggestive for LEOPARD syndrome. Authors also found same and Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy, mutation for probant’s father. Conclusions. 1.Authors described two related 3Department of Paediatric Neurology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy. cases with dysmorphic skull, skeletal anomalies, skin pigmentation, mental disabilities and short stature, justifying further genetic evaluation and reve- aling a very rare genetic disorder; 2.Genetic counseling and examination of Exome sequencing (WES) has already been proven to be an effective method other family members is important (probant’s sister). for the identification of the causative gene in small groups of subjects clini- cally selected by sharing homogenous phenotypes. 224 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, WIT eA sL eY le c| t eW d W a gW rou.E pS oH f 8G p. aO tiR enG ts with overlapping phenotype, resemblingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index the 1p36 deletion syndrome and with normal array-CGH (15kb resoluti- The most common features of del3q29 phenotype include mild-to-modera- on). By means of WES in two of them, we found two causative mutations: te intellectual deficit and slightly dysmorphic facial features: microcephaly, p.M303K in SYT1 (subject 1) and p. P1255
Pfs*3 in MED13L (subject 2). The long and narrow face/asymmetric face, short philtrum, large posteriorly ro- missense mutation in SYT1 involves an essential functional domain. By tated ears, high nasal bridge, crowded/dysplastic teeth, tapered fingers with Sanger sequencing of both genes in the other subjects, we identified ano- occasionally observed autism and gait ataxia. Clinical features of dup3q29, ther MED13L mutation (p. S203
Sfs*32) in one. All mutations were de novo. included micro/macro-cephaly, round face, bulbous nose, short or downs- Missense mutations involving MED13L have already been identified as re- lanting palpebral fissures, excessive hand creases, obesity and pes planus. sponsible for isolated congenital heart defects. One only literature report Herein, we report on two unrelated female patients with different phenotypic deals with complete or partial gene deletion, which were also associated to consequences (high interindividual phenotypic variability) due to de novo intellectual disability (ID). Mutations in SYT1 have never been described in deletion of an identical segment [spanning ~2.0Mb (start 195,438,699bp humans. - 197,404,251bp)] and one female patient with de novo duplication of Our three patients presented with moderate ID and shared facial features, 3q29 which overlap this region [spanning ~1.58Mb (start 195,740,387bp including brachycephaly, horizontal eyebrows, high forehead, long eyelas- - 197,317,074 bp)].  P11
.098-M hes, depressed nasal bridge, mid-face hypoplasia. Additional clinical signs Molecular analysis of ACTG2 in a cohort of patients with Megacystis were epilepsy (subject 1), cleft palate, clubfoot and conductive hearing loss Microcolon Intestinal Hypoperistalsis Syndrome suggests locus (subject 2) and atrial septal defect (subject 3). Patient 2 was diagnosed with heterogeneity acute lymphoblastic leukemia. M. M. Alves1, D. Halim1, J. B. Verheij2, C. S. van der Werf2, Y. Sribudiani1, Y. van Bever1, F. These results suggest that the haploinsufficiency of MED13L causes a typi- Muller3, J. Kerner4, D. Tibboel5, R. M. Wijnen5, R. M. Hofstra1, A. S. Brooks1; cal phenotype that should be considered in the differential diagnosis of the 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department 1p36 deletion syndrome. We tentatively suggest SYT1 as another candidate of Genetics,University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Biochimie gene for the same clinical presentation, but it needs to be further confir- Prénatale, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile Packard Children‘s Hospital, med.  P11
.096-M Palo Alto, CA, United States, 5Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, An interstitial microdeletion of 20q11.21 in a boy with Netherlands. cheilognathopalatoschisis, anorectal malformation, severe microcephaly, craniofacial features, feeding difficulty, mild growth impairment, and mild intellectual disability Megacystis Microcolon Intestinal Hypoperistalsis Syndrome (MMIHS) was E. Nishi1,2, K. Wakui2, M. Arakawa1, H. Kawame1,3, Y. Fukushima2, T. Kosho1,2; recently classified as an actinopathy: a disease caused by mutations in 1Division of Medical Genetics, Nagano Children’s Hospital, Azunimo, Japan, 2Department ACTG2, one of the 6 human actins. ACTG2 encodes for the enteric smooth of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 3Division muscle actin γ-2; heterozygous de novo mutations were found in 2 MMIHS of Genomic Medicine Support and Genetic Counseling, Tohoku Medical Magabank patients1. Our aim was to study a cohort of MMIHS patients to determine Organaization, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. whether a locus other than ACTG2 could be involved. Sanger sequencing of ACTG2 was performed in a cohort of 7 patients (5 single cases and 2 fami- lies: one consanguineous family and one family originating from a genetic Interstitial microdeletions involving 20q11.2 are very rare with only four isolate). We identified heterozygous ACTG2 mutations in 5/5 single cases. reported patients. We In both families a mutation in ACTG2 was excluded. All identified mutati- have identified a de novo interstitial 20q11.2 microdeletion in a 7-year-old ons were non-synonymous, affecting an arginine residue. These mutations boy, clinically showing cheilognathopalatoschisis, anorectal malformation, were located in different exons of ACTG2: exon 3 (R40C), 4 (R63Q) and 7 severe microcephaly, craniofacial features (triangular face, hypertelorism, (R178C and R178H) and were considered to have a pathogenic effect by at hypoplastic alae nasi, long philtrum, low set ears), feeding difficulties, mild least 2 out of 3 prediction programs. Although several sib-pairs have been growth impairment, mild intellectual disability (IQ67), and attention-deficit published, the majority of the patients were sporadic, consistent with the hyperactivity disorder. G-banded chromosomes were normal, cytogenomic presence of de novo mutations in a single gene. Interestingly, the mutation microarray (135K Oligo, Roche) revealed a de novoC O1X.145I2 ~, MMYbL Km2ic, rAoSdXeLle1-, affecting residue R178 has also been reported in 2 other MMIHS patients1, tion at 20q11.2 [arr[hg18] 20q11.21(29,297,619-30,447,117)x1 dn]. The suggesting that this position could play a major role in MMIHS pathogenesis. deleted segment encompassed 15 OMIM genes ( Moreover, the fact that ACTG2 mutations were excluded in the 2 families, etc). The sizes of deleted segments in four reported patients were 2.6Mb, points towards the involvement of a second locus. Whole-exome sequencing 6.5Mb, 6.6Mb, and 6.8Mb[Iourov et al.2013; Hiraki et al.2011; Callier et of these families should prove the involvement of another gene. al.2006;Iqbal et al.2007; ]. Clinical features shared by those with > 6Mb de- 1. Thorson et al. Hum Genet 2013. letion included feeding difficulty, facial features (triangular face, hypertelo-  P11
.099-S rism, hypoplastic alae nasi, long philtrum, and low set ear), developmental Mosaic deletion of 18q in lymphocytes represents a diagnostic delay and/or intellectual disability, though the other with 2.6Mb had a mil- challenge for clinicians and underlines the importance of CMA testing der manifestation. The present patient with the smallest deletion showed in children with ID clinical features of previously reported patients with 20q11.2 microdele- D. Niedrist, B. Oneda, R. Baldinger, A. Rauch; tion. Although long-term follow-up and collection of additional patients is Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren Zurich, Switzerland. needed to delineate the phenotypic spectrum of the condition, we propose the microdeletions at 20q11.2 to be a clinically recognizable syndrome cha- racterized by craniofacial features, feeding difficulty, growth impairment, We report on a 2½ year-old boy with mental retardation, muscular hypoto- and intellectual disability. nia, deafness with atresia of the external auditory canal and a preauricular  P11
.097-S tag on the right side. The boy was referred for global intellectual disabili- The clinical phenotype of 3q29 microdeletion and 3q29 ty with very limited speech capabilities and autistic traits. The pregnancy microduplication syndrome in three female patients had been uneventful except for an emergency Cesarean section because of M. Gentile1, C. Cesarano2, C. Ceccarini2, A. D’Aprile2, A. Pansini1, L. Buonadonna1, V. Bruni3, M. Bruno2, M. Gallicchio2, M. Carboni2, P. Zampetti1, G. Cotoia2, A. Manghisi4, F. C. breech position. Birth measurements were normal, however, the baby was Susca3, N. Resta3, R. Antonetti2, N. Bukvic4; hypotonic and exhibited difficulties in feeding. At physical examination at 1Ospedale Di Venere, Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, ASL Bari, Bari, Italy, 2OORR the age of 2½ years measurements were still normal but we noted discrete Foggia, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria, Dipartimento di Patologia Clinica - II dysmorphic features: long eye lashes, broad mouth with cupid bow lips, Laboratorio, Sezione di Citogenetica, Foggia, Italy, 3UOC Laboratorio di Genetica Medica small fingers with broad short endphalanges, clinodactyly of toes V on both – Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche ed Oncologia Umana - Università degli Studi di sides, tender translucent skin, fine hair and cryptorchidism on the right Bari “A Moro”, Bari, Italy, 4Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Consorziale, Policlinico di side. On the MRI at the age of 2 years delayed myelinisation was visible. Bari, UOC Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Bari, Italy. As the atresia of the external auditory canal is typical for a deletion 18q we performed a karyotype on lymphocytes which was first reported with no pathological findings. It has been demonstrated that whole genome scanning technologies (array- The array (2.7 Affymetrix SNP-oligo array platform) analysis revealed a de- CGH) is especially suited to identify chromosome abnormalities in indivi- letion in mosaic form of 20.7 Mb of the long arm of chromosome 18, encom- duals with unclear or variable presentations. Application of this technology passing 69 genes in total. The mosaic was confirmed with FISH, which also resulted in the delineation of several previously unrecognized microdeleti- revealed that the mosaic ratio in this case was 13% in cultivated blood and on/microduplication syndromes such as recently described del3q29 (OMIM 81% in buccal swab. Reevaluating the karyotype the deletion was visible. 609425; ORPHA65286) and dup3q29 (OMIM 611936; ORPHA251038) syn- This case demonstrates the higher sensitivity of SNParrayCMA testing for dromes with highly variable clinical phenoEtySpHesG. 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 225 mosaic aberrations.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.100-M Molecular diagnostics of rare hereditary diseases using next generation sequencing 9 with karyotype: dup(9)(q32q33). The array-CGH analysis confirmed the O. Mazal, J. Štika, J. Sabová; duplication of the long arm of chromosome 9, locating it more precisely bet- Synlab genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. ween bands q33.1 and q33.3 of 9.2 Mb not present in the mother (father not available). The second case concerns a child who has no obvious dysmorphic features, Next generation sequencing (NGS) is a rapidly evolving method for the cognitive levels borderline, anteverted nostrils, tendency to keep open his molecular diagnostics of hereditary genetic disorders, NGS is based on par- mouth, slight retrognathia, ears with large pinna and small lobe. Cytogenetic allel sequencing, capable of reading the sequences of whole genes in a single analysis revealed a karyotype: 46,XY,del(1)(q31.1q32.1) mat confirmed by run. Using this technology, we analysed two causative genes - NF1 (neuro- the array-CGH analysis of 13Mb deletion. Mother with the identical deletion fibromatosis) containing 58 exons, and PKHD1 (polycystic kidney disease) has normal cognitive profile and no relevant duymorphisms. with 67 exons. Neurofibromatosis is an autosomal dominant disorder of the The last case concerns an adult come to our attention for couple infer- nervous system, characterised by café au lait spots, cutaneous neurofibro- tility; karyotype analysis showed: 46,XY,del(18)(q21.3q22).ish del(18) mas and Lisch nodules in the iris, affecting 1 in 3-5,000 people. Polycystic (pter+,wcp18+,bcl2-,qter+) confirmed by FISH The array-CGH analysis con- kidney disease is an autosomal recessive disorder, characterised by the de- firms the deletion of about 9.4 Mb of maternal origin . velopment of cysts affecting the collecting ducts. The population prevalence CONCLUSIONS is 1:85,000 individuals. Methods: DNA was isolated from peripheral blood Generally chromosomal regions deletions of this magnitude are associated and amplicons prepared by PCR were analysed on a GS Junior system (Ro- with malformations, dysmorphic features or with a pathology of the psycho- che). Data were analysed by AVA (Roche) and Sequence Pilot (JSI medical motor development. However, chromosomal imbalances in specific regions systems) software. Results: We analysed 11 patients for PKHD1, and found can also be asymptomatic, due to the small number of dosage-sensitive ge- the following mutations: Thr36Met, Leu2128X, Ile2957Thr, Ile2331Lys, n Pe 1s 1 p .1r 0es 3e -n St in these regions. Thr36Met, Gly112Arg, Arg92Trp, Gly1712Arg, Gln1122Ser (not described) RASopathy syndromes in Polish patients: a molecular study of and Ser3505Arg (with unknown effect). Four patients were negative. Of 5 Noonan, Cardiofaciocutaneous and Costello syndromes NF1 patients, three were negative and two patients (who were related) had M. Pelc1, E. Ciara1, S. Łuczak1, A. Tańska1, J. Trubicka1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Kucharczyk1, a deletion of TAACTT in exon 48. Conclusion: NGS is a very useful method for M. Kugaudo1,2, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,3, A. Skórka1,3, M. Jędrzejowska1,4, A. Cieślikowska1, the analysis of large genes with many exons, such as NF1 and PKHD1. These P. Iwanowski1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, P. Kowalski1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, K. genes can be sequenced in a single run, instead of multiple single reactions. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; In the future we intend to analyse more genes using NGS, namely CO L2
A1 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, The Medical University of (Stickler syndrome) and USH2A (Usher syndrome).  P11
.101-S Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Paediatrics, The Medical University of Unusual RASopathy due to a novel and severe mutation in the NF1 Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4Neuromuscular Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, gene. Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. Y. Lacassie1, B. R. Korf2, L. M. Messiaen3; 1Department of Pediatrics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center and Children‘s Hospital New Orleans, New Orleans, LA, United States, 2Department of We present a group of 106 Polish RASopathy cases, including 81 unrelated Genetics, University of Alabama Birmingham (UAB), Birmingham, AL, United States, patients of various age (from infancy to adulthood) with 52 different muta- 3Medical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Genetics University of Alabama tions in genes encoding components of the Ras/MAPK signaling pPaTtPhNw1a1y. Birmingham (UAB), Birmingham, AL, United States. About 65S%OS o1f 61 unrelRaAteFd1 patients withK RNAoSonan syndrome (NS), including 4 cases of NS with multiple lentigines (NS-ML), had mutations in , 21% in , 12% in and 2% in . Nearly half oBfR NAFS cases were We report a Caucasian man first seen at age of 25 months, referred with the famMilAyP o2cKc1urrenMcAePs.2 IKn2 the group of 15 patients with cardiofaciocutaneous diagnosis of Cerebral Palsy due to prematurity. Furthermore, he presented syndrome (CFCS) abouHtR 8A0S% of all mutations occurred in , while 20% severe developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, failure to thrive, dysplasia in or . The five cases of Costello syndrome had two most of the right optic nerve, and pulmonic stenosis. We also found dolichocepha- common mutations in . AllR idAeFn1tified changes were missense, 8 of them ly, open fontanel, hypertelorism, large ears with posterior pits, wide neck, being novel substitutions in different Ras/MAPK genes, causative of NS, NS- mild pectus excavatum, short 4th metacarpals, and minor ridge dysplasia ML or CFCS phenotype and one mutation so far reported only in a pati- and radial loops in the indexes and right 3rd finger. Chromosomes and meta- ent with t-AML. The aCGH studies of a group of 21 patients with Noonan-like bolic tests were normal. Because features of a RASopathy, sequence analysis phenotype (including cardiac defects, musculoskeletal and facial abnorma- of the PTPN11, RAF1, SO S1
 and KRAS genes was performed, but no muta- lities) and no causative mutation detected in the known Ras/MAPK genes tions were found. At age 21, his older sister was diagnosed with plexiform revealed in one patient a 8p23.3-p23.1 deletion and in the other a 12q12- neurofibromas, requiring amputation of a leg. CT scan of the proband after q13.11 deletion. The molecular findings of our study mostly correspond to accident unexpectedly showed massive plexiform neurofibromas infiltrating the data reported worldwide. We presume that our results will contribute the spine, pelvis and extremities. Molecular testing showed an NF1 mutati- to the existing databases of RASopathy patients and enable detailed phe- on, c.2326-6T>G, resulting in in-frame skipping of exon 20 (r.2326_2409del), notype-genotype correlations and differential diagnostics among the pa- therefore expected to result in a protein lacking 28 amino acids from within tients suspected of RASopathies. The research was supported by Projects: the Cystein-Serine Rich Domain (CSRD) (p.Trp777_Ala804del). This is a NCN UMO-2011/03/N/NZ2/00516, MNiSW PB 0056/B/ P01
/2008/35 and “private” mutation, not previously reported and observed in 1/6,500 NF1- POIG.02.01.00-14-059/09. positive unrelated patients (UAB cohort). This was also found in his sister  P11
.104-M and father who both developed spinal neurofibromas but no classic skin A neuronal phenotype characterized in a mouse model for Noonan findings (cutaneous neurofibromas, CALMs, freckling). This family illustra- Syndrome tes the importance of molecular confirmation in patients with minimal or F. Altmüller1,2, D. Schanze1, I. Schanze1, C. Marini3, A. Fejtova2, M. Zenker1; no pigmentary manifestations and with features of other RASopathies. Our 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, RG Presynaptic Plasticity, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Leibniz proband, who was exceptional despite of all his limitations, died at age 26 Institute for Neurobiology, Dept. Neurochemistry and Mol. Biology, Magdeburg, (January 2014).  P11
.102-M Germany. Unexpected karyotypes in patients with non-syndromic phenotype studied in the postnatal period A. Pragliola1, L. Renzi1, A. Innoceta1, A. Turci1, B. Buldrini2, R. Gruppioni2, S. Fini2, A. Constitutional dysregulation of the Ras-mitogen activated protein kinase Sensi1; (MAPK) signaling pathway can lead to Noonan Syndrome (NS) or similar 1Laboratorio Unico AVR Romagna U.O. Genetica Medica, Pievesestina di Cesena, Italy, disorders, the so-called “RASopathies”, which are characterized by an over- 2Università degli Studi di Ferrara U.O. Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy. lapping pattern of physical abnormalities and cognitive impairment. Their molecular basis is an overactive Ras-MAPK signaling pathway caused by gain-of-function-mutations. In animal models, it has been shown that mu- We present 3 cases of patients with mild phenotypes, seen at the medical tations in homologous genes can lead to impaired cognitive function and genetics clinical service of the Romagna AUSL, in which analysis of high- reduced synaptic plasticity. However, the molecular pathogenesis for the resolution karyotype showed rearrangements of about 10 Mb. intellectual disability still remains unknown. This study was aimed at inve- The first case concerns a boy who on examination showed obesity, over- stigating the consequences of dysregulated Ras-MAPK signaling in neurons growth, flat feet, brachydactyly, reduced elbow extension, large testes and of a mouse model for NS expressing the oncogenic allele Ptpn11D61Y. mild facial features with maxillary protrusion, but no cognitive defect. Cy- 226 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, IInT AthLeY b r|a Win, WrecWon.fEigSuHraGtio.nO oRf Gexpression of neuronal genes represents an togenetic analysis revealed a duplication in the long arm of chromosomeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index SHO C2
 NF1 BRAF important mechanism that underlies persistent activity-induced changes in pK.RSAer S2
Gly mutation in was identified in 2 patients. The mutations the brain function in the process of neuronal plasticity. While the Ptpn11- in (p.Met1035Arg, p.Tyr2556*), (p.Gln257Arg, p.Thr241Pro) and D61Y mutation is usually found to evoke higher levels of phosphorylated R(IpT.A1sp153Val) genes were found in 2, 2 and 1 patients, respectively. ERK (pERK), we found no differences in the nuclear level of pERK compa- In two patients, mutations (p.Phe82Val and p.Met90Ile) in new NS-related ring wild type and mutant cells under basal conditions. However, neuronal gene were found and subsequent analysis of follow-up cohoMrLt Lid2enti- activity-driven induction of nuclear translocation of pERK was affected in fied p.Gly95Ala mutation in further two patieKnCtNs.J 2In several cases, the pri- the mutant neurons, suggesting a dysregulation of the activity-induced si- mary NS diagnosis waFsG rDe1fined to Kabuki syndrome (2 patients, mu- gnaling. In line with this finding, we found differences in the size of total tation), Andersen-Tawil syndrome (1 patient, mutation) and Aarskog recycling synaptic vesicle pools, which is a subject of regulation during syndrome (1 patient, mutation). Our results support the usefulness of homeostatic adaptation in neurons. whole exome sequencing in the identification of known and new mutations The lacking response to stimulation found in the Ptpn11D61Y neurons sug- related to specific disease as well as in the differential diagnosis. Supported gest a deficit in cellular signaling underlying usage-dependent neuronal pla- from NCN research projects no. 2011/01/D/NZ5/01347 and 2013/09/B/ sticity and might contribute to the intellectual disability found in patients NZ2/03164.  P11
.107-S with NS.  P11
.105-S Noonan syndrome-like disorder with loose anagen hair (mazzanti Cryptorchidism and pulmonary stenosis as the most important syndrome): a new case with neuroblastoma features in Noonan patients with mutation in PTPN11 in Slovak L. Garavelli1, S. Errico1,2, M. Verna3, M. Street2, S. Rosato1, A. Wischmeijer1,4, E. Bacchini5, population A. Lombardi5, G. Izzi3, G. Biasucci6, C. Del Rossi7, C. Rossi4, S. Bernasconi2, M. Tartaglia8; M. Cizmarova1, I. Haasová1, L. Kostalova1, Z. Priblilincova1, Z. Lasabova2, A. Hlavata1, L. 1Clinical Genetics Unit IRCCS, Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Reggio Kovacs1, D. Ilenčíková1; Emilia, Italy, 2Department of Paediatrics, Parma University Hospital, Italy, Parma, Italy, 1Department of Pediatrics Comenius University Medical School University Children´s 3Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Parma University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22Department of Molecular Biology, Jessenius Faculty of Hospital, Italy, Parma, Italy, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Policlinico Sant’Orsola- Medicine, Martin, Slovakia. Malpighi, University of Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics Radiology, Parma University Hospital, Italy, Parma, Italy, 6Department of Pediatrics, ‘‘Guglielmo da Saliceto’’ Hospital, Piacenza, Italy, Piacenza, Italy, 7Department of Pediatric Surgery Parma University Hospital, Italy, Parma, Italy, 8Department of Introduction: Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder Haematology, Oncology and Molecular Medecine, Istituto Superiore di Sanita`, Rome, which together with Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), Costello Italy, Rome, Italy. syndrome (CS) and Noonan-Neurofibromatosis syndrome (NFNS) belongs to a group of genetic syndromes called ‘RASopathies’. These disorders are characterised by occurance of similar phenotypic features. Among the most Mazzanti syndrome also known as Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen common are short stature, specific dysmorphic facial features and congeni- hair (OMIM #607721) associates facial features resembling Noonansyndro- tal heart anomalies. ‘RASopathies’ are caused by mutations in genes resul- me, ScHarOdCi2a c defects, cognitive deficits, reduced growth generally associated ting in dysregulation of RAS-MAPK signaling pathway. Mutations in PTPN11 with GH deficit, and hair anomalies. It is caused by an invariant mutation of account for approximately 50% of all cases of Noonan syndrome. the gene. We report on a subject with molecular confirmed diagnosis Aims: The comparism of phenotype features in patients with PTPN11 muta- of Mazzanti syndrome with neuroblastoma, first suspected at the age of 3 tion and without PTPN11 mutation. months by abdominal ultrasound. Methods: Mutation analysis of PTPN11 gene was performed in 19 Slovak At first evaluation he showed a round face, blond, thin and sparse hair, patients with phenotype of NS. It consisted of polymerase chain reaction slightly down-slanting palpebral fissures, slightly posterior rotated ears, and direct sequencing of 15 coding exons and exon/intron boundaries of evident palmar creases, mild generalized hypotonia and dystrophy, espe- the PTPN11 gene. cially in his face and legs. Because of severe feeding difficulty and failure to Results: We identified PTPN11 mutations in 47% of our patients (N=19) thrive he underwent an abdominal ultrasound and subsequently abdominal with clinical diagnosis of Noonan syndrome. Comparing the prevalence of MRI, which confirmed the presence of a circumscribed retroperitoneal no- phenotypic features in patients with PTPN11 mutation with prevalence of dular lesion between inferior cava vein and aortic artery at the level of the the same features in patients without PTPN11 mutation, we found the most liver (2.7 x 1.5 x 2.2 cm), hyperintense in T2 and isointense in T1, with slight significant differences in cryptorchidism (100% vs. 0%), pulmonary steno- enhancement with contrast. The mass was completely rMemYCoNved and the hi- sis (78% vs. 10%), pterygium colli (0% vs. 70%) and birth length which was stological analysis documented a neuroblastoma, poorly differentiated with short only in 22% of patients with PTPN11 mutation in comparison to 80% intermediate MKI. Tumoral cells were negative for the amplification in patients without PTPN11 mutation. and bone marrow aspirate was N-Myc negative. The patient did not require Conclusions: Our findings show that cryptorchidism, pulmonary stenosis, any subsequent chemotherapy or radiotherapy. pterygium colli and short birth length are the most important features that The present finding emphasizes the importance of monitoring these pati- distinguish patients with mutation in PTPN11 from patients without PT- ents to obtain a precocious diagnosis of possible malignancies. The growing P PN 111 .1 1 m 06u -t Mation. evidence of a variably increased cancer risk in apparently all RASopathies Noonan syndrome - the usefulness of whole exome sequencing in demands further studies to substantiate and specify risk figures and tumor the identification of known and new causative genes and disease s Pp 1e 1c .t 1r 0u 8m -. M differential diagnosis. A de novo microduplication 3q29 in a patient with oculo auriculo M. Gos1, S. Fahiminiya2, J. Klapecki1, E. Obersztyn1, A. Abramowicz1, A. Kutkowska- vertebral spectrum Kaźmierczak1, M. Piotrowicz3, J. Pilch4, R. Posmyk5, J. Wierzba6, J. Bal1, J. Majewski2; V. Guida1, L. Sinibaldi1, M. Pagnoni2, L. Bernardini1, D. Cocciadiferro1, S. Loddo1, M. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, Digilio3, T. Fadda2, G. Iannetti2, B. Dallapiccola3, A. De Luca1; 2Department of Human Genetics, McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Mendel Laboratory, Rome, Italy, 2Maxillo-Facial Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Genetics, Polish Mother‘s Memorial Surgery, Policlinico „Umberto I“, Rome, Italy, 3Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Hospital - Research Institute, Łódź, Poland, 4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical Rome, Italy. University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 5NZOZ Genetics, Center for Clinical Genetics, Białystok, Poland, 6Department and Clinic of Pediatrics, Hematooncology, Oncology and Endocrinology, Department of General Nursing, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland. Oculoauriculovertebral spectrum (OAVS; OMIM 164210) is a phenotypically and probably also a genetically eterogeneous disorder derived from an ab- normal development of the first and second branchial arches. Main clinical Noonan syndrome (NS) is a rare disease belonging to the group of RASopa- characteristics include defects of the aural, oral, mandibular, and vertebral tPhTiPesN c1a1used by the germline mutationRsA iFn1 genesS OenSc1oding proteins of RAS/ development. Anomalies of the cardiac, pulmonary, renal, skeletal, and cen- MAPK signaling pathway. The majority (about 50%) of cases is caused by tral nervous systems have also been described. We report on a 25 year-old mutations. Also mutations in and are quite common (up male with preauricular pits and tags, unilateral absence of the auditory to 17 and 13%, respectively). The aim of the study was the identification meatus, dysgenesis of the inner ear and unilateral microphthalmia, clinical of molecular defect responsible for the NS phPeTnoPtNy1p1e uSsOiSn1g whoRleA eFx1ome features fitting with the oculoauriculovertebral spectrum. Using SNP array sequencing (WES). Forty two patients with primary clinical diagnosis of analysis we identified a de novo microduplication of 723Kb on chromosome Noonan syndrome and excluded mutation in , and ge- 3q29, which was absent in 52 OAVS patients and in 80 ethically matched nes were included in the study. The WES was performed using Illumina non-OAVS individuals. This de novo microduplication was proximal to the sequencing platform. The WES analysis allowed for the identification of 3q29 microdeletion syndrome region and reciprocal microduplication. The mutation in RASopathies-related genes inE 7S/H42G ( 2160.71%4) |N MS pILatAieNnt,s I. TTAheL Y |i d Wen Wtifi Wed . Em Sic Hro Gdu .Opl Rica Gtion encompassed 9 genes including AT P13
A3 2 2an 7d XXYLT1, which are involved in organogenesis and regulation of Notch pa-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index thway, respectively. The present observation is in accordance with the hy- the age of 14 months. On physical examination he showed hypertelorism, pothesis that OAVS is a genetically heterogeneous condition, underlying the notched nares, bifid incisory tooth, pectus excavatus, accessory right nipp- i Pm 1p 1o .1rt 0a 9n -c Se of SNP array analysis in patients with OAVS features. le, Simian line, bilateraMl IfDift1h finger clinodactyly, glandular hypospadias and hypoplastic scrotum. Clinical evaluation prompted the diagnosis of Opitz Screening of CD96 and ASX L1
 in twelve patients affected with Opitz C GBBB syndrome and sequencing revealed homozygous c.1798dupC or Bohring-Opitz syndromes S. Balcells1, R. Urreizti1, J. Trepat1, N. Roca1, M. Cozar1, J. Jiménez-Almazán2, E. Vidal2, J. [p.His600ArgfsX12]. Since the mother had one of the major signs of the syn- Carbonell2, G. Neri3, J. M. Opitz4, J. Dopazo2, B. Cormand1, L. Vilageliu1, D. Grinberg1; drome, widows peak, X-linked inheritance was suspected. 1Dpt.Genetics, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 2Dpt. Second patient, at the age of three and a half, displayed hypertelorism and Computational Genomics, Ctro. Investigación Príncipe Felipe,BIER, CIBERER, Valencia, penoscrotal hypospadias on physical examination and displayed additional Spain, 3Istituto Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Policlínico A Gemelli, findings; such as sparse hair, telecantus, depressed and broad nasal bridge, Roma, Italy, 4University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. micrognathia, long philtrum, v shaped upper lips, diastasis recti and umbi- lical hernia. He had a striking resemblance to the first one and his mother also had widows peak. He clinically diagnosed as Opitz GBBB syndrome and Opitz trigonocephaly (or C syndrome, OTCS) and Bohring-Opitz syndro- MID1 analysis is still pending. me (or C-like syndrome, BOS) are two rare genetic disorders which show We will discuss Opitz GBBB syndrome in view of the literature.  P11
.112-M phenotypic overlap. The genetic bases of these diseases are not well under- Mutations in a new gene cause a novel overgrowth syndrome with stood. Two genes have previously been associated with OTCS or BOS with a macrocephaly, hypoglycemia, enlarged ventricles, mild/moderate dominant pattern of inheritance. Whereas the CD96 gene has been related intellectual disability and recurrent inflammatory diseases to OTCS (one case out of 25) and to BOS (one case in 4 patients analyzed), J. Tenorio1,2,3, A. Mansilla4, M. Valencia5, V. Martínez-Glez1, V. Romanelli1, P. Arias1, N. ASX L1
 (Additional Sex Combs-Like 1) has been related to BOS only (around Castrejón6, F. Poletta7, E. Guillén-Navarro8, G. Gordo1, E. Mansilla1, F. García-Santiago1, I. half of the patients). In this study we analyzed CD96 and ASX L1
 in a cohort González-Casado9, E. Vallespín1, M. Palomares1, M. Mori1, F. Santos-Simarro1, S. García- of twelve individuals, including two sibs. Eight of them were diagnosed with Miñaur1, L. Fernández1, R. Mena1, S. Benito-Sanz1, A. del Pozo1, J. Silla1, K. Ibañez1, OTCS, two displayed a BOS phenotype and another two could not be accura- E. López-Granados1, A. Martín-Trujillo10, D. Montaner11, The SOGRI Consortium, K. tely diagnosed. Exome sequences were available for six patients with OTCS E. Heath1, Á. Campos-Barros1, J. Dopazo11, J. Nevado1, D. Monk10, V. L. Ruiz-Pérez5, P. and three couples of parents, in which CD96 and ASX L1
 were inspected Lapunzina1,2,3; using bioinformatic tools. For the remaining patients, Sanger sequencing of 1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Instituto Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 5Instituto de Investigaciones all exons in these genes was carried out. Detailed scrutiny of the sequences Biológicas, IIB, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, allowed identification of only one potentially pathogenic mutation in one of 6Developmental Cancer Group, Hospital San Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, the patients. In this subject, affected with BOS, we identified a de novo mu- Spain, 7ECLAMC, Estudio Colaborativo Latinoamericano de Malformaciones Congénitas tation in ASX L1
 (c.2100dupT). By nature and location within the gene, this at CEMIC., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 8Medical Genetics Service, Hospital Virgen de insertion resembles those previously described in other BOS patients and la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain., Murcia, Spain, 9Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Hospital we conclude that it may be responsible for the disease. Our results indicate Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 10Laboratory of Epigenetics, that for eleven out of the twelve patients, the disease (OTCS or BOS) is not Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, Idibell, Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain, 11Bioinformatics Unit, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain. caused by mutations in CD96 or ASX L1
.  P11
.110-M A case of Opitz GBBB syndrome: clinical presentation E. Caramaschi, F. Lami, E. Bigi, A. Guerra, A. Percesepe; Overgrowth syndromes (OGS) are a group of disorders in which all parame- Università degli studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. ters of growth and physical development are above the mean for age and sex. Partial, localized, or regional OGS are those disorders in which excessive growth is confined to one or a few regions of the body. We evaluated a series Opitz G/BBB Syndrome is a multiple congenital anomaly disorder affecting of 270 families from the Spanish Overgrowth Syndrome Registry with no midline structures, characterized by variable expressivity of clinical signs. known overgrowth syndrome. We identified a deletion and three missense Primarly clinical features are facial anomalies (including ocular hypertelo- mutations in a new gene in six patients from 4 families with overgrowth, rism, broad nasal bridge and cleft lip and/or palate), laryngotracheo-eso- macrocephaly, intellectual disability, mild hydrocephaly, hypoglycemia and phageal abnormalities and hypospadias. Imperforate anus and congenital inflammatory diseases resembling Sjögren syndrome. Our studies of this heart defects are also present; patients may also show developmental de- gene point to disruption of three important signaling pathways as the pu- lay and brain abnormalities. We report the case of a patient born prema- tative final effectors. turely with cleft lip and palate. Some dysmorphic features were evidenced:  P11
.113-S hypertelorism, flat nasal bridge and bifid nasal tip, macrocephaly. Systolic An apparently balanced translocation in a boy with multiple murmur and mild hypospadias were noted on clinical examination. An congenital anomalies of the eye echocardiogram defined congenital heart disease (patent ductus arteriosus M. M. Alwasiyah1, L. M. Ries2, E. V. Semina3, C. Trujillo4; 1Aziziah Maternity & Children Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Pediatrics together with persistent left superior vena cava and coronary sinus). Du- and Children’s Research Institute at the Medical College of Wisconsin and Children’s ring follow-up neurological examination and EEG were normal, but delay in Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics and Cell speech and motor development emerged. MRI examination showed inferior Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy and Children’s Research Institute at the Medical vermis hypoplasia and small pituitary gland. Differential diagnosis among a College of Wisconsin and Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States, number of clinical entities was considered, but the hypospadia and the mar- 4Erfan & Bagedo Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. ked hypertelorism oriented towards the diagnosis of Opitz GBBB syndrome. The analysis of the MID1 gene confirmed a partial deletion, spanning from exon 3 to the end of the gene. Opitz Syndrome is genetically heterogeneous A 2 year old boy product of the 1st pregnancy was referred for karyotype presenting with X-linked and autosomal dominant form; the two forms can- testing because of multiple congenital anomalies, including bilateral ca- not be distinguished on the basis of clinical manifestations. The autosomal taracts diagnosed at birth, hypospadias and right cryptorchidia, hypotonia dominant form is linked to a still unidentified gene located on a large region and failure to thrive Glaucoma was diagnosed at 3 months of age. MRI sho- of chromosome 22q11.2. The X-linked one is associated with mutations in wed generalized brain atrophy. At one year of age developmental delay was the MID1 gene located on the short arm of the X chromosome (Xp22.2). noted and height, weight, and head circumference had fallen below the 3rd  P11
.111-S percentile. There was no family history of similar findings and the parents Two cases of Opitz GBBB syndrome S. Gümüs, S. Sapmaz, U. Altunoglu, H. Kayserili; are first cousins. Karyotype showed an apparently balanced translocation Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. 46,XY,t(3;6)(p25;q15). Karyotype of both parents was normal. Further te- sting for genes involved in anterior segment dysgenesis and/or congenital cataracts including PITX3, FOX E3
, and CY P1
B1 was done and all were nega- Opitz GBBB syndrome is a rare congenital syndrome characterized by hy- tive for mutations. Sequencing the breakpoints of the translocation did not pertelorism, hypospadias, cleft lip/palate, laryngotracheoesophageal abnor- find genes at or near the direct breakpoint. Whole exome sequencing ruled malities, imperforate anus, developmental delay, and cardiac defects. Opitz out mutations in known cataract genes, but identified a homozygous muta- GBBB syndromeM isID g1enetically heterogeneous, with both X-linked and auto- tion in the PAH gene (NM_000277:c.1139C>T, p.(Thr380Met). This mutation somal dominant forms. X-linked form of Opitz GBBB syndrome is caused by has been reported to cause Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) when combined mutation in the gene (OMIM ◦300552). with another deleterious mutation. Homozygosity for this mutation has not We here report two male cases with Opitz GBBB syndrome. One of them been reported previously, to our knowledge. We are confirming this result w2a2s8 referred with preliminary diagnosis of FND EduSeH toG h 2yp0e1rt4e l|o rMismIL AatN , bITyA SaLnYg e|r W seWquWenc.EinSgH anGd. OanRalGysis of parental samples is ongoing. We are still investigating the link between HPA/PKU and congenital cataracts (andABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index reviewing variants in other genes in the WES data), but untreated PKU has activity. The p.Ile112Asn change lies adjacent to the p85 (PIK3R2) regulato- been clearly linked to microcephaly and learning disabilities. ry binding domain on the p110 (PIK3CA) catalytic subunit of PI3K. Altered  P11
.114-M stoichiometry within the p85-p110 complex could underlie the hyperactive New severe learning difficulty syndrome with skeletal features due to PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling in this instance. Further experiments to investi- de novo missense mutation in the polycomb group ring finger protein gate this are currently ongoing. 2 (PCGF2) gene P. D. Turnpenny1, M. Wright2, M. Sloman3, D. D. D. Study4; Interestingly, the phenotype of this child appears unique comparing to 1Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Newcastle published PIK3CA-related segmental overgrowth patients. The boy did upon Tyne Hospitals, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 3Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & not show somatic asymmetry, focal overgrowth, capillary malformations, Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, epidermal nevi, or digital abnormalities. His brain MRI at 6 years showed United Kingdom. a thick corpus callosum, large cerebellar vermis and possible restricted right posterior persiylvian polymicrogyria but his cerebral cortex otherwise looked largely normal. Two UK patients, each known to a clinical genetics service (Northern, Pen- Our observation adds an isolated megalencephaly with mild body overgrow- insula), were independently recruited to the Deciphering Developing Dis- th to the PIK3CA-associated clinical spectrum. The identified novel mutati- orders (DDD) study, Cambridge. Patient 1 presented with poor weight gain on is among the few known germline PIK3CA mutations. We demonstrate and hypotonia in infancy, and subsequently global developmental delay. He robust and rapid functional assays to enable interrogation of PI3K-activity had relative macrocephaly, enlarged cerebral ventricles, and normal myeli- in this context from patient-derived cells. The constitutional distribution of nation on brain MRI at 17 months. At 2½ years a skeletal survey revealed PIK3CA mutation might be of prognostic advantage regarding somatic over- delayed epiphyseal ossification, particularly carpal bones, pseudo-epiphy- growth, cortical malformations and consecutively favorable development. ses of many metacarpals, hypoplasia of  L1
, and thoraco-lumbar kyphosis. He However, this hypothesis needs further assessment.  P11
.118-M has severe intellectual disability, no clear speech, drools heavily, has short A clinical score system as useful tool in selecting subjects with clinical tapering fingers and valgus deformity of the feet, and multiple pigmented presentation in the spectrum of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome naevi. Patient 2 presented at 6 months of age with poor weight gain. Subse- M. Zollino1, S. Ricciardi1, D. Orteschi1, M. Murdolo1, R. Tenconi2, A. Baroncini3, B. quently her development was delayed with a moderate learning disability. Dallapiccola4, E. Ponzi1, A. Asaro1, E. Mercuri5, G. Marangi1; She has relative microcephaly; an MRI scan performed at 7 years of age was 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Roma, Italy, 2University of Padova, normal. She developed constipation which was sufficiently severe to require Padova, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, ASL of Imola, Imola, Italy, 4Bambino Gesù an ACE procedure aged 12 years. She has fine hair, a long face with high Children’s Hospital and Research Institute, Roma, Italy, 5Department of Paediatric arched palate and prognathism, long thin hands and fingers and mild gene- Neurology, Catholic University, Roma, Italy. ralised joint hypermobility. She doePsC GnFo2t have spine or foot abnormaPlCitGieFs2. Both subjects were found through DDD to have a de novo p. P65
L (c.194C>T) missense variant in exon 4 of the gene (17q12). Previously, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS) is characterized by ID, typical facial gestalt, had no associated human phenotype. This identical de novo finding in 2 sub- and additional features, including breathing abnormalities. jects is strong evidence for a new syndrome associated with a novel morbid The overlapping phenotype of severe ID, epilepsy, and constipation makes gene, despite some divergence of clinical features. it difficult to differentiate the PTHS phenotype from that of Angelman (AS),  P11
.116-M Rett (RTTS), and Mowat-Wilson (MWS) syndrome. However comprehensive A nonsense mutation in BM P2
 causes a syndromic form of Pierre analysis of many patients led us to defTinCeF 4a checklist of the most consistent Robin sequence phenotypic manifestations of this condition, and to suggest a clinical score M. Vincent, P. Joset, S. Papuc, M. Papik, R. Asadollahi, S. Azzarello-Burri, K. Steindl, A. Rauch; >T1CF34 as tool for enrolling patients into analysis first. Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. We analyzed a total of 176 patients, of whom 22 had a proven mutation in (and on average a clinical score of 14-15), and 154 did not. Of them, 53 were selected by means of the same score system, as having a clinical Pierre Robin sequence is a disorder of craniofacial development comprising presentation within PTHS. These 53 subjects were grouped in two clinical mandibular hypoplasia, cleft palate and glossoptosis. It can be isolated or categories: associated with other malformations in a syndromic form, with a high ge- 1) Group A (tot 11), clinical score > 13 and facial phenotype highly consi- netic heterogeneity. stent with PTHS; Here we report on a 7 years old boy presenting with Pierre Robin sequence, 2) Group 2 (tot 42), clinical score of 10-11; 2A (tot 16): PTHS-like phenotype developmental delay, microcephaly, growth retardation, brachydactyly, deep that appears homogenous to large extend to each other; 2B (tot 11): PTHS- palmar flexion creases and supra-ventricular tachycardia. Exome sequen- like phenotyTpCeF 4that appear different from 2A, but homogenous as well; 2C cing revealed the heterozygous, nonsense mutation c.460C>T (p.R154X) in (tot 15): with certain clinical heterogeneity. We performed semiquantitative exon 2 of BM P2
 (Bone morphogenetic protein 2). Microdeletions at 20p12 analysis of mRNA in 5 subjects in Group A, and found that it was si- encompassing BM P2
 have been described in 3 other patients with similar gnificantly increased in two. Sequencing of the promoter region and UTRs phenotype, and have been also implicated in Wolff-Parkinson-White syn- regions is ongoing. Strategies and preliminary results of the diagnostic ap- drome. Duplications of the region located downstream the BM P2
 gene and proach in the remaining patients, including saliva analysis and exome se- containing a cis-acting enhancer element were described in patients with q Pu 1e 1n .1ci 1n 9g -, S are presented. brachydactyly type A2. BM P2
 is also known to stimulate SOX9 expression, Xq22.1-q22.3 deletion including PL P1
 gene in a girl with global and contribute to the postnatal development of normal growth plate and developmental delay, hypotonia, and brain retarded myelination articular cartilages. L. Sinibaldi1, L. Bernardini2, M. Giuffrida2, B. Torres2, A. Novelli2, A. Ferraris1; We suggest that BM P2
 causes a new syndromic form of Pierre Robin se- 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San quence, associating intellectual disability, microcephaly, growth retardation, Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy, 2Cytogenetics Unit, Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo brachydactyly and risk of heart rhythm disorder. della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.  P11
.117-S Functional validation of a novel germline mutation in the PIK3CA gene in a child without the typical segmental overgrowth We describe the case of a 3 years 6/12 old girl presenting marked deve- N. Di Donato1, A. Rump1, G. Mirzaa2, D. Alcantara3, E. Schrock1, W. Dobyns2, M. lopmental delay, hypotonia, and dysmorphisms. She was born at term from O’Driscoll3; 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany, 2University of apparently healthy, non consanguineous parents. Pregnancy and delivery Washington, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Genome were uncomplicated except for polyhydramnios. Neonatal growth parame- Damage & Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom. ters were in the normal range. She showed right choanal stenosis and velo- pharyngeal incompetence which made feeding difficult. A brain magnetic resonance imaging at age 14 months showed a retarded myelination in pa- We report on a 6 year boy with body overgrowth at birth, megalencepha- rietal and periventricular areas. ly and motor delay, who is a carrier of a de novo heterozygous mutation At last evaluation general hypotonia was still present, with global develop- in PIK3CA (NM_006218.2):c.335T>A, p.Ile112Asn. The mutation appeared mental delay and absent speech. Weight and height were in the upper part germline in peripheral blood, buccal swabs and skin fibroblasts (Sanger se- of the normal range, while cranial circumference was slightly under the ave- quencing); it has not been observed in published PIK3CA-related segmental rage. She presented facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, including depressed overgrowth patients. Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate immuno- nasal bridge, alternating esophoria, protruding tongue, pectus excavatum, staining of patient cells and Epidermal Growth Factor-mediated PI3K-AKT- hyperextensible ligaments, thoracic kyphosis, bilaterally recessed IV toes, ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 229 mTOR pathway stimulation proved that p.Ile112Asn leads to increased PI3K broad halluxes.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PT- PN11 Array-CGH analysis disclosed a de novo 5.6 Mb microdeletion of Xq22.1- lesions and their associated phenotype. Mutation scanning of the entire q22.3 chromosomal region. The pattern of X-inactivation was markedly coding sequence was performed in large NS/LS cohorts collected in skewed. The microdeleted region includes 52 genes 3 of which are OMIM the frame of the NSEuroNet Consortium. Among the 452 mutation-positive morbid: PL P1
, RAB40AL and SERPINA7. subjects, 68 different variants deemed to be of pathological significance, in- There have been only a few reports of whole PL P1
 gene deletions. PL P1
 mu- cluding 12 novel missense changes and 2 in-frame indels, were identified. tations have been associated with a continuum of neurologic phenotypes Besides the previously characterized mutations destabilizing SH P2
’s inacti- from severe forms of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) to spastic para- ve state or increasing binding to phosphotyrosyl-containing partners, a no- paresis. Null alleles tend to associate with milder PMD features in hemizy- vel m261utatio26n2 cluster w265as recognized. Specifically, eleven changes affecting gous males but higher rate of neurological manifestations in heterozygous Leu , Leu and Arg were identified in ten unrelated subjects with clini- females. PL P1
 haploinsufficiency could explain at least part of the girl’s neu- cal features fitting NS. Biochemical and structural characterization of these rological phenotype since it encodes for a primary constituent of myelin in mutants provided novel insights onP dTiPseNa1s1e pathogenesis. Finally, these data the brain. and published records were used to define more accurately the mutational  P11
.120-M spectrum of germline and somatic mutations in human disease. Dissecting the genetic bases of Poland Syndrome by exome  P11
.122-M sequencing A paternally inherited interstitial deletion of 15q11.2 causing clinical C. Vaccari1, I. Musante1, M. Lerone2, M. T. Divizia2, M. Torre3, M. V. Romanini4, M. F. features of PWS: refinement of the PWS-IC Bedeschi5, N. Catena6, F. M. Senes6, M. Valle7, M. G. Calevo8, M. Acquaviva1, D. Cittaro9, D. T. N. Nelson1, L. Brown1, K. Schlade-Bartusiak1, E. Gagne1, J. Livingstone1, S. Anson2, L. Lazarevich9, A. Barla10, M. Squillario10, R. Ravazzolo1, A. Puliti1; Armstrong1; 1Medical Genetics Unit, G. Gaslini Institute and DiNOGMI, Genoa University, Genoa, 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Children‘s & Women‘s Health Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 3Pediatric Surgery Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 4Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oncological Institute-San Martino Hospital, Genoa, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 6Dept. of Orthopedics and Traumatology, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 7Radiology Department, Imprinting occurs on chromosome 15q11.2-q12 by differential methylation G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 8Epidemiology and Biostatistics Service, Scientific of genes on the paternal and maternal chromosomes. Prader-Willi syndrome Direction, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 9Centre for Translational Genomics and (PWS) is caused by the absence of paternally imprinted genes at chromoso- Bioinformatics, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 10DIBRIS, Genoa University, me 15q11.2, whether by deletion, uniparental disomy, or imprinting center Genoa, Italy. (IC) defect. The PWS-IC is defined by the 4.1 kb shortest region of overlap (SRO) of reported deletions, which includes the promoter and exon 1 of the SNRPN gene. Mutation of the PWC-IC blocks the switch from maternal-to- Poland syndrome (PS) is a congenital disorder presenting with agenesis/ paternal imprint within the male germ line. hypoplasia of the pectoralis major muscle variably associated with thora- We present an infant with a classical clinical presentation of PWS. As a neo- cic and/or upper limb anomalies. Incidence was reported to be 1/30000 nate, he was hospitalized for severe hypotonia and required tube feeding. births, with higher prevalence in males. Most cases are sporadic. Familial He has bitemporal narrowing, and typical facial features and hand morpho- recurrence has been observed but PS genetic etiology remains to be clari- logy. Methylation-sensitive (MS) PCR across the differentially methylated fied. Since PS involved structures may originate from the same embryonic CpG island of SNRPN showed amplification of only the maternal-specific tissues, genes controlling cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation of product. High-resolution chromosome microarray analysis detected a copy these tissues might be involved. Alternatively, one common assumption is loss at 15q11.2 which overlaps the 4.1 kb PWS-SRO; this copy loss is at least that PS may origin from an embryonic vascular insult indicating genes con- 1.6 kb in size and may be as large as 5.8 kb. MS-MLPA confirmed the deletion trolling vessels development as indirectly involved. and showed a methylation pattern identical to that seen in other individuals We recruited a large cohort of PS patients (more than 250, about 10% fami- affected withd Pe WnoSv dou e to paternal deletion. Familial studies showed that the lial). Karyotype analysis in 128 patients did not show any relevant alterati- father carried the mutation but the paternal grandparents did not, consi- ons. ArrayCGH revealed the presence of chromosome anomalies in 19 out of stent with a deletion occurring on the grand-maternal allele. To the 119 analyzed patients (10 duplications and 9 deletions); bioinformatic data best of our knowledge, this is the smallest copy loss causing PWS reported analysis indicates gene enrichment in different pathways including those to date, and further refines the PWS-IC to a 1.8 kb region.  P11
.123-S involved in cell-cell adhesion and muscle structure development. We selec- Clinical phenotypes in patients with genomic anomaly detected by ted 3 sporadic and 6 apparently dominant familial cases for whole-exome aCGH sequencing. Patients’ parents, affected and non-affected siblings to a total of D. Durovcikova1,2, M. Hikkelova3, E. Cmelova4, S. Machalova5, A. Gencik6, J. Simko3; 31 subjects were sequenced. Preliminary data from one trio confirm invol- 1Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Dept Med Genet, University vement of genes regulating cell-cell and cell-matrix interaction and also in- Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Gendiagnostica, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Slovak medical dicate a possible contribution by genes implicated in vascular development. university, Dept.Med.Genet,University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Slovak Medical Analysis of other sequenced families is now ongoing in order to check sha- University,Dept Med Genet, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Medgene, Bratislava, Slovakia. ring and segregation of newly identified variants between different patients, and to clarify their role in pathogenesis of PS.  P11
.121-S High resolution molecular karyotyping has been implemented recent years PTPN11 mutations in Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes: molecular in our group of 11 outpatients as a diagnostic test for nonsyndromic dys- spectrum, structural and functional insights on pathogenic morphia or developmental delay. Genomic imbalance in different chromo- mechanisms, and genotype-phenotype correlations S. Martinelli1, L. Pannone1, G. Bocchinfuso2, M. Magliozzi3, C. Rossi4, F. Lepri5, E. Agolini3, somal region was detected in seven cases. Principally there were detected M. Accadia6, F. Consoli3, G. Zampino7, M. C. Digilio5, L. Stella2, A. De Luca3, B. Dallapiccola5, deletion/duplication in the range of 110 kb to 2,8 Mb. Clinical features and G. B. Ferrero8, B. D. Gelb9, H. Cavé10,11, M. Zenker12, M. Tartaglia1; aCGH data will be summarised. In two patients was found a genomic re- 1Istituto Superiore di Sanita‘, Rome, Italy, 2Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 3Istituto arrangments in more than one region. In one child patient with skeletal Mendel, Rome, Italy, 4Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 5Ospedale Pediatrico dysplasia like phenotype was identified a duplication at three different “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, Italy, 6Ospedale Vito Fazzi, Lecce, Italy, 7Università Cattolica del chromosomes. Genotype/Phenotype correlation in our patients with diffe- Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 8Universita‘ di Torino, Turin, Italy, 9Icahn School of Medicine rent genomic anomaly as a deletion/duplication has a direct impact on a at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 10Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 11Université Paris-Diderot Sorbonne-Paris-Cité, Paris, France, 12University Hospital of health care managment including reproductive outcome in the family. An Magdeburg, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany. assesment of significance of genomic imbalance along with the incidence of benign CNV in the light of acquiring new knowledge is still a considerable dynamic process A broadening spectrum of aCGH data, clinical phenotypes Noonan syndrome (NS) is a genetically heterogeneous developmental disor- in probands and their parents will be provide in the registry. Many of them der characterized by reduced growth, dysmorphic facial features, congenital may have a important role in creating potentional new nomenclature for heart defects, skeletal and hePmTaPtNo1lo1gical anomalies, and variable cognitive t Ph 1is 1 .e 1x 2tr 4e -m Mely rare genomic diseases. deficitsP. NTPS Nis1 c1aused by aberrant signaling through the RAS-MAPK cascade, An alternate unbalanced recombinants of chromosome 10 due to and we previously identified as the major gene underlying this con- familial pericentric inversion dition. encodes SH P2
, an SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, O. Liaugaudienė1, A. Utkus1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; phosphatase functioning as a signal transducer that positively modulates 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, RAS function. Mutations in the same gene are implicated in LEOPAPRTDP sNy1n1- Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. drome (LS), a disease clinically related to NS, or contribute to leukemogene- s2is3. H0ere, we explored further the molecular spectrEuSmH oGf g e2r0m1li4ne | MILAN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 13 years old female was referred for genetic counseling because of intellec- rean section because of premature membrane rupture and pathologic CTG. tual disability (ID), short stature, microcephaly, dysmorphic features (low Apgar was 3-0 and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was effective only after frontal hairline, left convergent strabismus, wide nose root, abnormal sha- orotracheal intubation because of choanal stenosis, midface hypoplasia, pe of the pinnas, flat philtrum, large mandible, hypodontia, malocclusion micrognathia, microstomia and tight trismus. At this moment, spontaneous of teeth), club-foot, partial syndactyly of II-III th toes. A sister of proband`s breathing is maintained through respiratory support. The clinical diagnose mother presented with ID, delay of speech, club-foot and additional features of RD is supported by the typical facial dysmorphisms, multiple joint con- not common to proband: normal stature, obesity, short philtrum, high nar- tractures, arthrogryposis, thin, tense and translucid skin with some erosi- row palate, crowded teeth, IIth toes overlapping thumbs. Mother’s second ons, long nails. Molecular characterization is still in progress.  P11
.127-S sister died in infancy because of multiple congenital anomalies. Array-CGH Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome lymphoblastoid cells show impaired DNA of proband`s DNA revealed trisomy of the distal bands of chromosome 10 damage response to oxidative stress short arm (10pter-->10p15.1) and monosomy of the distal bands of chro- I. Dutto1, M. Tillhon1, C. Gervasini2, M. Savio3, L. Larizza2, E. Prosperi1; mosome 10 long arm (10q26.12-->10qter). Subtelomeric FISH analysis con- 1CNR Institute of Molecular Genetics, Pavia, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Dept. Health firmed a rearranged chromosome 10 [rec dup(10p] due to a large, maternal Sciences, Milan University, Milano, Italy, 3Pathology Unit, Dept. Molecular Medicine, pericentric inversion. A reverse segmental imbalance [rec dup(10q)] was University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. detected in proband`s aunt by subtelomeric FISH. The high frequency of re- combinants in this family and data from literature review suggests a high recurrence risk in similar cases with large pericentric inversions comprising The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a genetic disorder associated with almost entire chromosomes. The research leading to these results was fun- growth defects, intellectual disability, and increased risk of tumors. About ded by the Lithuanian-Swiss cooperation programme to reduce economic 60% of RSTS individuals carry heterozygous mutation/deletion of CREBBP and social disparities within the enlarged European Union under project gene, while ~3-8% of RSTS are caused by mutations in the E P300
 gene. agreement No. CH-3-ŠMM-01/04, UNIGENE project. CREBBP and p300 proteins play a key role in many aspects of DNA metabo-  P11
.125-S lism, such as DNA repair. However, the efficiency of DNA damage response Functional characterization of  L440
Xfs mutation in the thyroid (DDR) in RSTS is not yet elucidated. Here, we have investigated DDR in lym- hormone receptor beta (TRβ) in an individual with RTH syndrome M. C. Lozano1, L. Mejía2,3, P. Durán4, M. C. Lattig1; phoblastoid cell lines from RSTS patients carrying monoallelic deletion, or 1Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia, 2Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia, mutations of CREBBP gene. RSTS cells showed signs of histone H2AX phos- 3Clínica Infantil Club Noel, Cali, Colombia, 4Fundación Cardioinfantil, Bogotá, Colombia. phorylation, indicating an endogenous DNA damage. In addition, all RSTS cell lines tested were more sensitive to treatment with the oxidative agent KBrO3. No significant differences were observed in protein expression le- Resistance to thyroid hormone is an autosomal dominant disorder that vels of PCNA, and DNA repair proteins, such as XP proteins, PARP-1, XRC C1
 affects 1 in every 40,000 births. It is characterized by reduced soft tissue and DNA polymerase β. The analysis of the recruitment of DNA repair pro- responsiveness to thyroid hormone, with increased levels of T4 and T3 teins (PCNA, DNA polymerase β, XRC C1
) to DNA damage sites, suggests that and non-suppressed thyroid hormone (TSH), due to mutations present in in RSTS the DNA repair process is slowed or impaired. Preliminary results the thyroid hormone receptor β gene (TRβ), particularly in its T3 binding on the efficiency of DNA repair, as assessed by the Comet test, has suggest a domain. The clinical phenotype varies both between different families and delayed kinetics in the repair of oxidative lesions in RSTS cells, in particular between affected family members. Individuals with RTH can have variable at the level of DNA incision. These results suggest that RSTS cells show a resistance in different tissues, as a consequence of mixed features of hypo- reduced efficiency in DNA repair, explaining the greater sensitivity to oxida- and hyperthyroidism. Our goal was to assess whether there was a functio- tive DNA damage, and accounting for the increased susceptibility to cancer nal alteration due to the mutation  L440
Xfs in TRβ gene that may generate o Pf 1 R 1S .1T 2S 8 p -a Mtients. RTH in our patient. In this study, we performed molecular and functional Report of five novel Schinzel-Giedion patients with mutation in characterization of the  L440
Xfs mutation found in a male patient, who was SETB P1
. Further delineation of the neuroradiological phenotype diagnosed with RTH at 15 months of age. The patient harbors a new muta- S. Whalen1, V. López-González2, A. Dieux3, S. Julia4, D. Héron5, C. Garel6, A. Legall7, D. tion in exon 10 of the TRβ gene, which consists of a deletion of a cytosine daet Rodriguez8, L. Burglen9; nnouvcole otide 1609 in the position 440, leading to a stop codon. The mutation 1Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, was found in neither his parents nor his two healthy sisters, indicating a 2Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3Service de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine - CLAD mutational event. Transfection studies showed that the mutant TRβ NdF, CHRU de Lille - Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Service de Génétique was unable to carry out the transcription of luciferase gene in the presence Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 5Unité Fonctionnelle de Génétique Médicale, of T3. Therefore, it is likely that the impaired receptor generates the severe Département de Génétique, Centre de Référence Déficiences intellectuelles de causes R PT 1H 1. 1p 2he 6n -Motype in our propositus. rares, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6Service de Radiologie, Centre de Référence Malformations et maladies congénitales du cervelet, Hôpital Armand Restrictive Dermophaty: report of two new cases Trousseau, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire de Neurogénétique moléculaire, Hôpital Armand S. Maitz1, M. Mariani1, A. Cereda1,2, M. S. Cuttin3, F. Moltrasio3, U. Felbor4, W. Schröder4, P. Trousseau, Paris, France, 8Service de Neuropédiatrie, Centre de Référence Malformations Vergani5, M. Verderio5, G. Paterlini6, C. Colombo6, P. Tagliabue6, A. Selicorni1; et maladies congénitales du cervelet, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 1Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetic Unit, MBBM Foundation, San Gerardo 9Laboratoire de Neurogénétique moléculaire, Centre de Référence Malformations et Hospital, Monza, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, maladies congénitales du cervelet, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. Bergamo, Italy, 3Department of Pathology, University of Milano-Bicocca, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 4Institut für Humangenetik, Universitaetsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 5Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, University of Milano- Bicocca, MBBM Foundation, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 6Department of Schinzel-Giedion syndrome was first described in 1979, and is characteri- Pediatrics, Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, MBBM Foundation, San Gerardo Hospital, zed by typical facial gestalt, severe developmental delay, frequent epilepsy Monza, Italy. and various malformations (urinary tract, genitalia, heart and skeletal). The reported cerebral malformations are ventriculomegaly, thin or absent cor- pus callosum, cortical atrophy, gyration anomalies. Hypoplastic pons was Restrictive dermopathy (RD) is a very rare, lethal genetic condition with found in 2 patients. peculiar phenotypic, histologic and genetic characteristics. The first case In 2010, SETB P1
 gene was identified as responsible for Schinzel-Giedion we describe was clinically diagnosed after death and confirmed thanks to syndrome, with identification, by exome, of de novo missense mutations, precise histological and molecular characterization. The fetus was stillborn some recurrent, all localized in the SKI oncogene homologous domain. at 31+1 weeks of gestation by cesarean section. He did not show any spon- We present 5 novel patients with Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (2 girls and 3 taneous respiratory activity at birth nor after cardiopulmonary resuscitati- boys) with mutation in SETB P1
 (proven de novo for 3). Two mutations were on. Post mortem, clinical examination showed multiple joint contractures previously reported (c.2602G>A, c.2608G>A) and the 3 others were novel and peculiar facial features like thick hair, absent eyelashes and eyebrows, (c.2607C>A, c.2608G>T, c.2606G>C). All patients had typical facial gestalt, hypertelorsim, small nose, small mouth in the “O” position with thin lips, severe developmental delay, epilepsy, genitalia anomalies. Hydronephrosis micrognathia, low-set ears. The skin was thin, erythematous and translu- was present in 4 patients, and the 5th patient had coralliform kidney stones cent with evident superficial vessels. Fissures and erosions were evident in with recurrent infections. Cerebral MRI showed constant corpus callosum particular in the axillary and inguinal folds, nails were long. It was hypo- anomalies, and frequent cortical atrophy, ventricular dilatation, septal rup- thesize the diagnosis of RD, confirmed by the microscopic examination of ture. Two patients had gyration anomalies. Four patients displayed similar the skin. Molecular analysis performed on fetal DNA, showed a homozygous posterior fossa anomalies with hypoplastic pons and enlarged medulla ob- duplication in ZMPST E24
 gene, already described as causative for RD. The longata, 3 patients had dysplastic cerebellar hemispheres. Atrophic caudate second patient is a SGA boy, born at 32 wEeeSkHs oGf g2e0st1at4io n| MbyI uLrAgeNn,t IcTesAa-LY | n W uclW ei wW a. sE nS oH teG d i. nO 4R pG atients. 231ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. These novel cases further delineate the cerebral spectrum of malformati- ons in Schinzel-Giedion syndrome, in particular with similar posterior fossa Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) is a dominantly inherited genetic dis- anomalies. order characterized by short stature, mesomelia and Madelung wrist defor- The 3 novel mutations, as all the previously described mutations, are locali- mity. The LWD is caused by haploinsufficiency of the Short Homeobox conta- z Pe 1d 1 i .n 1 2th 9e -S known mutational hotspot. ning gene (SHOX), located in the 2.6 Mb pseudoautosomal (PAR1) region. At Towards a better understanding of de novo germline mutations in the heterozygous level most mutations found are of different size deletions, SETB P1
 in Schinzel-Giedion syndrome point mutations within the coding sequence or mutations on regulatory en- R. Acuna-Hidalgo1, P. Deriziotis2, B. W. van Bon1, M. Chaisson3, M. Malig3, S. E. Fisher2, J. hancers downstream of the SHOX gene. We present the clinical and molecu- A. Veltman1, E. E. Eichler3, A. Hoischen1; lar data of a three generation family with LWD. The index patient is a 43 year 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, old female with disproportionate short stature, reduced arm span to height Netherlands, 2Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for ratio (particularly mesomelic shortening), a muscular body habitus and no Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Genome Sciences, University evidence of a classic Madelung deformity. We report for the first time a no- of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. vel 15kb deletion detected by microarray-CGH using a chromosome X exon- specific array (OGT) in the index patient. The deletion resides in the coding region of the SHOX gene, includes exons 3-6 containing the homeodomain Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS) is a rare and sdeevenroev doevelopmental disor- region. RT-PCR studies confirmed the deletion and revealed the same 15 kb der characterized by malformations in mSuEltTipBlPe1 organ systems. ExoSmETeB sPe1- deletion in her sister, father and son. The youngest male member of the fa- quencin g recently identified the cause of SGS as germline mutations mily has a very mild form of LWD, a phenomenon previously observed, that clustering within a 12-bp exonic region in . Mutations in this SHOX deficiency is more pronounced in females than in males and it can hotspotare presumed to be gain-of-function mutations which disrupt a de- also exhibit inter-familial and intra-familial variable expressivity. Extended gron (a consensus motif for protein degradation), disturbing normal SET- family studies (paternal side) have identified another 5 members to carry B P1
 proteolysis. Interestingly, somatic mutations in this hotspot have also the deletion. Detailed clinical evaluation of these family members is ongoing been found in leukemic cells and shown to increase cell proliferation in this which will shed more light in the phenotypic effect of this deletion. context.  P11
.133-S We have collected clinical informatiodne nanovdo samples from oSEveTrB 2 P51
 SGS pati- SKI gene analysis clarifies the diagnosis in cases suspected of ents, which to our knowledge constitutes the largest cohort of SGS patients Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome yet. To better understand germline mutations in , we inve- S. Krüger1, L. Graul-Neumann2, M. Grossmann1, A. Bier1, S. Tinschert3,4, P. N. Robinson5, D. Müller6, B. Albrecht7, J. Plaschke1, D. Horn5; stigated the parental origin of the allele in which these mutations occur in 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Ambulantes SGS. Using a combination of long range PCR and single moldeec unloev oreal time Gesundheitszentrum der Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Division sequeSnEcTinBgP 1(Pacific Biosciences), we determined the parent of origin for für Klinische Genetik an der Medizinischen Universität Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, four out of five trios analyzed. In three out of four cases, the mutati- 4Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 5Institut für Medizinische on SinET B P1
 occurred in the paternal allele and only in one in the maternal Genetik und Humangenetik der Charité, Berlin, Germany, 6Institut für Humangenetik, allele. Additionally, we examined the molecular and cellular consequences Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 7Institut für Humangenetik, of mutations inS EthTeB cPo1ntext of SGS. When compared to controls, fi- Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. broblast and lymphoblastoid cell lines of SGS patients have alterations in downstream targets of , such as higher levels of SET protein and de- regduel antoevdo gene expreSsEsTioBnP.1 Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is a genetic disorder characterised Our studies provide insight into the occurrence and molecular consequences by craniosynostosis, dysmorphic facial features, a marfanoid habitus and of germline mutations causing SGS. cardiovascular, connecStiKvIe tissue, neurological, and skeletal anomalies. The  P11
.130-M phenotype overlaps with Marfan (MFS) and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS). 5p15.33-31 deletion and unilateral open lip schizencephaly: causal or Recently, mutations in have been described as causative for SGS. All mu- casual association? tations are located in the SMAD binding or the DHD domain of the SKI pro- A. V. Gulino1,2, G. Traficante1, I. Sani3, S. Guarducci3, A. Petracca1, S. Bargiacchi1, C. Barba4, M. Falchi4, R. Guerrini4, S. R. Giglio1,3; tein, a repressor of TGFSßK-Iactivity. TGFß signaling is also affected in MFS and 1Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, LDS explaining some of the shared features. Florence, Italy, 2Paediatric Department, Assisi Hospital, Assisi, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Here we report on the analysis in four patients suspected of SGS (Table, Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital;, Florence, Italy, 4Department of Neurology, n/a no information available). Two of them (T7178, T7424) have previously Patient ID T6857 T7178 T7386 T7424 Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy. been described (Robinson et al. Am J Med Genet A. 2005;135:251-62). Sex, Age male, SKI sequence variant female, 2y male, 28y male, 29y 46y We report on a case of a 3 year-old girl, with left hemiplegia, psychomotor c.95T>A c.100G>T c.185C>G delay and high pitched neonatal crying, epilepsy with MRI evidence of right Craniosynostosis (p.Leu32Gln) (p.Gly34Cys) none (p.Ala62Gly) open-lip schizencephaly; CGH array analysis disclosing a paternal inherited Dolichocephaly 5p complex rearrangement consisting of a 7.6 Mb deletion (del5p15.33-31) Hypertelorism + n/a n/a - Down slanting palpe- + + + + and a 2,6 Mb duplication (dup5p15.31). Indeed, the 5p15.2 critical Cri du bral fissures + + + - Chat (CdC) region is spared and accordingly our patient does not present the Exophthalmos High arched or cleft + - - - typical dysmorphic and severe developmental features of CdC syndrome. palate + + - - The proband’s father has a high pitched voice, a history of hyperactivity and Micrognathia or poor school performances and normal EEG. Intrafamilial phenotype variabi- retrognathia + + + + lity is not uncommon in contiguous gene syndromes and it can be explained Low set posteriorly + + + + by differences in modifying genes and in critical allele polymorphisms. rotated ears Arachnodactyly Schizencephaly is a full-thickness cleft within the cerebral hemispheres, Camptodactyly + + + + that can result from disruption or malformation. It has never been reported Scoliosis + + + - before in patients with 5p- syndrome, who typically show a variable degree Pectus deformity + - - - Joint hypermobility - + - - of hypoplasia, especially of subtentorial structures. Mitral valve prolapse - + + - Based on the already published phenotypic data and CNV databases as well Aortic dilatation + + + + Hernias - - - n/a as on the increasing knowledge on the function of the genes located in the Muscular hypotonia - - - n/a deleted fragment, we discuss the genotype-phenotype correlation in our pa- Developmental delay - + - - tient and the consequence of haploinsufficiency of NSUN2 in determining + + - + Sanger sequencing of the who+le coding region +of SKI (NM+_003036.3) +revealed speech delay and hyperactivity, and of ADAMT S16
 in causing abnormal la- heterozygous mutations in two patients. The mutation c.100G>T (p.Gly34Cys), rynx cartilages development. We also speculate on a potential pathogenic but not the sequence alteration c.95T>A (p.Leu32Gln) has already been descri- mechanism linking loss of Iroquois homeobox gene cluster and/or TPPP bed as a pathogenic mutation for SGS. However, the description of two other leading to schizencephaly.  P11
.132-M pathogenic missense mutations in the same codon 32 within the SMAD binding Novel Deletion within the translated sequence of the SHOX gene domain as well as in silico predictions underline the role of the sequence alterati- leading to Leri-Weill Syndrome with emphasizing severity in females on c.95T>A as a pathogenic mutation. Furthermore, we identified an unclassified G. Tanteles, A. Alexandrou, I. Alexandrou, C. A. Sismani; heterozygous variant, c.185C>G (p.Ala62Gly) in the third patient (Table). 232 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index In conclusion, the molecular analysis of SKI should be considered to differentiate  P11
.136-M between marfanoid phenotypes such as MFS, LDS and SGS. Regulatory element deletion cause a down-regulation of ZDHH C15
 gene in a proband with Smith Magenis syndrome phenotype  P11
.134-M C. Picinelli1, I. Bestetti1,2, S. Sirchia3, C. Castronovo1, L. Paganini4, F. Menni5, A. Selicorni6, Submicroscopic genomic alterations detected by array CGH analysis M. F. Bedeschi7, L. Larizza1,3, P. Finelli1,2; 1Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico in a cohort of patients with Silver Russell syndrome found negative to Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational classical genetic and epigenetic tests Medicine, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Department M. Crippa1, C. Picinelli1, S. Galletti1, A. Sironi1, L. Calzari1, C. Castronovo1, M. Cisternino2, G. of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 4Division of Pathology, B. Ferrero3, A. Riccio4, A. Selicorni5, M. T. Bonati6, S. Russo1, L. Larizza1,7, P. Finelli1,8; Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Pediatric 1Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Università degli Studi di Milano Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 6Clinical Genetics and Pediatrics Division, San Gerardo Hospital, Italy, 4Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Monza, Italy, 7Medical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Technologies, Second University of Naples, Caserta, Italy, 5Department of Pediatrics, Policlinico, Milano, Italy. University of Milano Bicocca, Hospital S. Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 6Clinic of Medical genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 7Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 8Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, Milano, Italy. Here, we describe a boy aged 3 years who showed mild facial minor anoma- lies such as brachycephaly, square face, thick eyebrows, broad palate, gene- ralized hypotonia, developmental delay, behavioural problems (self injury), Silver Russell syndrome is characterized by pre- and postnatal growth re- sleep disorders and congenital heart defect. tardation, variable facial dysmorphisms, clinodactyly of the fifth fingers, and Based on suspected Smith Magenis syndrome (SMS), chromosomal analy- sometimes asymmetry of face, trunk and extremities. Genetic and epigenetic sis was performRedA Ia1nd showed a 46,XY karyotype. FISH analysis of the SMS aberrations on chromosomes 7 and 11 are commonly found in SRS, leaving locus at 17p11.2, as well as MLPA, mutational analyses and quantitative ex- out however, a fraction of up to 50% of cases with unknown genetic aetiolo- pression of the gene, gave normal results. High-resolution array-CGH gy. A cohort of 32 clinically selected SRS patients, without detected genetic analysis disclosed two rare maternal deletions at 4q35.2 and Xq13.3, both or epigenetic alterations was analyzed by high resolution array CGH analysis yet unreported in healthy subjects according to the Database of Genomic Va- to identify possibly pathogenetic CNVs. Twenty-eight patients (87.5%) were riants. Whereas it is not possible to assign aZ DpHatHhCo1g5enetic rZoDleH tHo Cth1e5 4q35.2 found to carry one or more rare CNVs, according to the Database of Genomic deletion, the Xq13.3 loss of 54 kb involves a predicted conserved insulator Variants and, overall, 55 rare CNVs, 25 gains (45.5%) and 30 losses (54.5%) that maps 29 kb far from the 5’ end of the gene. acts as were identified. Inheritance, established for 36 of the identified rare CNVs, a palmitoyl-transferase in brain, and ZitDs HnHuCll1 e5xpression has beenZ rDeHpoHrCt1ed5 showed that 7 occurred de novo (19.5%). Interrogation of public databases in a syndromic patient. We thus investigated in the patient’s blood the cau- allowed us to pinpoint genomic regions containing genes, either imprinted sative role of the identified CNV on by RT-qPCR. The or not, that according to their function, appeared plausible candidates for expression level was significantly reduced in thZeD mHHalCe1 p5r oband compared to SRS. Interestingly 4 CNVs span genomic regions already associated with controls, whereas the expression level in the mother was within the control growth defects, 3 CNVs contain known genes found altered in previously rangeR.OAuI1r results suggest the involvement of perturbation in the described SRS patients and 3 CNVs include genes implicated in growth con- onset of the proband’s phenotype and point to this gene, sharing interactors trol pathways not yet associated with SRS. These results confirm the genetic w  P1
it 1h . 137-S, as a novel candidate gene for SMS. heterogeneity of SRS and the high percentage of potentially causative imba- A novel NSD1 mutation in Sotos syndrome with constriction of vena lances, attesting the wide clinical expressivity of patients with a phenotype cava strongly suggestive for this syndrome. Genome-wide scan is reconfirmed an A. Bakken1, C. F. Rustad2, Ø. L. Holla1, Ø. L. Busk1, G. J. Braathen1,3,4; appropriate and powerful tool to achieve a differential diagnosis between 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, SRS and SRS-like patients. Skien, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway,  P11
.135-S 3Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Hospital, Mosaicism of the H19 hypomethylation in a patient with very low Lørenskog, Norway, 4Campus AHUS, Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, weight and severe insulin resistance Oslo, Norway. G. Traficante1, S. Romano2, S. Russo3, A. Petracca1, S. Bargiacchi1, E. Andreucci2, S. Giglio1,2, S. Stagi4; 1Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Background: Sotos syndrome, first described in 1964, is characterized by Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Department of Molecular Genetics, Auxological Institute, Cusano Milanino, Italy, typical facial appearance, overgrowth (height and/or head circumference 4Department of Health Sciences, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy. ≥2 SD above the mean), and sometimes other features such as learning disa- bility behavioral problems, congenital cardiac anomalies, neonatal jaundice, renal anomalies, scoliosis, and seizures. A 6-year-old boy, born to healthy non-consanguineous parents, presented a The occurrence of Sotos syndrome is 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 14,000 newborns. history of severe staturo-ponderal deficiency, bilateral cryptorchidism and However, many cases are assumed to be undiagnosed. hypogenitalism. The propositus was delivered at 38 weeks by cesarean sec- Methods: Genetic analyses including karyotype, array Comparative Genomic tion for intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR). Birth weight was 1400 g Hybridization and exome High Throughput Sequencing (HTS) was perfor- (-3SD), birth lenght 38 cm (-4SD) and OFC 32 cm (-2SD). He had moderately med in a two year old girl with an unknown syndrome. delayed developmental milestones, a poor appetite and feeding difficulties Results: HTS analysis revealed a novel de novo nonsense mutation in the since the first year. Physical examination showed dysmorphic features sug- NSD1 gene. gestive of Silver-Russell Syndrome (SRS): triangular facies, relative macro- Her facial appearance was consistent with Sotos syndrome whereas her as- cephaly with frontal bossing, prominent forehead, mild low-set prominent sociated balloon dilated vena cava inferior constriction has not previously ears, micrognathia, downturned mouth, thin lips, fifth finger brachidactyly/ been assigned to Sotos syndrome. clinodactyly. Psychomotor development was normal. Conclusion: We describe a novel NSD1 nonsense mutation causing Sotos At 6 years he was 90 cm (-5.12 SD) tall and weighed 8,900 kg (-9.22 SD). His syndrome. To our knowledge, this is the first time a Sotos patient has pre- basal levels of free thyroxine, TSH, cortisol and coeliac disease screening s Pe 1n 1t .e 1d 3 w 9-i Sth a vena cava constriction. were normal. Plasma concentrations of IGF-I and IGFBP-3 were low for age Unbalanced translocation t(8;17)(q23;q24) in a patient with and sex (-2.30 and -1.95 SD). Growth hormone stimulation tests revealed developmental delay and epilepsy a classic growth hormone deficiency. He also had severe insulin deficiency C. Pinato1, C. Rigon1, A. Friso1, A. Volzone2, E. Osanni2, M. Cassina1, L. Salviati1, M. and normal glucose response after OGTT, negative diabetes autoantibodies Clementi1; and normal glycated haemoglobin, features not reported in association with 1Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2La SRS. Nostra Famiglia-IRCCS “E. MEDEA”, Conegliano (TV), Italy. Molecular studies revealed a hypomethylation of the paternal H19/IGF2 Im- printing Control Region. Insulin like growth factor 2 (IGF2) is an imprinted gene, which has an important role in foetal growth. IGF2 is downregulated We present a 2 year-old male patient with poor growth, developmental de- through hypomethylation of a differentially methylated region in SRS, cha- lay and epilepsy. He is the second-born child of healthy non-consanguineous racterised by growth restriction. Insulin metabolism abnormalities have parents, with an unremarkable family history. He was born at gestational never been described in SRS: could it be a specific manifestation of reduced week 40 after an uncomplicated pregnancy. Seizures appeared at 16 months IGF2 expression? and the EEG revealed focal abnormalities in the left frontal and parietal ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | r eW giW onsW d. uE rS inH g sG le. eO pR . TG he array-CGH analysis identified a de novo 2.322 3M3bABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index deletion on chromosome 8q23.1q23.2 due to an unbalanced translocation The use of the name Temple syndrome is not universal, as yet, but rather t(8;17)(q23;q24). The analysis detected two additional anomalies which than the somewhat cumbersome use of ‘maternal uniparental disomy of were both inherited from the healthy father: a 165.8 Kb duplication invol- chromosome 14 related conditions’ we propose this name change.  P11
.142-M ving chromosome 7p15.2 and a 914.6 Kb duplication involving 22q13.2. In Testicular regression and cerebral abnormalities: a new syndrome the deleted region, SYBU and KCNV1 appear to be candidate genes for the D. Sanlaville1,2, A. Labalme1, A. Vasiljevic3, L. Guibaud4, M. Till1, Y. Morel5, P. Edery1,2, M. patient’s neurologic and electroclinical phenotype. In fact, SYBU encodes Rossi1,2; a protein which is part of a kinesin motor-adaptor complex that is critical 1Service de Génétique, Centre de référence des Anomalies du Développement, Hospices for the anterograde axonal transport and contributes to activity-dependent Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 2INSERM U1028 UMR CNRS 5292, UCBL, CRNL TIGER Team, presynaptic assembly during neuronal development. KCNV1 encodes a neu- Lyon, France, 3Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 4Service d’Imagerie Pédiatrique et Fœtale, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 5Service ronal modulatory subunit of a voltage-gated potassium channel and it is d’Endocrinologie Moléculaire et Maladies Rares, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France. predominantly expressed in the brain.  P11
.140-M TB C1
D7 mutations are associated with intellectual disability, megalencephaly, patellar dislocation and celiac disease We report three male siblings affected by a Multiple Congenital Abnorma- B. Mandriani1, A. Alfaiz2, L. Micale1, B. Augello1, M. Pellico1, C. Fusco1, J. Chrast2, I. lities/Intellectual Disability (MCA/ID) syndrome which, to the best of our Xenarios2,3, P. De Nittis1, C. Rinaldi1, A. Di Lauro1, L. Zelante1, A. Reymond2, G. Merla1, P. knowledge, has not been reported to date. Patient 1 presented with a clini- De Nittis4; 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Center for cal phenotype including micropenis, anorchia and a very low serum level of Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of antimullerian hormone, consistent with progressive testicular regression; Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Medical Genetics Unit, IRCSS Casa Sollievo severe developmental delay; spasticity; epilepsy; dysmorphic features; deaf- della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. ness; retinopathy; cerebral atrophy, corpus callosum hypoplasia and peri- ventricular cysts. The two subsequent pregnancies were terminated at 34 weeks gestation because of recurrences. The fetuses (patients 2 and 3) sho- Mutations in both TS C1
 and TS C2
 cause the tuberous sclerosis complex wed cerebral cysts (2/2), thin corpus callosum (1/2), very low levels of an- (TSC), a multisystemic disorder characterized by the development of ha- timullerian hormone in the amniotic fluid (2/2) associated with ambiguous martomas or benign tumors in various organs as well as epilepsy, intellec- genitalia in patient 2. Pathological examination of patient 2 showed a testi- tual disability (ID) and autism. Whereas the binding of TB C1
D7, the third cular atrophy, micropenis, a thin corpus callosum, white matter abnorma- constitutive subunit of the TS C1
-TS C2
 complex, is required to maintain its lities (gliosis, cysts), and cerebellar focal neuronal migration anomalies. A integrity, sequencing of TSC patients with no TS C1
-TS C2
 mutations indica- large geneStiRcY a, nSFd1 m, AeRtaXb, oAlTicR aXs, sKeAsTsm6Bent performed in patient 1 was normal: ted that TB C1
D7 is unlikely to represent a “TS C3
” gene. Loss of function of standard karyotype and array CGH (105k, Agilent®); molecular analysis of TB C1
D7 results in an increase in mTOR C1
 signaling, and consequently a de- the genes (exon 18); analysis of cholesterol pre- lay in the induction of autophagy. cursors, screening for peroxysomal disorders (blood and fibroblasts), CDG Mutations in TB C1
D7 were recently reported in a family with ID and macro- syndromes, creatine deficiencies, adenylosuccinate deficiency, blood lactate crania. Using exome sequencing we identified two sisters homozygote for a and pyruvate, maternal X inactivation pattern. Magnetic resonance spectro- novel TB C1
D7 truncating mutation. In addition to the already described ma- scopy was normal. An exome sequencing analysis has been performed and crocephaly and mild ID, they share osteo-articular defects, patella dislocati- we are interested to study other possible patients showing a similar clinical on, behavioral abnormalities, psychosis, learning difficulties, celiac disease, picture. In conclusion, we report the preliminary results of the clinical and prognathism, myopia and astigmatism. Consistent with a loss-of-function of molecular study of a previously unreported MCA/ID syndrome, characteri- TB C1
D7 the proband’s cell lines show an increase in the phosphorylation of zed by testicular regression and cerebral abnormalities.  P11
.143-S 4EB P1
, a direct downstream target of mTOR C1
 and a delay in the initiation Autosomal recessive POLR1D mutation with decreasing of TCOF1 of the autophagy process. mRNA is responsible for Treacher Collins syndrome This second family allows enlarging the phenotypic spectrum associated E. Schaefer1,2, C. Collet3, D. Genevieve4, M. Vincent4, D. Lohmann5, E. Sanchez4, E. with TB C1
D7 mutations and defining a TB C1
D7 syndrome. Our work rein- Sanchez4, C. Bollender6, M. Eliot7, G. Nürnberg8, M. Passos-Bueno9, D. Wieczorek5, L. Van forces the involvement of TB C1
D7 in the regulation of mTOR C1
 pathways Maldergem10, B. Doray1,2; and suggests an altered control of autophagy as possible cause of this di- 1Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, sease. France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, U1112, Faculté de Médecine, Université de  P11
.141-S Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Inserm U606, Assistance Publique–Hôpitaux de Paris Temple syndrome - introducing a new name for a characteristic (AP-HP), Hôpital Lariboisière, Service de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, Paris, chromosome 14 imprinting disorder France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, CHRU Montpellier, Université de Montpellier 1, I. K. Temple1, Y. S. Ioannides1, K. Lokulo-Sodipe1, D. J. G. Mackay1, J. H. Davies2; Montpellier, France, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 2University Hospital Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Service de Pédiatrie, Centre hospitalier de Haguenau, Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Haguenau, France, 7Service ORL, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 8Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 9Human Genome Center, Department of Genetics and Evolutive Biology, Institute of Bioscience, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo SP, Brazil, 10Centre de Génétique Humaine, Université de Chromosome 14 harbours an imprinted locus at 14q32. Maternal uniparen- Franche-Comté, Besançon, France. tal disomy of chromosome 14, paternal deletions and loss of methylation at the intergenic differentially methylated region, result in a human phenotype Purpose: of low birth weight, hypotonia, early puberty and short stature. This rarely TCOF1 T reacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is a mandibulofacial dysostosis diagnosed imprinting disorder has considerable overlap with other better caused by mutations in genes involved in ribosome biogenesis and synthe- known imprinting conditions such as Russell Silver and Prader Willi syn- sis. mutations are observed in arouPnOdL 8R01%D of the patients and are dromes. inherited as an autosomal dominPaOnLtR m1Canner. Recently, two other genes have We have reviewed the world literature of 51 cases to identify the key dia- been reported inM leetshso tdhsa:n 2% of patients, in patients wTCitOhF a1utPoOsoL-- gnostic features to increase awareness, enhance diagnosis and improve Rm1aCl domiPnOanLRt 1inDheritance, and in patients with autosoRmesaul lrtesc:essi- treatment. ve inheritance. We performed direct sequencing of PO, LR1D Key findings and in two unrelated consanguineous families. The 1) Small for gestational age: The median birth weight standard deviation four affected children shared the same homozygous mutation in score (SDS) was -1.88 and none had a birth weight SDS >0. The median birth (c.163C>G, p.Leu55Val). This mutation is localized in a region encoding the length SDS was -1.64. dimerization domain of the RNA polymeTrCasOeF. 1It is supposed to impair RNA 2) Hypotonia and motor delay (93% and 83%). polymerase resulting in a lower amount of mature dimeric ribosomes. A 3) Mildly reduced intellectual ability; IQ, 75-95. functional analysis of the trCaonnsccrliupstiso onf: by RT-qPCR was perPfOorLmR1eDd 4) Small hands and feet (87% and 96%) in the first family demonstrating a 50% reduction in the index case compa- 5) Early puberty (86%) tible with this hypothesis. This is the first report of 6) Short stature in adulthood; the median final height SDS was -2.04 mutation responsible for an autosomal recessive inherited Treacher Collins 7) Metabolic syndrome; the median final adult weight SDS was -1.07 demon- syndrome. These results reinforce the concept of genetic heterogeneity of strating a relatively greater weight for height in adults; median BMI of 27. Of Treacher Collins syndrome and underline the importance of combining 15 patients over the age of 11 years, three developed non-insulin dependent clinical expertise and familial molecular analyses for appropriate genetic diabetes mellitus at the ages of 12 years, 19 years and 20 years. counseling. The facial appearance distinguishes this condition from other imprinting 234 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG disorders.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.144-M Molecular and cytogenetic characterization of an unusual case of partial trisomy 13q mosaicism rian culture: 46,X,der(X), in this case present homogeneously. Cytogenetic- A. Pansa, A. Scatigno, B. Facchinetti, G. Cassina, P. Fruscella, C. Perico, D. Nicoli, F. Comi, molecular characterization by FISH with various X specific probes allowed U. Giussani; to define, beyond doubt, that the X derivative is a dicentric isochromosome A.O. Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy. with an inactive centromere and with symmetric point in Xp21: 46,X,idic(X) (qter→p21::p21→qter). This data allowed to demonstrate : 1) the presence of phenotype atypia. 2) ovarian functionality, 3) the short stature of both Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome) is a rare multiple malformation syndrome mother and daughter due to SHOX gene deletion.  P11
.147-S and includes anomalies of the central nervous system, cardio-vascular and SNP array revealed maternal UPD16 in a boy with short stature, urogenital system. The probability of survival for live-born to one year is craniosynostosis and psychomotor retardation. 3%. Partial or mosaic forms of trisomy 13 can occur and they cause a va- M. Trkova1, K. Vesela2, V. Becvarova1, L. Hnykova1, H. Hroncova1, J. Horacek1, D. Stejskal1; riable phenotype. 1Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 2First Faculty of Medicine, UK, Prague, Czech Republic. We report a case of a live-born baby with multiple congenital anomalies in- cluding severe Fallot tetralogy, bilateral postaxial polydactyly of fingers and toes, monolateral hydronephrosis, microcephaly with trigonocephaly and We report on a 15 months old boy (gemini after IVF, healthy sister) with brain anomalies (hypoplastic corpus callosum and dismorphic cerebellar positive prenatal anamnesis (IUGR, oligohydramnion), craniosynostosis, vermis). The child also presents some faciainl asnitoumalies (sloping forehead, short stature, hypotonia, hypospadia, cryptorchidia, pulmonary vein ste- hypotelorism, low set ears and microretrognathia) and scalp defect (aplasia nosis and delayed psychomotor development. Chromosomal examination cutis of vertex). Cytogenetics, fluorescence hybridisation and array- revealed normal male karyotype 46, XY. The whole genome genotyping was CGH analysis showed the presence of two cell lines in which a normal chro- performed using SNP array (300K, Illumina) and no pathogenic CNV was mosome 13 was replaced in one by a isochromosome (13q) and in the other found. However, three extensive blocks with loss of heterozygosity span- by a isochromosome 13 derivative, with a deletion spanning from 13q11 ning almost one third of the whole chromosome 16 were found. Parental to 13q14, resulting in partial trisomy 13q. The two cell lines were present DNAs were analyzed and the maternal UPD16 was confirmed. Chromosome either in peripheral blood lymphocytes or skin fibroblasts. et 16 showed the mixture of isodisomy and heterodisomy with homozygous Calhromosomal mosaics meta dael up of cell lines with distinct intrachromosomal haplotype within the centromere. This haplotype arrangement implies the structural rearrangements are unusual. Two cases reported by Reardon following origin of the UPD16: meiosis II nondisjunction, recombination . (1981) and by Fogu . (2008) showed similar karyotypes with rear- and mitotic loss of the paternal chromosome 16 (trisomy rescue). Data for rengements of the same region on isochromosome 13 derivative. We sug- UPD16 are inconsistent, prominent phenotype of maternal UPD16 is IUGR gest a common mechanism producing the coexistence of distinct structural with or without catch-up growth. Other features may include heart defects, rearrangements at common breakpoints on chromosome 13. inguinal hernia, hypospadia, pulmonary hypoplasia, although these features Phenotype of the baby is discussed with respect to other cases showing par- may be partly due to hidden mosaic trisomy 16. Mental development ranges t Pi 1al 1 t .r 1i 4so 5m -Sy mosaicism in Patau syndrome. from normal to severely delayed. We consider a potential impact of two im- Classical karyotyping vs molecular karyotyping (arrayCGH) in a case printed genes and five predicted imprinted genes on chromosome 16 to the of trisomy 9 mosaicism distinct phenotype of the UPD16. E. E. Fiedler, B. Glaeser, C. Spaich, D. Bartholdi, S. Biskup; Institut für Klinische Genetik, Stuttgart, Germany.  P11
.148-M Whole exome sequencing identifies novel genetic variants in the PRDM5 gene in Brittle cornea syndrome and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome Trisomy 9 mosaicism is considered to be a rare chromosomal abnormality S. Micheal1, F. Islam2, S. N. Zafar2, F. Akhtar2, M. Khan3,4, R. Qamar4, A. I. den Hollander3,5; with limited survival and a characteristic pattern of multiple anomalies. The 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Al-Shifa Eye Trust Hospital features commonly associated with trisomy 9 include growth retardation, Jhelum Road, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, 3Department of Human facial dysmorphisms, skeletal abnormalities, congenital heart disease and Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department intellectual disability. More than 50 cases have been reported, most of which of Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, were diagnosed after birth. We report a case of a one month old baby girl 5Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, with craniofacial abnormalities, hydronephrosis and multiple contractures. Netherlands. ArrayCGH analysis was performed and detected a trisomy 9 mosaicism in Background: approximately 40% of the cells. Classical karyotyping of lymphocytes re- vealed trisomy in about 3% of the metaphases. Previous prenatal analysis Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) and Axenfeld-Rieger syn- of cell cultures from amniotic fluid had not shown the mosaic trisomy 9 drome (ARS) are disorders affecPtRinDgM t5h e antZeNriFo4r 6s9egment of the eye, often constitution. Mosaicisms are expected to be exhibited at different levels in leading to secondary glaucoma. BCS is an autosomal recessive disorder as- different tissues. In addition, cell culturing leads to a bias in terms of the ra- sociated with mutations in the aPnIdT X2 FgOeXnCe1s,. while Axenfeld- tio between trisomic and disomic clones and very likely underestimates the Rieger syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion that has percentage of trisomic cells in conventional karyotyping. Our data show the been associated with genetic defects in and The purpose of importance of using uncultured samples (amniotic fluid and blood) and the current study is to identify the underlying genetic causes in a family with v Pa 1l 1ue o 4f m -Microarray technology in the assessment of mosaicisms. aMuetothsoomdsa:l recessive BCS and in a family with autosomal dominant ARS by .1 6 whole exome sequencing (WES). Cytogenetic-molecular characterization of an idic (Xq) in a female WES was performed for a single affected individual of both fa- with Turner syndrome and her daughter milies. Missense, nonsense and splice site variants identified by WES were C. Ardisia1, D. Rogaia1, V. Ottaviani1, C. Gradassi1, R. Romani1, M. Schippa1, P. Prontera1, G. Angeletti2, E. Donti1; pRreisourilttisz:e d based on pathogenicity prediction scores (PhyloP, Grantham). Se- 1Medical Genetics, University of Perugia, Italy, 2Department of Medicine, University of gregPaRtiDoMn 5analysis of selected variants was performed in family members. Perugia, Italy. A homozygous splice site variant (c.93+ P5
RGD>MA5) was identified in the gene, which was found to segregate with the disease in the BCS family. In the ARS family, a novel heterozygous missense variant The following is the case of a patient born 2 weeks preterm weighing 2.800 (c.877A>G; p.Lys293Glu) was prioritized from the WES data, and was found kg. She had a multicystic kidney that was removed immediately after birth. to segregate with the disease in an autosomal dominant fashion. Both va- At age 9, due to a significant growth delay, a cytogenetic analysis was made rCioanntcsl uwsieorne sa: bsent from population-matched controls, the Exome Variant on peripheral blood revealing a homogeneous 45,X karyotype thus leading Server and an in-house exome variant database. to Turner syndrome. Growth hormone treatment contributed to stature in- PRDM5 In the current study we identified a homoPzRyDgoMu5s splice site crease but with the development of secondary sex characters and the men- variant in a BCS family and a heterozygous missense variant inan ARS family strual cycle, it became necessary to repeat blood cytogenetic analysis that in the gene. This suggests that genetic variants in can lead to confirmed the 45,X karyotype. At 30 years, following absence of menstrual different disorders affecting the anterior segment. cycle , she realized she was pregnant. She had to undergo a caesarian deli- very and was simultaneously operated for ovariectomy. Karyotype obtained from gonadic tissue was mos 45,X/46,X,der(X). The insufficient amount of cells however did not help to investigate on marker nature. As the daugh- ter presented the same stature growth delay, at 5 years her constitutional karyotype was analyzed and was the samEe SonHeG fo u2n0d1 in4 h|e Mr mILoAthNer,’s I TovAa-LY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 235ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P11
.149-S „Federico II“, Naples, Italy, 6Second University of Naples, Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary WHSC/NSD2 is the major candidate gene for growth delay and facial Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, Naples, Italy, 7Department of dysmorphisms in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: expression analysis Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples „Federico II“, Naples, Naples, Italy. and functional studies on primary fibroblasts and immortalized peripheral lymphoblasts from three patients. C. Cafiero1, G. Pani2, D. Samengo2, G. Marangi1, M. Zollino1; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of General Wolfram Syndrome type 2 (WF S2
) is considered a phenotypic and genotypic Pathology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy. variant of WFS, whose minimal criteria for diagnosis are diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy. The responsible gene for WF S2
 is named CISD2, a highly conserved zinc- Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome (WHS, OMIM194190) is a contiguous gene syn- finger gene encoding for the Endoplasmic Reticulum Intermembrane Small drome caused by partial deletion of the short arm of one chromosome 4. (ERIS) protein, which plays a pivotal role in calcium homeostasis. It was The core WHS phenotype includes growth delay, intellectual disability, di- identified for the first time in three consanguineous families of Jordanian stinctive facial appearance and seizures. It maps within the terminal 1.9 Mb descents who carried a point mutation in exon 2 that disrupts messenger region on 4p16.3, where the critical region, WHSCR-2, was described. With RNA splicing by eliminating exon 2, causing a premature stop codon. After respect to pathogenic genes falling within WHSCR-2, WHS C1
 is the major this first report of Jordanian patients, no further CISD2 mutations have been candidate gene for both facial characteristics and growth delay. WHS C1
 is reported worldwide. expressed mainly in embryonic tissues and presents homology with Dro- We describe the first case in Europe of WF S2
 with a novel homozygous sophila dismorphy genes. Its PWWP, HMG-box, PHD and SET structural do- CISD2 exon 2 deletion in a 17 year-old girl, identified using both PCR and mains suggest an histone methyltransferase activity and a role in the epige- high density SNP array. She presented diabetes mellitus, optic neuropathy, netic regulation of morphogenetic transcriptional programmes. However, to intestinal ulcers, sensorineural hearing loss, and defective platelet aggrega- which extent whsc1 expression and activity are reduced in patients’cells due tion. Her brother and parents carried the heterozygous mutation and were to 4p16 deletion has not been thoroughly investigated. Additionally, while apparently healthy, although they showed subclinical defective platelet ag- very little is known about whsc1 regulation, it is intriguing that this gene is gregation. a potential target of hsa-miR948, that also maps to 4p16.3, and whose con- Since the mutation had never been reported, consanguinity was hypothe- comitant deletion may, in a subset of patients, reduce the effect of WHS C1
 sized. Long runs of homozygosity analysis from SNP-array data did not show monosomy by increasing the expression of the residual allele. Based on the- any degree of parental relationship, while microsatellite analysis confirmed se consideration, we decided to evaluate at a mRNA and protein level the ex- the hypothesis of a common ancestor. pression of WHS C1
 and of hsa-miR948 in primary and immortalized cell li- T Ph 1i 1s . 1re 5p 2o -r Mt provides novel clinical and molecular insights about WF S2
. nes from selected patients and healthy individuals as controls. Furthermore, Early diagnosis of Kallmann syndrome in a 4 year old boy with a the expression levels have been correlated with biochemical characteristics familial X;Y translocation (H3K36 and H4K20 methylation) and cellular phenotypes (DNA damage Y. Kido1, S. Soh2, T. Yoshimura3, S. Kuwashima4, Y. Tanaka3, H. Okada2, S. Sakazume1; response, inflammatory signaling) reportedly related to WHS C1
 biological 1Department of Pediatrics, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Saitama, activity at least in tumor cells. Japan, Koshigaya, Japan, 2Department of Urology, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya  P11
.150-M Hospital, Saitama, Japan, Koshigaya, Japan, 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Coeliac disease in Williams syndrome Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Saitama, Japan, Koshigaya, Japan, M. Ercan1, B. G. Nur1, S. B. Karaüzüm2, A. Yilmaz3, R. Artan4; 4Department of Radiology, Dokkyo Medical University, Tochigi, Japan, Mibu, Japan. 1AkdenizUniversity School of Medicine Department of Pediatric Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2AkdenizUniversity School of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 3AkdenizUniversity School of Medicine Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Antalya, Turkey, 4Akdeniz University School of Medicine X;Y translocation (tXY) is a rare chromosomal rearrangement typically in- Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Antalya, Turkey. herited from a tXY carrier mother. Patients with tXY commonly display 46, X or Y, der(X),t(X;Y)(p22.3;q11). Women with tXY show a mild phenotype due to X inactivation and are fertile. Men with tXY show a range of phenotypes Williams syndrome is a multi-system disorder characterized by distincti- with variable degree of severity according to the size and position of the ve facial features, growth delay, mental retardation with typical neurobe- deletion of the X chromosome, comprising short stature, chondrodysplasia havioral profile, cardiovascular anomalies, endocrine anomalies including punctata, ichthyosis, ocular-albinism, mental retardation, and Kallmann autoimmune pathologies, and hypercalcemia. Coeliac disease is an autoim- syndrome (KS). Here we describe a boy with tXY inherited from a carrier mune, gastrointestinal disorders characterized by intolerance to the dietary mother. His phenotype was characterized by mesomelic short stature, mid- grain protein gluten. An increased prevalence of Coeliac disease has been face retrusion, ichthyosis, micropenis, bilateral undescended testes, hypo- reported in Down syndrome and Turner syndrome, but there has been only plastic scrotum, agenesis of right kidney and central hypogonadism as as- few previous report which respect to the association of Coeliac disease in sessed by gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and human chorionic Williams syndrome. gonadotropin (hCG) stimulation tests. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of Coeliac disease in of the olfactory tracts showed hypoplastic olfactory bulbs bilaterally, aplasia our 24 molecularly confirmed Williams syndrome patients (12 girls, 12 of the left olfactory sulcus and hypoplasia of the right olfactory sulcus. The boys, mean age 9.4 years). All patients were analysed by the dosage of tissue patient‘s mother and sister showed mesomelic short stature and his mother transglutaminases IgA and IgG HLA genotyping and intestinal biopsy was displayed Madelung deformity. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array performed to the patients with positive serology. Celiac disease symptoms analysis defined the breakpoint in intron 7 of the KA L1
 gene. Conclusion: and gastrointestinal problems were recorded. Biochemical profile (calcium, For early diagnosis in patients with KS, it would be useful to search for other urine calcium/creatinin ratio, thyroid functions), IgA tissue transglutamina- symptoms including renal abnormalities (agenesis of right kidney) and to ses (IgA tTG) and IgG tissue transglutaminases (IgG tTG) were assessed in assess the presence of olfactory tracts by MRI (hypoplastic olfactory bulbs all cases. Serum total IgA levels assessed only in tTG positive patients. Pati- b Pi 1la 1t .e 1r 5a 3ll -y S). ents were selected for the haplotypes in the HLA class II region (HLA DQ), Chromosome Xq21 deletion syndrome - rare cause of deafness and endoscopy and intestinal biopsy on the basis of tTG positivity. mental retardation The results show that the prevalence of Coeliac disease in Williams syndro- A. Klímová; me was higher than in the general population. As our results, Coeliac disease Department of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech Republic. questioning and serologic screening is recommended at certain intervals in all cases with Williams syndrome to explain the cause of growth retardation a Pn 1d 1 .g 1a 5s 1tr -o Sintestinal problems. Our case is a family, where Chromozome Xq21 deletion syndrome was dia- A novel ZCD2 intragenic deletion in Wolfram Syndrome 2 gnosed. M. Carella1, E. Mozzillo2, M. Delvecchio1, P. Palumbo1, L. Fidanza1, E. Grandone1, A. Genetic counselling was recommended because of mental retardation, bi- Salina3, C. Aloi3, P. Buono2, F. Cirillo4, A. Izzo5, G. D’Annunzio3, G. Vecchione1, A. Orrico6, R. lateral hearing loss and paleocerebellar syndrome at 5-year boy. He also Genesio7, F. Simonelli6, A. Franzese2; had hypotonia, developmental delay and hyperactivity. We started genetic 1Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Department of examination and we found normal karyotype 46,XY,9qh+. Molecular gene- Translational Medical Science, Section of Pediatrics, University of Naples „Federico II“, tic examination excluded X-Fragile syndrome, Prader-Willi-Angelman syn- Naples, Italy, 3Laboratory of Diabetology - Laboratory for the Study of Inborn Errors of drome and mutations in the GJB2 gene. Microarray comparative genomic Metabolism, Pediatric Clinic, DINOGMI University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 4Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy, hybridisation identified a 5-Mb deletion of Xq21, which include the POU3F4, 5Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples ZNF711 and CHM genes. The boy did not have any symptoms of choroide- remia. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe analysis (MLPA) showed that the 236 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG unaffected mother also carried the deletion. The boy had no siblings.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Next time the family was examinated in the following pregnancy of the mo- predicting the clinical outcome of ALL and it is able to suggest a diagnostic ther, but the case was complicated because of twin pregnancy. Prenatal dia- tool for some stage of ALL and even provide the better prospective for treat- gnosis was recommended and chorionic villus sampling was performed with ment strategy by applying some demathylating agents.  P12
.002-M the result one male and one female foetus. Molecular genetic examination of The A785G CY P2
B6 germline polymorphism may affect the risk of de the Chromozome Xq21 deletion syndrome in the male foetus was performed novo Acute Myeloid Leukemia and the same familiar deletion was identified. Mother underwent selective K. Kakosaiou1,2, A. Daraki1,2, S. Zachaki1, K. Stavropoulou1, P. Nakopoulos1, C. Sambani1, fetocide of the affected male foetus at 16 weeks‘ gestation. Further course V. Aleporou-Marinou2, P. Kollia2, K. Manola1; of gravidity is normal. 1NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,  P11
.154-M Athens, Greece. 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome: neurocognitive functioning in two italian young patients M. Vendemiale1, F. Ortolani2, M. Settembre1, A. Rossiello1, D. Cornacchia1, G. D‘Aniello1, A. Labbate1, R. Tripoli1, M. Riccardi1, M. Lucarano1, F. Nicastro3, M. Carella4, M. Gentile5, E. The etiology of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is currently unknown alt- Piccinno6, F. Papadia6, R. Fischetto6; hough genetic background and environmental exposure postulated to be a 1Servizio Psicologia Clinica-Dir.Medica P.O.Giovanni XXIII AOU Policlinico, Bari, Italy, possible cause of AML development. The CY P2
B6 enzyme plays a vital role 2UOC Malattie Metaboliche Genetica Clinica e Diabetologia Ospedale Pediatrico, Bari, in the degradation of many genotoxic compounds, protecting cells from Italy, 3UOC Malattie Metaboliche Genetica Clinica e Diabetologia, Ospedale Pediatrico oxitative damage. CY P2
B6 gene is subjected to the A785G germline poly- „Giovanni XXIII“, Bari, Italy, 4UOC Genetica Medica IRCCS “Casa sollievo sofferenza”, San morphism which reduces enzyme activity. Thus, individuals homozygous or Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, 5UOC Genetica Medica ASL BA4 P.O.Di Venere, Bari, Italy, 6UOC Malattie Metaboliche Genetica Clinica e Diabetologia Ospedale Pediatrico heterozygous for mutant allele (G/G or A/G) present decreased enzymatic „Giovanni XXIII“, Bari, Italy. activity. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of the A785G polymorphism in the AML susceptibility. Possible associations with specific AML-chromosomal abnormalities were also investigated. CY P2
B6 genoty- The 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome causes a wellknown syndrome re- ping was performed in 220 de novo AML patients and 243 healthy donors cently described in the scientific literature. Clinical features are: neonatal by RCR-RFLP and Real-Time PCR assays. Cytogenetic analysis was successful hypotonia, low birth weight, craniofacial dysmorphism, developmental de- in 98% of patients. Among them, 72.7% presented an abnormal karyotype. lay, intellectual disability and amiable behaviour disposition. The present A significantly higher incidence of the mutant genotypes (A/G and G/G) was study analyzes neuropsychological assessment in two young italian patients observed in de novo AML patients compared to the controls (p<0.0001). The with a genetically described 17q21.31 microdeletion. Case 1: 18-year-old mutant allele frequency was similar between the different gender and age male. Case 2: 13-year-old female. groups. Interestingly, a higher frequency of heterozygotes A/G was observed Neuropsychological Assessment Wechsler Adult and Children Intelligence in normal karyotypes compared to abnormal (51.7% vs 30.0%, p=0.010). Scales Revised, Italian Neuropsychological Battery, Peabody, Vineland Adap- Furthermore, a significantly higher incidence of G/G genotype was obser- tive Behavior Scales, Adaptive Behavior Inventory, Parent Stress Index, Brief ved in patients with t(8;21) and MLL rearrangements compared to patients Cope, Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support, Child Behavior with normal karyotypes (28.5% and 20.0% vs 6.6%, respectively). Our stu- Checklist. Case 1: severe mental retardation (Intelligence Quotient, IQ = 32), dy comprises the first investigation of the A785G CY P2
B6 polymorphism in immature representative capacity, impairment of receptive and expressive AML susceptibility. Our results reveal a possible implication of this genetic communication, anxiety and apprehension. The Adaptive functioning is im- v Pa 1r 2ia .0n 0t 3in - SAML development and its specific chromosomal aberrations. paired in all areas (communication, skills of daily living, socialization and Higher incidence of co-existing Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) motor skills). Mental Age 4y2m. Case 2: moderate to severe mental retarda- rearrangements and Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) tion (IQ<40), expressive and receptive language deficits, decline in all areas mutations in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) in a South-East of adaptive functioning (M.A. 5y7m), socially indiscriminate attachment Asian population behavior, hyperactivity. Reading and writing disabilities, semantic memory T. Lim1, A. Lim1, L. Oon1, T. Lim1, D. Tan2, Y. Ng1, Y. Yeap1, E. Chen1, J. Ho1, S. Tien1; deficits, verbal and visuospatial short-term memory deficits, ideational and 1Pathology Department, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 2Medical motor dyspraxia, deficit in scheduling tasks and spatio-temporal organiza- Oncology, National Cancer Centre Sinagpore, Singapore, Singapore. tion were present in both patient. The emotional systems are characteri- zed by trust in peers and adults, kindness, dependence and poor individual autonomy. The attachment is secure with important people.To our know- Both EGFR mutations and ALK rearrangements in NSCLC are associated ledge these observations can be added to preliminary evidences already with sensitivity to EGFR and ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors, respectively. present in literature: 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome correlates to low The incidence of ALK rearrangements is about 5% worldwide and EGFR mu- intellectual capacities, learning disability, good interpersonal skills and an tations and ALK translocations are generally known to be mutually exclu- approaching behaviour. sive. The aim of this study is to determine the incidence of ALK rearrange-  P12
.001-S ments and incidence of co-existing EGFR and ALK mutations in a South-East Impact of Aberrant Promoter Hypermethylation on down-regulation Asian population. FISH using an ALK break-apart probe was performed on of MT S2
 and MT S1
 in Childhood ALL formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues from 1183 NSCLC K. MalekZadeh1,2; 1Molecular Medicine Research Center, Bandar Abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Moleculr cases from year 2011 till 2013. EGFR mutation test was performed using MEdicine Research Center; Hormozgan University for Medical Science, Bandar Abbas, direct sequencing of EGFR exons 18-21. ALK FISH results were obtained Islamic Republic of Iran. from 1152 samples (97.4%). A total of 105 cases showed a rearranged ALK gene (9.1%) of which 76.2% showed the typical FISH pattern while 21.9% showed an atypical pattern with loss of the 5’ ALK gene segment and 1.9% The tumor suppressor genes MT S1
 and MT S2
 are cycline dependent kinas showed loss of the 3’ALK gene. Among the ALK rearranged patients, 95 cases inhibitors inactivated in some human neoplasms via several mechanisms had concurrent EGFR mutation assays performed out of which EGFR mutati- such as hypermethylation. We have investigated the methylation status ons were identified in 17 cases (17.9%). The incidence of concomitant ALK of MT S1
 and MT S2
 in its effect on transcriptional down-regulation in 125 and EGFR alterations in the entire cohort was 1.48%. In our cohort study, bone marrow aspirate (7 cases T-cell and 118 cases B-cell phenotypes) from the incidence of ALK gene rearrangement is relatively similar to the repor- childhood ALL patient and 100 healthy control in north Indian population ted incidence. The co-existence of ALK rearrangements and EGFR mutations by using MSP-PCR ,bisulfite sequencing, SQRT-PCR and RT-PCR. There were has been found to be rare in Western populations (0.33-6%). The higher significant differences in pattern of hypermethylation between patients and incidence of concomitant mutations in our South-East Asian population sug- healthy controls of MT S2
 (p=0.000) and MT S1
 (p=0.001) and also when both g Pe 1s 2ts .0 e 0t 4hn -Mic differences in terms of genetic alterations. genes methylated. Patients with hypermethylated of both genes showed an FISH analysis of four unbalanced translocations involving increasing risk for 2.33 fold (95%CI=2.33(1.97-2.77), p=0.03). Significant chromosome 1q in hematologic neoplasms association of MT S1
 hypermethylation was observed only among the male A. Simone1, L. Militti1, R. Di Gianfilippo2, A. Soranno1, A. Di Tecco2, D. Fantasia1, G. patients (p=0.004) in contrast hypermethylation of MT S2
 was significantly Calabrese1,3; associated with increasing risk of ALL among both genders. Down-regulati- 1Medical Genetics, Università di Chieti, Chieti, Italy, 2Genetics, Pescara Hospital, Pescara, on of mRNA expression was found in cases in which MT S1
 and MT S2
 were Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy. hypermethylated. In conclusion our data also indicate the impact of hyper- methylation mediated inactivation of these genes which is associated with risk of childhood ALL. This abnormality particularly in promoter of MT S2
 Unbalanced whole-arm translocations (WATs) of the long arm of chromoso- occurs in leukemogenesis and can be consEidSeHreGd a2s0 a1n 4im |p MorItLanAt Nfac, tIoTrA inL Y |m We 1W reWsu.lEt SinH coGm.OpleRteG trisomy 1q. These are rare chromosomal abno2rm37a-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index lities detectable in both solid tumors and hematologic neoplasms including 644T>C and c.-625G>C, the presence of minor allele was associated with cases of myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), higher survivin mRNA expression. Besides eight frequent, six rare polymor- in most cases described as dicentric derivative chromosomes. We report on pBhIRisCm5s were found, c.9349G>C found in 3‘ UTR previously unpublished. 1q unbalanced WATs detected at diagnosis in 4 patients as resulting from a This was the first study in Croatia which demonstrated correlation between t(1;15)(p10;p10) in a case with myelofibrosis (MF) and in one with AML, polymorphisms with the level of survivin expression and the risk of t(1;14)(p10;p10), and t(1;22)(p10;p10) in two other AML patients. Conven- oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Since itB IiRs Ck5nown that tional cytogenetics was supplemented by FISH analysis using specific probes increased expression of survivin is associated with increased resistance to for the centromeric alpha-satellite region of chromosome 1 (D1Z7; 1p11.1- chemotherapy and radiation, as well with poorer survival, polymor- q11), chromosomes 14/22 (D14Z1/D22Z1; 14p11.1-q11.1/22p11.1-q11.1), phisms could be used as predictive and prognostic biomarkers in the etiolo- and chromosome 15 (D15Z4; 15p11.1-q11.1). FISH analysis showed that gy of head and neck squamous cell cancer.  P12
.008-M the signal of chromosome 1 alphoid region D1Z7 was absent on derivative Bladder cancer risk in relation to DNA repair capacity, gene chromosomes in all patients suggesting that breakpoint on chromosome 1q expression and epigenomic profiles. is distal to the centromere, while D14Z1 on t(1;14), D15Z4 on t(1;15), and A. Allione1,2, B. Pardini1, S. Guarrera1,2, V. Turinetto3, G. Fiorito1,2, F. Rosa1, A. Russo1,2, F. D22Z1 on t(1;22) were present. Therefore all derivative chromosomes sho- Modica1, C. Giachino3, P. Vineis1,4, C. Sacerdote1,5, G. Matullo1,2; wed unique centromere (monocentric) derived from the acrocentric chro- 1Human Genetics Foundation, Turin, Italy, 2Dept. Medical Science, University of Turin, mosome rearranged with 1q, then resulting in reclassification of 1q WATs as Turin, Italy, 3Dept. Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, der(15)t(1;15) (both cases), der(14)t(1;14) and der(22)t(1;22). Moreover, 4Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 5University of Turin and Centre for Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention (CPO Piemonte), Turin, Italy. during follow up in the MF case cytogenetic analyses revealed progressive expansion of the clone with der(15) up to homogeneity, thus suggesting a proliferative advantage for the der(15)-related clone. Although studies on a large cohort of patients are needed, present results confirm 1q pericentro- The ability to repair DNA damage is strongly associated with the risk of meric region instability in leukemia, and support trisomy 1q role to favor cancer and inter-individual variation in DNA repair capacity (DRC) might leukemogenesis and hematopoietic tissue alterations. account for different susceptibility of developing cancer. DRC represents a  P12
.005-S complex marker comprising the sum of several factors such as gene vari- Involvement of APC gene in Acinar Cell carcinomas of the Pancreas ants, gene expression, stability of gene products, and effect of inhibitors/ N. Sahnane1, D. Furlan1, B. Bernasconi1, M. Frattini2, F. Molinari2, S. La Rosa3, F. Sessa1, stimulators. Individuals with low DRC will tend to accumulate more damage M. Tibiletti3; 1Department of Surgical and Morphological Sciences, University of Insubria, Varese, than those who have a better ability to repair such damage. This variability Italy, 2Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostic, Institute of Pathology, Locarno, Switzerland, is modulated by the genetic background to which SNPs/haplotype combi- 3U.O. Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale di Circolo – Polo Universitario, Varese, Italy. nations in DNA repair genes, as well as epigenetic regulation are likely to contribute. Phenotypic assays to evaluate DNA repair activity (in particular NER comet Pathogenetic mechanisms of pancreatic acinar cell carcinomas (ACCs) are assay, H2AX phosphorylation and micronucleus assay) were performed poorly characterized. There is no data about gene hypermethylation and on cryopreserved lymphocytes from 159 bladder cancer cases (collected chromosomal aberrations in ACCs. In a subset of ACCs is reported the im- before treatment) and 159 controls matched by age and smoking habits, pairment of APC/β-catenin pathway including mutations of APC gene. enrolled in Turin Bladder Cancer Study (TBCS). We aimed at studying the However, it is not known whether the loss of APC function can occur even relationship between DRC (evaluated by comet assay, micronuclei and H2AX through alternative genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. In this study, we phosphorylation assay) and bladder cancer integrating, gene expression investigated the methylation profile of 34 tumor suppressor genes, Copy and epigenetic profile data (methylation levels and microRNA expression). Number Alterations (CNA) of 52 chromosomal regions, and APC alterations In particular, we performed an integrated analysis on the genotype/pheno- (mutation, methylation, and loss) together with the measurement of APC type correlation in a population of bladder cancer cases and controls pro- mRNA level in 45 ACCs and related available peritumoral pancreatic tissu- vided with detailed description of the follow-up for response to therapy/ es using different methodologies: MS-MLPA, FISH, mutation analysis, and recurrence/survival. This integrated approach will help in elucidating the reverse transcription-droplet digital PCR. ACCs did not show an extensive role of DRC (and its determinants) as predictive and prognostic marker and global gene hypermethylation profile. RASSF1 and APC were the only two to identify DNA repair phenotypic assays to be performed in blood cells as genes frequently methylated (60% and 56% of cases, respectively). APC n Po 1n 2- .i 0n 0v 9as -Sive predictive method. mutations were found in 7% of cases, while APC loss and methylation were Mutation detection in urines from bladder cancer patients as non- more frequently observed (48% and 56% of ACCs, respectively). They were invasive prognostic tool also found in pancreatic tissues adjacent to ACCs showing these alterations. R. Critelli1,2, A. Naccarati1, M. Assumma1, S. Polidoro1, C. Sacerdote3, A. Russo1,2, G. APC mRNA low levels were found in 58% of cases and correlated with high- Fiorito1, F. Modica1, E. Zwarthoff4, G. Matullo1,2, P. Vineis1,5; er levels of CNAs. In conclusions, ACCs are frequently polysomic and mainly 1Human Genetics Foundation, Turin, Italy, 2University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 3Center characterized by CNAs and gene methylation. APC alterations are crucial for Cancer Prevention, Turin, Italy, 4University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. events in the pathogenesis of ACCs and the reduction of APC mRNA levels mainly depends on gene loss and promoter hypermethylation rather than gene mutation.  P12
.007-S In Europe, bladder cancer (BC) is the sixth most commonly diagnosed tu- The role of BIR C5
 polymorphisms in oral and oropharyngeal mour and the second most common cause of death among patients with squamous cell carcinoma genitourinary tract malignancies. Patients with non-muscle-invasive blad- V. Musani1, M. Levacic Cvok1, P. Ozretic1, M. Conda1, D. Leovic2, S. Levanat1; der cancer (NMI-BC) have excellent survival; however two-thirds develop 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 2Clinical Hospital Osijek, 31000 Osijek, recurrences. Tumour specific mutations can be used to detect recurrences Croatia. in urine assays, presenting non-invasive diagnostic procedure respect to cy- BIR C5
 stoscopy. The present study involves male subjects recruited between 1994 and 2012 and diagnosed with BC. Urine samples have been collected for the Survivin, encoded by gene, belongs to the family of inhibitors oBf IaRpCo5- first time at the time of diagnosis and exfoliated cells have been extracted. A ptosis (IAP) proteins. In healthy organisms it is not expressed in differen- subgroup of patients have been followed up for three years, collecting a urine tiated tissues, while its expression is markedly increased in tumors. sample every six months. The mutation spectrum of hTERT, FGFR3, HRAS, polymorphisms have been previously associated with increased expression, KRAS, NRAS and PIK3CA in 286 patients has been investigated at diagnosis. stability and localization of survivin, all oBf IwRh C5
ich can affect tumor develop- Thirty-eight patients have completed six samplings, twenty-five patients have ment. five samplings and nineteen patients have four samplings, for a total of 454 In this study we investigated the role of polymorphisms in oral and follow-up samples. Mutations are detected using three different multiplex- oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Genetic testing of 38 patients and ed SNaPshot assays. The first allows to detect in one reaction the nine most 74 healthy controls was conducted using high resolBuItRioCn5 melting analysis frequent FGFR3 mutations. The second multiplex screens simultaneously for and Sanger sequencing. nineteen RAS mutations. The last multiplex detects seven mutations, three in Results showed different significance of individual polymorphisms. hTERT gene and four in PIK3CA gene. Preliminary analyses show that mu- c.-235G>A showed significantly higher frequency in patients compared to tations in hTERT gene promoter and in FGFR3 gene are the most frequent control samples. For c.-644T>C and c.-625G>C, minor homozygous geno- somatic mutations in tumours of the urinary bladder. Mutational profiler will types were significantly associated with higher Broders’ grade, which was be correlated with recurrences and survival in order to verify the usefulness a 2ls 3o 8 observed for c.-235G>A. The minor homozygEoSusH gGen 2ot0yp1e4s o| fM eiItLheArN , oIT f A urL inY a r| y W exW foliW ate.E d S ceH llsG t. oO foR llG ow-up BC progression. c.9194G>A or c.9809T>C were associated with higher TNM stage. For c.-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.010-M SEPT9/SYHR1, novel fusion gene identified in bladder cancer by RNA- seq. Germline mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes account for about 60% of T. Kekeeva1, A. Tanas1, A. Shikeeva1, L. Zavalishina2, Y. Andreeva2, G. Frank2, D. Zaletaev1; inherited breast cancer and, subsequently, for approximately 3% of all bre- 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Medical ast cancer (BC) cases. It is of chief importance that women who carry a he- Academy of Postgraduate Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. reditary mutation are identified and given options for prevention; for this reason BRCA testing is increasingly offered to women with suspected BRCA mutations, implying a rapid growth of testing requests to the molecular la- Bladder cancer is one of the most common genitourinary malignancies in boratory. In this regard, we are currently comparing the analysis of these ge- the world. The urothelial carcinoma (UC) has multiple genetic alterations, nes with the Ion AmpliSeq next generation sequencing technology with the but only a few low-frequency fusion genes have so far been reported for this classic Sanger method. Preliminary data on 14 samples, already analysed disease. In this study, we present a thorough search for novel fusion tran- using Sanger method, were obtained using the BRCA1/2 Ion Ampliseq kit on scripts in UC sample using high-throughput RNA sequencing. Ion Torrent PGM: data indicated a reliable and robust variant identification Sequencing was performed according to the paired-end RNA sequencing and sequence coverage ranging from 99.995 to 100%. Data comparison will protocols from Illumina for Solexa sequencing on a Genome Analyzer II. be presented for 40 patients. In addition, recent data suggest that consti- We used the fusion discovery software tool Chimerascan. From 51 million tutive epimutations in BRCA1 might be relevant to breast carcinogenesis. paired-end sequence reads, we identified 563 candidate fused transcripts. We identified in a pilot study on Sequenom MassARRAY system that blood By stringent requirements, we nominated the one candidate fusion tran- DNA from BC patients (negative for BRCA1/2 mutations) was consistently script for further experimental validation, which was positive by RT-PCR more methylated in a region corresponding to chr17:38531627-38532076, and Sanger sequencing. The transcript was intrachromosomal SEPT9/ compared to controls (60-90% vs 30-40%). Therefore an epigenetic and CYHR1 fusion gene. Septin 9 (17q25) is a member of the septin family of quantitative expression analysis of BRCA1 is currently carried out in a lar- GTPases that have diverse cellular activity, including roles in cytokinesis, ger group of patients with or without BRCA mutations, and controls, in or- apoptosis, and vesicle trafficking. A chromosomal translocation involving der to establish a correlation between the degree of methylation and the this gene and MLL gene is described for acute myelomonocytic leukemia. expression levels in our cohort of patients. This study is supported by grant CYHR1 (8q24) (cysteine and histidine-rich cytoplasmic protein) is involved PRUa1GR-2012-001 “DIANE”.  P12
.014-M in cellular trafﬁcking transport of galectin 3. We founded two transcript va- Characterization of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants of unknown clinical riants: SEPT9 exon 2 was fused to CYHR1 exon 3 and SEPT9 exon 1 was significance identified in a Norwegian cancer cohort juxtaposed to CYHR1 exon 3. We also revealed SEPT9/CYHR1 in 1/12 of UC E. Jarhelle1,2,3, H. M. F. R. Stensland1,2, L. Mæhle4, M. V. Ghelue1,2,3; FFPE samples. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health, University Further investigation of functional and clinical relevance of novel fusion Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Northern Norway Familial Cancer Center, gene remains to be elucidated to reveal the role of SEPT9/CYHR1 in the car- University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 3Department of Clinical Medicine, cinogenesis of bladder. University of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University  P12
.012-M Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Phenotypic and clinical characteristics of 3300 Israeli BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers R. Michaelson-Cohen1, B. Kaufman2, I. Kedar3, E. Dagan4, V. Adir5, O. Reish6, H. Baris7, S. BRCA1 BRCA2 The most commonly mutated high penetrance genes in hereditary breast Shtemer3, E. Evron6, V. Libman6, E. Levy1, M. Simeonov8, R. Gershoni-Baruch7, R. Catane2, E. Friedman8, E. Levy-Lahad1; and ovarian cancer (HBOC) are and . Germline loss-of-function 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem Israel, Jerusalem, Israel, mutations in these genes confer a high risk of breast cancer to the individual 2Institute of Oncology Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 3Rabin Medical Center, carrier. However, besides the clear loss of function mutations, there are still Petach-Tikva, Israel, 4University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 5Bnai-Zion Medical Center, Israel a large number of sequence variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS) Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 6Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Tel-Aviv University, in both genes. These VUS generate a huge challeBnRgeC Ab1oth forB gReCnAe2tic counse- Zerifin, Israel, 7Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 8Sheba Medical Center, Tel ling and prophylactic surgery. Hashomer, Israel. In the current study, the consequences of some and VUS iden- tified in Norwegian canceBr RpCaAti1ents wBeRrCeA e2valuated. Initially, their possible influence on RNA splicing was investigated by targeted sequencing of cDNA. Background: BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations are the most common cause of he- In addition, the complete and cDNA were sequenced in order reditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). The HBOC-Consortium was to uncover eventual alternatively spliced transcripts. Some of tBhRe CvAa1riants created for unified data collection on Israeli BRCA carriers. affecting the BRCT domBaRinCsA 2ofBRCA1 were tested for their influence on Methods: A uniform computerized-database was used by 12 cancer-centers BRCA1 trans-activation function. In BtoRtCaAl, 119 individualsB wRCitAh1 VUS Results: Data were collected on 2145 BRCA1, 1131 BRCA2, and 22 double- and 1B8R CinAd2ividuals with VUS from families with HBOC were included mutation carriers. in this study. Three of the BvRaCriAa1n ts, BRCA 2c.213-5T>A, c.5434C>G BRCA1 vs. BRCA2 mutation carriers had more breast cancer (BC) (40.0% and c.68-7T>A, were shown to influence RNA splicing. Investigation vs. 36.3%, p=0.06), ovarian cancer (OC) (17.1% vs. 10.6%, p<0.001), were of the full-length cDNA of and proved to be challenging due younger at cancer diagnosis (BC 45yrs. vs. 49 yrs., p<0.001, OC 53yrs. vs. to the presence of several alternatively spliced transcripts which were also 62yrs., p<0.001), had more familial BC (64.5% vs. 59.0%, p<0.001), and fa- present in the controls. A functional assay, developed to assess the trans- milial OC (36.7% vs. 27.3% p<0.001). activation ability of BRCA1, indicated that some of the variants may have a BRCA1 carriers of 185delAG vs. 5382insC had less BC (38.6% vs. 46.4%, deleterious effect. p=0.02), at older age (46yrs. vs. 40yrs., p=0.023), but more OC (17.6% vs.  P12
.015-S 12.9%, p=0.04). Two new cases of double heterozygosity for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene Risk-reducing-bilateral-salpingoooporectomy (RR-BSO) rates were assessed mutations identified in a cohort of Italian breast and ovarian cancer in carriers 38-80yrs. BC patients had higher rates than unaffected carriers families (92.6% vs. 78.1%, p<0.001), but underwent RR-BSO later (51yrs. vs. 48yrs., F. Vignolo Lutati1, G. Casalis Cavalchini1, A. Sapino2, B. Pasini1; 1Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Turin, Torino, Italy, p<0.001). Carriers with familial OC had higher rates than carriers without 2SC Anatomia e Istologia Patologica – AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino - (83.0% vs. 74.7%, p=0.05). Carriers with familial-cancer had RR-BSO earlier Presidio Molinette, Torino, Italy. than those without (48 yrs. vs. 50yrs., p=0.037), especially BRCA2 carriers with familial OC (47 yrs. vs. 51yrs., p=0.018). 18/497(3.6%) male carriers had BC. 1/3 were BRCA1 carriers, and were Double heterozygosity for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations is a very rare fin- younger at cancer diagnosis compared to BRCA2 mutation carriers (50yrs. ding, particularly in non-Ashkenazi individuals, and only a few cases have vs. 57yrs., NS). been reported to date. Here we describe genetic and clinical data of two fe- Conclusions: RR-BSO rates in Israeli carriers are very high, particularly in male double heterozygotes for both BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations found in women affected with BC and family history of OC. Consortium data are con- a cohort of 201 mutated Italian breast/ovarian cancer families out of 942 sistent with lower cancer rates for BRCA2 mutations.  P12
.013-S cases analyzed. The first one is a female patient affected by bilateral breast Setting up the basis for translating “omic” data for BRCA1/2 into cancer at 47 and 49 years of age, carrying both a BRCA2 nonsense mutati- clinical practice ons (c.7408A>T - p.Arg2394X) and a BRCA1 proven splicing defect (IV S5
- F. Buscherini, C. Diquigiovanni, F. Isidori, L. Godino, R. Zuntini, S. Ferrari, D. Turchetti, 12A>G or c.331_332ins11 - p.Arg71SerfsX21). The second one is a female E. Bonora; patient affected by ductal breast cancer at 42 years of age, carrying both Unit of Medical Genetics Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, BOLOGNA, Italy. a BRCA1 nonsense mutations (c.3726C>T - p.Arg1203X) and a BRCA2 fra- meshift mutation (c.3036_3039delACAA - p.Ala938ProfsX21). Although this ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 239 event is rare (2/201: 1% in our clinical records, consistent with literatureABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.018-M Investigating the management of symptomatic and pre-symptomatic data) and the phenotype is not worse than carriers of a single mutation, it BRCA gene mutation carriers in an Irish Tertiary referral centre has to be considered in the assessment of the biological effect of variants of T. P. McVeigh1, R. Irwin1, N. Cody2, K. J. Sweeney1, A. J. Green2, N. Miller1, M. J. Kerin1; uncertain biological effect. Furthermore the presence of a second mutation 1National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland, 2National Centre for Medical has important consequences for genetic counselling of relatives. We suggest Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. that mutation analysis of index cases should always be extended in order to avoid missing a second BRCA mutation.  P12
.016-M Aims: Germline mutations in BRCA1 and 2 confer a high risk of breast can- BRCA mutation testing in all newly diagnosed patients with breast- or cer. The aim of our study was to outline the disease phenotype and manage- ovarian cancer: The DNA BONus study ment of BRCA gene mutation carriers in the West of Ireland. C. Bjorvatn1,2, T. Aas3, B. E. Fiane4, K. Woie5, H. Espelid6, T. Rusken7, H. P. Eikesdal8,2, M. T. Henanger1, W. Listøl1, P. M. Knappskog1,2, V. M. Steen1,2, N. Hoogerbrugge9, H. H. Vetti1; Methods: A longitudinal cohort study was undertaken. The study group in- 1Western Norway Familial Cancer Center, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, cluded patients proven to carry a single gene mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 Norway, 2Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, between 2000 and 2013. Clinicopathological information was obtained by 3Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 4Department chart review. of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway, Results: Fourteen pathogenic mutations were identified in BRCA1 in 45 indi- 5Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, viduals from 24 families. The most common mutations were large genomic Norway, 6Department of Surgery, Haugesund Hospital, Haugesund, Norway, rearrangements, with deletion of exons 1-23 in 5 families, deletion exons 14- 7Department of Surgery, Førde Central Hospital, Førde, Norway, 8Department of Oncology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 9Department of Human 20 in 3 families and deletion exons 21-24 in 2 families. Fourteen pathogenic Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. mutations were identified in BRCA2, in 32 individuals from 19 families. The most common was frameshift mutation 8525delC, in 5 families. Of forty-one Introduction: BRCA patients affected with breast cancer, 17 carried mutations in BRCA1 and 24 -mutation carriBerRsChAip affects treatment, follow-up and mutations in BRCA2. Median age of onset of breast cancer in BRCA1 muta- further cancer prevention in patients newly dBiaRgCnAosed with breast- or ovari- tion carriers was 40years(25-67), and 45years(35-64) in BRCA2 mutation an cancer. Therefore indications for mutation testing grow rapidlBy.R WCAe carriers (p=0.02, Mann-Whitney). Eight patients developed bilateral breast investigate prospectively 1) the frequency of mutation carriers among cancers including 6 BRCA1 mutation carriers. Five of six patients with ova- uBnRsCeAlected breast- and ovarian cancer patients, 2) current criteria for rian cancer carried BRCA1 mutations. Ten of 51 pre-symptomatic carriers mMuattaetriioanls t easntidn gm beyt haogde sa: nBdR fCaAmily history, and 3) psychosocial effects of underwent surgical prophylaxis, including 9 prophylactic mastectomies and -mutation testing in newly diagnosed patients. 5 oophorectomies. -mutation testing is offered consecutively Conclusions: BRCA gene mutations account for a small proportion of inhe- since September 2012 (ongoing) to unselected newly diagnoBsReCdA -patients rited predisposition to breast cancer. Carriers of these mutations require with breast- or ovarian cancer at BfoRuCrA hospitals in Western Norway. Initial intensive surveillance or surgical prophylaxis. Counselling and testing of testing is performed by a selected panel of 40 most frequent mutati- pre-symptomatic family members can facilitate intervention and modify ons, covering more than 90% of -mutations in the native Norwegian d Pi 1s 2ea .0s 1e 9p -h Senotype. pRoepsuullatsti:o n. Additionally, patients with a positive family history are invited Characteristics of Greek patients with breast cancer rearrangements for genetic counseling and further genetic testing. in BRCA1 gene By February 2014 N=2B08R CbAreast cancer patients (40% response A. Vratimos1, F. Fostira1, P. Apostolou1, I. Konstanta1, G. Fountzilas2, I. Konstantopoulou1, rate) and N=40 ovarian cancer patients (67% response rate) ha vBeR CbAee1n in- D. Yannoukakos1; cluBdReCdA i2n the study. A pathogenic -mutation has been found in 5 (2.4%) 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, National Center of Scientific Research Demokritos, breast cancer patients and 6 (15%) ovarian cancer patients; 9 and Athens, Greece, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Papageorgiou Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. 2 mutations. Only one of these mutation carriers would have been mCoisnsceldu sbiyo ncu: rrent guidelines. 42% of the participants have been invited for BRCA1 genetic counseling. BRCA2 In most countries large genomic rearrangements (LGRs) in and BRLCeAss than half of the patients with breast cancer and two thirds genes occur in a BsRmCaAll1 percentage of patients tested for hereditary of patients with ovarian cancer choose genetic testing at diagnosis. The in- breast-ovarian cancer. Instead, in the Greek population, four specific LGRs cidence of -mutations is particularly high among unselected patients have been identified in [deletions of exon 20 (4kb), exon 20 (3kb), with ovarian cancer. The updated results will be presented.  P12
.017-S exon 24 (4,5kb), and exons 23-24 (11kb)], the latter three of which have Involvement of the RNU2 macrosatellite in breast cancer susceptibility been characterized as founder mutations. Several factors may be associated C. Tessereau1, M. Buisson1, M. Imbert1, L. Barjhoux1, F. Damiola1, M. Dondon2, S. Eon- with LGRs, such as younger age at breast cancer (BC) diagnosis, bilaterallity Marchais2, GENESIS investigators, F. Lesueur2, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2, N. Andrieu2, O. and estrogen receptor–negative status. Sinilnikova1,3, S. Mazoyer1; 1Cancer Research Centre of Lyon, Lyon, France, 2Institut Curie, Paris, France, 3Unité Mixte The study‘s objective was to assesBsR tChAe1 possible establishment of criteria de Génétique Constitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents HCL/CLB, Lyon, France. leading to targeted screening, as well as to increase our insight into the role and clinical significance of specific pathogenic findings. RNU2 In a cohort oBfR 2C.A110 0 hereditary BC or OC patients, 74 (3,5%) were found RNU2-1 The macrosatellite is a tandem array of a 6.1 kb repeat unit contai- to carry one of the four LGRs. We have investigated the possible associati- ning the 190 bp-long gene coding for snRBNRACA U12 , RNU,2 and 3.8 kb of in- on between LGRs and the aforementioned factors. The mean age at terspersed repetitive DNA. Although located 124 kb telomeric to the breast diagnosis was 40,6 years. Among the 74 patients, 43 (60%) developed BC, and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene , the locus is absent 15 (20%) both BC and OC, where 16 (20%) developed OC only. 14 out of 74 from the human genome assembly due to the inherent difficulty to assemble developed bilateral (3/14), contralateral (9/14) and ipsilateral (2/14) BC. repetitive sequences. Thus, the influence that these large tandem repeat ar- Histopathology data was available for 40 out of 58 BC patients, demonstra- rays might exert on neighbouring gene expression, stability or architecture ting that 29/40 (72%) were triple-negative, 6/40 (15%) were ER+/PR+/ and RtNheUi2r contribution to the genetic basis of commRoNnU h2uman diseases re- Her2-, 3 (7,5%) were ER-/PR-/Her2+, 1 (2,5%) was ER+/PR-/Her2-B aRnCdA 11 mains largely unexplored. We have recently characterized in more dBeRtCaAil1s (2,5%) was ER+/PR+/Her2+. the locus and tested the association between copy number and In conclusion, LGRs compared to other loss-of-function mutations of breast cancer risk. Indeed, the proximity of this macrosatellite to gene do not seem to be associated with specific clinical or histopathological combined with its high degree oBfR pCoAly1m2o rphism raises the interesting pos- f Pe 1a 2tu .0re 2s 0. -M sibility that it could be involved in breast cancer susceptibility, especially TAp73α regulates Otx1 expression during breast cancer stem cells RasN nUo2 mutation is identified in / in 80% of the families tested in a differentiation and in response to cisplatin treatment diagnostic setting. We conducted a case-control study by genotyping the I. S. Pagani1,2, C. Pirrone1, E. Amelotti1, A. Terrinoni2, F. Bernassola2, A. G. Sanarico2, M. macrosatellite with a qPCR assay in 1452R fNamU2ilial breast cancer ca- Agostini3, F. Pasquali1, F. Lo Curto1, I. Zucchi4, E. Candi2, G. Melino2,3, G. Porta1; ses, 1457 affected and unaffected relatives and 1241 unrelated controls of 1University of Insubria, Varese, Italy, 2Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Medical the French study GENESIS. WRe NfoUu2nd that mean global copy number Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Milan, Italy. (GCN) is higher in cases (52 copies) than in controls (50 copies)R. INnU a2dditi- on, we BfoRuCnAd1 more very high GCN (>100) in affected women. We are presently investigating the functional impact of extremely large GCN Breast cancer is the most fatal disease for women in Western countries, de- on the locus. spite mammography screening and adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen and 240 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, pIT oA lycL hY e m| W othW eraW py. .E KS nH owG i. nO g R thG e molecular mechanisms underlying thisABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index disease may contribute to the identification of new targets for future the- gests that mutations in CHEK2 and NBN genes might play a role in the de- rapies. Tp53, Tp63 and Tp73 tumor suppressor family members encode for velopment of breast cancer among Macedonian patients. A study including transcription factors which control genome integrity. They take part in cell larger number of patients and controls are needed to confirm these results.  P12
.023-S response and in tumor suppression. Wild-type p53 protein is a growth mo- BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation detection by a Next Generation dulator and its inactivation is a critical event in malignant transformation Sequencing approach: an epidemiological study conducted in of breast cancer stem cells (CSCs). Otx1 is an homeobox gene involved in Southern Italy central nervous system development, and when deregulated, plays a role in M. Esposito1,2, M. D’Aiuto3, A. Telese1, V. Precone1,2, M. Nunziato1,2, A. Calabrese3, G. tumorigenesis. We showed that Otx1 is over-expressed in ductal and lobular Frisso1,2, G. D’Aiuto3, V. D’Argenio1,2, F. Salvatore1,2,4; invasive breast cancers and that is involved in adult mammary gland deve- 1Ceinge - Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and lopment. We demonstrated that p53 directly regulates Otx1 gene expression Medical Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3Department of binding to the 3’p53 responsive element (RE) on its promoter, and that this Senology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori – IRCCS Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy, 4IRCCS- Fondazione SDN, Naples, Italy. pathway regulates the LA7 breast CSCs differentiation. Here we will show that the TAp73α isoform of p73 is able to bind the 5’p53RE on the Otx1 pro- moter, leading to the LA7 cell differentiation and the asymmetric division of breast CSCs. Furthermore we will demonstrate that Otx1 and TAp73 are Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) accounts for about 10% of over-expressed in ductal and lobular invasive breast carcinoma. Finally we all breast cancers and BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the most prevalent genes cau- will show the functions of the TAp73α/Otx1 pathway in differentiation of sing this pathology. BRCA1/BRCA2 germline mutations escalate the risk of mammospheres obtained from wild-type and c-ErbB2 transgenic mice, and developing HBOCs by up to 20 fold. Testing for BRCA gene mutations is im- the response to cisplatin treatment in MCF7 and MBA-MB-231 breast cancer portant to improve the clinical management of the high-risk patients and of cells. their mutation carriers famiulyn mdeerm fobretrys.  P12
.021-S A NGS screening for BRCA1/2 germline mutations of 300 patients, with One in three Greek patients with early onset or familial breast cancer early-onset breast cancer (“ ”) and/or with positive family histo- carries a loss of function mutation in a known or candidate breast ry, is reported in order to identify mutation carriers.BRCA1/BRCA2 coding cancer gene regions were amplified using the BRCA MASTR v2.1 Assay (Multiplicom). F. Fostira1, T. Walsh2, S. Casadei2, M. K. Lee2, P. Apostolou1, G. Fountzilas3, I. Sequencing reactions were performed with the 454 GS FLX System (Roche) Konstantopoulou1, M. King2, D. Yannoukakos1; 1NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, and the downstream data analysis was carried out through the SeqNext tool 3Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. (JSI Medical Systems). More than 15% of the analyzed patients, including a few men, carried a causative mutation. Several novel variants were identified: 1 splice variant, The antiquity of the Greeks as a population defined by language and culture, causing the loss of a canonic donor splice site at position +2 in the intron 21 and the complexity of Greek historical demography, present challenges to of BRCA1 gene, and 1 missense variant falling in the BRCA2-DNA binding genetic testing for predisposition to cancer. The Greek population harbors region; one double mutation including 1 missense mutation on BRCAi1n gveitnroe ancient founder mutations in many genes, including five BRCA1 damaging causing a premature stop codon; 2 synonymous variants and 1missence va- alleles, as well as many disease alleles that are specific to one or a few fa- riant predicted without clinical significance were found. Functional milies. The aim of this study was to identify loss-of-function mutations in evaluations are ongoing to assess their pathogenicity. 22 genes in 736 patients with breast cancer diagnosed at a young age (<35 Subsequent analysis of the mutation carriers families, allowed the identi- years) or with a strong family history of breast, ovarian, and/or pancreatic fication of at higher risk subjects, including men healthy carriers, that have cancer. b Pe 1e 2n .0 in 2v 4o -l Mved in surveillance program of preventing health care. Targeted capture and multiplexed sequencing was carried out using BROCA, Rare key functional domain missense substitutions in MR E11
A, which captures the entire loci of 22 genes. Of 736 patients with young onset RAD50, and NBN contribute to breast cancer susceptibility or familial breast cancer, 252 (34%) carried loss-of-function mutations in F. Damiola1,2, M. Pertesi2, J. Oliver2, F. Le Calvez-Kelm2, C. Voegele2, E. L. Young3, N. one of 11 genes. Frequencies were: 103 BRCA1 founders, 61 other BRCA1, Robinot2, N. Forey2, G. Durand2, M. P. Vallée2, K. Tao3, T. C. Roane4, G. J. Williams5, ,. Breast 45 BRCA2, 29 CHEK2, 7 PALB2, 7 ATM, 2 PTEN and 1 in each in RAD51C, Cancer Family Registry6,7,8, J. L. Hopper9, M. C. Southey10, I. L. Andrulis7, E. M. John8, E. M. John8, D. E. Goldgar11, F. Lesueur12, S. V. Tavtigian3; FAM175A, BRI P1
, PIK3CA and T P53
. PALB2 p.R753X was observed in four 1Cancer Research Centre of Lyon, Lyon, France, 2International Agency for Research on Greek families and may be a founder allele. We conclude that among Greek Cancer, Lyon, France, 3Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, patients with familial or early onset breast cancer more than a third carry University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 4University of loss-of-function mutations in a breast cancer-related gene. Founder mutati- Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United States, 5Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley ons account for about 50% of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutational burden and National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States, 6Center for Molecular, Environmental, about 40% of the mutational burden in all known and candidate breast can- Genetic and Analytical Epidemiology, School of Population Health and Genetic cer genes. Given genetic heterogeneity, patients benefit from an approach Epidemiology Laboratory, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 7Lunenfeld- Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Department of Molecular that detects all classes of mutations in known breast cancer genes.  P12
.022-M Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8Cancer Prevention Institute of Mutations in CHEK2 and NBN genes among Macedonian breast cancer California, Fremont, and Stanford University School of Medicine and Stanford Cancer patients Institute, Stanford, CA, United States, 9Center for Molecular, Environmental, Genetic and M. Jakimovska1, I. Maleva1, L. Stojanovska2, A. Arsovski2, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; Analytical Epidemiology, School of Population Health, EGA The University of Melbourne, 1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology „Georgi D. Efremov“, Melbourne, Australia, 10Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, The University of Melbourne, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Melbourne, Australia, 11Department of Dermatology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Republic of, 2Re-Medika Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. University of Utah School of Medicine, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 12Genetic Epidemiology of Cancer team, Inserm, U900, Institut Curie, Mines ParisTech, Paris, France. Heterozygotes for mutations in CHEK2 and NBN genes were found to be as- sociated with increased risk of developing cancers, including breast cancer The MR E11
A-RAD50-Nibrin (MRN) complex plays several critical roles re- (BC). The aim of our study was to determine the frequency of three common lated to repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Inherited biallelic mutations in mutations in CHEK2 gene (1100delС, I157T and IV S2
+1G>A) and two mu- any one of the three components predispose to genetic instability disorders. tations in NBN gene (R215W and 657del5) among Macedonian BC patients Inherited heterozygous mutations in the MRN genes have been implicated and controls from the general population. For this purpose we have designed in breast cancer (BC) susceptibility, but the underlying data are not entirely a multiplex PCR followed by SNaPshot analysis. A total of 299 BC patients, of convincing. In order to verify if rare MRN variants are intermediate-risk BC whom 112 with a cancer family history and 283 controls were included in susceptibility alleles, we mutation screened the coding exons and proximal the study. Mutations were more frequent among BC patients (n=13, 4.3%) splice junctions of the MRN genes in 1,313 early onset BC cases and 1,123 than among controls (n=5, 1.8%), although without statistical significance. population controls. Twelve patients were heterozygous for one of the analyzed mutations, while Considering the extremely low frequency of likely pathogenic variants in one patient had two mutations (NBN R215W and CHEK2 I157T). The most these genes in the general population, we have decided to evaluate the genes frequent mutation was CHEK2 I157T, found in 10 BC patients and 4 controls. as if they constitute one relatively large gene (though still smaller than ATM, The frequency of this mutation was statistically higher among BC patients another gene in the same pathway). with a cancer family history when compared to the controls (p=0.028). NBN Limiting our analyses to variants with MAF<0.1% and combining protein R215W was found in one BC patient and one control, while CHEK2 1100delC truncating variants, likely spliceogenic variants, and key functional domain and NBN 657del5 were found each in one BECS pHaGtie n2t0 a1nd4 n |o M coInLtrAoNl. C, HITEAK2L Y | r aW reW mW iss. eE nS seH sG ub.O stiR tuG tions, we found significant evidence that the 2M4R1N IV S2
+1G>A has not been found in our study. In conclusion, our study sug-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology „Georgi D. Efremov“, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav genes are indeed intermediate-risk BC susceptibility genes (OR= 2.88, P= Republic of, 2Adzibadem-Sistina Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav 0.0090). In addition we found that key domain missense substitutions were Republic of, 3Re-Medika Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. more frequent (24 vs 12 observations) than the truncating variants and BRCA1/2 conferred a slightly higher OR (3.07 vs 2.61) with a lower P-value (0.029 vs 0.14). Thus, the spectrum of pathogenic variants in MRN genes includes, The contribution of mutations to hereditary breast cancer (BC) in as for ATM and CHEK2, a relatively high proportion of missense, and dif- women from R. Macedonia is largely unknowBnR. OCAu1r previous small study re- fers notably from the BRCA1/2 pattern where most susceptibility alleles are vealed the preseBnRcCeA o2f seven mutations (c.181T>G, c.1102G>T, c.5266dupC, protein-truncating variants. c.81-?_547+?del and c.5407-?_5467+?del in and c.8167GB>CR CaAn1d c.1-  P12
.025-S B?_R6 C9
A327+?del in gene) in 10 unrelated BC families. Search for recessive cancer predisposition genes: the advantage of Here we describe the next generation sequencing analysis of and multiple primary cancer cases vs. family history-positive patients genes in 94 BC patients using TruSeq Custom Amplicon for library E. Kuligina1,2, A. P. Sokolenko3, N. V. Mitiushkina2, S. N. Abysheva2, T. V. Gorodnova2, G. A. Yanus3, S. G. Kuznetsov4, E. N. Imyanitov2,3; prepBaRraCtAio1n and sequencing on Illumina MiSeq personal sequencer. In addi- 1Polo d’Innovazione di Genomica, Genetica e Biologia, University of Perugia, Perugia, tion to the standard inclusion criteria, patients with triple negative tumors Italy, 2N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3St.- and ness profile determined by MLPA analysis were included in this Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Institute for study. Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland. Eight BC patients have been previously analyzed by Sanger sequencing; all sequence vaBrRiaCtAio1ns previousBlyR CdAe2termined were correctly identified. Among the 94 analyzed BC patients we detected a total of 78 sequence va- Virtually all known tumor predisposing genes have been identified via the riations (30 in and 48 in ). Thirty five of these variants were analysis of familial cancer cases. Here we argue that this approach is likely to found with a frequency between 2.7% and 42.9% among the analyzed pa- miss recessively acting cancer genes and suggest the analysis of family histo- tients, while 43 variants were found in only one or two patients. A tBoRtaClA o1f ry-negative patients with multiple primary malignancies for identifying ho- 14 pathogenic mutations were detected of which 11 have been previous- mozygous at-risk genotypes. We performed calculations showing that in ca- ly described (c.5266dupC, c.3700_3704delGTAAA, c.2596CB>RTC Ain2 ses of transmission of a recessive cancer predisposing allele (a), which has a and c.5351dupA, c.5848_5851delGTTA, c.B7R81CA1_17814delTGTG, c.7879A>T, frequency of 0.1 and a penetrance of 100%, only a minority of patients with c.7916 C>T, c.8168A>G, c.9104A>C,B cR. C9
A3520_9351delAT in ), while the aa genotype (19%) will have one or both parents with the same genotype three mutations were novel (c.4360delT in and c.3186_3189delTCAG and hence report a family history of cancer. Therefore, while the focus on and c.8315_8328delAATCTCTTAT in ). familial cancer clustering is a powerful tool for identifying dominant mutati- In conclusion, our work demonstratesB tRhCaAt 1using BTRrCuASe2q Amplicon techno- ons, the cases of disease caused by the homozygous recessive at-risk alleles logy and sequencing on MiSeq system is a fast, reliable and cost effective may be easily missed. We further revealed that the c.2515_2519delAAGTT approach for mutational screening of and genes.  P12
.028-M homozygous mutation in a Holliday junction resolvase, GEN1, was over- Testing for genetic predisposition to breast cancer by NGS represented in women with bilateral breast cancer (BC) as compared to S. Ivanov1, R. Vazharova1, L. Balabanski1, D. Serbezov1, I. Dimova2, M. Malinov1, D. healthy controls [11/360 (3.1 %) vs. 18/1305 (1.4 %); OR = 2.25 (1.02 - Toncheva2,1; 4.75); p = 0.031], although this trend was not pronounced in unilateral BC 1Genomics Laboratory of Malinov Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical patients. Noticeably, the presence of biallelic c.2515_2519delAAGTT muta- Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. tion was associated with the absence of BC in mothers of both bilateral and unilateral BC patients [7/239 (3.0 %) vs. 0/41 (0 %) and 21/1,558 (1.3 %) vs. 0/215 (0 %), respectively; p = 0.041]. This study confirms that patients About 5-10% of breast cancer is due to inherited mutations. Genetic testing with multiple cancers may be particularly fruitful for the identification of for predisposition in individuals with family history is recommended to r Pe 1c 2e .s 0s 2iv 6e - d Meterminants of cancer predisposition. determine their risk for developing this cancer type. Next generation se- High-throughput genetic analysis in 100 hereditary breast cancer quencing enables us to perform analysis for large number of predisposing patients genes. U. E. A. Faust, T. C. Benkert, M. Heilig, S. Hertler, M. Sturm, H. Nguyen, C. Schroeder, O. In this study, DNA samples were obtained from 27 individuals with positive Riess, P. Bauer; family history – affected or still not affected. Informed consent was obtained Dept of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany. from all the subjects. Sequence analysis for BRCA1/BRCA2 or 94 cancer- predisposing genes and 284 variants associated with cancer was performed on Illumina MiSeq system. Objective: Here, we report our first results from our HBOC-NGS-panel that A wide range of variants were identified in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. includes 56 genes associated with breast and ovarian cancer. So far, 100 Four pathological variants were detected (14.8%): mutation in BRCA2 samples were analyzed in a diagnostic setting. at the chromosomal (chr) position chr13:32890665, which affected the Methods: A custom NGS-panel (HaloPlex, Agilent) was used to target 56 ge- first position of the 5‘ splice region following exon 2; mutation in BRCA1 nes. Depending on the patient’s family history, a set of “diagnostic” genes at chr17:41219635, causing an inframe triple nucleotide deletion of vali- (mostly BRCA1/2, RAD51C/D) as well as ”screening” genes were defined. ne 1688 (8.3%); mutation in T P53
 - c.775T>AT; 193H>LH; frameshift muta- DNA was isolated from all samples, enriched and sequenced on the Illumina tion in BRCA2 - c.2808_2811delACAA, p.Ala938ProfsTer21. MiSeq (2x 150 bp paired-end) following standard protocols. For diagnostic To the best of our knowledge, this study was the first to identify 3 common genes, regions with low depth (< 20x) were complemented by Sanger se- polymorphisms in BRCA2, characteristic solely of the Bulgarian populati- quencing as well as MLPA. All mutations were confirmed by conventional on, including chr13:32973737, T/, a singlenucleotide polymorphism (SNP) Sanger sequencing. within the 3‘UTR of exon 27; chr13:32973280, A/, mononucleotide deleti- Results: So far, we have sequenced 100 hereditary breast cancer patients. on within the 5‘UTR of exon 27; and chr13:32973924, T/, mononucleotide Overall 91-99 % of all targeted exons were represented with a “diagnostic” deletion downstream of the gene sequence. Furthermore, this study was average depth of > 20x. Roughly 70 SNVs were identified per sample and the first to apply nextgeneration sequencing of cancer-predisposing genes stringent filtering resulted in less than seven variants for validation. in Bulgarian population, prompting further investigation for local founder We identified 15 mutations that are known to cause HBOC as well as muta- mutations and variants characteristic for this particular region.  P12
.029-S tions likely to cause HBOC. Further experiments and segregation analysis A PALB2 high-risk mutation recurrent in familial breast cancer cases is required to determine the pathogenicity in the latter. In addition hete- from the province of Bergamo rozygous mutations were found in genes relevant for different autosomal I. Catucci1,2, P. Peterlongo1,2, M. Colombo2, L. Caleca2, P. Verderio3, S. Pizzamiglio3, C. recessive cancer syndromes. Foglia2, C. Corna4, A. Falanga5, M. Marchetti5, T. Bianchi6, L. Bernard7, M. Barile8, B. Conclusion: Taken together, we demonstrate that NGS is a fast and cost ef- Bonanni8, B. Peissel9, S. Manoukian9, C. Tondini4, P. Radice2; ficient genetic screening tool to analyze for variants in genes associated with 1IFOM, Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare, Milano, Italy, 2Unit of the development of hereditary breast cancer. By applying this approach we Molecular Bases of Genetic Risk and Genetic Testing, Department of Preventive and Predictive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy, 3Unit were able to uncover both known and novel sequence variants  P12
.027-S of Medical Statistics, Biometry and Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutational spectrum among Macedonian dei Tumori, Milano, Italy, 4Unit of Medical Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliera Papa Giovanni women with breast cancer detected by next generation sequencing XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, 5Department of Immunohematology and Transfusion Medicine, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, I. Maleva1, M. Jakimovska1, K. Popovska-Jankovic1, K. Azienda Ospedaliera Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, 6Associazione Italiana Kubelka2, M. Karagjozov2, L. Stojanovska3, A. Arsovski3; Volontari Sangue (AVIS) Comunale Milano, Milano, Italy, 7Department of Experimental 242 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Oncology, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Cogentech, Milano, Italy, 8Division of Cancer Prevention and Genetics, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Milano, Italy, 9Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Preventive and Predictive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto prising 1191 cases and 448 controls. The minor allele at locus 12p11 was Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy. found to confer a significant protective effect, with a per allele odds ratio of 0.7 (0.5-0.9, p=0.002, X2). The minor allele at 12q24 had a slight protective effect (per allele OR =0.9 (0.8-1.1, p =0.29, X2)). The minor allele 21q21 did Germline deleterious mutations of PALB2 are associated with breast can- not confer a protective effect, and was in disequilibrium as per test of Hardy- cer risk and have been reported in several populations. In our initial sur- Weinberg. vey, truncating PALB2 mutations were detected in 12/575 (2.1%) familial Conclusion: All three genetic variants were detected in the population in the breast cancer cases negative for BRCA gene mutations (BRCAX), recruited west of Ireland. The G allele at 12p11 was associated with reduced breast at two large cancer centres in Milan (Istituto Nazionale Tumori and Istitu- cancer risk. Population-specific genome wide association studies are re- to Europeo di Oncologia). One mutation (c.1027C>T; p.Gln343X) recurred quired to identify susceptibility loci specific to the Irish subgroup  P12
.032-M in three cases, two of whom originally from the province of Bergamo. The DNA-diagnostics for inherited breast and/or ovarian cancer: standard genotyping of the c.1027C>T in 113 BRCAX cases ascertained at Azienda approaches and novel technologies Ospedaliera HPG23 of Bergamo, detected a total of 6 carriers (5.3%), while L. N. Lyubchenko1, I. S. Abramov2, E. I. Bateneva1, A. S. Tyulyandina1, O. V. Krokhina1, I. K. only 2 carriers were observed among 477 female blood donors recruited in Vorotnikov1, V. A. Sobolevsky1, S. M. Portnoy1, T. V. Nasedkina2; the same area (0.4%). The estimated age-adjusted odds ratio of these fre- 1N.N.Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, quencies was 13.4 (95% confidence interval: 2.7−67.4). This value is similar Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian to those previously observed for a few PALB2 mutations recurrent in other Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. countries and suggests that the c.1027C>T is associated with a relatively high breast cancer risk. Of note, we also found that among breast/ovarian cancer families recruited in Bergamo the mutational spectra or both BRCA1 Modern molecular techniques allow revealing the most characteristic gene- and BRCA2 were much less heterogeneous than in families ascertained in tic changes responsible for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer (hBC/ Milan. In particular, one BRCA1 founder mutation was observed in >8% of OC), calculating the risk of neoplasia development, defining treatment and Bergamo families (Caleca et al., 2014). Further analyses are required to ve- prevention. In routine diagnostics of hBC/OC two methods: biochip-based rify whether genotyping for specific recurrent mutations can be proposed as approach and real-time PCR were used for the analysis of founder mutati- a cost-effective strategy for the rapid identification of individuals genetically ons in Russian Federation, namely, 185delAG, 300T>G, 4153delA, 4158A>G, predisposed to breast/ovarian cancer in the Bergamo area. 5382insC, 6174delT, 1100delC. However, only 15% of patients were found  P12
.030-M to carry the BRCA1/2 or CHEK2 mutation. Other genes, like T P53
, PALB2, RNA-Sequencing in MCF-7 cells: identification of a new transcript of ATM, BRI P1
, RAD50, BLM and so on, are widely tested in patients with SEMA3F and its expression in breast cancer R. Aversa1, M. R. Ambrosio1,2, A. Zambelli3, A. Ciccodicola1, L. D‘Apice4, V. Costa1; hBC/OC susceptibility. The aim was to study an impact of T P53
 germline 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics „A. Buzzati-Traverso“ (IGB), National Council of mutations and polymorphisms into predisposition to bilateral BC and/or Research (CNR), Naples, Italy, 2Department of Translational Medical Sciences (DiSMeT), secondary-primary multiple neoplasia (SPMN). Genomic DNA was isolated University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 3Oncology Department, IRCCS S. Maugeri and exons 4-11 of ТР53 gene were amplified with commercial primer set Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 4Institute of Protein Biochemistry, National Council of Research SeqPlateT P53
. Next-generation sequencing was performed using a platform (CNR), Naples, Italy. GS Junior (454/Roche). The results were validated by Sanger sequencing. Exons 4-11 of T P53
 gene in 22 patients with SPMN including BC or bilateral BC and without founder mutations in BRCA genes (wtBRCA) were analy- Breast cancer is the most common tumor in women, and the second leading zed. The findings included several rare variants with population frequency cause of death. Tumor cells invasiveness is mainly due to an alteration of less than 0.001%. Previously found nonsense mutation 2637С/T, leading to cell-cell and cell-matrix connections. Thus, an altered expression of adhesi- stop-codon instead of arginine (codon 306) in patient with bilateral BC was on molecules and their receptors is a crucial event in this process. Among confirmed by NGS. A heterozygous germline missense mutation in codon them, semaphorins, a large family of transmSeEmMbAr6aBne or secreted molecules 241 (с.722С>A) was diagnosed in patient with SPMN (Li-Fraumeni syndro- that regulate cell migration and adhesion, are of peculiar interest. A growing me). The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The data demon- number of studies - and our recent work on in breast cancer among strated the clinical utility of T P53
 testing in selected patients with SPMN these - has demonstrated their involvement in cancer progression, often and/or bilateral BC.  P12
.033-S with divergent functions. The experiences and views of health care professionals and In order to simultaneously investigate gene expression and alternative researchers regarding the feedback of results in the context of next splicing for all the genes encoding adhesion molecules, and particularly for generation sequencing in oncology semaphorins, their receptors and co-receptors, we performed RNA-Sequen- H. Howard1,2,3, A. Mahalatchimy1,2,4, A. Soulier1,2, A. Blassime1,2, A. Cambon-Thomsen1,2; cing experiSmEeMnAt 3oFn MCF-7 cells, a well-established and widely used cellular 1INSERM, Toulouse, France, 2Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 3Radboud model of breast cancer. Interesting preliminary results were obtained, parti- University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4IRDEIC Université cularly for gene. Indeed, we identified a novel transcript generated Toulouse 1 Capitole, Toulouse, France. by alternative splicing, predicted to encode for a truncated semaphorin. Mo- reover, through semiquantitative PCR and quantitative Real-Time assay we measured SEMA3SFE eMxApr3eFssion on a panel of breast cancer tissues compared Next generation sequencing (NGS) allows the production of large volumes to their healthy counterpart. The analysis revealed a strong and significant of sequence data (and potentially genetic results) and the ethical and prac- up-regulation ofS EMA3F in breast cancer and, intriguingly, the sole pres- tical issues regarding feedback of results become particularly pertinent to ence - in the healthy tissues - of the newly identified transcript. These evi- address. Should (any) results be given to research participants? If so, which dences suggest to be a potential biomarker for onset/progression results and who should provide them? Within two EU funded projects in o Pf 1 b 2r .e 0a 3s 1t -c Sancer. oncology (CAGEKID and EUROTARGET), in order to gather researchers’ and Investigating the importance of variants at 12p11, 12q24 and 21q21 health care professionals’ views and experiences on providing results we in breast cancer in the west of Ireland distributed a questionnaire to attendees of genetics meetings in Europe in U. M. McVeigh, T. P. McVeigh, K. J. Sweeney, M. J. Kerin, N. Miller; 2013. National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland. Of the 95 respondents, 88% work as researchers and/or clinicians in a field related to oncology and half (52%) use NGS in some aspect of their work; 56% of respondents state that they provide specific information about NGS Introduction: Recent genome-wide association studies have identified novel to participants or patients before enrolling them in a study or using their breast cancer susceptibility loci in women of European ancestry at 12q24 samples for sequencing. The majority, 83% had never received requests (rs1292011); 12p11 (rs10771399) and 21q21 (rs2823093). The aim of our from physicians or patients for access to NGS data to inform treatment de- study was to investigate the prevalence of variants at these three loci in a cisions. Regarding feedback of results in a research setting, 54% or respon- specific Irish subpopulation, and to examine the association between these dents think that results stemming from NGS studies should be provided to variants and breast cancer in this cohort. individual participants and 72% think that actionable incidental findings Methods: DNA was extracted from the whole blood of patients with breast should be disclosed to participants. Finally, 53% of respondents think that cancer and from healthy female controls using a salting out method. Geno- specific measures and/or limitations should be implemented for the sha- typing of each sample for each of the three targets was carried out using ring of NGS data/results with colleagues in the scientific community. Such a Taqman®-based platform. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS empirical data from stakeholders is a valuable contribution to the ongoing software after testing for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. discussion of how to responsibly handle and feedback results to patients ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 243 Results: A total of 1639 samples were included in the study group, com- and research subjects.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.034-M Whole-genome profiling of cervical carcinomas patients with CGH+SNP microarrays: correlations with clinical outcome Fasl and Fas anti- and pro-apoptotic isoforms after Soluble Fasl treatment, K. Kašíková1,2, J. Smetana1,2,3, V. Vallová1,2, L. Mouková4, M. Cvanová3, L. Brožová3, P. indicates that this pathway can be re-activated. These findings lead us to hy- Kuglík1,2; pothesize that Fas receptor binds Soluble Fasl that, undermining Fas antia- 1Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Institute of Experimental Biology, Brno, Czech poptotic isoform, activates apoptosis. Soluble Fas isoform could have a key Republic, 2University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, role as antiapoptotic factor as the alternative splicing underlying the expres- 3Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine and Faculty of Science, Institute of Biostatistics sion regulation of the two Fas isoforms. Knowing that HuR is one of the spli- and Analyses, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Department of cing factors leading to Fas transmembrane isoform, we are performing func- Gynaecological Oncology, Brno, Czech Republic. tional studies aimed at modulating the reciprocal amount of Fas isoforms by interfering with the expression of HuR. U-CH1 apoptosis, cellular vitality and migration will be evaluated after HuR iperexpression and silencing to Alterations in the genome that lead to changes in DNA sequence copy assess the role of Fas antiapoptotic isoform in chordoma apoptosis regulati- number are characteristic features of solid tumors. In this study, we used on. We are also silencing miR-21 targeting FASL mRNA to verify whether the GGH+SNP microarray technique for detailed screening of copy number al- increase of endogenous Fasl may activate apoptosis. This study, providing terations (CNAs) in a cohort of 26 patients with uterine cervical carcinoma findings on the involvement of Fas/Fasl pathway in chordoma could help to (UCC), and the findings were correlated with the incidence of lymph node elucidate the role of apoptosis in chordoma tumorigenesis, addressing the metastasis and lymphangioinvasion. The whole-genome screening discove- identification of new potential pharmacological targets. red CNAs in 73.1% of samples. Frequent areas of gains were observed in 3q  P12
.037-S (50.0%), 1q (42.4%), 19q (23.1%), while losses were commonly observed Transcriptome analysis of cancer cells in chronic myeloid leukemia in 11q (30.8%), 4q (23.1%), 13q and 2q (both 19.2%). Regions of loss of he- A. V. Lavrov1, S. Smirnikhina1, E. Adilgereeva1, E. Chelysheva2, O. Shukhov2, A. Turkina2, terozygosity were observed in 15.4% in 11q23, 14q21, 18q12.2 and 8q21. S. Kutsev1,3; 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Hematological The incidence of gain 3q was associated with gain 1q (P=.033), while loss of Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian National Research Medical 4p was commonly observed with loss of 13q (P=.010). Higher occurrence of University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow, Russian Federation. CNAs was associated with patients under 45 years (P=.016). Patients with adenocarcinoma have statistical trend to carry genomic profiles without CNAs (P=.051). Incidence of lymph node metastases was associated higher Long term observation studies confirm high efficiency of targeted therapy number of CNAs (12 vs 9; P=0.452) and patients without LVSI had trend to of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) by tyrosine kinases inhibitors (TKI). higher incidence of gains in chromosome 15q. Taking together array-CGH However part of CML patients demonstrate primary resistance to TKI. This techniques allowed us to precisely detect specific cytogenetic lesions in UCC, resistance appears to be connected with activation of alternative BCR-ABL- which can be used for prognosis of the disease as well as novel genomic independent signaling pathways. Transcriptome analysis of cancer cell in markers associated with the development of invasive cervical cancer. CML is a perspective approach to elucidate molecular mechanisms of TKI- Supported by OPVK CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0183.  P12
.035-S resistance and to find new approaches to CML treatment. We aim to find Human bile contains microRNA-laden extracellular vesicles that can and to study differences in expression levels of cancer cells in primary CML be used for cholangiocarcinoma diagnosis patients, who demonstrated sensitivity or resistance to TKI. Gene expres- C. Tomuleasa1, F. Selaru2, I. Berindan-Neagoe1; sion profiles were analyzed using Illumina HT-12 Expression Bead Chip. 1Iuliu Hatigenu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 2The These chips quantitate expression levels of more than 47000 transcripts. Hohns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, United States. According to European Leukemia Net (2013) criteria patients were divided into resistant to TKI therapy - molecular response >10% in 6 months of the- rapy and optimal responders with molecular response <1% in 6 months of Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) presents significant diagnostic challenges, re- therapy. Comparative transcriptome analysis revealed 2672 of differently sulting in late patient diagnosis and poor survival rates. Primary Sclerosing expressed genes in responders and non-responders. Enrichment analysis of Cholangitis (PSC) patients pose a particularly difficult clinical dilemma, the differently expressed genes showed the following molecular networks since they harbor chronic biliary strictures that are difficult to distinguish involved (p < 0,05): HTLV-1 infection (FZD10, ADCY1, MYB); PPAR signa- from CCA. MicroRNAs (miRs) have recently emerged as a valuable class of ling pathway (SCD-1, OLR1); Transcriptional misregulation in cancer (MPO, diagnostic markers; however, thus far, neither extracellular vesicles (EVs) CEBPE, ELANE); Melanogenesis (ADCY1, FZD10). Detailed analysis demon- nor miRs within EVs have been investigated in human bile. We aimed to strated that all of the selected genes are overexpressed in cancer cells of pa- comprehensively characterize human biliary EVs, including their miR con- tients sensitive to TKI therapy. Differently expressed genes and expression tent. Conclusion: We have established the presence of extracellular vesicles particularities of the selected pathways may be useful molecular markers in human bile. In addition, we have demonstrated that human biliary EVs for prognosis of the TKI therapy efficacy and may be used to optimize treat- contain abundant miR species, which are stable and therefore amenable to ment of CML.  P12
.038-M the development of disease marker panels. Furthermore, we have charac- XRC C4
 gene (Intron 3 VNTR) polymorphism predisposition to chronic terized the protein content, size, numbers and size distribution of human phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and XRC C1
 gene (399) biliary EVs. Utilizing Multivariate Organization of Combinatorial Altera- polymorphism in associated with event-free survival in CML treated tions (MOCA), we defined a novel biliary vesicle miR-based panel for CCA with imatinib in Turkish population diagnosis which demonstrated a sensitivity of 67% and specificity of 96%. K. Ozdilli1,2, M. Pehlivan3, F. Oğuz Savran4, H. Issever5, H. Haydaroğlu Sahin6, S. Importantly, our control group contained 13 PSC patients, 16 patients with Pehlivan7; biliary obstruction of varying etiologies (including benign biliary stricture, 1Medipol University Hospital Istanbul, ISTANBUL, Turkey, 2İstanbul University Faculty papillary stenosis, choledocholithiasis, extrinsic compression from pancrea- of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 32Gaziantep University tic cysts, and cholangitis), and 3 patients with bile leak syndromes. Clinical- Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology., Gaziantep, Turkey, 43İstanbul ly, these types of patients present with a biliary obstructive clinical picture University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, ISTANBUL, Turkey, that could be confused with CCA. These findings establish the importance 5Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Public Health, ISTANBUL, of using extracellular vesicles, rather than whole bile, for developing miR- Turkey, 6Gaziantep University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 7Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical based disease markers in bile.  P12
.036-M Biology, ISTANBUL, Turkey. Functional studies on post-transcriptional regulation of FAS/FASL in chordoma L. Ferrari1, S. Zanoli1, A. Calastretti1, N. Boari2, G. Canti1, P. Mortini2, P. Riva1; The aim of this study was to explore the association between polymorphis- 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli Studi ms of three DNA repair genes (XPD, XRC C1
 and XRC C4
) and clinical parame- di Milano, Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Neurochirurgia, IRCCS Ospedale San ters in patients with Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Raffaele, Milan Italy, Milan, Italy. (CML) treated with imatinib. Sixty-two patients with CML and 70 healthy controls were examined for XPD (A-751G), XRC C1
 (A399G), XRC C4
 (intron 3 VNTR and G-1394T) polymorphisms. DNA was extracted from periphe- Chordoma, originating from notochord remnants, is characterized by chemo- ral blood samples using salting out procedure. All polymorphisms were resistance. Since the apoptotic Fas/Fasl pathway is involved in notochordal genotyped by PCR and/or PCR-RFLP and analyzed. All data were analyzed cell apoptosis, we investigated its possible role in chordoma. Accordingly using de Finetti program and SPSS version 14.0 for Windows. No signi- we detected the lack of FASL mRNA and the presence of both FAS anti- and ficant differences were detected between CML group and healthy controls pro-apoptotic isoforms and the inactive Caspases 8 and 3 forms in most of with respect to the distributions and numbers of genotypes and alleles in the tumors analyzed, suggesting the Fas/Fasl pathway inactivation in chor- d2o4m4a. The enhancement of apoptosis in U-CH1 choE rS dH omG a c2 e0 lls1 , 4 ex | p M resI sL inA gN , XITPAD,L XYR C| CW1 WandW X.RECSCH4 (G-1.3O9R4)G. However, intron 3 VNTR polymorphism inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.041-S Whole-exome sequencing identifies rare coding variants in new XRC C4
 gene was showed an association with CML patients. The distribution predisposition genes for familial colorectal cancer of DD, DI and II genotypes for the gene was 3.2%, 51.6% and 45.2% in CML C. Esteban-Jurado1, M. Vila1, P. Garre2, J. Lozano1, A. Pristoupilova3, S. Beltrán3, J. compared with 14.3%, 60% and 25.7% in the controls. In the univariate Muñoz1, T. Ocaña1, F. Balaguer1, S. Franch1, J. Piqué1, A. Castells1, A. Carracedo4, C. analyses of clinical parameters, there was no significant prognostic factor Ruiz-Ponte4, A. Abulí5, X. Bessa6, M. Andreu6, The EPICOLON consortium, L. Bujanda7, T. found to influence overall survival. The four factors that were predicted for Caldés2, S. Castellví-Bel1; 1IDIBAPS, CIBEREHD, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico San Carlos, better event-free survival from univariate analysis were younger age (< 60) Madrid, Spain, 3CNAG, Barcelona, Spain, 4FPGMX, CIBERER, UIniversity of Santiago de (p=0.020), absence of splenomegaly (p=0.011), lower Sokal risk score at Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 5IDIBAPS, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, diagnosis (p=0.0148) and XRC C1
 GG genotype (p=0.033). Our results sug- Spain, 6Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 7Hospital Donostia, CIBEREHD, San gest that XRC C1
 GG genotype may be a useful marker for CML prognosis and Sebastián, Spain. II genotype of intron 3 VNTR polymorphism in XRC C4
 may be associated with susceptibility.  P12
.039-S Polymorphism in genes CY P2
C9  and OD
C1  involved in aspirin Colorectal cancer (CRC) represents one of the most frequent neoplasms in handling influence colorectal cancer risk Europe. Besides classical hereditary forms, around 30% of cases present H. J. Sheth1, E. Northwood2, F. Elliot2, J. Barrett2, M. Jackson1, M. Koref1, J. Burn1, D. familial aggregation mostly with an unknown inherited cause. Next genera- Bishop2; tion sequencing permits to characterize genetic variation in one individual 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Leeds Institute of and to discover new disease predisposition genes. Cancer and Pathology, Leeds, United Kingdom. Material and methods: Patients were selected from high-risk clinics from Spanish hospitals as well as from the EPICOLON consortium. Forty-two in- dividuals from 29 families with strong CRC aggregation compatible with an Long term regular use of aspirin is associated with a reduced risk of co- autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance and without alterations in the lorectal cancer (CRC) of up to 60%. However, not all aspirin users receive known CRC hereditary genes were selected. Exome sequencing was perfor- the beneficial chemopreventive effect. This is potentially attributable to the med in germline DNA with subsequent quality control, removal of sequen- presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in cing artifacts, data annotation and variant filtering. An automatic CRC-speci- aspirin’s pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic pathways. We investiga- fic pipeline was used for prioritization. ted the impact of 32 SNPs within 9 genes and 2 SNPs in intergenic regions Results: Sequencing mean coverage was >95x. Only very rare variants, pro- on CRC risk using the Leeds Colorectal Cancer Panel which contains 1910 ducing a clear loss of function and located in genes with a function related cases and 1276 controls; these SNPs were chosen for their potentially func- to CRC or cancer were selected as final candidates. Afterwards, they were tional effect. Sixteen out of 34 SNPs were removed from analysis as they validated by Sanger sequencing and segregation was studied in additional had frequency of <3%. All remaining SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equi- affected family members when available. Loss of heterozygosity in tumor librium. P values for the tests of association were adjusted for sex OaDndC 1a ge. DNA was analyzed in variants with correct disease segregation. Best candi- The presence of rs11694911 T allele (OR=0.79, 95% CI=0.63-1.0, p=0.04) date variants included those located in interesting genes such as CDKN1B, and rs2302615 T alleleC (YOPR2=
C09 . 81, 95% CI=0.67-0.99, p=0.024) at lo- XRC
C4 , EPHX1, NFKBIZ, SMARCA4, BRCA2 and BARD1. Three variants are cus were associatedO wDiCth1 a reduced CRC risk. When the data was stratified expected to abolish protein function and 4 missense changes had strongly (colon versus rectum), rs1799853 T allele (OR=0.73, 95% CI=0.60- deleterious in silico predictions. 0.90, p=0.003) and rs2302615 T allele (OR=0.76, 95% CI=0.61-0.93, Conclusions: We identified variants in DNA repair genes that represent p=0.005) showed significant association with colon cancer suggesting in- good candidates to become new CRC predisposition genes, some of them fluence may be dependent on the tumor location. Both variant alleles have previously involved in other neoplasms. 
P12 .042-M previously been shown to modulate chemopreventive activity of aspirin in Whole Exome Sequencing of Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Families colorectal adenoma occurrence, but this is the first dataset to indicate their from Canada effect on carcinoma risk. This data suggests that the presence of these vari- D. R. Evans; ants modulates CRC risk which in turn may provide insight into the variation Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. Johns, NL, Canada. in aspirin’s chemopreventive efficacy. 
P12 .040-M Identification of novel candidate genes for early-onset colorectal cancer susceptibility Familial Colorectal Cancer Type X (FCCTX) is an inherited predisposition R. M. de Voer1, M. Hahn1, R. D. A. Weren1, A. R. Mensenkamp1, W. A. van Zelst-Stams1, L. to colorectal cancer (CRC) in families fulfilling the Amsterdam-I criteria. A Spruijt1, M. Kets1, J. Zhang1, C. Gilissen1, M. Tychon1, R. Derks1, H. K. Schackert2, A. Geurts- syndrome of unknown etiology, FCCTX is genetically heterogeneous. FCCTX van Kessel1, N. Hoogerbrugge1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, R. P. Kuiper1; families appear to have a moderate to high lifetime risk of developing CRC. 1Radboud university medical centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Carl Gustav Universität A cohort of 91 FCCTX patients (66 families) from the Canadian provinces of Dresden, Dresden, Germany. Ontario and Newfoundland & Labrador (NL) were selected for whole exome sequencing of genomic DNA. A pooled segregation analysis of all missen- se variants recurrent in patients within two or more families identified 93 Approximately 25-30% of colorectal cancer (CRC) cases are expected to re- candidate missense variants. We then prioritized missense variants with sult from a genetic predisposition, but only in 5-10% of these cases high- low minor allele frequency (<1%), deleterious prediction of protein conse- penetrant germline mutations are found. Therefore, the majority of CRC quence and absence of identified variants in population controls. This re- heredity is still unexplained. This missing heritability is thought to result fined our list of genetic culprits to variants within seven candidate genes. from the presence of rare variants with a moderate-penetrant risk. Whole- An age, sex and ethnically matched case-control cohort will be analyzed exome sequencing (WES) nhas m ade it possible to identify such risk factors. for statistical enrichment of candidate variants. We further queried our As hereditary CRC is marked by an early age of onset, we performed WES on exome data for all deleterious rare variants in a set of CRC susceptibility a cohort of CRC patients ( =55)with an onset of disease before 45 years of genes identified by review of the current literature. Among these variants age. To identify potentially pathogenic variants, we searched for rare prote- we identified POLE p. 
L424 V; a missense substitution described in several in-truncating variants or highly conserved missense variants. A total of 272 patients of families with predisposition for CRC. In a final query involving protein-truncating variants and 1537 missense or in-frame insertions and the proband of a single, large NL family, we screened the exome for variants dEeMleRt3ionPsT wPNe1re2 identLifRiePd6. Recurrence filtering and selection of genes poten- within two regions of linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 19 (LOD 3.49, tially involved in CRC development revealed threne novel candidate genes: 4.51), to refine the disease locus using segregation analysis. Studies of whole , and PTPN.1 A2 screeLnR Po6f tPhTeP cNo1d2ing region of these genes in exomes continue to highlight the potential for identifying rare deleterious a cohort of early-onset or familial CRC patients ( =181) revealed addLiRtiPo6- variants in CRC families worldwide. nal rare variants in and . encodes a protein tyrosine 
P12 .043-S phosphatase and is described to be a driver of cancer development. Towards personalized cellular adoptive immunotherapy targeting encodes a component of the Wnt-Fzd-LR
P5 -LR
P6  complex that triggers immunogenic neo-antigens in microsatellite unstable colorectal beta-catenin signaling. This study contributes to the further understanding cancers of the heterogeneity of the genetic susceptibility for CRC. Follow-up studies P. Maby1, M. Hamieh1, D. Tougeron2, B. Mlecnik3, G. Bindea3, H. Angell3, T. Fredriksen3, N. on the frequency of mutations in these genes in larger cohorts, and their Elie4, A. Drouet1, E. Fauquembergue1, J. Mauillon5, R. Sesboüé1, J. Galon3, T. Frebourg6, J. Latouche6; functional assessment, will provide conclusive evidence for the role of these 1Inserm U1079, Rouen, France, 2Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital, genes in CRC development. Poitiers, France, 3Inserm U872, Laboratory of Integrative Cancer Immunology, Paris, France, 4Imaging Core Facility, CMABIO, University Hospital, Caen, France, 5Department ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 245ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 6Inserm U1079 and Department France, 11Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 12Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France. of Genetics, University Hospital, Lille, France, 13Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 14Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Dijon, France, 15Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Grenoble, France, 16Department of Genetics, Hospital, Niort, France, 17Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital, Rouen, France. Colorectal cancers (CRCs) with microsatellite instability (MSI) represent 15 % of all CRCs, and occur in patients with Lynch syndrome. MSI CRCs have a more dense cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) infiltration and a better progno- The aim of this study was to determine if the at risk SNP alleles for colorectal sis than microsatellite stable CRCs. Stronger immunogenicity of MSI CRCs cancer (CRC), previously identified by GWAS studies, could either alone or in is commonly explained by the presence of frameshift mutations in genes combination contribute to clinical presentations suggestive of an increased containing repeated coding sequences which could lead to the synthesis of genetic risk for CRC. We performed a p rospective national case-control neo-antigens recognized by specific CTLs. First, to explore the direct link study based on highly selected patients (CRC in two first degree relatives, between infiltrating CTL density and frameshift mutations, we quantified one being diagnosed before 61 years; orCRC before 51 years; or multiple within 121 MSI tumors from two independent series CTL (CD8+) density, primary CRCs, the first before 61 years; exclusion of Lynch syndrome, ade- using tissue microarrays, and we searched for frameshift mutations in re- nomatous and hamartomatous polyposes), and appropriate controls corre- peated coding sequences of 19 genes. We found that infAilStTraEt1inHg NCFT1LA den- sponding to healthy volunteers, between 45 and 60 years of age, without TsiCtyF 7sLig2nificantly increased with the number of framine svhitirfto m utations, and personal or familial history of CRC. We incrlsu1d6e8d9 21706269 patients and 350 con- was particularly correlated with frameshift mutations in , and trols. We conrfsi4r7m7e9d5 t8h4e association of CRC risk with 4 SNPs, with rosd4d9s3 9ra8t2io7 genes. Second, we undertook to stimulate, ,patients’ peri- (OR)r hs5ig8h9e2r0 8th7a8n/ Nporveevli o1usly reported : on 8q23.3 (OR: 1.89; pheral blood CTLs specific of their own tumor neo-antigens, using artificial p=0.0006); on 15q13.3 (OR: 1.45; p=0.0033), and antigen presenting cells (AAPCs) developed in our laboratory and expres- and on 18q21.1 (OR: 1.49; p=0.0061 and OR: 1.48; sing the corresponding neo-peptides derived from their own tumor specific p=0,0039). We found a significant cumulative effect of the at risk alleles or frameshift mutations. We could indeed easily and efficiently activate such genotypes with OR at 1.62, 2.11, 2.92 and 3.95 for 1, 2, 3 and at least 4 at risk CTLs, in two tested Lynch syndrome patients. These results suggest that, in arsll1e6le8s9 2a7n6d6 OR at 1.71r, s24.73729 a5n8d4 6.31 for 1, 2 arnsd5 839 2a0t 8ri7s8k genotypes. This MSI CRC patients, and especially in Lynch syndrome patients, it should be study shows that genotyping of a limited number of SNPs, such as 8q23.3 possible to propose new personalized adoptive cell immunotherapy stra- , 15q13.3 and 18q21.1 , should allow to tegies based on the characterization of frameshift mutations within their identify subjects at increased risk of CRC who might benefit from early CRC tumour and on the construction of AAPCs expressing the corresponding detection. neo-peptides. 
P12 .046-M 
P12 .044-M Diagnostic criteria for constitutional mismatch repair deficiency Fourfold increased detection of Lynch syndrome by raising age limit (CMMR-D) syndrome: suggestions of the European consortium “Care for tumour genetic testing from 50 to 70 years is cost-effective A. S. Sie1, A. R. Mensenkamp1, E. M. M. Adang2, M. J. L. Ligtenberg3, N. Hoogerbrugge1; for CMMR-D” (
C4 CMMRD) 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, K. Wimmer1, C. P. Kratz2, H. F. Vasen3, O. Caron4, C. Colas5,6,7, N. Entz-Werle8, A. Gerdes9, Netherlands, 2Department of Health Evidence, Radboud university medical center, Y. Goldberg10, D. Ilencikova11, M. Muleris6,7, N. Lavoine12, C. Ruiz-Ponte13, I. Slavc14, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics and Department of Pathology, B. Burkhardt15, L. Brugières12, on behalf of the EU-Consortium Care for CMMR-D Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (
C4 CMMR-D); 1Division Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatric Hematology & Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Leiden University Medical Objective: Recognizing colorectal cancer (CRC) patients with Lynch syndro- Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer me (LS) can increase life expectancy of these patients and their close re- Institute, Villejuif, France, 5Department of Genetics, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP, latives. To improve identification of this under-diagnosed disease, experts F-75013, Paris, France, 6INSERM, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, F-75012, Paris, suggested raising the age limit for CRC tumour genetic testing from 50 to France, 7Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S 938, CDR Saint-Antoine, 70 years. The present study evaluates the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of F-75012, Paris, France, 8Pédiatrie Onco-Hématologie - Pédiatrie III - CHRU Hautepierre UdS - EA 3430, Strasbourg, France, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen this strategy. University Hospital Rigshospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 10Department of Oncology, Design: Probabilistic efficacy and cost-effectiveness analyses were perfor- Sharret Institute, Hadassah – Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 112nd med comparing tumour genetic testing of CRC diagnosed at age 70 or below Pediatric Department of Children University Hospital, Comenius University, Bratislava, (experimental strategy) versus CRC diagnosed at age 50 or below (current Slovakia, 12Department of Children and Adolescents Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer practice). The proportions of LS patients identified and cost-effectiveness Institute, Villejuif, France, 13Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica (FPGMX) including cascade screening of relatives, were calculated by decision analy- SERGAS, Grupo de Medicina Xenómica, IDIS, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red tic models based on real life data. de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERer), Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 14Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 15Department of Pediatric Results: Using the experimental strategy, 4 times more LS patients can be Hematology and Oncology, University Children‘s Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany. identified among CRC patients as compared to current practice. Both the costs to detect one LS patient (€ 9,437/carrier versus € 4,855/carrier) and the number needed to test for detecting one LS patient (42 versus 19) dou- Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency (CMMMLRH-1D)M sySnHd2roMmSeH i6s a diPsMtinSc2t bled. When including relatives the experimental strategy was found to be childhood cancer predisposition syndrome that results from biallelic germ- highly cost effective because CRC prevention in relatives neutralised the ex- line mutations in one of the four MMR genes, , , , or . tra genetic testing costs, resulting in lower costs (-€ 2180 per extra tested The tumour spectrum is very broad, including mainly haematological, brain patient) and an average of 9 life years gained. and intestinal tract tumours. Patients show a variety of non-malignant fea- Conclusion: Testing all CRC tumours diagnosed at or below age 70 for LS tures that are indicative of CMMR-D. However, currently no clinical crite- is cost-effective. Implementation is important as relatives from the large ria that should entail diagnostic evaluation of CMMR-D exist. The recently number of LS patients that are missed by current practice, can benefit from established European consortium care for CMMR-D (
C4 CMMRD) proposes a life-saving surveillance. 
P12 .045-S 3-points scoring system for the suspected diagnosis CMMR-D in a pediatric/ Clinical relevance of 8q23.3, 15q13.3 and 18q21.1 SNP genotyping to young adult cancer patient. Tumours highly specific for CMMR-D syndrome evaluate colorectal cancer risk are assigned 3 points, malignancies overrepresented in CMMR-D 2 points S. Baert-Desurmont1,2,3, F. Charbonnier1,2, E. Houivet4,5, L. Ippolito1, J. Mauillon2, M. and all other malignancies 1 point. According to their specificity for CMMR-D Bougeard1, C. Abadie1,6, D. Malka7, J. Duffour8, F. Desseigne9, C. Colas10, P. Pujol11, S. and their frequency in the general population additional features are weigh- Lejeune12, C. Dugast6, B. Buecher13, L. Olivier-Faivre14, D. Leroux15, P. Gesta16, O. Caron7, Q. ted with 1 - 2 points. They include multiple hyper- and hypopigmented skin Wang9, B. Bressac-de Paillerets7, J. Rey11, M. Buisine12, A. Cailleux5, H. Sebaoui17, J. Blot17, J. Tinat1,2,3, J. Benichou4, T. Frebourg1,2,3; areas, brain malformations, pilomatricomas, a second childhood malignancy, 1Inserm U1079, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and Innovation in a LS-associated tumour in a relative and parental consanguinity. According Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, to the scoring system CMMR-D should be suspected in any cancer patient France, 3Canceropole Nord-Ouest, Rouen, France, 4Department of Biostatistics, who reaches a minimum of 3 points by adding the points of the malignancy University Hospital and Inserm U657, University of Rouen, Institute for Research and and the additional features. We expect that application of the here suggested Innovation in Biomedicine, Rouen, France, 5Centre d‘Investigation Clinique, University strategy for CMMR-D diagnosis will increase the number of patients being Hospital, Rouen, France, 6Department of Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center identified at the time when they develop their first tumour. This will allow Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France, 7Department of Genetics, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 8Department of Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center Val d‘Aurelle, adjustment of the treatment modalities, offering surveillance strategies for Montpellier, France, 9Department of Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center Léon second malignancies and appropriate counselling of the entire family. Bérard, Lyon, France, 10Department of Genetics, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, 246 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .047-S Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency due to a homozygous MSH6 mutation in a 14-year-old boy with colonic polyps, colorectal cancer with 1-3 different kits. Following clinical standards, we evaluated the ana- and retinal lesions lytical sensitivity, the analytical specificity, false positive and negative rates, L. S. Penney1,2, A. L. Rideout1, S. Dyack1,2, M. Bernstein1,2, M. Rashid1,2, W. Huang2, G. R. the assay robustness and the precision for each of the considered captu- LaRoche2; ring techniques. Our results demonstrate that technical and functional dif- 1The IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. ferences exist between capturing methods that could compromise clinical diagnosis if specific method-associated deviations are not considered. 
P12 .051-S MLH1, Mutually exclusive RAS-RTK and JAK2 mutations drive sub-clonal CMoSnHs2ti, tMutSioHn6a l M PisMmSa2tch Repair- Deficiency (CMMR-D) is a rare cancer pre- expansions in the majority of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cases in disposition syndrome in patients with biallelic mutations in one of Down syndrome or . Heterozygous mutations cause the adult onset, do- S. I. Nikolaev1, M. Garieri1, F. Santoni1, E. Falconnet1, P. Ribaux1, M. Guipponi1, A. Murray2, minant cancer syndrome Lynch syndrome. However, CMMR-D causes child- J. Groet2, E. Giarin3, G. Basso3, D. Nizetic2, S. E. Antonarakis1; hood onset cancers, particularly hematological, brain and gastrointestinal 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2The Blizard Institute, Barts and The malignancies. Children with CMMR-D also may have skin pigmentation fin- London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, dings suggestive of neurofibromatosis type 1. 3University of Padua, Padua, Italy. We report on a 14-year-old boy with a previous kaposiform hemangioendo- thelioma who was diagnosed with at least 100 colonic polyps and 6 invasive adenocarcinomas of the colon and rectum. He had café au lait macules, axil- Children with Down syndrome (DS) and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia lary and inguinal freckling and bilateral, multifocal congenital hypertrophy (ALL) have poorer survival and more relapses, than euploid ALL children, of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE). Therefore he fit diagnostic cri- highlighting the need for a molecular understanding of DS-ALL. Using full teria for both NF1 and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. He also had a pre- exome or cancer genes-targeted sequencing of 42 ALL samples from 39 DS vious clinical diagnosis and family history of Cleidocranial Dysplasia. There patients, we discover driver mutations in RAS (KRAS and NRAS) recurring was no family history of colon cancer and he had 2 siblings. to a similar extent (13/42) as JAK2 (10/42) mutations or 
P2 RY8-CRLF2 fu- The colon cancers were MSI-H and by immunohistochemistry the tumour sions (14/40). RAS/RTK mutations were mutually exclusive with JAK/STAT cells and adjacent normal mucosa were negative for MSH6 and positive for mutations (p=0.018), driving a combined total of two thirds of analysed ca- MLH1, MSH2 and PM
S2 . A homoAzPyCgous pMaUthToYgHe nic MSH6 mutation was ses. Clonal architecture analysis shows that both JAK/STAT and RAS/RTK identified (c.3202C>T) in the patient and both parents were found to be he- mutations are mostly sub-clonal. The study of clonal evolution in the cases terozygous. Genetic testing of the and genes was normal. with primary leukaemias and relapses shows that JAK-STAT mutations are To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of CMMR-D with CHRPE exclusively associated with primary leukaemias and RAS mutations - with and demonstrates difficulties in making this diagnosis in a patient who fits relapses. This indicates that JAK2-mutated sub-clones respond well to con- the clinical criteria for both NF1 and FAP. It also illustrates ethical dilemmas ventional therapy, but then is replaced with RAS-mutated sub-clones. The around genetic testing of at risk siblings. dominant clones (including those persisting in primary and relapse leu- 
P12 .048-M kaemias) were a combination of mutations in chromatin modifiers (62%), Recurrent copy number alterations in prostate cancer: an in silico tumour suppressors, lymphocyte differentiation factors, and/or CRLF2 meta-analysis of publicly available genomic data rearrangements. These events were cumulatively present in 93% of cases, J. A. Squire1, P. Greer2, J. Williams2; 1University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Queen‘s University, Kingston, ON, with no association with JAK/STAT or RAS/RTK groups. Additionally, novel Canada. differences in number and profile of driver events were observed between cALL and preB immunophenotypic subtypes of BCP-ALL. Overall our data provide a better molecular understanding of DS-ALL and We present a meta-analysis of somatic copy number alterations (CNAs) from suggests a personalized therapeutic approach to driver-mutations, with in- eleven publications that examined 662 prostate cancer patient samples, dividual mutation profile-tailored inclusion of RAS (particularly KRAS) inhi- derived from 546 primary and 116 advanced tumors. Normalization, seg- bitors (such as deltarasin) and/or chromatin modifier enzyme inhibitors. mentation and identification of corresponding CNAs for meta-analysis was achieved using established commercial software (Nexus). Unsupervised analysis identified five genomic subgroups in which ~90% of the samples had an abnormal profile characterized by 8q gains. The most common loss was at 8p (NKX3.1). The CNA distribution in other genomic subgroups was characterized by losses at 2q, 3p, 5q, 6q, 13q, 16q, 17p, 18q and 10q (PTEN), and acquisition of 21q deletions associated with the TMPRS
S2 :ERG fusion rearrangement. Parallel analysis of advanced and primary tumors in the cohort indicated that genomic deletions of PTEN and the gene fusion were enriched in advanced disease. A supervised analysis of PTEN deletion and the fusion gene showed that when PTEN was deleted the overall percentage of the genome altered was significantly higher, suggesting that this impor- tant genomic subgroup was likely characterized by intrinsic chromosomal instability. Predicted alterations in expression levels of candidate genes in each of the recurrent CNA regions characteristic of each subgroup showed that signaling networks associated with cancer progression and genome stability were likely to be perturbed at the highest level in the PTEN deleted genomic subgroup. 
P12 .049-S In-depth comparison of available targeted resequencing strategies for BRCA gene panels S. Zuñiga, O. Rodriguez, G. Marco, J. Durban, L. Cabornero, S. Santillan, C. Collado, V. Fernández-Pedrosa, J. C. Triviño; Sistemas Genomicos, Valencia, Spain. Next-Generation Sequencing is currently the technique of choice for genetic testing in genetic heterogeneous diseases. The broad spectrum of available target enrichment methods complicates the selection of the most suitable technique considering the size of the targeted region, the required depth of coverage to correctly identified variants, the number of samples to be se- quenced, the turnaround time and the overall cost. Here we report a com- prehensive comparison of four different commercial targeted enrichment kits (Haloplex, Nextera, Multiplicom and SureSelect) for the selection of the most convenient strategy to fully characterize the coding regions of BRCA genes in an Illumina benchtop sequencerE. MSoHsGt o f2 s0a1m4pl e| sM wIeLrAe aNn,a lIyTsAedL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 247ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .052-M Neoantigen in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma for dendritic cell- based ‎cancer vaccine development and is usually associated with a chromosomal translocation that results in M. M. Forghanifard1, M. Gholamin2, O. Moaven3, M. Farshchian4, M. Ghahraman5, M. R. a EWS/FLI1 gene fusion. Four independent cell-lines have been established Abbaszadegan5; from a subject who succumbed to metastatic disease following relapse after 1Islamic Azad University, Damghan Branch, Damghan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Division myeloablative chemotherapy. Whole-transcriptome and exome sequencing of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ‎Mashhad of normal primary bone marrow-derived stromal fibroblasts, Epstein-Barr University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Virus (EBV) transformed normal lymphoblasts, a pre-therapy primary tu- Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School‎, Boston, MA, United mor-derived cell-line, and a post-chemotherapy metastatic tumor-derived States, 4Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Medical Genetics Research Center, Medical School, cell-line, was conducted on an Ion Torrent Proton™ system to profile the Mashhad University of Medical Sciences‎, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. differences in gene expression and in exonic DNA sequence to characterize the molecular changes associated with primary tumorigenesis and disease persistence after treatment. The presence of the EWS/FLI1 fusion gene in Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a highly malignant tumor the tumor cells was confirmed and the breakpoint determined from both which usually is ‎diagnosed in advanced stages due to its asymptomatic observation of chimeric reads in the RNA-seq data and exome sequence ana- course of tumorigenesis. Current ‎therapeutic modalities are not effective lysis. Exome datasets indicate apparent loss of heterozygosity genome-wide enough and the 5-year survival rate of the disease is still ‎very low which in CHLA10 consistent with cytogenetic analysis that shows tetraploidy in prompts the urgent need for finding novel efficient therapeutic methods. In this cell-line. Results from RNA-seq also indicate numerous instances, geno- this ‎study we evaluated ex vivo immune response of ESCC patients against me-wide, of differing transcript isoform expression and exon usage between our newly designed ‎chimeric construct consisting of highly immunogenic normal, primary tumor, and metastatic tumor cells suggesting an increasing cancer/testis antigens (CTAs). After ‎confirming effective expression of the genomic mutational burden in the evolution of the disease, and pointing in in vitro transcribed chimeric mRNA in ex vivo ‎electroporated dendritic cells particular toward aberrant regulation of RNA-splicing components. Taken of the ESCC patients, the patients’ CTLs were primed by DCs and ‎cytotoxicity together, the combination of RNA-seq and exome-sequencing on normal assay was performed to evaluate how the primed CTLs can recognize and cells and primary vs. post-chemotherapy tumor is providing a broad and target the ‎chimeric mRNA-loaded cells. The chimeric protein was strongly deep view of molecular signatures in tumor progression and indicating that expressed relative to the ‎housekeeping gene expression in electroporated a P 1si 2g .n 0i 5fi 5ca -Snt role is played by changes in non-coding RNA expression. cells. The cytotoxicity of the CTLs were ‎significantly higher in DCs loaded Beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2: results from screening 94 genes in with chimeric mRNAs compared to mock DCs (p < 0.05) in ‎all of the tested 100 patients with familial breast and ovarian cancer using panel ESCC patients. We are introducing a novel construct that our functional stu- sequencing and custom array-CGH dy ‎showed can stimulate and induce an effective immune response in ESCC E. Schröck1, A. Rump1, K. Hackmann1, M. Beer1, A. Beyer1, B. Klink1, N. Di Donato1, P. patients. The designed ‎chimeric mRNA-loaded DCs are capable of priming Wimberger2, K. Kast2; CTLs effectively, and induce cytotoxicity ‎against tumor. Therefore, loading 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, dendritic cells with chimeric epitopes of highly immunogenic ‎antigens, such Dresden, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für Frauenheilkunde und Geburtshilfe, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. as cancer testis antigens are potentially interesting and effective therapeutic ‎modalities for immunotherapy of ESCC.‎ 
P12 .053-S Aberrant expression of BMP signaling pathway target genes are Breast and ovarian cancer predisposition has been associated with a num- involved in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma progression and ber of high-, moderate-, and low-penetrance susceptibility genes. Here we development report on the results of high-resolution custom array-CGH for deletion/du- A. Javdani-Mallak1, M. Forghanifard2, M. Abbaszadegan1; plication analysis and panel-based screening of 94 genes associated with 1Human genetic division, immunology research center, Avecina research institute, hereditary cancer predisposition. Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of biology, faculty of sciences, Mashhad branch, Islamic Azad university, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. Selection criteria for the 100 patients were defined by the German Consorti- um for Breast and Ovarian Cancer. NGS was performed on an Illumina MiSeq and target enrichment was done with the Illumina TruSight cancer panel, whereas custom array CGH was performed using Agilent technology. In 28 Esophageal cancer is one of the lethal malignancies in northeastern of Iran % of the patients, BRCA1 or BRCA2 variations have been found. These were and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), as a frequent kind of can- either clearly pathogenic protein truncating mutations (12 %) or very rare, cer, shows striking variations in geographic distribution reflecting expos- unclassified missense variations with high probability of effect (16 %). In ure to specific environmental factors which are remained to be complete- 39 % of the patients we found rare, unclassified missense variants in low ly defined. According to the importance of ESCC in this high risk area and penetrance susceptibility genes, especially NBN and ATM. In one case with the great attention in studying the malignant progression of cells through early onset of breast cancer and no familial history, a putative splice relevant a converging pathway of oncogenesis, the present study aimed to estima- mutation in T
P53  could be identified, which is currently being investigated te the expression analysis of VentX and Evx1, two critical target genes of on cDNA level. 33 % of the patients did not reveal any convincing sequence bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling pathway. In this study a total variation. In 10% of the patients we identified deletions in either BRCA1, of 50 tumoral and margin normal tissues from treatment-naive ESCC pati- CHEK2, or ATM. ents were enrolled to expression analysis using comparative real-time PCR. The extension of mutation screening beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 reveals VentX was significantly underexpressed in 76% of ESCC tissues (P<0.05). disease-causing mutations in high-penetrance genes, like T
P53 , as well as Underexpression of VentX was significantly correlated with increased tumor mutations in low-penetrance susceptibility genes. However, the enormous size. The overexpression of Evx1 was detected in 82% of ESCC samples si- number of unclassified sequence variants and the detection of carriers for gnificantly (P<0.05). This overexpression was inversely correlated with the other hereditary diseases pose a huge challenge for genetic counselling. progress of tumor stage and increased depth of tumor invasion. Our results 
P12 .057-S show that aberrant expression of VentX and Evx1 genes in ESCC tissues may First evidence for FANCM as a novel breast cancer predisposing gene have significant effects in the progress of ESCC tumorigenesis and may play G. Neidhardt1, J. Hauke1, H. Hellebrand2, S. Heilmann3, K. Klaschik1, E. Mangold4, H. roles in development of the disease through malfunction of BMP signaling Thiele5, J. Altmüller5, P. Nürnberg5, A. Meindl2, E. Hahnen1, R. K. Schmutzler1; pathway. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of VentX and 1University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar at the Technical University, Munich, Germany, Evx1 gene expression analysis in ESCC patients globally. 
P12 .054-M 3Institute of Human Genetics and Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University Retrospective analysis of genomic and transcriptional changes in of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, a case of Ewing sarcoma tumor progression determined by whole Germany, 5Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), Cologne, Germany. transcriptome and exome semiconductor-based sequencing G. Meredith1, Y. Sun1, N. Hernandez1, M. Taylor1, B. Sanderson1, K. Giorda1, K. Giorda1, BRCA2 FANCD RAD51C FANCO PALB2 FANCN T. Woodburn2, D. Dhingra1, G. Bee1, J. Bishop1, S. Ghosh1, P. Kapranov3, J. Buckley4, K. SBeRvIePr1al FmAeNmCbJers of the FANC (Fanconi anaemia complementation group) Bramlett1, O. Stephan5, C. Reynolds6, T. Triche7; gene family such as ( ), ( ), ( ) and 1Lifetechnologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 2Cancer Center Texas Tech University, ( ) have been associated with breast cancer (BC) and ovarian Lubbock, TX, United States, 3St. Laurent Institute, Providence, CA, United States, 4Keck cancer (OC) predisposition. Given the fact that most risk families do not carry School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Lifetechnologies, Darmstadt, Germany, 6Cancer Center Texas texh University, Lubbock, TX, United States, 7The Saban mutations in established BC/OC genes, we hypothesized that yet unknown Research Institute Children‘s Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, United States. disease genes exist. In the course of FaAnN eCxMome sequenBcRinCgA p1/ro2ject aimed to identify novel BC predisposing genes, we identified a heterozygous nonsense mutation (p.Gln1701Ter) within the gene in a -negative pa- 
E2 w4i8ng sarcoma is a cancer that often presents in tE heS H seG co n2 d0 d1 e4 ca d| eM oI f L liA feN , tIiTeAntL aYff e|c WtedW byW ea.ErlSy-HonGse.Ot BRCG (46y). The FANCM protein is a central com-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index University, Szczecin, Poland, 3Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Institute of Molecular Pathology ponent of the Fanconi anaemia core complex and promotes the recruitment and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 6University of Porto, Porto, of the S-phase checkpoint machinery after binding to DNA damage sites. The Portugal, 7Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Texas Children‘s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 9Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, nonsense mutation removes tBhRe CEAR1C/
C24 -like domain (aa1802-1922) of the Germany, 10University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 2022aa FANCM protein. A subsequent Sequenom-based case-control study including 1896 independent -negative BC index cases and 1726 Introduction controls revealed a significant association with BC occurrence (9/1896 ca- : Gastric cancer is a multiCfaDcHto1rial disease and results from a ses vs. 2/1726 controls; p<0.05). The carrier frequency of the p.Gln1701Ter combination of environmental factors and genetic alterations. Approximate- mutation in controls (0.12%) is similar to that identified inF tAhNe CfrMamework ly 8-10% of cases are familial. Germline mutations explain a small part of the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (5/4300; european ancestry; of these families. In the majority of cases with early-onset or famPailtiiaeln gtas- 0.12%). Taken together, our data provide first evidence for as a no- stric cancer the underlying genetic cause remains unknown. Therefore, we vel BC predisposing gene (9/1896 cases vs. 7/6026 coFnAtrNoClsM; p=0.00242) at aim to find new genetic predisposition genes for gastric cancer. : a moderate penetrance level (OR: 4.101; CI95%:1.401-12.199; RR=2.357; 41 patients with early-onset (<35 years of Raegseu altt sdiagnosis) or familial ga- CI95%F:A1N.2
C7 M-3.326). Due to the low frequency of the p.Gln1701Ter stric cancer (two first-degree relatives with gastric cancer diagnosed below mutation, however, large collaborative studies are required to quantify the the age of 50) were included in our study. : Exome sequencing was RR of alterations for BC and potentially other cancer entities. 
P12 .058-M performed on germline DNA of the 41 patients. High-quality variants were First clinical experience with screening formalin fixed and paraffin- selected and common variation was excluded from the data set. Next, both embedded (FFPE) archival tissue for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 truncating variants and missense variants predicted to be damaging to pro- - A new paradigm in genetic investigation and counseling tein function were selected. In total, 225 variants were validated by Sanger A. H. Petersen1, M. M. Aagaard1, M. Waldstrøm2, A. Bojesen1; sequencing (average 5.5 variants per patient, range 1-12 variants): 63 trun- 1Vejle Sygehus, Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle, Denmark, 2Vejle Sygehus, cating variants and 162 missense variants in 191 genes. Thirty-eight genes Department of Clinical Pathology, Vejle, Denmark. were recurrently affected in maximally three patients. Homozygous and Background: compound heterozygous missense variants were identified in 8 and 3 pati- ents, respectively. Three truncating and 26 missense varCiaonntsc laursei oinn known Women carrying a germline mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 cancer predisposing genes. Other variants are located in genes previously (BRCA1/2) have a very high lifetime risk of breast- and ovarian cancer. Men associated with or functionally linked to gastric cancer. : Using carrying the same mutations are facing an increased risk of prostate- and exome sequencing we identified several candidate genes for gastric cancer breast cancer. Until now, screening for BRCA1/2 mutations required high predisposition. Their contribution to gastric cancer predisposition will be quality DNA (from blood or other fresh specimens). This has ruled out fa- investigated by screening larger cohorts of patients with early onset and/or milies in which the relative(s) suffering from breast or ovarian cancer have familial gastric cancer. alreadAyi mdi:ed. Several attempts to screen for mutations in archival formalin- 
P12 .061-S fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue have so far been with limited suc- Impaired Th17 mucosal host defense against Helicobacter pylori in cess. We present the first clinRiecsaul ldtast:a from our newly developed NGS an early-onset gastric cancer patient with a homozygous germline based analysis, screening archival FFPE samples of non-tumor tissue for variant in MYD88 germline mutations in BRCA1/2. In 33 FFPE samples we found 3 I. P. Vogelaar, M. J. L. Ligtenberg, R. S. van der Post, M. C. M. Kets, R. M. de Voer, T. J. G. Jansen, L. Jacobs, G. Schreibelt, H. J. M. van Krieken, J. M. de Vries, M. G. Netea, N. pathogenic BRCA1 mutations, 3 pathogenic BRCA2 mutations and 2 variants Hoogerbrugge; of unknown significance in BRCA2. In 17 samples coverage was sufficient to Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. disclose a negative result and in 8 samples the coverage was too low, and Introduction: Helicobacter pylori H. hence the result was desigCnaotnecdl uinscioonncsl:usive. The quality of the data varied pylori CDH1 between samples with a strong negative correlation between age of the tis- The main causes for gastric cancer are ( sue and sequence quality. Mutations in BRCA1/2 can now be ) infection, diet and genetic factors. Germline mutations under- sought after in deceased relatives, in families with suspected germline mu- lie a gastric cancer predisposition syndrome with autosomal dominant in- tations. For clinical use, mutations found in FFPE samples should always be heritance, characterized by early-onset diffuse gastric cancer. In the majori- confirmed in other samples from either the same individual, or from samp- ty of cases with earPlya-toinesnett or familial gastric cancer the underlying genetic les from close relatives. 
P12 .059-S cause remains unknown. We aimed to finCdD nHe1w genetic predisposition genes Comprehensive genetic characterization of pediatric patients with for gastric cancer. : A 23-year old female patient with diffuse-type B-lineage ALL reveals novel mutations and gene fusions gastric cancer and without a germline mutation also suffered from C. Schroeder1, M. Walter1, C. Kyzirakos2, M. Sturm1, U. Pflückhahn2, R. Handgretinger2, S. rReecsuurlrtesnt fungal infections. Family history revealed a consanguineous rela- Ebinger2, O. Kohlbacher3, O. Riess1, H. Rammensee4, P. Lang2, M. Bonin1, P. Bauer1; tion of her parents. There were no other cases of gastric cancer in the family. 1Instiute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Children‘s : Whole exome sequencing of the patients’ germline DNA identified Hospital University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Applied Bioinformatics, Center for aH .hpyolmoroizygous missense variant (c.712C>T, p.Arg238Cys) in the gene en- Bioinformatics, Quantitative Biology Center, and Dept. of Computer Science, Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of Immunology, Institute for Cell Biology, Tübingen, Germany. coding MYD88, which plays a central role inS tthaep himylmocuoncceu rse asuproenusse, against infections. Immunological assays on periphHe.rpayll borloiod mCoannodniudcal eaalr- bceicllasn rsevealed normal immune responses to but im- High-throughput sequencing technologies provide new opportunities for paired immune responses upon stimulation with and personalized treatment approaches as well as for the identification of novel , characterized by a speCcoifnicc lduesfieocnt in production of Th17 cytokines genetic biomarkers in cancer. We analyzed a total of 9 tumor and reference IL-17 and IL-2H2.p. yTlhoirsi , was due to defective I
L1 -beta responses, a crucial cy- samples of patients with primary and relapsed B-lineage ALL by whole- tokine for Th17 development. : Impaired Th17 mucosal host de- exome-/transcriptome sequencing and SNP-microarrays. The results were fMenYsDe8 a8gainst which is associated with gastric cancer development, combined to obtain a comprehensive overview on the genomic landscape was observed in a patient with early onset gastric cancer and a homozygous of B-lineage ALL. Only few genes were altered recurrently and our data con- He lvicaorbiaanctt.e Tr hese defective Th17 responses were also likely the cause of firms the hypothesis that the interindividual heterogeneity requires highly fungal infections. Our data suggest that genetic defects leading to defective individualized therapeutic approaches. Besides common and well known ge- a Pn 1t 2i- .062-M innate pattern recognition predispose to gastric cancer. netic variations like mutations (e.g. in NRAS, JAK, ILR7), CNVs (e.g. a deletion Prohibitin 3‘ untranslated region 1630 C>T polymorphism and copy of PAX5) and fusion genes (e.g. BCR:ABL) a novel gene, PYGO2, was identi- number variation contributes to its gene expression deregulation in fied to be altered in three patients. Besides a fusion gene (MEF2D:PYGO2), a gastric cancer mutation and a duplication of PYGO2 were found in different patients. Our M. F. Leal1, P. D. R. Cirilo2,3, T. K. F. Mazzotti2,3, D. Q. Calcagno1,4, F. Wisnieski1, S. data suggest that PYGO2 plays a role in leukomegenesis. Demachki4, M. C. Martinez2,3, P. P. Assumpção4, R. Chammas2,3, R. R. Burbano4, M. C. 
P12 .060-M Smith1; Unraveling the genetic predisposition of early-onset and familial 1Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2University of São Paulo, São Paulo, gastric cancer Brazil, 3São Paulo State Cancer Institute, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Federal University of Pará, N. Hoogerbrugge1, R. S. van der Post1, H. J. M. van Krieken1, J. Lubinski2, A. Jakubowska2, Belém, Brazil. C. M. Aalfs3, L. P. van Hest4, C. Oliveira5,6, H. Pinheiro5, S. Jhangiani7, D. Muzny7, R. A. Gibbs7, J. R. Lupski7,8, J. de Ligt1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, H. K. Schackert9, G. N. Ranzani10, V. Molinaro10, I. P. Vogelaar1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1; PHB 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Pomeranian Medical Gastric cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldPwHiB- de. has been reported as an oncogene and tumor suppressor in several ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |n WeopWlaWsia.sE, iSnHcluGd.iOngR inG gastric cancer. Here, we evaluated whether the2 49ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index copy number and the rs6917 polymPoHrpBh ism affect its expression in gastric have also confirmed LOH at 8q21.3 and 14q13.3 with a frequency of 17.9% cancer. Forty-eightpairs of gastric cancers and corresponding non-neopla- (5/28) and 60.0% (9/15), respectively, which other authors have reported. 
P12 .065-S stic gastric samples were evaluated. expression was analyzed by real-ti- Effects of NDRG2 downregulation on glioblastoma patient survival me quantitative PCR and by immunohistochemistry. Gene copy number was G. Steponaitis, D. Skiriute, P. Vaitkiene, M. Mikuciunas, A. Kazlauskas; iPnHvBestigated by quantitative PCR. Allele-specific expression was determined Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Neuroscience institute, Laboratory of bPyH Bsequencing and by TaqMan assay. Down-regulation aPnd up-regulation of Neurooncology and Genetics, Kaunas, Lithuania. wasP observed in the tumors (45.5% and 20.5%, resPpectively). Reduced Background. expression Pwas associated with dedifferentiation ( =0.029), lower in- vasion ( =0.002), absence of lymph node metastasis ( =0.040) and early Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most lethal malignant gastric cancer (PH=B0.002). In all cases, the PHB immunoreactivityP wHBas de- human brain tumor with the poor survival prognosis exceeding to 12-15 tected in neoplastic and non-neoplastic cells. PPHB was mainly expressed in months after diagnosis. No reliable molecular marker has been vNeDriRfiGed2 the cytoplasmP. amplification was observed in 34.2% tumors. gain for GBM diagnostics up to date. Therefore, extensive research in molecu- was associated with higher gene expression ( =0.003) and late-onset ga- lar changes of GMB is essential to better understand this ipna vthitorology. stric cancer ( =0.022). In our sample, 22% patients were heterozygous and gene has been reporNteDdR tGo2 be downregulated in GBM, whereNaDs RoGve2rexpres- 4.17% were homozygousP for the minor allele in the rs6917 polymPorphism. sion of this gene represses glioblastoma cell proliferation . To further The presence of the T allele in this polymorphism was associated with re- aMdadtreersisa lt haen dro Mlee tohf ods. in gliomagenesis, we analyzed expres- duced expression in GC ( <0.001) and in non-neoplastic samples (P<H0B.0 01). sion at mRNA and protein level in gliomas of different malignancy grade. Only one patient presented a higher C/T ratio in both tumor and non-neo- NDRG2 The study included 78 different malignancy glioma plastic samples. In PmHoBst cases, lower C/T ratio was detected. Thus, copy tumors (9 astrocytomas grade-I, 29 grade-II, 14 grade-III and 26 gliobla- number variation and differential expression of the rs6917 polymorphism stomas). mRNA expression study waRs epseurflotsrmed using quantitative m 
P1 a 2y . h 0a 6v 3e - Sa role in transcriptional regulation. real-time NRDevReGr2se-Transcription PCR analysis, while protein expression was Extrachromosomal driver mutations in glioblastoma and low grade estimated by using Western blot technique. . We found a strong de- glioma crease of mRNA expression in glioblastoma to about 10-fold compa- S. I. Nikolaev1, F. Santoni1, M. Garieri1, P. Makrythanasis1, E. Falconnet1, M. Guipponi1, red to I-III grade gliomas (Kruskal-Wallis, p<0.0001). In line with the mRNA A. Vannier1, I. Radovanovic1, F. Bena2, K. Schaller1, V. Dutoit2, V. Clement-Schatlo1, P. data, NDRG2 protein level was markedly reduced in gNliDobRlGa2stomas (to about Dietrich2, S. E. Antonarakis1; 3-4-fold) as compared to grade I-III gliomas (p<0.0001). Spearman correla- 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, tion analysis demonstrated NsiDgnRiGfi2cant correlation of transcripts and Switzerland. protein expression levels (r=0.662, p<0.0001). Survival anNaDlyRsiGs2 showed ne- gative correlation between expression and tumor progression (Log- rank p=0.0001). Our results highlight the importance of for glioma Alteration of the number of copies of Double Minutes (DMs) with oncogenic tumorigenesis as well as being as an indicatory factor for glioma malignancy EGFR mutations in response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) is a novel and patient survival. 
P12 .066-M adaptive mechanism of glioblastoma. In this study we provide evidence that Genomic profiling reveals three molecular relapse patterns in IDH1/2 such mutations in DMs, called here Amplification Linked Extrachromoso- wild-type glioblastoma mal Mutations (ALEMs), originate extrachromosomally and could therefore U. Beyer1, V. Riehmer1, J. Gietzelt2, B. Hentschel2, M. Westphal3, G. Schackert4, M. C. Sabel5, be completely eliminated from the cancer cells. By exome sequencing of 7 B. Radlwimmer6, T. Pietsch7, G. Reifenberger8,9, M. Weller10, R. Weber1, M. Loeffler2; glioblastoma patients we revealed ALEMs in EGFR, PDGFRA and other ge- 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, nes. These mutations together with DMs were lost by cancer cells in derived 2Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, gliomaspheres. We confi rmed the extrachromosomal origin of such muta- Leipzig, Germany, 3Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Hamburg- tions by showing that wild type and mutated DMs may coexist in the same Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Technical University tumor. Analysis of 4198tumors from TCGA collection suggested the pres- Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 5Department of Neurosurgery, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center ence of ALEMs across different tumor types with the highest prevalence in (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 7Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn glioblastomas and Low Grade Gliomas. In these tumors, driver oncogenic Medical School, Bonn, Germany, 8Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich Heine mutations in DMs were 13 - 25 fold more frequent as compared to the dis- University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 9German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Essen/Düsseldorf, tribution of passenger mutations confirming the effective expansion of ex- Germany, 10Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. trachromosomal drivers. The extrachromosomal nature of ALEMs provides a powerful mechanism of rapid regulation of the copy-number of mutated oncogenes including their massive increase or complete loss in response to Molecular changes associated with the relapse of glioblaIsDtoHm1/a2 after stan- e Px 1t 2ra .0c 6el 4lu -Mlar stimuli such as RTK inhibitors or growth factors. dard radiochemotherapy remain poorly understood. Here we compared New loci of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in glioblastoma genomic profiles of 27 pairs of primary and recurrent wild-type E. Alekseeva1,2, A. Tanas1,2, E. Prozorenko3, A. Zaytsev4, V. Strelnikov1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2; glioblastomas by genome-wide array-based comparative genomic hybri- 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First dization. By bioinformatic analysis, primary and recurrent tumor profiles Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3N.N. Blokhin Russian were normalized and segmented, chromosomal gains and losses called ta- Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4P.A. Hertzen Moscow Research king the tumor cell content into account, and difference profiles deduced. Institute of Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation. Seven of 27 (26%) pairs lacked DNA copy number differences between primary and recurrent tumors (Equal pairs). The recurrent tumors in 9/27 (33%) pairs contained all chromosomal imbalances of the primary tumors Despite recent advances in the diagnosis and treatment of glioblastoma, plus additional ones, suggesting that a major subclone sequentially accu- the prognosis for patients with this highly malignant tumor remains poor. mulated aberrations (Sequential pairs). In 11/27 (41%) pairs, the profiles Research of glioblastoma at the molecular genetic level can help reveal of primary and recurrent tumors were divergent, i.e. the recurrent tumors changes underlying this tumor, identify potential markers of prognosis of contained additional aberrations but had lost othersC, DsuKgNg2eAst/iBng a polyclo- the disease and response to therapy. An efficient approach of identifying nal composition of the primary tumors and considerable clonal evolution candidate genes, the disturbance of structure and functioning of which may (Discrepant pairs). Losses on 9p21.3 harboring the locus were be associated with the development of cancer, is the analysis of LOH. We significantly more common in primary tumors from non-Equal pairs. Non- have assessed 7 genomic loci for which LOH in glioblastoma have not been Equal pairs showed ten regions of recurrent genomic differences between previously reported: 2q31.2, 3p25.1, 5q14.3, 7q21.2, 12q21.33, 18q11.2 and primary and recurrent tumors harboring 46 candidate genes associated 21q21.1. None of these loci is associated with glioblastoma susceptibility with tumor recurrence. IInD Hpa1r/t2icular, copy numbers of genes encoding apo- according to OMIM. The selected loci were examined by microsatellite ana- ptosis regulators were frequently changed upon recurreInDcHe.1 I/n2 summary, lysis in 86 glioblastoma samples. Four of the seven loci, 2q31.2, 12q21.33, approximately 25% of wild-type glioblastoma pairs have stable 18q11.2 and 21q21.1 revealed no LOH cases. However, LOH was identified genomic imbalances. In contrast, approximately 75% of wild-type at 3p25.1, 5q14.3 and 7q21.2 with a frequency of 25.8% (8/31), 20.0% glioblastomas undergo further genomic aberrations and alter their clonal (3/15) and 30.3% (10/33), respectively. Identified areas of LOH can contain composition upon recurrence impacting their genomic profile, a process potential candidate genes that may be of interest in terms of the molecu- possibly facilitated by loss on 9p21.3 in the primary tumor. lar pathology of glioblastoma. Some of these genes are SL
C6 A6 (3p25.1), CCNH (5q14.3), AKA
P9  (7q21.2). Thus, we have identified new loci of LOH in glioblastoma, in which candidate genes that play a role in tumor develop- 250 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG ment and represent potential molecular genetic markers may be located. WeABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .067-S Targeted resequencing for analysis of gene mutations in pediatric Glioblastoma Multiforme classification of gliomas and different molecular abnormalities have been L. Giunti1, A. Provenzano2, R. Artuso1, B. Mazzinghi1, I. Sardi3, S. Cardellicchio3, A. linked to tumor grading and disease progression. Buccoliero4, F. Castiglione5, L. Genitori6, M. de Martino7, S. Giglio1,2; In our study we investigated MGMT promoter methylation, 10q loss of hete- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Department of rozygosity (LOH) and IDH1 R132H mutation in tumor specimens from 103 Clinical Experimental and Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, patients with glioblastoma and II and III grade gliomas, to further under- 3Neuroncology Unit, Meyer Children Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 4Anatomic Pathology stand: 1) correlation with grading, 2) prognostic value. Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital; Florence, Firenze, Italy, 5Department of Pyrosequencing analysis of MGMT promoter showed that methylation le- Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Firenze, Italy, 6Neurosurgery Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Meyer Children‘s Hospital, Florence, vels decrease from low to high grade tumors (p <0,001), confirming that Firenze, Italy, 7Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence; Florence, Firenze, hypermethylation (methylation levels >20%) correlates with a better pro- Italy. gression free survival (PFS). Interestingly, a mildly methylated subgroup (methylation 20%-40%) revealed a better PFS. Microsatellite and a-CGH analyses showed that 10q LOH is common in high grade tumors and asso- Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; WHO-grade IV), the most frequent prima- ciates with MGMT hypomethylation, while absence of LOH and hyperme- ry malignant brain tumor in adults, accounts for approximately 7-9% of thylation correlate with low grade tumors. IDH1 mutation was investigated all central nervous (CNS) tumors in childhood. Adult and paediatric GBMs by pyrosequencing and detected in all of low grade gliomas (10 cases), in (pGBMs) have distinct genetic and molecular pathways of tumorigenesis and 7/11 II grade gliomas. We did not find mutations in IV grade gliomas, indica- different studies, based on array-CGH analysis, reported that there are signi- ting a strong association between tumor grading and IDH1 mutation status ficant differences in Copy Number Alterations (CNA). In our previous study (p<0,001). In addition, we found a correlation between IDH1 mutation and we identified, using array-CGH, recurrent CNA in 8 pGBMs establishing mi- MGMT methylation level (p<0,001), both decreasing with increasing tumor nimum common regions (MCR) of duplication/amplification and deletion. grade. In conclusion, our data reinforced the role of MGMT methylation and Based on these results, we developed a next-generation sequencing (NGS) IDH1 mutation as hallmarks of better prognosis, and conversely 10q LOH as approach to screen the genetic profile of tumors. NGS has provided a new a poorer one. Moreover, we evidenced the existence of a mildly methylated paradigm in biomedical research to delineate the genetic basis of human di- g Pl 1io 2m .0a 7 s 0u -b Mtype correlated with a better PFS. seases. The panel was designed to cover 420 genes selected within of MCRs miRNA expression profile in tumor cell lines treated with the histone to try to identify new genes involved in tumorigenesis and/or progression deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 of pGBMs. In 8 patients we found 18 heterozygous mutations in different ge- D. Martín-Sánchez1,2, C. Jiménez-Criado1,2, J. González-Valero1, N. Gutiérrez2, J. García nes. The same mutations were also found in DNA extracted from blood and Hernández1, J. Cruz-Hernández2, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; in two cases we demonstrated the parental origin of 12 mutations. Given the 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedicine rarity of the disease and the scarcity of data in the literature, our findings Research (IBSAL), Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. may better elucidate if there is a genomic background in development and progression of pGBM. The recognition of candidate genes underlying this disease could then improve treatment strategies for this devastating tumor. Introduction: The presence of HDAC proteins is necessary for the correct 
P12 .068-M regulation of gene expression. Multiple studies have demonstrated that inhi- Distinctive expression profiles of lncRNAs in glioma subtypes bition of these proteins can lead to deregulation of gene expression and ab- A. Matjašič1, M. Tajnik1, M. Popović2, B. Matos3, E. Boštjančič1, D. Glavač1; 1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of medicine, Institute of pathology, Department of normal cell proliferation. In our study we have analyzed the miRNA profile molecular genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, Faculty of medicine, of three epithelial cell lines (HCT116, HT29 and HC
C1937 ) and two mesen- Institute of pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University medical center, Department of chimal cell lines (H929 and MM1S) after treatment with a histone deacety- neurosurgery, Ljubljana, Slovenia. lase inhibitor, currently in phase III clinical trial. Background: Materials and methods: We have analyzed miRNA expression comparing the profiles before and after treatment. RNA was isolated from cell lines and Gliomas are the most malignant and common primary brain miRNA labeling was performed using a conventional assays. An Exiqon chip tumors, classified upon malignancy grade and histological characteristics. miRCURY LNA Array microRNA ™ was used for analysis. Comparisons bet- Correct diagnosis that relies solely on histopathological characteristics ween the different study groups were performed using SAM to identify tho- might be difficult and inadequate, particularly in cases that lack typical fea- se miRNAs whose expression showed statistically significant differences. tures. Glioma subtypes have distinct molecular features and gene expression Results: Comparing the expression profiles of the cell lines between 24h analyses could uncover molecular biomarkers for deciphering glioma subty- and 72h after treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor, we found pes. Our purpose was to identifyP alntcieRnNtAs sa tnhda tm meitghhot dpsla: y role in gliomage- that epithelial cells show a group of 18 up-regulated and 16 down-regulated nesis and investigate potential association of differential expression profiles miRNAs. Whereas mesenchymal cells show 20 up-regulated and 20 down- with different glioma subtypes. Sixty-four patients regulated miRNAs. Both types of cells share 3 up-regulared miRNAs at 24h, were included in the study. We used quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) in 8 at 72 hours and 1 down-regulated miRNA. order to determine differentially expressed lncRNAs using LncRNA array Conclusions: These data show that treatment with histone deacetylase mo- profiler on a smaller cohort of pathohistologically evaluated glioma samp- difies miRNA expression patterns. Specifically depending on the cellular ori- les normalized to human brain reference RNA. A subset of differential ln- gin of tumor cells, which could explain different outcome of patients treated cRNAsR wesaus lftusr: ther validated by qPCR approach on a biger cohort of glioma w 
P1 it 2h 0th 7i 2s -a Mpproach. . samples and statistically evaluated using Mann-Whitney and Kruskal-Wallis Whole-genome sequencing of matched primary and metastatic tests. LncRNA profiling revealed a total of 74 among 90 analysed hepatocellular carcinomas lncRNAs to be widel7yS eLx pErGeOsAse dH OaTnAdI Rst aJtPiXst iMcaEl Gte3s tRsN idCeRn3t ified Z aN sFuXb1s-eAtS 1of L. Ouyang1, J. Lee2, C. Park2, M. Mao3, Y. Shi1, Z. Gong1, H. Zheng1, Y. Li1, G. Wang1, Y. Zhao1, 10 significantly differentially expressed lncRNAs. Further analyses of 7 dys- H. Fu1, J. Kim2, H. Lim2; regulated lncRNAs ( , , , , , and Con)- 1BGI, Shenzhen, China, 2Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, hclauvsei oshnosw: ed statistically significant differences in relative gene expression Republic of, 3Pfizer Inc., San Diego, CA, United States. ratios implicating distinctive expression profiles in glioma subtypes. Our findings support the concept of lncRNAs as molecular bio- markers by determining distinctive subtype-related lncRNA expression pat- To gain biological insights on tumor metastases, we used whole-genome terns between glioma subtypes, which suggest an important role of lncRNAs sequencing at 33X-43X coverage to profile somatic mutations in primary in glioma biogenesis and implicate the potential use of lncRNAs in glioma HCC (HBV+) and metachronous lung metastases (> 2 years interval). In total, histological classification. 5,027-13,961 and 5,275-12,624 somatic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) 
P12 .069-S were detected in primary HCC and lung metastases, respectively. Generally, Genomic hallmarks in glioma E. Bonaparte1, R. Falcone1, C. Augello2, M. Ciboddo2, M. Caroli3, P. Colapietro4, S. M. 38.88-78.49% of SNVs detected inmetastases were present in primary tu- Sirchia1,4, M. Miozzo1,2, S. Tabano1,2; mors. We identified 65-221 structural variations (SVs) in primary tumors 1Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, and 60-232 SVs in metastases. Comparison of these SVs shows very simi- Milano, Italy, 2Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation; Università degli lar and largely overlapped mutated segmentsbetween primary and meta- Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Division of Neurosurgery, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda static tumors. Copy number alterations between primary and metastatic Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Health Sciences, Università pairs were also found to be closely related. Together, these preservations degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. in genomic profiles from liver primary tumors to metachronous lung me- tastases indicate that the genomic features during tumorigenesis may be E deS vH eloG e2 d0 t1 4 u| M poI rL A hyN st, I lT ogA icL Y |r eWtaWineWd d.EurSinHgG m.eOtaRstGasis.Additionally, a few mutations were found s 2p 5ec 1i- Recent genome-wide studies have been p o s p t o fically in lung metastases, which may explain the clinical observationthatABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index both primary and metastatic tumors are usually sensitive or resistant to the to characterize the chromosomal translocation events in glioblastoma cell same systemic treatments. lines, and detected a t(7;9) disrupting the FOCAD (KIAA1797) gene enco- 
P12 .073-S ding a then uncharacterized protein. FOCAD was deleted in around 50% of Identification of a novel CDH1 gene mutation in a family with primary glioblastomas, and its gene product, focadhesin, had an impact on hereditary diffuse gastric cancer M. Lopez1, P. Santibañez1, C. Cervera-Acedo1, J. Aguirre-Lamban1, A. Martin-Carnicero2, glioblastoma growth in vivo and cell motility in vitro. The aim of this pro- R. Salazar2, E. Dominguez-Garrido1; ject was to further characterize focadhesin by targeting its unknown bin- 1Fundacion Rioja Salud-CIBIR, Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital San Pedro, Logroño, Spain. ding partners. Therefore, we performed two independent yeast two-hybrid Introduction: screens using a human brain cDNA library. In total, we isolated 206 clones, from which we eliminated 155 clones, because they could grow without au- Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) is an autosomal xotrophic marker expression. The DNA sequences of the remaining 51 prey dominant genetic predisposition syndrome caused by CDH1 germline mu- inserts were identified. In 26 prey plasmids, the cDNAs were protein-coding tations, with incomplete penetrance. HDGC is relatively uncommon, repre- and in frame. Finally, 8 distinct potential binding partners were identified, senting about 2% of gastric cancer. The majority of inactivating mutations which can be categorized into the functional groups of calcium signaling, mi- in HDGC families are of the truncating type (75%), whereas the remaiSnuinbg- tosis, protein folding, RNA processing and cell metabolism. To confirm these jaercet ms aisnsden msee ttyhpoed. sT: he estimated lifetime risk for DGC is more than 80% in interactions, we performed retransformation experiments using fresh yeast. mutation carriers and prophylactic total gastrectomy is recommended. Three candidates were also analyzed by pull-down assays and co-localiza- A 47 year-old female patient diagnosed with DGC was tion studies using human cells. Two interactions have been confirmed so screened for CDH1 gene mutations. DNA and RNA extraction was carried far. In the next step, the functional relevance of the verified interactions will out from (blood and tissue (gastric biopsy) an)d the entire coding sReqeusuenltcse: be investigated in glioblastoma cells with stable focadhesin knockdown and and flanking intronic portions of the CDH1 were sequenced. Other family cells with homozygous deletion of the FOCAD gene with or without FOCAD- relatives three sisters, an uncle and a nephew were also screened. r Pe 1s 2cu .0e 7 b 6y - Mviral transduction. A deletion in exon 9 of CDH1 gene (c.1220delC, p.407*), not previously de- Targeted deep sequencing of fusion transcripts - developing clinical scribed, has been found. This mutation generates a stop codon that leads to assays for leukemia samples a pathogenic variant. The presence of the mutation was corroborated both, A. Ameur1, M. Sevov2, I. Bunikis1, S. Häggqvist1, I. Höijer1, I. Jonasson1, U. Gyllensten1, M. at DNA and RNA level in blood and tissue. The proband died during the stu- Hermanson2, L. Cavelier2; dy. One of the sisters presented also the deletion and had a previous history 1IGP, National Genomics Infrastructure, SciLifeLab, Uppsala, Sweden, 2IGP, Uppsala of malignant coCloonrecclutasli oponl:y p at the age of 49. Her son (nephew of the pro- University, Uppsala, Sweden. band) presented also the mutation. Neither of the other relatives harboured the mutation. HDCG has a poorly prognosis, mainly because of its difficult early detection. The identification of CDH1 mutations offers One of the main focuses of the National Genomics Infrastructure-Sweden the opportunity of carry out prophylactic strategies for unaffected at-risk (NGI) is to bring high-throughput sequencing to clinical use. Here we descri- individuals. be recent work on PCR- and hybridization-based deep sequencing of speci- 
P12 .074-M fic targeted fusion transcripts using Pacific Biosciences RSII (PacBio) and Novel mutations in Juvenile polyposis syndrome Ion Torrent PGM/Proton instruments, methods that can help to guide the N. Sharon Schwartzman1, H. N. Baris1, E. Reinstein2, E. Sabo3, A. Suissa4, I. Kedar2, M. Mei Zahav5, A. Mory1, E. E. Half4; treatment of leukemia patients. 1The Genetic Institute, Rambam Health Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2The Recanati Genetic By long-read PacBio sequencing we are developing clinical workflow for de- Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3The pathology department, tection oBf CBRC-RA-BALB1
L1  tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) resistance mutations in Rambam Health Campus, Haifa, Israel, 4The Gastroenterology Institute, Rambam Health chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Our assay enables rapid sequencing of a Campus, Haifa, Israel, 5Respiratory Unit, Schneider Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel. 1578bp cDNA amplicon without the need of a nested PCR. Mutati- ons down to a level of 1% are clearly detected using this approach. Moreover, the long PacBio reads makes it possible to resolve the mutational composi- Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder tion of all different clones present in CML patient samples. Since compound characterized by multiple juvenile polyps (JP) mainly in the colon with in- mutations might confer cross-resistance to multiple TKIs, the information creased risk of colorectal cancer. Subsets of patients develop severe gastric provided by our assay can directly influencMe LtLhe choice of therMapLyL. polyposis with increased risk of gastric cancer. In another project we study MLL-rearranged leukemias, characterized by Of fifty patients evaluated for polyposis in 2013, two JPS patients with novel chromosomal translocations involving the gene at 11q23. can form mutations were diagnosed. fusions transcripts together with several different genes, some of which are 1st: 27yrs after right colectomy for multiple hyperplastic, and JPs resulting still unknown. In some cases conventional MasLsLays like G-banding and FISH in recurrent rectal bleeding and anemia, normal gastroscopy. Sequencing fail to detect these fusion partners. We are therefore evaluating a hybridi- and MLPA for SMAD4 were negative. BMPR1A sequencing yielded c.367G>T zation-based assay for targeted captuMreL oLf cDNA, in combination with (p.123E>*), a novel nonsense mutation. Ion Torrent sequencing. Our preliminary results indicate that our method 2nd: At 32 yrs total colectomy for multiple adenomatous polyps suspicious increases the sensitivity for detecting fusion genes by several orders of of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. Gastroscopy detected multiple hyper- magnitude compared to a regular RNA-sequencing approach. 
P12 .077-S plastic polyps. APC sequencing and two common MUTYH mutations were Results of 20 years of Li-Fraumeni syndrome diagnosis in France normal. Due to severe bulky gastric polyposis a revision of the pathology G. Bougeard1, S. Baert-Desurmont1, R. Sesboüé1, M. Renaux-Petel1, J. M. Flaman1, L. was performed and JPS was clinically diagnosed. A total gastrectomy was Brugières2, T. Frebourg1, The French LFS working group; performed for persistent anemia and cancer risk. Epistaxis and telangiec- 1Inserm U1079 and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Department of Pediatric tases on his back and chest raised the possibility of hereditary hemorrha- Oncology - Gustave Roussy Institute, Villejuif, France. gic telangiectasia (HHT). Sequencing of SMAD4 found c.406_407delGT T
P53  (p.V136CfsX6), a de novo novel frameshift mutation. JPS composes 10% of polyposis syndromes. About 20% of SMAD4 patients The Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), due to germline mutations, repre- have JPS-HHT combined syndrome. Phenotypically, patients with SMAD4 sents a remarkable cancer predispToPs5it3io n characterized by the extent of tu- mutations may have gastric polyposis with a significant risk of gastric can- mour spectrum. For 20 years, analysis of over 1700 families allowed us to cer. These JPS patients illustrate the need for careful history collection and identify 214 French families with mutation, thanks to the Chompret’s thorough pathological analysis, that should guide the genetic evaluation. criteria gradually elaborated by the French LFS working group. Updated Genetic workup of JPS patients is important for family counseling and to data from 322 LFS patients with 552 tumours revealed that the median age e Ps 1t 2ab .0li 7s 5h - t She need for HHT evaluation in patients with SMAD4 mutations. of first tumour onset was 27 years, that the most frequent tumours were Targeting the functional relevance of the novel tumor suppressor breast cancers (167), soft-tissue sarcomas (103), osteo/choTnPd5r3o-sarcomas gene FOCAD (KIAA1797) in glioma pathogenesis (58), brain tumours (43) and adrenocortical carcinomas (42), and that 43% F. Brand, A. Kosfeld, M. Bucher, R. G. Weber; of patients developed multiple primary tumours. Germline TP m53utations Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. were detected in 50% of children with adrenocortical carcinoma, choroid plexuTsP c5a3rcinoma, or rhabdomyosarcoma. SixtMy-DfoMu2r percent of altera- tions were missense mutations and 4% genomic rearrangements. We found Malignant gliomas have a highly invasive phenotype, which is a main de- that mutation carriers harbouring the 285-309GG haplotype terminate for the poor prognosis of patients suffering from these tumors developed tumours 5 years earlier than others. The most striking observati- d2e5sp2ite multimodal therapy. In previous studies, EwSeH uGse d2 0214-4co |l oMr-FILISAHN , oITnA wLaYs t |h Wat pWatWien.tEs SwHithG d.OomRinGant-negative missense mutation developed first-tumour earlier (22 y) than patients with null-mutation (42 y). TwentyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2The Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson years after the identification of LFS molecular basis, this report reveals that Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3Department of Human Genetics, Hadassah Medical 2 forms of LFS probably exist: an aggressive, characterized by early-onset tu- Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Department of Surgery, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 5Department of Pathology, Hebrew University-Hadassah mours, due to highly penetrant dominant-negative missense mutations, and Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel, 6Department of Pathology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical a moderate, characterized by later age of onset, due to mutations with lower Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 7Department of Oncology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, penetrance. The remarkable high incidence of multiple primary tumours is Te Aviv, Israel, 8Department of Gastroenterology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, probably explained by genotoxic effects of chemo- and radio-therapy and Jerusalem, Israel, 9Department of Gastroenterology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, the key role of p53 response to DNA damage. Tel Aviv, Israel, 10Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 
P12 .078-M 11Gastroenterology Division, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Identification of a characteristic copy number alteration profile Israel. by high-resolution SNP arrays associated with metastatic sporadic colorectal cancer J. Sayagués1, M. González-González1, C. Fontanillo2, M. Abad3, M. Gutiérrez1, I. Mota1, O. Bengoechea3, Á. Santos-Briz3, O. Blanco3, E. Fonseca4, J. Ciudad1, M. Fuentes1, J. De Las It is becoming evident that Lynch Syndrome (LS) is one of the most common Rivas5, J. Alcazar6, J. García6, L. Muñoz-Bellvis6, A. Orfao1; cancer syndromes. Diagnosis is not always trivial and may be costly. Know- 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (IBMCC-CSIC/USAL), Universidad de Salamanca, ledge of incidence, spectrum of mutations and genes involved in specific po- Salamanca, Spain, 2Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics Unit, IBMCC-CSIC/USAL, pulations, facilitates the diagnostic process and contributes to clinical work- Celgene Research SL, Salamanca, Spain, 3Departament of Pathology, University Hospital up. AIM: To report a cohort of LS families in the Israeli population, gene of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 4Service of Medical Oncology, University distribution, mutations detected and co-occurrence of related syndromes. Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 5Bioinformatics and Functional METHODS: Patients were studied at high risk clinics. Diagnostics followed a Genomics Unit, IBMCC-CSIC/USAL, Salamanca, Spain, 6Service of General Surgery and multi-step process. It included testing for founder mutations, tumor testing, Digestive Apparatus, University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSALnvestigación del Cáncer (IBMCC-CSIC/USAL), Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. gen e sequencing and MLPA. LS was defined by positive tumor analysis and/ or positive mutation testing. RESULTS: We describe a cohort of 318 carri- ersfrom 169 families with LSM. WSHe 6have identified 61 different muMtaLtHio1ns in Background: Metastatic dissemination is the most frequent cause of death 102 families; 3 founder mutations occurred in over 70% of Ashkenazi LS in sporadic colorectal cancer (sCRC). The metastatic process is considered, families, where mMuStaHt2ions in were more common than in . We at least in part, to be related to a specific background of genetic alterations identified founder mutations also among Jewish families from Georgia, Iran accumulated in cells from primary tumors, the identification of such gene- and Afghanistan. was mutated in 62% of the cases, one third of these tic alterations being critical for the identification of sCRC patients at risk of mutations were large deletions. Constitutional mismatch repair deficMieSnHc2y developing metastases. (C-MMMSRHD6) was identified in 6 families. CONCLUSIONS: Mutation spectrum Methods: In this study we used high-resolution 500K SNP-arrays for the and gene distribution in the Israeli population is unique. Mutations in identification of copy number alteration profiles present at diagnosis in pri- and cause the majority of cases. Six founder mutations contribute to mary tumors from metastatic (n=23) versus non-metastatic (n=26) sCRC. LS in 4 different ethnic sub-groups. C-MMRD occurs either due to founder Results: Our results showed a characteristic pattern of copy number altera- mutations or consanguinity. These features affect the phenotype, the dia- tions among metastatic sCRC which involved losses of 23 regions at chromo- g Pn 1o 2s .t 0i 8c 1p -r Socess, risk estimation, and genetic counseling. somes 1p, 17p and 18q, together with gains of 35 regions at chromosomes Genotype and Parent of Origin Effect on Colorectal and Endometrial 7 and 13q. Phenotypes in Patients with a PM
S2  mutation Conclusion: As could be expected, such copy number profile involved multip- M. Suerink1, H. M. Klift van der1, S. W. Broeke ten1, F. J. Hes1, H. F. A. Vasen2, C. M. Tops1, J. le genes previously associated with sCRC (i.e. SMAD2) and/or the metastatic T. Wijnen1, O. M. Dekkers3, M. Nielsen1; process (i.e. PODXL) and it was further associated with a poorer outcome. 1Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
P12 .079-S Netherlands, 2Department of Gastroenterology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Oligogenic germline mutations predispose to early lung Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical adenocarcinoma in non-smokers Center, Leiden, Netherlands. E. Frullanti1, M. A. Mencarelli1, M. Baldassarri1,2, F. Cetta3, F. Mari1,2, S. Furini4, P. Piu5, T. Introduction A. Dragani6, F. Ariani2, A. Renieri1,2; 1Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Mutations in thePM
S2  gene are responsible for Lynch syn- Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 3IRCCS MultiMedica, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Department of Medicine, drome, a genetically inherited disorder with an increased risk of foremost Surgery & Neuroscience, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 6Fondazione IRCCS Istituto colorectal cancer (CRC) and endometrial cancer (EC). Possibly, the reported Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. variabiMliteyt ihno cdasn cer prevalence and age of diagnosis between patients and families can partly be explained by genotype and/or parent of origin effects (POE). The genotypes and clinical data of 383 European PM
S2  mu- Despite the great bulk of research to identify genetic susceptibility genes in tation carriers were available for analysis. Mutations with loss of RNA ex- lung cancer by genome-wide association studies, only three loci have been pression (group 1) and retained RNA expression (grouRpe 2s)u wltesr e compared. identified and replicated consistently in subsequent studies. In addition to A one-way Anova test and Cox regression were done to compare mean age confer a very low risk, they have been associated with lung cancer in smo- of cancer diagnosis and calculate hazard ratios (HR). Mean age of kers, but not in non-smokers. The polygenic nature of common cancers has CRC diagnosis was 50,99 years (CI 48,09-53,89) for group 1 and 60,00 years frequently been suggested, but its biological basis still remains elusive. We (CI 52,50-67,50) for group 2 (p=0,032). For EC no significant differences in tested the hypothesis that genetic susceptibility may rely on germ-line mu- mean age of diagnosis were found. Cox regression showed slightly higher tations of a restricted number of genes. A combination between an advanced non-significant HRs for both CRC (HR: 1,274, p=0,440) and EC (HR:1,216, technical tool, i.e. the exome sequencing, and a new patient selection stra- p=0,722) wDhiesnc ucosmsiopnar ing group1 to group 2. No significant HR for CRC or tegy was used. Among 964 lung adenocarcinoma patients we selected two EC depending on whether the mutation was inherited from father or mother patients with very early onset disease (mean age 43) in absence of cigarette was found. A higher mean age at CRC diagnosis and a non-signi- smoking, and having a first degree healthy sibling available for genome com- ficant higher CRC risk in the group with loss of RNA expression was identi- parison older than at least 7 years. Germ-line truncating mutations were fied. No significant evidence of a POE was found. Larger studies are needed detected in 8 and 5 different cancer predisposing genes in each affected sub- to confirm findings. Possible information on genotype and other modifying ject, respectively, but not in the healthy sib (p=0.0026). Some of them are risk factors might lead to individual risk stratification and surveillance pro- well known cancer players in lung tumors and others are genes previously g Pr 1a 2m .0s 8 in 2 -t Mhe future. identified in other cancer tissues. This study demonstrated for the first time Bi-allelic MSH6 mutations in a case of early onset multiple primary that never-smoker patients with lung adenocarcinoma carry a specific and tumors resembling Lynch and Turcot syndrome private oligogenic combination of germ-line mutations in cancer predispo- G. C. Casalis Cavalchini1, D. Giachino2,3, G. Mandrile2,3, I. Borelli1,4, M. Micheletti1, T. sing genes. Exome sequencing of another pair of sibs with slightly later age Venesio5, M. De Marchi2,3, B. Pasini1,4; onset is ongoing. These findings, if replicated with further studies, support 1Medical Genetics Unit, AO Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy, the hypothesis of an oligogenic nature of early onset common cancers. 2Medical Genetics Unit, San Luigi University Hospital, Orbassano, Italy, 3Department of 
P12 .080-M Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 4Department of Medical Lynch Syndrome in the Israeli population Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 5MedicalUnit of Pathology, Institute for Cancer Y. Goldberg1, I. Kedar2, N. Halpern1, M. Plesser1, A. Hubert1, L. Kaduri1, T. Hamburger1, Research and Treatment Genetics Unit, AO Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, M. Sagi3, I. Lerer3, A. Nissan4, H. Goldshmidt5, I. Solar6, R. Geva7, H. Strul8, G. Rosner9, H. Candiolo, Italy. Baris2,10, T. Peretz1, Z. Levi10,11, R. Kariv9; ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 253ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Multiple primary tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, uterus, ovaries, cen- c.1187G>A (p.G396D) variant and was diagnosed as MAP syndrome. Pre- tral nervous system and other organs are hallmarks of Lynch syndrome, dictive test for relatives unveiled an unexpected finding, we found one of caused by heterozygous germline mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) her sons with an apparent wild type sequence. Further analysis evidenced genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PM
S2 . Bi-allelic mutations of the same genes a large deletion comprising exon 4-16 in both mother and son. Breakpoint have been associated with a rare childhood cancer syndrome characterized characterization of this deletion allowed us to precisely define this alterati- by hematological malignancies, sarcomas, brain and gastrointestinal tumors on as c.348+33_*64+146del4285insTA with a precise size deletion of 4,285 together with cafè-au-lait spots resembling Neurofibromatosis 1. Here we kb. The same deletion has been published in other two unrelated families report on a female patient who developed multiple primary tumors between from French and Portuguese origin suggesting a founder effect. Large rear- 21 and 27 years of age including two metachronous colorectal cancers, a rangements at MUTYH locus are rare although probably under-diagnosed. fillodes tumour of the breast, a glioblastoma and a clear cell carcinoma of Based on these findings we recommend first, to include MUTYH gene in the the ovaries. Genetic testing identified two germline heterozygote MSH6 testing strategy for LS and second, to test for MUTYH large rearrangements mutations: a frameshift mutation (c.1610_1613delAGTA) inherited from in heterozygous cases after whole gene sequencing, as well as in apparent the father and a suspected deleterious missense mutation (p.Arg1076His) homozygous cases. 
P12 .085-S inherited from the mother. No T
P53 , MLH1 or MSH2 mutations were found. Male breast cancer in the Netherlands: uptake and outcome of BRCA Microsatellite analysis revealed instability of BAT26 and BAT40 in both the testing. Results of study the Dutch Breast Cancer Research Group colon and the ovarian carcinomas. The MLH1, MSH2 and PM
S2  proteins sho- (BOOG 2009-04) in collaboration with the EORTC 10085 study. wed nuclear staining in all specimens while MSH6 was completely absent in C. J. van Asperen1, N. Dijkstra2, P. J. M. van Hees1, W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams3, J. C. tumor and normal cells, including the fillodes tumor of the breast and the Oosterwijk4, M. G. E. Ausems5, R. A. Oldenburg6, M. A. Adank7, E. W. Blom8, M. Ruijs9, T. normal mucosa of the colon. Germline mutations in the MMR genes, either A. M. van Os10, L. A. M. Janssen1, C. van Deurzen11, S. Roshani11, J. W. M. Martens6, C. P. mono-allelic or bi-allelic, can therefore underlie a wide spectrum of cancer Schroder4; syndromes characterized by variable age at onset and severity of the cancer 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2BOOG Study Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3RadboudUMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4UMCG, Groningen, risk. Development of multiple primary tumors in young adults appears to be Netherlands, 5UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, suggestive for the presence of bi-allelic mutations of the MMR genes. 
P12 .083-S 7VUMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, 9NKI, Amsterdam, Constitutional epimutation of MLH1 gene coexisting with a genomic Netherlands, 10AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 11Dept. of Pathology, ErasmusMC, deletion in Lynch Syndrome Rotterdam, Netherlands. G. Cini1, M. G. Tibiletti2, P. Sala3, E. Giacomini1, M. Quaia1, A. Chiaravalli2, I. Carnevali2, A. Background: Viel1; 1CRO Aviano National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy, 2Circolo Hospital-University of In male breast cancer (MBC) the prevalence of BRCA1/2 mu- Insubria, Varese, Italy, 3National Cancer Institute, Milano, Italy. tations varies considerably between countries. In the Netherlands data were collected of all MBC patients diagnosed in the last 20 years. The nationally mismatch repair MLH1 agreed criteria for DNA testing are rather broad, implying that many MBC A few Lynch Syndrome patients display constitutional epimutations of the cases with or without a family history for breast cManectehro hdasv:e been tested. genes. Two models of epimutations have been hy- Aim of this study is to get more insight in the percentage of BRCA1/2 muta- pothesized: the “primary” type arises spontaneously and is reversible bet- tions among an unselected cohort of MBC patients. All diagnosed ween generations; the “secondary” type is caused by an unknown cis-acting MBC patients between 1989-20R0e9s u(lnt=s:1 487) were linked to databases of genetic-based alteration, with a classical Mendelian autosomal dMoLmHi1n ant all clinical genetic centers. Data of BRCA testing, family history and tumor inheritance pattern. characteristics were collected. 334 (22%) of MBC patients were We report here a case with a heritable large genomic deletion of as- tested for BRCA1/2. Ten (3%) BRCA1, 51 (15%) BRCA2 mutations were sociated with constitutional promoter methylation of the same gene. Both identified and also 7 (2%) variants of uncertain significance (VUS). At least aberrations were found by MLPA analyses in a patient with colorectal and one first or second degree relative with breast cancer <50 yr was seen in endometrial cancers (30 and 40 years), displaying MSI-H and loss of the 80% of BRCA1, 20% of BRCA2 and 6% of noCno-BnRcCluAs1io/2n :M BC patients. Pre- MLH1 protein. They were also detecMteLdH i1n three other affected relatives and liminary studies did show that the majority (86%) of BRCA associated MBC in tumors. were ductal carcinomas of no special type. Roughly one fifth We have explored the link between deletion and methylation by diffe- of unselected MBC patients had undergone DNA testing, in 18% of these a rent molecular approaches. The deletion of 997bp included the ATG codon, BRCA mutation was found. Most striking family histories were seen in BR- exon 1 and part of intron 1. Bisulfite sequencing demonstrated that CpG- CA1 families, whereas the majority of BRCA2 MBC patients had no strong methylation was present on the MdLelHe1ted allele and involved both flanking family history. Based on our results and previous studies genetic testing for sequences. As expected, a lymphoblastoid cell line obtained from the pro- BRCA1/2 should be recommended for any MBC case, regardless of family band expressed about half of the transcript levels, suggesting that the history for breast cancer. 
P12 .086-M mutated/methylated allele was completely silenMcLedH.1 Treatments with the Role of MAP/Microtubule Affinity Regulating Kinase 4 in the demethylating agent 5-AzaC was not able to revert the methylation status of regulation of cell cycle progression and cytoskeleton dynamics the CpG analyzed and had only a MlitLtlHe1 impact on expression. D. Rovina1, L. Fontana1, L. Monti1, C. Novielli1, N. Panini2, S. M. Sirchia1, E. Erba2, I. In conclusion, in this family with a classical autosomal dominant pattern, Magnani1, L. Larizza1; we have obtained evidences that hypermethylation is not an indepen- 1Medical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, dent event, but it is induced by a so far unknown mechanism related to the Milano, Italy, 2Flow Cytometry Unit, IRCCS, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario presence of the concurrent deletion. Negri, Milano, Italy. 
P12 .084-M Appearances deceive twice. Lynch-like syndrome ends up being MUTYH-associated polyposis. Apparent homozygous MUTYH mutation ends up being compound heterozygous with a large deletion MAP/microtubule affinity regulating kinase 4 (MARK4) is a serine-threonine A. Castillejo1, E. Hernández-Illán2, S. Oltra3, M. I. Castillejo1, V. M. Barberá1, A. B. kinase that phosphorylates and regulates MAP proteins. MARK4 differs from Sanchez-Heras4, J. L. Soto1; the other members of the MARK protein family, for encoding two isoforms 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 2Research (MARK4L and MARK4S) differentially expressed in the nervous system, and Laboratory, Alicante University Hospital, Alicante, Spain, 3Genetics Unit, La Fe University for the peculiar sub-cellular localisation at the centrosome and the midbody. Hospital, Valencia, Spain, 4Hereditary Cancer Unit, Elche University Hospital, Elche, In order to better define the role of MARK4 in cell cycle and cytoskeleton Spain. dynamics, we performed cytofluorimetric analysis of fibroblasts and glioma cells, showing that MARK4 is expressed throughout the cell cycle and is preferentially activated during mitosis and cytokinesis. Using the same cell Significant phenotypic similarities among Lynch syndrome (LS) and MU- system we demonstrated the role of MARK4 in cell cycle progression and TYH-associated polyposis (MAP) has been reported. cytoskeleton regulation by knockdown and overexpression experiments. We describe a family suspicious of having LS. A 69 years old female dia- Upon MARK4S silencing, fibroblasts and glioma cells display altered mor- gnosed of an endometrial cancer (T1N0M0) and right CRC (T3N0M0) with phology, matched with a reduction in proliferation rate and mitotic fraction. multiple polyps at ages 60 and 65, respectively. Endometrial tumor had loss In addition, silenced cells show duplicated centrosomes positioned apically of MLH1 and PM
S2  expression, MSI, no BRAF_V600E mutation, absence of to the nucleus, a feature typical of the G1/S phase transition. Overexpression MLH1 methylation, and KRAS_G12C mutation. No pathogenic variant was of MARK4L or MARK4S reduced the density of the microtubule network, found in the MLH1 mutation screening and MAP suspicion was considered. confirming microtubules as the main target of MARK4. Furthermore in fi- MUTYH testing was approached by Sanger sequencing screening of recur- 254 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, bITroAbLlaYst |s WMAWRKW4L.E wSaHs fGou.nOdR toG colocalise with vimentin and to reorganise rent variants at exons 7 and 13. Patient did show homozygous pattern forABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index intermediate filaments. Overexpression of kinase-dead mutants indicated kin locus at 1q32.1 should be considered as novel prognostic markers with that the effects on both cytoskeleton compartments are due to MARK4 ki- potential clinical utility. 
P12 .089-S nase activity. The overall data highlight MARK4 as a key component in the Germline variants and immunotherapy response in advanced regulation of MT dynamics, demonstrate its role in cell cycle progression, melanoma particularly at the G1/S transition, and point to vimentin as a new plausible C. Adaniel, J. Rendleman, D. Polsky, R. Berman, R. Shapiro, A. Heguy, Y. Shao, I. Osman, A. M 
P1 A 2R .0K 84 7 in -Steractor. Pavlick, T. Kirchhoff; New York University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States. Multiple primary melanoma (MPM) as a valid criterion for genetic assessment : an Italian IMI multi-center study W. Bruno1, P. Ghiorzo1, L. Pastorino1, F. Ayala2, V. De Giorgi3, F. Gensini4, M. Mandalà5, C. Menin6, S. Osella Abate7, G. Palmieri8, M. Rodolfo9, A. Ronco10, G. Spadola11, M. Tibiletti12, BACKGROUND: Ipilimumab-based immunotherapy has substantially in- P. Queirolo13, G. Bianchi14, IMI collaborators (Italian Melanoma Intergroup); creased survival for patients with advanced melanoma, however, the benefit 1Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Genoa University, Genoa, is observed only in a small portion of treated patients. It is highly plausible, Italy, 2Naples Cancer Institute, Naples, Italy, 3Department of Dermatology, University yet completely unexplored, that germline genetic factors modulate immu- of Florence, Florence, Italy, 4Clinical Physiopathology Department , Florence University, notherapy outcome. In this study we performed whole-exome sequencing Florence, Italy, 5Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy, 6Veneto Oncology Institute - IRCCS, Padua, Italy, 7Turin University, Turin, Italy, 8Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry (WES) to discover novel germline determinants of response to ipilimumab. - National Research Council, Sassari, Italy, 9Department of Experimental Oncology, METHODS: Blood samples were collected from >60 metastatic melanoma National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy, 10Presidio Sanitario Gradenigo, Turin, Italy, patients treated with ipilimumab at the New York University Cancer Cen- 11Melanoma and muscle-cutaneous sarcomas Division, European Oncology Institute, ter. WES was performed on objective responders (OR) and non-responders Milan, Italy, 12Ospedale di Circolo-Università dell‘Insubria, Varese, Italy, 13Medical (NR), defined by immune-related response criteria, using the Nextera plat- Oncology, IRCCS San Martino - National Cancer Research Institute, Genoa, Italy, form (Illumina) at average 30x coverage. A novel method for testing the as- 14Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Genoa University, IRCCS San sociation between OR and NR by variant, gene and enrichment of molecular Martino-National Cancer Institute, Genoa, Italy. networks was implemented. Gene-Set Enrichment Analysis and Pathway Studio were used to test the pathway associations. RESULTS: The prelimi- nary data comparing an initial subset of 30 ORs and 30 NRs identified si- The prevalence of mutations in the CDKN2A melanoma candidate gene gnificant associations with ipilimumab response for several loci including correlates with number of affected family members and number of MPM/ RP
S6 KB1 (p=0.001) and LNX2 (0.001). In addition, the pathway analysis neoplastic events. International referral guidelines for genetic counselling showed significant associations for SMAD 3 (p=0.04) and interleukin 1 and testing (GenoMEL) indicate that in low melanoma incidence populati- (p=0.04) related pathways. CONCLUSION: Preliminary findings provide pro- ons individuals developing two melanomas may be candidate for conside- mising evidence supporting the presence of germline genetic factors asso- ration for genetic testing, even in the absence of family history (FH). Aims ciated with response to ipilimumab therapy. The data suggest in part a role of this multicenter case-control study performed within the Italian Melano- for immune-related pathways. As we continue to accrue patients, we antici- ma Intergroup were to verify the likelihood to identify mutations carriers pate an increase in the analytical power of the discovery phase and also an in MPM vs single primary melanoma (SPM) patients recruited, to update expanded validation of the current findings, suggesting for the first time that the current Italian shared protocol for hereditary melanoma (SIGU-ONC re- germline genetic factors modulate immunotherapy response. commendations, Bianchi et al, 2004) and to include the presence of MPM, 
P12 .090-M in the absence of family history, as a criterion. Despite regional differences Functional consequences of cancer associated variants in six human (i.e. founder mutations), 118/587 (20,1%) of the recruited MPM patients microRNAs (including those with melanoma FH) and 52/443 (11,7% ) of sporadic MPM I. Torruella-Loran, A. Gallego, I. Balcells, E. Garcia-Ramallo, Y. Espinosa-Parrilla; Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Barcelona, Spain. harbored CDKN2A mutations, suggesting that the development of MPM (2 or more events) even in the absence of FH can be considered a criterion for genetic testing on national basis. The presence of MPM cases in a family was confirmed as a strong mutation predictive parameter, while CDKN2A muta- MicroRNAs are crucial post-transcriptional gene regulators whose strong tions in sporadic SPM was under 5%. The search for the MITF 
E318 K muta- sequence conservation leads to predict that nucleotide changes in these tion, recently identified as a novel intermediate risk allele, showed that the molecules may be related to disease. We analyzed human microRNA genetic mutation was associated with the risk of sporadic MPM (3,7% of sporadic variation and its possible involvement in cancer through a functional ap- MPM compared to 0.8% of SPM), underscoring the importance of the MITF proach. From 284 common SNPs (MAF>0.05) located in 254 out of 1872 mutation to the burden of MPM susceptibility. microRNAs (miRBase Release20.0), 191 were in the precursor microR- 
P12 .088-M NA (2.0 SNP/kb), 58 in the mature microRNA (1.5 SNP/kb) and 35 in the Genetic variants in the interleukin locus at 1q32.1 as markers of microRNA seed region (1.8 SNP/kb). Five of these SNPs, which were pre- melanoma survival viously associated with cancer, were selected for further studies. Three of J. Rendleman, C. Adaniel, E. Kern, N. Fleming, M. Krogsgaard, D. Polsky, R. Berman, R. them (rs12416605, rs35770269 and rs2910164) were in the seed region Shapiro, A. Pavlick, Y. Shao, I. Osman, T. Kirchhoff; of miR-938, miR-449c and miR-146a, respectively; one (rs11614913) in the New York University, New York, NY, United States. mature miR-196a-2 and the last one (rs3746444) in the mature miR-499b and seed region of miR-499a. Target gene predictions using TargetScan for these microRNA variants revealed that major alleles had a larger number of Interleukins play a critical role in immune regulation of tumor development. predicted target genes than minor ones and very little overlap was observed Because melanoma is a highly immunogenic cancer, and its progression of- between both alleles in all cases. Furthermore, morphological differences in ten correlates with immune-related factors, in this study we have tested wh- HeLa cells were observed between the rs3746444 A and G alleles (miR-499a ether inherited genetic variants in interleukin pathways affect the clinical seed) after transfection experiments. Also different expression levels bet- outcomes of melanoma patients. We performed a two-stage association ana- ween the C and T rs11614913 alleles (mature miR-196a-2) were detected lysis of 94 SNPs tagging 32 interleukin genes in 1,200 melanoma patients, by RT-qPCR. We are currently investigating the effect of these variants in the ascertained at the New York University Medical Center between 2001-2013. spectrum of genes regulated by the studied microRNAs through transcripto- The two stages (discovery and validation) were matched by tumor characte- me and functional experiments. Different alleles of common microRNA SNPs ristics, age, and gender. Multivariate Cox regression models tested the asso- associated with cancer could lead to changes in microRNA expression and ciations with recurrence-free and overall survival (RFS and OS, respective- affect their gene regulatory networks. ly), including age, gender, stage, thickness, ulceration status, anatomic site, 
P12 .091-S and histological subtypes as covariates. A region within 1q32.1 containing The expression of mature microRNAs let-7a, miR-155, miR-205 in I
L10 , I
L19 , I
L20 , I
L24  was significantly associated with melanoma OS. Speci- non-small cell lung cancer and tumor-adjacent normal tissue fically, two SNPs in I
L10  (rs3024493 and rs2222202) showed the strongest A. Shikeeva1,2, T. Kekeeva1, L. Zavalishina2, Y. Andreeva2, G. Frank2; associations with OS (HR=5.82, 95% CI=2.08-16.3, p=0.0009; HR=0.47, 95% 1Research Center of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. CI=0.28-0.80, p=0.006 respectively). The association between rs3024493 and OS replicated among both stages (stage 1 p=0.028, stage 2 p=0.017). This study has identified novel associations of germline genetic risk variants in an interleukin locus at 1q32.1 with melanoma outcomes (rs3024493), Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the major group of lung cancers. Mi- and validated the associations from previous smaller studies that showed croRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs that play a crucial germline variants in I
L10  (rs2222202) associate with worse OS. Pending role in the regulation of mRNA translation and degradation. miRNA expres- multi-institutional meta-analysis and further genetic and functional investi- sion is affected in many cancers. The expression levels of miRNAs let-7a, gations, this study strongly suggests that gE eS rmH lG ine 2 v0 ar1 ia4 n t| s M inI tL hA e N int, e I rT leA u-LY |m WiRW-15W5, .mESiRH-2G05.O inR tuGmor and adjacent normal tissue at 2 and 5 cm2 fr5o5mABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index tumor were measured by real-time PCR with subsequent quantification mutations (one novel) in tRNA-thr altered (mt)-tRNA secondary structure using a 2-ddCT method. Obtained results were then analyzed for association and one novel mutation occurred in the anticodon loop of tRNA-gly. with clinical-morphological parameters: age, cancer stage, and tumor cells In agreement with recent high-throughput screenings of nuclear DNAs, the differentiation. The expression of let-7a was significantly decreased in tu- rate of somatic mitochondrial mutations in neuroblastoma is low. Rare and mors comparing to adjacent tissue at both 2 and 5 cm. Let-7a and miR-155 novel germ-line variants in CYTB, ND1 and (mt)-tRNA loci might be impor- levels in tumor were substantially lower than in adjacent tissue in patients tant contributors to HR neuroblastoma development. 
P12 .095-S under 63 years. The expression of let-7a and miR-155 in tumor was also A heterozygous deletion in BUB1B predisposing to pediatric cancer, suppressed in patients with III-IV stages of NSCLC. Besides that patients outside the context of classic Mosaic Variegated Aneuploidy syndrome with poorly differentiated NSCLC had significantly lower let-7a level in tu- M. Jongmans, S. Bemelmans, J. Loonen, G. van de Zande, N. Hoogerbrugge, R. Kuiper, R. mor comparing to adjacent tissue. The levels of let-7a, miR-155, miR-205 de Voer; were different even in adjacent tissue, in patients with differentiated tumors Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. it was higher than in the group with poorly differentiated tumors. The study BUB1B showed that let-7a expression is suppressed in tumors comparing to adja- cent normal tissue at 2 and 5 cm from tumor. The decrease of let-7a and Biallelic mutations in cause MBoUsBa1icB Variegated Aneuploidy (MVA) miR-155 is distinctive for younger patients, III-IV stages of NSCLC, and poor syndrome, characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, intellectual tumor cells differentiation. Altogether these findings consider miRNAs let- disability and cancer predisposition. encodes a kinase involved in 7 Pa 1 2an .0d 9 m 3-i SR-155 as markers of unfavorable prognosis for NSCLC patients. spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) function. We describe a boy with PDD- A germline mismatch repair mutation possibly leading to a de novo NOS who developed acute lymphoblastic leukemia at age 9 years and pri- NF1 germline mutation mary diffuse leptomeningeal gliomatosis at age 17 years. His father, aged C. Bracco1,2, I. Borelli1,2, M. Micheletti2, D. Martorana3, E. Grosso2, B. Pasini1,2; 54 years, had aB hUeBa1dB circumference at -2 SD and developed a brain tumor at 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Torino, Italy, 2Medical Genetics the age of 19 years. They both were found to carry a monoallelic deletion of Unit, AO Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy, 33Molecular Genetics exons 9-23 of . Karyotyping of EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell Unit, University-Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy. lines (LCL) from both father and son, revealed an enrichment of aneuploid cells (10% in both) and a significant increase in premature sister chromatid separation compared to controls. Since these two patients presented with We report on a female patient diagnosed with breast, colon, and endometri- features of the MVA syndrome, but did not present BthUeB f1uBll -blown pheno- al cancer at the age of 38, 40, and 41 respectively, presenting with café au lait type, we hypothesized that this could be explained by BUBR1 protein ex- macules, multiple neurofibromas and axillary freckling. pression levels below 50%. To study this hypothesis, mRNA and BU- With respect to the family history, her paternal grandmother died at the age BR1 protein expressionB UleBv1eBls were measured in EBV-transformed LCLs of of 63 for a colon cancer diagnosed when she was 35, whereas her father died the two cases. Expression levelBs UwBe1rBe ~50% and, therefore, in concordance at the age of 42 because of an accident. with a deletion of one allele. Our findings suggest a role for hetero- As the proband met the criteria for Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), analysis of the zygous germline mutations in in cancer predisposition, outside the NF1 gene was performed. A frameshift mutation (c.7096_7101delAACTTT) context of classic MVA syndrome. An explanation might be found in digenic was identified confirming the clinical diagnosis. inheritance. To study this hypothesis, we will perform exome sequencing on The parents showed no clinical signs of NF1 nor did the two proband‘s sib- germline DNA of the son and initially we will search for aberrations in SAC lings, which tested negative. genes in particular. 
P12 .096-M Because of the co-occurrence of endometrial and colon cancer in our pati- Somatic mosaicism and transmission of an MSH2 pathogenic variant ent, and the presence of an early-onset colon cancer in the paternal grand- in a parent of a Lynch Syndrome proband mother, expression of mismatch repair protein and Microsatellite Instability S. A. M. Taylor1,2, M. J. Somerville1,2, S. Tancredi2, L. Vicen2, C. Handford1, D. Gilchrist1, S. (MSI) were analyzed on endometrial and colon cancers. L. Hume1,2; Both tissue showed loss of staining for the MSH2-MSH6 heterodimer and 1Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2Molecular Diagnostics high MSI, therefore analysis of MSH2 was performed, leading to the identi- Laboratory, Genetic Laboratory Services, Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, AB, fication of a nonsense mutation of exon 2 (c.289C>T, p.Gln97*), consistent Canada. with the presence of the Lynch syndrome. As women with NF1 have a fivefold risk of developing premenopausal bre- ast cancer, no further analysis was performed. We describe the finding of somatic mosaicism for a pathogenic variant of the Although it was not possible to analyze any member of the paternal family, MSH2 gene in the parent of a proband with Lynch Syndrome. The proband an intriguing possibility is that the inherited germinal mutation affecting was diagnosed with a colorectal tumor at age 50 that was immunodeficient the mismatch repair system led to a de novo NF1 germinal mutation in our for MSH2 and MSH6. Sequencing and MLPA analysis of MSH2, MSH6 and patient. MLH1 in a blood sample revealed the presence of a heterozygous pathoge- 
P12 .094-M nic variant in the MSH2 gene, c.920_923deITCAG (p.Val307Glufs*23). The Whole genome sequencing of mitochondrial DNA in low and high-risk father was found to have a low level of mosaicism, <10%, for this variant in neuroblastoma patients F. M. Calabrese1, P. Pignataro1, F. Totaro1, G. Acierno1, F. Cimmino1, R. Gallesio2, G. Tonini3, DNA from blood. This finding was confirmed on a buccal sample from him L. Longo2, A. Iolascon1, G. Gasparre4, M. Capasso1; which showed a greater proportion of the pathogenic variant, ~20%. The 1University of Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 2IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genova, father had been diagnosed with prostate cancer at age 70 and his family hi- Italy, 3Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica (IRP), Padova, Italy, 4Universitario S. Orsola- story is not suggestive of Lynch Syndrome. The mother’s sample was negati- Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. ve and parentage was confirmed using microsatellite loci. BRCA1/2 analysis was negative in the proband’s sister who was diagnosed with uterine and ovarian cancer at age 37. She was found to be a carrier of this MSH2 patho- Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations may contribute to tumor initiation genic variant. The results in this family suggest the pathogenic variant arose and progression. mtDNA mutations have never been considered as causati- as an early postzygotic mutation in the father of the proband. Documented ve or secondary events for neuroblastoma progression. We sequenced 36 incidents of de novo mutation of the mismatch repair genes (MMR) in Lynch full-length mitochondrial genomes belonging to 16 low-risk (LR) and 20 syndrome are rare. Our findings lend further support to the suggestion that high-risk (HR) Italian neuroblastomas by Sanger method. HNPCC-like histopathological characteristics of tumours in addition to re- Mutations were selected considering variability <0.01 (SiteVar algorithm) vised Bethesda criteria be used to improve ascertainment of individuals and with respect to 14,144 mitochondrial genomes from healthy individuals. To families at risk of Lynch Syndrome. 
P12 .097-S determine whether the selected mutations were somatically acquired, we A study to investigate the genetic basis of multiple primary tumours sequenced the matched germ-line DNAs. J. Whitworth1,2, J. Hoffman1, C. Chapman1, K. Ong1, F. Lalloo3, D. G. Evans3, E. Maher4,1,2; We found 3 somatic missense mutations in CO1, CO2, CYTB genes in HR 1Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2University of patients and 1 in (mt)-tRNA gene in LR patients. Moreover, we identified Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, 47 germ-line mutations: 5 were novel (2 missense and 2 tRNA mutations Manchester, United Kingdom, 4University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. in HR and 1 insertion in LR patients); 10 (83.3%) rare missense mutations occurred in HR and 2 (16.7%) in LR patients. Genes with higher germ-line mutation frequency in HR patients than in LR ones included CYTB (20.0% Multiple primary malignant tumours (MPMT) are frequently taken as an in- vs 6.2%), ND1 (10.0% vs 0.0%), and (mt)-tRNA (25.0% vs 12.5%). All CYTB dicator of potential inherited cancer susceptibility and occur at appreciable a 2n 5d 6ND1 mutations in HR patients were missense. E T Sh He h Gig 2he 0s 1t r 4a t |e Mof Ir La Are N , fIrTeAquLeYn c|y W boWthW am.EoSngH uGn.sOeleRcGted cancer patients and referrals to cancer mutations was found in mt-tRNA gene (19.4% of cases). In HR patients, two genetics services. Analysis of a referral based series of 212 MPMT cases sho-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index NDRG4 wed that only around 40% of those who underwent genetic testing and 20% neoplasia and there have been proposed that it might be a tumor suppres- of referrals overall were identified as having a pathogenic germline mutati- sor gene. Additionally, studies haveN DdeRmG4onstrated that may have a on conferring predisposition to malignancy. Comparison of individuals who role in cell survival, tumor invasion and angiogenesis in tumors. We believe tested positive and negative revealed considerable overlap between the two that this homozygous mutation in may be a good candidate for the groups with respect to clinical characteristics indicative of an inherited can- causative variant of the autosomal recessive form of IM in the family studied cer syndrome, suggesting that many of the latter group also have a genetic aFninda wncei aplr oSpuopspeo trhta: t it should be investigated in other cases of autosomal basis. Analysis of PTEN and T
P53 , however, did not reveal any significant recessive infantile myofibromatosis. variants. Failure to detect a germline mutation may result from mosaicism CNPq and Capes. 
P12 .100-M for a mutation in a known inherited cancer gene, an unusual phenotype Next-generation panel based characterisation of breast/ovarian that leads to the relevant gene being overlooked or mutation in a novel in- cancer genetic predisposition herited cancer gene. To address these possible explanations, further cases R. Janavicius1,2, V. Rudaits3, L. Griskevicius1; are being identified and next generation sequencing techniques applied to 1Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics Hematology, Oncology and Transfusion blood samples from the series. Initial analysis is being performed using the Medicine Center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2State Research Institute Innovative Medicine Ilumina TruSight cancer panel (of known inherited cancer genes) with sub- Center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Dept. of sequent whole exome or genome sequencing if no mutation is identified. Tu- Oncogynecology, Vilnius, Lithuania. mour samples will also be analysed for loss of heterozygosity at the relevant locus where putative mutations are found. Recruitment is currently open. 
P12 .098-M BACKGROUND. Genetic predisposition to breast and/or ovarian cancer is Colorectal cancer susceptibility alleles as a possible explanation for largerly confined to mutations in BRCA1/2 genes, although rarer mutations phenotype variance in MUTYH associated polyposis (MAP) patients in other known genes (e.g. T
P53 , PTEN, STK11, CDH1, PALB2, BRI
P1 , CHEK2 S. W. ten Broeke1, L. Thomas2, S. Horpaopan3, I. Spier3, T. van Wezel1, F. J. Hes1, C. Tops1, H. F. A. Vasen1, J. T. Wijnen1, J. J. Houwing-Duistermaat1, J. R. Sampson2, S. Aretz3, M. etc.) are also important. Massivelly parralel (or next-generation, NGS) rese- Nielsen1; quencing technology is attractive for identifing cancer predsposing mutati- 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Bonn ons in known genes (panels) and discover new associations. University, Bonn, Germany. METHODS. We aimed to better characterize cancer predisposing landsca- Introduction. MUTYH pe in clinicaly selected 96 breast and 96 ovarian cancer cases (with strong family history or early age at diagnosis and negative for previously tested Biallelic mutation carriers have a predisposition to BRCA1/2 genes mutations) by perfoming NGS based analysis of 94 genes colorectal carcinoma (CRC) and polyp development, but the severity of the previously associated with both common (e.g., breast, colorectal) and rare phenotype is highly variable. We investigated whether this can be explained cancers (TruSight Cancer Nextera Custom hybridization-based target en- by the presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which have pre- richment) on MiSeq (Illumina). VariantStudio software was used for anota- vMioeuthsloyd b. een implicated in the susceptibility to CRC and polyps in genome- tion and filtering of genetic variants. wide association studies (GWAS). RESULTS. Of 192 tested subjects, 8% carried germline loss-of-function mu- 154 MAP patients from three countries (UK,NL and DE) were geno- tations (confirmed by Sanger sequencing) in 10 cancer predisposing genes, typed for 17 SNPs previously identified by GWAS. Data were analysed with 3 of them were not previously implicated in hereditary breast/ovarian can- ARNesOuVlAts .a nd cox regression analysis. Homozygotes for the non-risk allele cer predisposition. were used as reference category. CONCLUSION. NGS panel based resequencing is effective way for better cha- A CRC odds ratio (OR) was identified for rs10936599 of 5.101 racterising of cancer predisposition landscape. 
P12 .102-M (95% CI:0.761-34.206) for heterozygotes and 1.403 (CI:0.234-8.415) for Role of inflammatory gene variants in oral cancer in an Indian homozygotes (p=0.022). The CRC OR for rs10795668 in this cohort is 5.470 population (CI: 1.413-21.171) for heterozygotes and 4.684 (CI:1.200-18.289) for ho- M. Banerjee1, M. K. Gupta1, M. Saxena1, N. Sagar1, R. Pant2; mozygotes (p=0.042). For rs961253 heterozygotes an OR for having more 1Molecular & Human Genetics Lab, Department Of Zoology, University Of Lucknow, than 100 polyps of 2.887 (CI:1.274-6.541) was identified, this is 1.041 Lucknow, India, 2Department Of Radiotherapy, Lucknow Cancer Institute, Lucknow, (CI:0.299-3.622) for homozygotes (p=0.021). For two SNPs (rs3802842 India. and rs16892766) previously associated with CRC risk in Lynch patients, a significant pair wise effect on difference in age of diagnosis (of 12 years) wDiassc uidsesniotinfi.ed between patients with zero and more than 1 risk alleles Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the eighth most common cancer (p=0.015). worldwide.Alcohol, tobacco and smoking are well known risk factors for There is evidence for an effect of GWAS SNPs in MAP patients. OSCC. During oral cancer development; inflammation, angiogenesis and However, a larger cohort size is needed to truly determine this effect. Unra- thrombosis are involved which correlate with immune vciezl.l sI Lin-1vRoNlv ed in the velling risk factors - like SNPs - in MAP patients might allow for individual production of cytokines, growth factors and adhILe-s1ioβn molecules. The stuIdLy- r Pi 1sk .s 0t 9ra 9t -i Sfication and personalised surveillance programs in the future. w6as to evaluate associationT oNf Fc-yαtokine gene variants Variable 2 Number of Tandem Repeats (VNTR in intron 2), -511C/T [rs16944], Identification by exome sequencing of a novel homozygous mutation -597G/A [rs1800797] and -308 G/A [rs1800629] with oral cancer in in NDRG4 in a family with infantile myofibromatosis N. D. Linhares1, M. C. M. Freire2, R. G. C. C. L. Cardenas1, H. B. Pena3, M. Bahia4, S. D. J. a north Indian population. Clinical and addiction details of healthy age/sex Pena1,2,3; matched controls (n=140) and OSCC patients (n=77) were recorded after 1Laboratório de Genômica Clínica, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de ethical clearance and consent. DNA was extracted and SNPs genotyped by Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 2Departamento de Bioquímica e Imunologia, polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, (PCR-RFLP). Minor allele frequencies; genotype and allele frequencies were Brazil, 3Laboratório Gene – Núcleo de Genética Médica, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 4Divisão calculated by chi-square (χ2) analysis (SPSS v.15.0). Gene-gene interaction, de Gastroenterologia Pediátrica, Hospital das Clínicas da UFMG, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. pairwise linkage disequilibILr-iu1RmN (, LIDL-)1 bβa sed oILn- 6D’ statistics and correlation cILo-e6f ficient (r2) of frequencies were analyzed using SHEsis (ToNnFli-nαe version). Genotypic frequencies of and while allelic frequency of Infantile myofibromatosis (IM) is a rare disorder characterized by the deve- showed significant association with OSCC (P<0.001). increases lopment of benign tumors in the skin, muscle, bone, and viscera. The inci- risk of OSCC upto 1.68 times in alcoholic subjects. GATI* and GGTII* haploty- dence is 1/150,000 live births and the disease is the most common cause of pes increased the risk up to 2.863 and 38.285 times respectively. This is the fibrous tumors in infancy. Although the identification of mutations in genes first report from India showing the effect of cytokine gene polymorphisms that may causPe DIMGF iRs Bthe firsNtO sTteCpH t3owards the possibility of targeted treat- in OSCC to predict individuals at risk of oral cancer. The knowledge of risk ments, the molecular pathogenesis of IM is still poorly understood. Recently, alleles will enable individuals to take precautionary measures before hand mutations in and have been implicated in families with and prevent or delay the onset of disease. the autosomal dominant forms of IM. We have performed whole-exome se- 
P12 .103-S quencing of a family with a probably autosomal recessive visceral multicen- Referral of ovarian cancer patients to genetic counselling by tric infantile myofibromatosis. We studied twoN bDrRoGth4ers and their healthy oncologists: room for improvement consanguineous parents. In the two brothers we identified a c.511G>C M. T. Ricci1, S. Sciallero2, S. Mammoliti2, A. Pessino2, V. Gismondi1, M. Franiuk1, L. Varesco1; (p.Val171Leu) novel homozygous mutation in NDRG (4N-myc downregula- 1IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Unit of Hereditary Cancer, Genoa, Italy, 2IRCCS AOU San ted gene family member 4). The healthy parents were heterozygous for the Martino-IST, Medical Oncology Unit 1, Genoa, Italy. mutation. Consistent with the phenotype of IM, is a tumor-related gene. Its expression has been shown to beE dSeHcrGea s2e0d 1in4 n u| mMeIrLouAsN ty,p IeTsA oLf Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 257ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Aims and methods: BRCA1/2 mutations occur in 10-15% of ovarian cancer formation, (EGA, TCGA). (OC) patients, regardless of family history. In November 2012 a pilot proto- IPA highlighted that Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) was differential- col was developed by the Unit of Hereditary Cancer (UHC) and the Oncology ly expressed between the two clinical groups and was upregulated in the Service (OS) caring most OC patients in our Institute, to assess the feasibility platinum-sensitive group. Validation studies performed on 31 patient tumor of offering genetic counselling (GC) to all OC women. Oncologists agreed to samples demonstrated a significant difference in PFS between the low and propose GC during their clinics and to refer all interested OC patients by high IRF1 groups (P = 0.027) as well as a distinct difference in the proba- directly arrangBeR aC Aco1n/2tact with UHC. After the first year we evaluated onco- bility of recurrence. In conclusion, we have shown that high levels of IRF1 lRoegsisutlst’s a:dherence to protocol, patients’ compliance with GC and testing, and strongly correlated with increased overall survival in late-stage disease re- prevalence of mutations. gardless of debulking status and grade in those patients who received pla- 104 OC women underwent an oncology visit from November 2012 tinum therapy. 
P12 .106-M to December 2013. Ten patients were excluded because they had GC iBnR tChAe Role of p53 gene in the pathogenesis of Acinar Cell Carcinomas of the past. Only 29 patients (29/94; 31%) were referred to GC; 22/29 attended pancreas GC (76%) and 21/22 had genetic testing (95%). Three pathogenic B. Bernasconi1, N. Sahnane1, D. Furlan1, M. Frattini2, F. Molinari2, S. La Rosa3, A. Vanoli4, mutations were detected (3/21; 14%); among healthy female close relati- F. Sessa1, M. Tibiletti3; ves, seven were tested and three were mutation-positive. Referral was much 1Department of Surgical Morphological Sciences, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy, higher for patients attending the first visit (14/26; 54%) than for follow up 2Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostic, Institute of Pathology, Locarno, Switzerland, 3U.O. patients (15/68; 22%). The main differences in these two settings are the Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale di Circolo - Polo Universitario, Varese, Italy, 4Department of Pathology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. tCiomnec lsuchsieodnusle: (one vs half an hour) and the checklist in the cliniBcaRlC rAecord (including or not family history). Patients’ compliance to GC/testing was high, and mu- tation prevalence was as expected. However, oncologists’ compliance was Introduction: The role of p53 (17p13.1) in the pathogenesis of pancreatic low, mainly because of practical barriers. Efforts are needed to integrate GC- acinar cell carcinomas (ACCs) has not been fully clarified yet. Few studies, focused tools and procedures in oncology practice. mainly using immunohistochemistry (IHC), suggested that p53 is not in- 
P12 .104-M volved in ACCs but molecular data are controversial. Recently, p53 muta- Targeted resequencing approach to investigate the mutational tion and a significant (>50% of cells) p53 nuclear immunoreactivity (IR) landscape associated to platinum resistance in EOC have been reported in 20% and 27% of ACCs, respectively. Aim: To clarify M. Di Marino1, L. Beltrame1, L. Paracchini1, R. Fruscio2, V. Fotia3, T. Grassi2, L. Clivio1, M. the role of p53 in the pathogenesis of ACCs we investigate p53 alterations D‘Incalci1, S. Marchini1; 1IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milano, Italy, 2Clinic of (mutation, methylation, loss and nuclear protein expression) in 44 ACCs Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Milano-Bicocca, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, using different approaches: direct sequencing of exons 5-8, MS-MLPA, FISH Italy, 3Medical Oncology Unit, IRCSS- Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri, Pavia, Italy. and IHC. Results: p53 mutations were found in 8/44 (18%) cases, corre- lated with higher tumor stage (5 cases were at stage IV). In one case, p53 Introduction mutation was observed only in the metastasis of a primary p53 wild-type Despite initial response to first line platinum-based chemo- ACC. Methylation of p53 was observed in only one case. Loss of p53 gene, therapy, more than 80% of high grade serous ovarian cancer patients relap- including 17p13.1 deletion and monosomy of chromosome 17, was found se and develop resistance. The molecular and genetic features involved in in 50% of ACCs and in 4 cases a concomitant mutation was identified. The drug resistance are still unknown. By gene expression profile in a cohort of simultaneous presence of both p53 mutation and loss correlated with worse patients from which matched biopsies were taken at primary surgery (PS-O) prognosis (p=0.001). Conclusions: p53 alterations including mutations and when tumor was sensitive to chemotherapy and at time of relapse (SCR) cytogenetic loss are frequent in ACCs. p53 mutation and loss are correlated when the tumor was resistant, we identified EMT pathway as a key player with higher tumor stage and with worse prognosis. Our results suggest that in tumor relapse (Marchini et al., 2013). Here we investigate the genomic al- p53 is not an early event in ACC tumorigenesis, but it is involved in late pha- tMereatthioondss driving drug resistance by performing targeted DNA resequencing s Pe 1s 2 o .1f c 0a 7n -c Ser progression. on our cohort of SCR and PS-O samples. Do pancreatic cancer patients diagnosed with BRCA1/2 Ashkenazi DNA libraries enriched in a selected panel of 30 genes encom- mutations have less clinical risk factors? passing key players of signal transduction, cell cycle and DNA repair were R. Gershoni-Baruch1, R. Epelbaum2, A. Kurolap3, E. Dagan4; generated using TruSeq Custom Amplicon kit and sequenced on MiSeq (Il- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam HealthCare Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2Institute of lRuemsuinlats). Data were analyzed using a high performance cluster computing Oncology, Rambam HealthCare Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport platform (Cloud4CARE project). Faculty of Medicine, Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 4Department of Nursing, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel. Analysis identified a total of 166 mutations (152 SNPs and 14 In- Dels), of which 51 affecting PS-O and 115 SCR. With a 500X coverage, we oCbosnecrlvuesdio BnRsC A1, BRCA2 and T
P53  mutated in the majority of cases. In addi- tion, the PI3K pathway was found mutated in SCR samples only. Aim: This study investigated the clinical background of Ashkenazi pancrea- Our preliminary results suggest two main conclusions: tic cancer patients, either carriers or non-carriers of any of the three foun- 1- genomic alterations (SNPs or InDels) were more frequent in SCR compa- der Ashkenazi mutation in BRCA1/2 genes namely, 185delAG, 5382insC and red to PS-O; 6174delT. 2- most of the mutations affected genes belonging to DNA and PI3K pa- Methods: Clinical characteristics including age at onset, smoking behaviour, thway. physical activity, BMI, and chronic diseases e.g., hypertension and hyperlipi- 
P12 .105-S demia was available for 90 pancreatic cancer patients, consecutively refer- Transcriptome and pathway analysis identifies IRF1 as a predictor of red to our oncogenetic clinic. progression free and overall survival in ovarian carcinoma Results: Fifteen (16.7%) carried a founder Ashkenazi mutation in either J. Billaud1, J. A. Martignetti2, S. Cohen3, R. Mosig2, R. Halpert1, P. R. Dottino2; BRCA1or BRCA2: of these, nine (60%) carried the 6174delT mutation in BR- 1Qiagen‘s Applications Team, Redwood City, CA, United States, 2Icahn School of Medicine Mount Sinai, New-York, NY, United States, 3Icahn School of Medicine Mount Sinai, New- CA2; five (33.3%) and one (6.7%) harbored the 185delAG and the 5382insC York, CA, United States. mutations in BRCA1, respectively. Carriers compared to non-carriers were diagnosed at 6,1 c±a7r.r5i earnsd 63.0±11.3 years onfo ang-eca, rrersiepresctively (p=0.520); and have higher BMI levels (28.9±7.3 compared to 25.1±4.9; p=0.112). Although, Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC) is the most lethal female reproductive not significant smoked less than (3, 20% compared to tract malignancy. Most patients present with advanced stage disease and 28, 37.3%; p=0.197), were less physically active (3, 20% compared to 34, the cornerstone of treatment is surgical debulking followed by platinum- 45%; p=0.092), suffered less from the chronic diseases, hypertension (3, based chemotherapy. The major contributor to the high fatality-to-case ratio 20% compared to 31, 41%; p=0.072); and hyperlipidemia (0 compared to is chemoresistant disease. We sought to identify candidate biomarkers/pa- 11, 14.7%; p=0.080). thways which could distinguish between platinum sensitivity and platinum Conclusion: Our observation revealed that although not significant, non- resistance and test their prognostic ability. Ovarian tumor samples from pa- carriers tend to have more known risk factors for the development of pan- tients with primary high-grade serous ovarian cancer were divided into two c Pr 1e 2a .t 1ic 0 c 8a -n Mcer compared to BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. groups based on response to platinum status. Transcriptome analysis was Germline FH mutations presenting with Phaeochromocytoma performed using RNA-Seq and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used G. R. Clark1, M. Sciacovelli2, E. Gaude2, D. M. Walsh3, G. Kirby4,3, M. A. Simpson5, R. C. to explore differences between these two sets of samples. Findings were va- Trembath5, E. R. Woodward3, C. Frezza2, E. R. Maher1; lidated using qRT-PCR. Survival analysis was performed in two independent 258 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG sample sets: gene expression data (GEO); relapse-free/overall survival in-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 1University of Cambridge, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2University of Cambridge, MRC Cancer Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3University of Birmingham, Centre for Rare Diseases, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4West Midlands rently sporadic PHEO /PGL were screened.Germline mutations were inve- Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United stigated by using direct sequencing for point mutations in RET, VHL, SDHB, Kingdom, 5Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Kings‘ College London, London, SDHD and TMEM, and multiplex ligation - dependent probe amplification United Kingdom. for gross deletions in VHL gene. Results: In 30/200 (15%) probands, germ-line variants were identified: 12 heterozygous germline mutations ( 7 novel nonsense: W218X; frameshift: At least a third of patients with phaeochromocytoma (PCC) or paraganglioma c.661delG, p.Asp221ThrfsX27; splicing:c.424-12delTCTT; missense: R116M; (PGL) harbour an underlying germline mutation in a known PCC/PGL gene. frameshift: c. 636_637 ins A, p. Met 213Asn fsX8 and missense: H132R; spli- Mutations in SDHx genes (SDHB, SDHD, SDHD and SDHA) encoding a com- cing: c. 424-1insG -7 delA ) of the SDHB gene, 10 in VHL◦1 novel, V84M, ponent of the TCA cycle, succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), are a major cause in 3 families ◦, 6 variants in SDHD, 1 in RET and 1 in TMEM gene. Familiy of inherited PCC/PGL. SDHB mutations are also associated with inherited members were also tested. Most of the patients with mutation in SDHB gene renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Inactivation of SDH in tumour cells results in were found to have malignant PHEO/PGL. Patients with mutations in VHL, abnormalities of cellular metabolism associated with activation of hypoxic RET and TMEM genes developed PHEO. gene response pathways and epigenetic alterations (e.g. DNA methylation). Conclusion:The most commonly mutated gene was SDHB, which carries the Similar findings have recently been reported in cases with mutations the FH highest risk of malignancy. Our patients with extra-adrenal disease needs gene, which encodes the TCA cycle component directly downstream of SDH, careful follow-up, since they are in higher risk for the development of meta- fumarate hydratase. However, the clinical phenotype of germline mutations stases or novel adrenal/extra-adrenal PHEO. The patients with VHL mutati- in SDHx genes and FH is usually distinct with FH mutations classically as- on (V84M) is apparently classified as 2C. These patients may develop some sociated with hereditary cutaneous and uterine leiomyomatosis and renal other tumors than PHEO. cell carcinoma. In order to identify potential novel PCC/PGL predisposition 
P12 .111-S genes we undertook an exome resequencing study in a case of childhood Post-transcriptional regulation of PHOX2B gene expression PCC. After identifying a candidate FH missense mutation (p.Cys434Tyr) T. Bachetti1, E. Di Zanni1, R. Ravazzolo1,2, I. Ceccherini1; 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Giannina Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, we sequenced FH in a further 71 patients with PCC, PGL or head and neck 2Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmogy, Genetics, Maternal and paraganglioma (HNPGL) and identified a further candidate missense muta- Child Health and CEBR, Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy. tion (p.Glu53Lys). We then performed In vitro analyses and demonstrated that both missense mutations were associated with elevated intracellular fumarate levels compared to a wild-type rescue construct. These findings Neuroblastoma (NB) is one of the most frequent and severeP sHoOliXd2 tBumors in (a) confirm that germline FH mutations may present, albeit rarely, with PCC childhood. ALK or PGL and (b) extend the clinical phenotype associated with FH mutations Mutations in the genes coding for the transcription factor and for to paediatric PCC. 
P12 .109-S its transcriptional target have been detected in sporadic and familial Molecular analysis of somatic mutations in Phaeochromocytoma and cases of NB and over-expression of the two genes have been identifiePdH iOnX N2BB Paraganglioma samples and cell lines. in silico in vitro A. Luchetti1,2, D. Walsh3, H. Martin2, G. Clark1, T. Martin4, R. Irving4, E. R. Woodward3, F. IPnH OthXi2s Bwork, in order to investigate the mechanisms underlying Latif3, M. Robledo5, E. R. Maher1,2,3; overexpreisns sioilnic oin NB, we report and characterization of the 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3’ untranslated region (3’UTR). 2Cambridge NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Centre First, the search for elements known to regulate the mRNA stability for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5CNIO, allowed us to identifPyH tOhrXe2eB AU-RICH elements (AREs) in the more distal Madrid, Spain. region of the 3’UTR, in addition to several putative miRNAs binding sites. Regions of the distal portion likely responsible for mRNA regulati- oInn vwiterroe eventually defined by combining the above predicPtiHoOnXs 2wBith results At least a third of patients with phaeochromocytoma (PCC) or paragan- from the phylogenic conservation of the PHOX2B 3’UTR. glioma (PGL) harbour an underlying germline mutation in a known PCC/ experiments in IMR32 NB cells have sPhHowOXn2 tBhat mRNAL uis- PGL gene. Identification of germline mutations and key somatic mutations cniofet rsatsaeb le, thus suggesting it as target of post-transcriptional regulation me- is important for the application of personalised medicine. To investigate chanisms. The successive cloning of the 3’UTR downstream the the molecular pathogenesis in PCC, PGL and head and neck paraganglioma gene in the pmiRGlo vector allowed us to confirm such a hypothesis (HNPGL) we analysed PCC/PGL/HNPGL by next generation (NGS) and San- and, folPloHwOiXn2gB the generation of constructs containing progressively shorter ger sequencing strategies. For the NGS studies, 55 tumours were analysed deletions of the 3’UTR, to map position and extent of the regions responsible with the Ion Torrent AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 which targets 54kb for the mRNA stabilityP.HOX2B of mutational hotspots in 50 oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes and As a consequence of all the above described observations, we suggest that exome resequencing was performed in 12 tumours. Confirmed somatic mis- regulation and modulation of post-transcriptional stabilitymay be sense mutations occurring in a single tumour were detected in CDH1, APC c Po 1n 2s .i 1d 1e 2re -Md a pharmaceutical target in NB. and JAK3. Activating mutations in HRAS (p.Gln61Arg and p.Gly13Arg) and In vitro drug screening approaches targeting PHOX2B over- HIF2A (p.Pro531Thr) were detected in 9.3% and 2% of tumours analysed. expression in neuroblastoma HRAS and HIF2A oncogenic mutations were detected in 6/30 PCC, 0/21 E. Di Zanni1, D. Fornasari2, R. Ravazzolo3,1, I. Ceccherini1, T. Bachetti1; HNPGL and 0/4 PGL (frequency in PCC vs HNPGL P=0.69). Ten tumours 1U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di harboured mutations in inherited PCC/PGL/HNPGL genes and no HRAS or Milano, Dept. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Milano, Italy, HIF2A mutations occurred in this group. Combining our data with a pre- 3Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Oftalmologia, Genetica e Materno Infantile (DINOGMI), Università di Genova, Genova, Italy. vious report of HRAS mutations in PCC/PGL (JCEM 2013;98:
E1266 -71) we find that the mean frequency of HRAS mutations (7/9 at codon 61) in spora- dic PCC/PGL is 10.8% (9/83; 95% CI = 6.3 to 17.9%) and in PCC/PGL with PHOX2B is a transcription factor involved in the regulation of neurogene- an inherited gene mutation 0% (0/29; 95% CI 0 to 13.9%) suggesting that sis and in the correct differentiation of autonomic nervous system. Several HRAS and inherited PCC/PGL gene mutations might be mutually exclusive. 
P12 .110-M evidence report a pathogenetic role of PHOAX
L2 KB in neuroblastoma (NB): (i) Germline mutations in SDHB, SDHD, VHL, RET and TMEM genes in somatic and germline gain of function mutations in familial, sporadic and patients with nonsyndromic pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma in syndromALicK casesP oHfO NXB2; (ii) the finding of , a transcriptional target of Serbian population PHOX2B, as major familial NB predisposition gene; and (iii) tinh ev iotrboserva- J. Bankovic, B. Ilic, B. Beleslin Cokic, J. Antic, G. Rodic, I. Milicevic, M. Petakov, S. tion of and B over-expression in tumor samples and NB cell li- Damjanovic; nes. Starting from these observations, we have performed an drug Clinic for endocrinology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. screening targeting PHOX2B over-expression as a potential pharmacologi- cal meansL uinci fNerBa. sFei grsetn, ew e have ev aluated th eP HefOfeXc2tBs opfr oam (oi)t esrm all subset of molecules and an (ii) epigenetic library in a IMR-32 cell line stably ex- Background: Several susceptibility genes have been found to be associated with development of pheochromocytoma ◦PHEO◦/ paraganglioma ◦ PGL pressing under thecontrol of PHOX2B to identify molecules able in down-regulating PHOX2B expression. Curcumin, SAHA ◦: RET, VHL, SDHB, SDHD and TMEM. We investigated the frequency of and trichostatin A showed a down-regulation of promoter activity germline mutations in these genes in patients with apparently sporadic and a decrease of both prointe isnil iacnod mRNA expression. To deepen into cur- PHEO/PGL. cumin mechanisms of action, we have investigated the role of transcription Material and methods: Two hundred patiEenStHs (G F 2/M0 11412 |/ 8M8 I)L wAiNth, aIpTpAa-LY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 259 factors (TF) predicted by analysis to bind the PHOX2B promoter.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index PBX1/MEI
S1  Among these TF, we have demonstrated that treatments with 8 or 20 μM Overall, predictive biomarkers associated with the anti-EGFR therapy effica- curcumin led to a decrease of expression and modulated the cy, correlating well with treatment response was identified in 70% of our activity ofA NLKFκB and AP-1. Moreover, combined drug treatments showed patients. The tumor genome is prone to continuous changes and plasma- successful effects of down-regulation of the expression of both PHOX2B and Seq, a fast and affordable tool enables identification of novel clones and gui- its target , thus supporting the notion of the effectiveness of molecule de real-time modification of treatment regimen to delay or prevent disease combination in tumor therapy. progression. 
P12 .113-S 
P12 .115-S PIK3CA mutations in non-small cell lung cancer PM
S2  mutation detection and PM
S2  mutation spectrum in the S. Ekinci1, H. Ilgin-Ruhi1, M. Doğan2, S. Gursoy3, S. Dizbay-Sak4, A. Demirkazık5, F. Netherlands Tukun1,3; H. M. van der Klift1, A. R. Mensenkamp2, Y. J. Vos3, J. J. P. Gille4, E. J. W. Redeker5, E. Bik1, 1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, A. Wagner6, E. Gomez Garcia7, M. J. W. Olderode-Berends3, F. H. Menko4, T. A. van Os5, S. 2Ankara Numune Training and Research Hospital, Medical Oncology Clinic, Ankara, Verhoef8, M. Nielsen1, F. J. Hes1, P. Devilee1, M. Ligtenberg2, J. T. Wijnen1, C. M. J. Tops1; Turkey, 3Duzen Laboratories Group, Division of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 1Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Medical 4Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Pathology, Ankara, Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Turkey, 5Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Oncology, Netherlands, 4VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Academic Ankara, Turkey. Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 8Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. PM
S2  Background: Heterozygous mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) gene cause Most of the proteins that are encoded by oncogenes which Lynch syndrome (LS), an autosomal dominant predisposition for colorectal, play a role in molecular pathogenesis of cancer, function as protein kinases. endometrial and other cancers. Biallelic mutations lead to constitutional Acquired constitutional activity of these proteins leads to the activation of MMR-deficiency syndrome (CMMR-D) in PwMhSic2h various typ es of malignancy signaling pathways which are involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, pro- occur early in life. Isolated loss of PM
S2 , detected by immunohistochemistry tein synthesis, cell migration and many other cellular processes. One of the in tumours directs mutation scanning to to diagnoseLS and CMMR-D. most important signaling pathways that plays role in the pathogenesis of Mutation scanning of this gene has been notoriously difficult due to the cancer is phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway. Especially presence of highly homologous pseudogene sequePnMceSs2 and frequent gene class IA PI3Ks are known to play aP IrKo3leC iAn the paPtIhKo3gCeAnesis of cancer. Basi- conversion events. Here we present results of recently iPmMpSr2oved DNA-based cally, p110α isoform of catalytic domain accounts for the enzymatic function and RNA-based mutation detectionP sMtrSa2tegies for as obtained in the of class IA PI3Ks. It is encoded by gene. mutations has been five Dutch accredited diagnostic laboratories thPaMt So2ffer genetic testing. previously reported in many cancers. Methods: PIK3CA gene Altogether, 53 different deleterious mutations were discovered in 126 LS and 8 CMMRD index patients. Recurrent mutations, probably of All exons of the were sequenced in 40 NSCLC tumor founder origin, appear to be common in the Dutch cohort: 15 mutations samples. All individuals provided informed consent, and the study was per- found in at least 3 probands represent 68% (96/142) of mutated alleles. formed in accordance with ethical guidelines. Results: Notably, one such recurrent mutation, detected in 3 probands PinM oSu2r cohort, is the recently described retrotranspositional insertion of an SVA repeat, The 1634A>C mutation which has already been identified in many that is missed by current DNA-based protocoMlsL. H
P1 athogenic mutati- cancers and NSCLC was determined in 7,5% of the tumor tissue samples. ons were found in 78% (57/73) of patients with isolated PM
S2  loss, and This mutation rate is higher than reported in the literature. Interestingly another 10% (n=7) could be explained by an muPtMatSi2on (data from 2 a second mutation (1658_1659delGTinsC) was identified in these patients. labs with complete data set). Based on an estimated number of 700 Dutch The concurCroennccelu osfi otnh:e se two mutations has been reported as Cowden pPMroSv2en LS families, 18% (126/700) is explained by a mutation. Our syndrome in the literature which is known to be a cancer predisposition data substantially expand knowledge on the spectrum of disease-causing syndrome. This finding is quite important since it can be an mutations. 
P12 .116-M indication of underlying cancer predisposition syndrome in NSCLC patients. A new POLD1 germline mutation as cause of Familial Colorectal Besides previously reported PIK3CA mutations some novel mutations have Cancer Type X been defined. E. Hernández-Illán1, A. Castillejo2, M. I. Castillejo2, A. Segura3, M. J. Juan4, M. Juarez1, R. Jover5, J. L. Soto2; 
P12 .114-M 1Research Laboratory, Alicante University Hospital, Alicante, Spain, 2Molecular Genetics Development of Acquired Resistance to Anti-EGFR Therapy in Laboratory, Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 3Hereditary Cancer Unit, La Fe Colorectal Cancer Identified by Whole-Genome Plasma DNA University Hospital, Valencia, Spain, 4Hereditary Cancer Unit, Valencian Institute of Sequencing Oncology, Valencia, Spain, Valencia, Spain, 5Research Laboratory, Gastroenterology S. Mohan1, E. Heitzer1, P. Ulz1, I. Lafer1, S. Lax2, M. Auer1, M. Pichler3, A. Gerger3, F. Eisner3, Service, Alicante University Hospital, Alicante, Spain. G. Hoefler4, T. Bauernhofer3, J. B. Geigl1, M. R. Speicher1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Pathology,General Hospital Graz West, Graz, Austria, 3Division of Oncology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, The genetic basis for Familial Colorectal Cancer Type-X (fCRC-X) is unknown. Graz, Austria. Mutations at the proof-reading domains of DNA polymerase ε (POLE) and δ (POLD1) have been recently identified in families with multiple colorectal Introduction: adenomas and CRC. KRAS EGFR-targeting monoclonal antibodies, cetuximab and pani- We aimed to assess the prevalence of POLE and POLD1 mutations in tumumab, are important therapeutic options in wild-type metastatic fCRC-X. colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients. However, secondary resistance inevi- A total of 63 index cases fulfilling Amsterdam II criteria with normal ex- tably ensues in all patients within 3-12 months from the start of therapy. pression of mismatch repair proteins and microsatellite stable tumors were TMheet hmoedcsh:anism and timing of emergence of resKiRstAaSnce which limit the ef- included. Sanger sequencing of POLE-exon13 and POLD1-exon11 was per- ficacy of these drugs, is highly relevant for designing therapeutic strategies. formed. We examined the plasma DNA of 10 wild-type mCRC pati- None of the cases carried mutations in POLE. We found one case with a new ents who received anti-EGFR therapy, using aK hRigAhS-tBhRroAuFghPpIKu3t CwAhole gEeGnFoR- POLD1 variant in heterozygosis: c.1421T>C (p.Leu474Pro). The patient was me sequencing (PlasmaR-Seesqu)l tasn:d ultra-deep sequencing of genes associated a woman who underwent a synchronous CRC and large bowel gastrointe- with resistance to anti-EGFR therapy such as , , and stinal stromal tumor at age 36. Her maternal aunt had metachronous CRC with Illumina’s MiSeq. Genome-wide characterisation of the plas- (dx33y) and endometrial cancer (dx56y) and was a carrier of this variant. ma DNA and corresponding primary tumor revealed several tumor specific Therefore, the index case’s mother, who underwent endometrial cancer aberrations such as over-representation of chromosomes 8q, 13 andK 2R0AqS, (dx52y), was an obligate variant carrier. It has been described that the ho- and losMseEsT of 8p, 4 and 1
E8 R.B TBh2e development of resistance to anti-EGFR the- mologous residue of POLD1 p.Leu479Pro mutation in S. cerevisiae causes a rapy wasK oRbAsServed to be associated with noEvGelF fRocal amplification of mutator phenotype. Furthermore, this is the paralogous residue of the hot (n=3), (n=2) and (n=1) or high level polysomy of 12p wKRhiAcSh, spot at POLE (p.Leu424). In silico prediction analysis strongly suggests a iBnRcAluFd, ePsI K3CA (n=1E).G OFvRerrepresentation of gene was assCoocinacteluds wioitnh: pathogenic nature for this variant. Integration of all these evidences drove initial good response to therapy. However, ultra-deep sequencing of us to classify this new variant as probably damaging. 260 and did not reveal any novel EmSuHtaGtio 2ns0. 14 | MILAN , PITOALD
L1 Y m | uWtaWtionWs .mEiSghHt Gex.pOlaRinG about 1.6% of fCRC-X. POLD1 testing should be included in the diagnostic strategy for unexplained familial CRC.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P12 .117-S 
P12 .119-S Polymerase Proofreading - Associated Polyposis (PPAP): an unusual DNA methylation profiles of PDGFB and FGF2 are potential family with the highly penetrant POLE p.Leu424Val mutation with biomarkers of disease progression in primary myelofibrosis colorectal cancer, polyposis, duodenal cancer and diabetes C. Augello1, R. Falcone2, F. Savi3, S. Tabano1,2, C. Pesenti2, N. Fracchiolla4, A. Iurlo4, U. S. M. A. Goodman1, C. M. Brewer2, I. Tomlinson3, K. Ong4, A. Considine4, M. M. J. Gianelli2, M. Miozzo2,1, S. Sirchia5; Bradford1; 1Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation; Università degli Studi di Milano, 1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, RD&E NHS Foundation Trust, Plymouth, United Milano, Italy, 2Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Kingdom, 2Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, RD&E NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, Policlinico, Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy, 3Division of Pathology, San Paolo Hospital, Milano, United Kingdom, 3Molecular & Population Genetics Laboratory, Welcome Trust Centre Italy, 4Department of Hematology-Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4West Midlands Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy, 5Department of Health Sciences, Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. Mutations in the exonuclease domain of the polymerase E (POLE) gene have The primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is characterized by clonal proliferation recently been identified as causing a rare but highly penetrant predispositi- of the hematopoietic precursors, fibrosis, osteosclerosis and angiogenesis. on to colorectal cancer and colorectal polyps. Palles et al employed whole- Bone marrow fibrosis is a reactive process, where the fibroblast proliferati- genome sequencing and detected the p.Leu424Val (
L424 V) mutation in 12 on is in response to cytokines, such as platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) families, with no evidence of a shared common ancestor. The phenotypes and the basic fibroblastic growth factor (FGF2), produced by malignant of these families were consistent with an autosomal dominant predisposi- megakaryocytes or monocytes. No specific prognostic markers are today tion to colorectal adenomas and carcinomas, with some individuals having available to refine the clinical classification and the risk to develop fibrosis. multiple tumours. Tumours from these subjects were all microsatellite stab- The purpose of this study is to investigate DNA methylation of PDGFB and le (MSI-S) and did not show any preponderance of site within the colon or FGF2, to verify possible associations among the epigenetic profile fibrosis particular morphology. There were no extra-colonic tumours described in progression and prognosis of PMF. The methylation is evaluated by pyro- any affected individuals in these families. Following the identification POLE sequencing in a cohort of 58 PMF cases and 20 controls. The methylation 
L424 V in our family through the CORGI study, subsequent testing identified percentages of PDGFB and FGF2 in PMF ranged from a complete demethyla- the familial mutation in an individual with an MSI unstable (MSI-H) tumour tion to hypermethylation (PDGFB range: 3-95, mean value: 39; FGF2 range: and synchronous duodenal adenocarcinoma, rectal carcinoma and adeno- 1-96%, mean value: 40), in controls the methylation values of both genes mas. It was also noted that all the individuals affected with colorectal cancer are clustered in more restricted intervals (PDGFB: 28-46% mean value: 35; in this family also have diabetes, consistent across 3 generations. The co- FGF2: 16-43% mean value: 28). The methylation values of PDGFB and FGF2 segregation of diabetes and colorectal cancer requires formal confirmati- are significantly increased in the prefibrotic cases compared to controls on in some relatives. This association warrants further study. An increased (PDGFB: 71 vs. 33, p < 0.0005 and FGF2: 56 vs. 27.5, p < 0.0005). Interestin- risk of CRC in patients with diabetes mellitus has been recognised for some gly hypomethylated PDGFB was an indicator of better prognosis for fibrosis, years. Emerging evidence that polymerase D (POLD1) gene has an impor- International Prognostic Scoring System (IPPS) and Dynamic International tant function in adipose tissue homeostasis lends weight to the associati- Prognostic Scoring System (DIPPS) progression (p=0.03, p=0.02 and p=0.01 on. This family provides evidence of a broader phenotype of malignancy in r Pe 1s 2p .e 1c 2ti 0v -e Mly). POLE, and opportunity for new investigations into the possible mechanism Synergistic effect and VEGF/HS
P70 -hom haplotype analysis: l Pin 1k 2i .n 1g 1 d 8i -a Mbetes and colorectal cancer. relationship to prostate cancer risk and clinical outcome Association of variant -765G>C in the PTG
S2  gene promoter with S. Sfar1, H. Saad2, F. Mosbah3, L. Chouchane1; 1Department of Molecular Immuno-Oncology Faculty of Medicine, Monastir, Tunisia, melanoma in Italian patients and its relation to gene expression in 22Depatment of Urology, EPS Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir, Tunisia, Monastir, Tunisia, dermal fibroblasts 3Depatment of Urology, EPS Sahloul, Sousse, Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia. M. Gomez Lira1, S. Ferronato1, G. Malerba1, M. Santinami2, A. Maurichi2, A. Sangalli1, A. Turco1, P. Perego3, M. Rodolfo4; 1Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Unit of Melanoma and Sarcoma, Fondazione Prostate cancer is aV EcoGmFplex dHiSsPo7rd0e-hr ormesulting from the combined effects of IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy, 3Molecular Pharmacology Unit, multiple environmental and genetic factors. Our previous single locus ana- Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy, 4Unit of Immunotherapy, lysis showed that and polymorphisms were significantly Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy. associated with prostate cancer susceptibility and prognosis. Both genes encoding these proteins were located on chHroSm
P7 o0so-hmoem 6p21, and combViEnGinFg the neighboring SNPVsE iGnFto haplotypes may increase the association with the Aim: The production of prostaglandins, especially prostaglandin E synthe- disease. Three tagging polymorphisms, the VEGF H 
S2 P47307
- hTo/mC, the - tase (PG E2
) is hypothesized to influence carcinogenesis by promoting cell 1154 G/A and the -634 G/C SNPs were genotyped in 101 cases and proliferation, inhibiting apoptosis, stimulating angiogenesis, and mediating 80 controls. For the combined analysis of and ,P we found immune suppression. Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), the inducible isoform of a positive gradient in the ORs related to the number of hiHghS Pr7is0k- hgoemnotVyEpGeFs cyclooxygenase coded by the PTG S2
 gene, is the key enzyme in the produc- with a 3.53V-EfoGlFd increase of prostate carcinoma risk (OR= 3.53; = 0.015). tion of prostaglandins involved in inflammatory processes including cancer. Furthermore, The TAG and CAG haplotypes at positions , In melanoma skin cancer, Cox-2 is overexpressed in primary malignant me- -1154 and -634 exhibited a twofold (OR= 0.46; P= 0.014) and a seven- lanoma and in their corresponding metastases. Aim of this study was to in- fold (OR= 0.14; P= 0.00005) reduction in prostate cancer risk, respectively. vestigate if polymorphisms -765G>C (rs20417), and -1195A>G (rs689466) Regarding prostate cancer prognosis, the TAG haplotype had a negative as- in the PTG S2
 gene impact on its expression in dermal fibroblasts and are as- sociation with thHeS Pa7gg0r-hesosmiv/eV pEhGeFnotype as defined by the histopathological sociated with individual susceptibility to malignant cutaneous melanoma. grade (OR= 0.28; P= 0.006). Our findings confirm the role of at-risk haplo- Methods: Two hundred forty patients presenting melanoma and 342 con- type across the gene cluster in determining susceptibility trol individuals were genotyped for polymorphisms -765G>C (rs20417) and to prostate cancer.  P12
.121-S -1195A>G (rs689466) by restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR- Frequency and clinical implication of rare BRAF variants other than RFLP) analysis. PTG S2
 gene expression was performed by Real Time PCR BRAF V600E mutation in a large cohort of consecutive thyroid fine using Sybr Green. needle aspiration cytology samples Results: The allele -765C was associated with an increased prevalence of G. Hong1, K. Park1, C. Ki1, S. Kim2, J. Chung2, J. Shin3, Y. Oh4, J. Kim1; melanoma. No association of -1195A>G polymorphism was observed. Ha- 1Departments of Laboratory Medicine & Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, plotype analysis of both variations showed that the haplotypes carrying the Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Division of minor alleles were associated to a higher risk of melanoma (p=0.02). Ex- Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Thyroid Center, Samsung pression analysis indicated that allele -765C is associated to a higher gene Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic expression and thus could represent a risk allele by affecting the functiona- of, 3Department of Radiology and Center for Imaging Science, Samsung Medical Center, lity of the promoter. Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 4Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Conclusion: In conclusion, variant -765G>C may be associated to malignant Seoul, Korea, Republic of. cutaneous melanoma with a low penetrance effect and this effect could be a consequence of altered gene expression. Background BRAF BRAF : BRA Fmutation analysis is a useful adjunctive tool in diagno- sing thyroid nodules. The V600E (cB.1R7A9F9T>A) mutation comprises over 95% of all gene mutations in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | T W heW cliW nic. oE pS aH thoG lo.O gicR aG l association of rare variants other than V260601EABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Methods mutation is still obscure. a role in drug resistance and relapse, we performed Infinium HumanMe- : We evaluated a total of 1067 consecutivBeR pAaFtients with malignant thylation450K BeadChip arrays and to characterize the molecular evolution or indeterminate thyroid nodules by ultrasonography. All fine needle aspi- of relapsed childhood ALL, we used Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12 arrays to ration cytology (FNAC) samples wBRerAeF tested for mutation using mu- identify somatic copy number alterations (CNAs) in 16 diagnosis/relapse tant enrichment with 3‘-modified oligonucleotide (MEMO) sequencing with pairs. Flow-sorted normal B-cell progenitor subpopulations and CD4+CD8+ rReeaslu-tlitmseB PRCARF concurrently. Rare variants were evaluated with regard T-cell purified from thymus were used as controls. to cytology and/or histology results. Analysis variant CpG sites in an unsupervised manner, we identified three : mutations were detected in 37.9% (404/1067) of all samples. distinct DNA methylation profiles in samples according to their structural The V600E mutation was detected in 98.3% (397/404), and six rare vari- variations. ALL cases did not show significant differences between paired ants were detected by MEMO sequencing. Three types of variants were iden- diagnose/ relapse samples though they had hyper DNA methylation than tified: c.1799_1801del (p.Val600_Lys601delinsGlu), c.1794_1795insGTT control samples. Aberrant DNA methylation had been detected in negative (p.Ala598_Thr599insVal), and c.1801A>T (p.Lys601*). The former two are regulator of cell cycle genes and DNA damage repair genes in ALL. Copy known mutations to be associated with PTC and three patients with these number analysis of patients revealed varying numbers of genetic lesions mCountacltuiosnios nwsere diagnosed as PTC histologically. The third variant was novel. ranging from 0 to 45 CNAs per sample. The vast majority of CNAs obser- The cBaRseA Fwith c.1801A>T was diagnosed as a benign follicular nodule. ved were shared between diagnosis and relapse in the same patients. One : Out of 1067 thyroid nodule cytology samples, six (0.56%) had of the most frequent CNAs involved deletions of CDKN2A/B , occurring in 8 rare variants. A novel variant was identified in a cytologically benign patients, 2 of 8 patients lost the CDKN2A/B at relapse time. Integration of thyroid nodule. Targeted testinBgR foArF detecting only the V600E mutation may methylation and genotyping data revealed high concordance. be good enough to increase the diagnostic value of FNAC, however, iden- Early relapse samples were more likely to be similar to their respective dia- tification of other variants in gene may provide additional valuable gnostic sample that suggests early-relapse results from the emergence of a information on the nature of thyroid nodules in the future. related clone.  P12
.122-M  P12
.124-M Association between the cytogenetic profile of tumor cells and Genome-wide methylation analysis of tubulocystic and papillary renal response to preoperative radiochemotherapy in locally advanced cell carcinomas rectal cancer M. Korabecna1, A. Horinek1, O. Seda1, Z. Halbhuber2, R. Blatny2, O. Hes3, V. Tesar1; M. González-González1, J. García2, J. Alcazar2, L. Gónzalez2, O. Bengoechea3, M. Abad3, 1First Faculty of Medicine of Charles University and General Faculty Hospital in Prague, M. Gutiérrez1, A. Santos-Briz3, O. Blanco3, M. Martín4, E. Fonseca5, A. Rodríguez6, M. Prague, Czech Republic, 2Central European Biosystems, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Fuentes1, L. Muñoz-Bellvis2, A. Orfao1, J. Sayagués1; of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University, Pilsen, Czech Republic. 1Servicio General de Citometría, Departamento de Medicina and Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (IBM, Salamanca, Spain, 2Service of General Surgery and Digestive Apparatus, University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSALnvestigación del Cáncer (IBMCC-CSIC/USAL), This study was undertaken to characterize and compare molecular signatu- Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Departament of Pathology, University res associated with tubulocystic renal cell carcinoma (TRCC) and papillary Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 4Servicio de Radio-diagnóstico, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 5Service of Medical renal cell carcinoma (PRCC). Oncology, University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 6Servicio de We performed methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) coupled with Oncología Radioterápica, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. genome wide microarray analysis (Roche NimbleGen) in 6 PRCC and 2 TRCC together with analysis of control tissues of normal histological appearance adjacent to each examined tumor sample. Neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy to locally advanced rectal carcinoma pa- All examined tumors and their control tissues of histological normal ap- tients has proven efficient in a high percentage of cases. Despite this, some pearance share alteration in regulation of specific pathways. In TRCC we patients show non-response or even disease progression. Recent studies found higher number (48) of methylated tumor suppressor genes (TSG) suggest that different genetic alterations may be associated with sensitivity than in PRCC (35). Only TSG DPH1 and VHL were found to be distinctive- vs. resistance of rectal cancer tumor cells to neoadjuvant therapy. We inve- ly methylated in all PRCC. The methylation of gene sequences SPIB, PLAT, stigated the relationship between intratumoral pathways of clonal evoluti- PCDHB1 and FAF2 was found exclusively in TRCC tumor samples, the me- on as assessed by iFISH (51 different probes) and response to neoadjuvant thylation in genes KIF C3
, MDH2, PAG1, BICD1, PLG and CTRL was limited to radiochemotherapy, evaluated by Dworak criteria in 45 rectal cancer tu- all PRCC tumor samples only. mors before (n=45) and after (n=31) treatment. Losses of chromosomes 1p Using bioinformatics tools (DAVID and GSEA), we found the pathways and (44%), 8p (53%), 17p (47%), 18q (38%) and gains of 1q (49%), 13q (75%) genes which are altered by differential methylation and which may be re- as well as amplification of 8q (38%) and 20q (47%) chromosomal regions sponsible for developmental divergence of both tumors from precancerous were those specific alterations found at higher frequencies. Significant as- renal tissue. The genes involved in transmembrane transport of small mole- sociation (p<0.05) was found between alteration of 1p, 1q, 11p, 12p and cules, lipoprotein metabolism and transmission across chemical synapsis 17p chromosomal regions and degree of response to neoadjuvant therapy. A are significantly overrepresented among genes methylated preferentially in clear association was observed between cytogenetic profile of the ancestral TRCC, PRCC is characterized by overrepresentation of genes playing roles in tumor cell clone and response to radiochemotherapy; cases presenting with RNA metabolism and processing. del(17p) showed a poor response to neoadjuvant treatment (p=0.03), while Supported by grants no. PRVOUK  P25
/LF1/2 of the Ministry of Education, presence of del(1p) was more frequently observed in responder patients Youth and Sport of the Czech Republic and no.RVO-VFN 64165 of the Mini- (p=0.0002). Moreover, a significantly higher number of copies of chromoso- s Pt 1ry 2 .o 1f 2 H 5e -Salth of the Czech Republic. mes 8q (p=0.004), 13q (p=0.003) and 20q (p=0.002) were found after the- Identification of mosaicism in patients with sporadic retinoblastoma rapy vs. paired pre-treatment rectal cancer samples. Our results point out using NGS the existence of an association between tumor cytogenetics and response G. Gómez-Mariano1, C. Rodriguez-Martín1, L. de la Vega1, Á. Zaballos2, C. Sabado3, T. to neoadjuvant therapy in locally advanced rectal cancer. Further studies in Vendrell3, J. C. Ferreres3, N. Martín3, P. García-Miguel4, A. Sastre4, J. Abelairas4, J. Alonso1; larger series of patients are necessary to confirm our results. 1Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Majadahonda, Spain, 2Centro  P12
.123-S Nacional de Microbiología, Majadahonda, Spain, 3Hospital Vall d‘Hebron, Barcelona, Epigenetic Profile of Early Relapsed Childhood ALL Spain, 4Hospital Infantil La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Y. Erbilgin1, O. Hatirnaz Ng1, S. Firtina1, T. T. Celkan2, S. Anak3, Z. Karakas3, N. Sarper4, E. Zengin4, E. Turkkan5, D. Atay5, Y. Ng1,6, O. Dogru7,8, E. Dayıoglu9, M. Sayitoglu1, U. Ozbek1; 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Objectives: Retinoblastoma is the paradigm of hereditary cancer. Appro- Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, ximately, 40% of patients carry germline mutations in the retinoblastoma Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Pediatric Hematology Division, Kocaeli gene RB1 that predispose to develop retinoblastoma. These mutations can Medical Faculty, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, 5Pediatric Hematology Division, be detectable in blood DNA using standard techniques. However, these tech- Istanbul Okmeydani Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Faculty of niques are not sensitive enough to detect mosaicism in sporadic cases of the Engineering, Bilgi University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Medical Park Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, disease (without family history). This study was thus designed to determi- 8Akdeniz University, Medical Faculty, Antalya, Turkey, 9Department of Thoracic and ne the frequency of mosaicism in patients with sporadic retinoblastoma by Cardiovascular Surgery, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. using next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. Methods: We selected for this study 22 patients with sporadic retinoblasto- ma in which we had previously identified two inactivating mutations in the Relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is one of the leading causes of RB1 gene in tumor DNA, but in which none of those mutations were de- death among children with cancer. The prognosis for early relapse children tected in blood DNA using Sanger sequencing. Blood DNA of these patients r2e6m2ains poor. To discover the underlying epigeneticE pSaHthGwa 2ys0 t1ha4t m| May IpLlaAyN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG was analyzed by NGS (Roche/454) in order to identify in low proportionABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index (mosaicism) one of the mutations identified in the tumor. genotypic distribution between cases and controls revealed a statistically Results: Roche/454 sequencing was able to detect mutations present at <1% higher frequency of the variant genotypes (A/G, G/G) in s-AML compared to in blood DNA. In our series, NGS was able to detect, in 5 out of 22 patients the controls (p=0.001). Allele frequency distribution analysis showed that (22.7%), one of the mutation identified in the tumor in the blood DNA. The s-AML patients exhibited an almost 2-fold increased risk of carrying at least frequency of the mutations in blood DNA ranged between 0.8 and 16.8%. one variant G allele compared to the controls. Stratification of patients ac- Conclusion: Roche/454 sequencing is very sensitive allowing the identifica- cording to the karyotype revealed a significantly increased frequency of A/G tion of mosaicism in patients with sporadic retinoblastoma. The existence heterozygotes in patients carrying -7/del(7q) (89.5%). The GST P1
 promoter of mosaicism can modify the risk of retinoblastoma and the probability of was hypermethylated in a large proportion of s-AML patients (32.5%), but transmitting the mutation to offspring. Therefore, the identification of mo- in none of the controls. No statistically significant associations were found saicism in these patients improves genetic diagnosis. between the methylation status and GST P1
 genotype. Our findings provide  P12
.126-M evidence for an important role of the GST P1
 gene in AML pathogenesis. BRCA1 and T P53
 germline mutations are associated with gynecologic  P12
.128-M sarcomas T P53
 gene mutation analysis in breast cancer: Our experience of six D. E. Nowakowska1, A. Niwińska, A. Kluska, M. Dąbrowska, A.D. Czapczak, E. years Kwiatkowska, A. Nasierowska-Guttmejer2; T. Dabir1, S. Liew2; 1The Maria Sklodowska -Curie Cancer Center & Institute in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 1Medical Genetics Dept., Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2Queen‘s 2Central Clinical Hospital Ministry of Interior in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. University, Belfast, United Kingdom. Introduction: gynecologic sarcomas comprise less than 1% of all gyneco- Hereditary breast cancers account for 5-10 % cases and are predominant- logic malignancies and represent very heterogeneous group. Very little is ly due to BRCA1/2 genes and less commonly due to other high penetrant known about etiology of these malignancies, the only documented etiolo- (T P53
, STK11, PTEN) and less penetrant (CHEK2,ATM,PALB2, BRI P1
) ge- gic factor in less then 25% of these tumors is previous pelvic irradiation nes. Breast cancer is an important component of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome and some have been linked to tamoxifen treatment. We report that BRCA1 (LFS) cancer spectrum related to T P53
 gene mutation. Genetic testing for & T P53
 germline mutations are associated with gynecologic sarcomas.<br BR C1
/2 is generally not offered in young breast cancer women (<30 years) /Methods: alone unless they meet the testing criterion ( Manchester score etc). Howe- During the last ten years 16 patients diagnosed with gynecologic sarcoma ver T P53
 testing is suggested for young breast cancer alone cases without were seen at Genetic Counseling Unit at Cancer Center & Institute of Onco- family history of LFs tumours logy in Warsaw. All the patients were offered genetic testing, after genetic We analysed our data of past 6 years (2008-2013) of T P53
 gene testing in counseling and after obtaining the written informed consent. The consent women with breast cancer. Information was obtained regarding family hi- protocol was accepted by the local ethical committee. BRCA1 analysis was story of cancers, age of onset, receptor pathology and BRCA1/2 testing. No performed on DNA from the peripheral blood leukocytes. The mutations in T P53
 mutation was found in our breast cancer alone cohort. The solitary BRCA1 were detected using DHPLC and sequencing of exons 2, 5, 11 and 20, T P53
 mutation was detected in a woman with family history suggestive of where the Polish founder mutations are found most frequently. T P53
 gene LFS. The T P53
 gene mutation detection rate in our cohort was only 4.5 %. was sequenced from exon 2 to 10. (1/22). Results: Although our sample size is small T P53
 gene mutation rate is likely to be Among 16 patients with gynecologic sarcomas, we found 6 (37%) BRCA1 better in breast cancer cases with LFS family history and may be influenced germline mutation carriers. by receptor pathology as published previously. Genetic centres with limited We have found only one T P53
 mutation carrier, who had been diagnosed resources need to consider these factors before requesting expensive send with vulvar angiosarcoma at exceptionally young age. away genetic tests. Availability of affordable NGS panel testing for breast Conclusions: cancer genes may address this issue in future and would also help in un- In women diagnosed with gynecologic sarcoma screening for the germli- derstanding the contribution of the above mentioned genes to hereditary ne mutations in the BRCA1 gene is important strategy. In pediatric patients breast cancer.  P12
.129-S gynecologic sarcoma should prompt Li-Fraumeni syndrome diagnosis. Expression analysis of TNF related apoptosis inducing ligand and its Table 1 age at receptors in gastrointestinal tumors patient ID mutation mutation diagnosis diagnosis I. Chatziandreou1, S. Tsikalakis1, S. Sakellariou1, N. V. Michalopoulos2, G. number in BRCA1 in T P53
 (years) Theodoropoulos2, P. Kontogianni2, D. Theodorou2, P. Korkolopoulou1, E. Patsouris1, A. A. oviductal carcinosarcoma and serous Saetta1; DN 121 67 yes no G3 ovarian adenocarcinoma 11st Department of Pathology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 21st Department of DN 310 carcinosarcoma sarcoma stromale uteri 54 yes no Propaedeutic Surgery Hippokrateion Hospital, Athens, Greece. carcinosarcoma uteri, adenocarcinoma DN 1430 52 yes no uteri DN 1659 vulvar sarcoma fusocellulare 75 yes no vaginal carcinosarcoma and uterine TRAIL (TNF related apoptosis inducing ligand) is a member of the tumor AN 245 adenocarcinoma G3 and uterine stromal 60 yes no necrosis factor superfamily. Due to its ability to selectively induce apoptotic sarcoma AN 1263 uterine leiomyosarcoma 45 yes no death in transformed cells, TRAIL pathway has been considered as a pro- DN 5698 vulvar angiosarcoma 9 no yes mising drug target for cancer therapy. Our purpose was to examine TRAIL  P12
.127-S pathway components expression in gastrointestinal tumors. Glutathione S-transferase  P1
 gene in secondary Acute Myeloid mRNA relative expression levels in 45 colon, 11 esophageal, and 11 gastric Leukemia cancers (37 RC L2
-fixed, 30 fresh frozen,43 male and 24 female, median age A. Daraki1,2, F. Rosmaraki1,2, S. Zachaki1, K. Kakosaiou1, C. Panagiotopoulou1, C. 67 years) along with matching normal tissues were analysed using RT-PCR Sambani1, P. Kollia2, V. Aleporou-Marinou2, K. Manola1; for TRAIL pathway genes, namely TRAIL, DR4, DR5, DcR1, DcR2, OPG. Colon 1NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, cancer samples displayed elevated mRNA levels in 20% (9 of 45), 42% (19 Athens, Greece. of 45), 47% (21of 45), 64 % (29 of 45), 44% (20 of 45), 31% (14 of 45) of the cases for TRAIL, DR4, DR5, DcR1, DcR2, OPG genes respectively. Furthermo- re, TRAIL receptors were found simultaneously overexpressed in a subset of Interactions between genetic, epigenetic and genotoxic factors play a pivotal colon tumors. TRAIL overexpression was correlated with low stage tumors role in secondary acute myeloid leukemia (s-AML) development. The GST P1
 (p=0.03) in our cohort. Esophageal cancers overexpressed TRAIL and its re- is a well-known housekeeping gene engaged in the detoxification of a varie- ceptors DR4, DR5, DcR1, DcR2 at 18%, 54.5%, 27%, 45.5% and 45.5% of ty of carcinogens. We hypothesized that genetic and epigenetic mechanisms the cases, respectively. Finally, in gastric cancer samples overexpression was resulting in reduction or inactivation of GST P1
 expression may be implica- found in 45% of the cases for Dcr2 and 36% for DR4/5, DcR1 and TRAIL. ted in s-AML pathogenesis. Thus, we investigated the possible implication of TRAIL receptor mRNA levels were found elevated in a significant percenta- the A313G germline polymorphism in s-AML development and/or its spe- ge of gastrointestinal tumors. In addition, TRAIL expression emerged as an cific chromosomal abnormalities. Moreover, we studied the possible con- early event, which may delay disease progression. tribution of GST P1
 promoter hypermethylation in s-AML development and the methylation status in respect to patients’ genotype. Concerning GST P1
 genotyping, a case-control study in 75 s-AML patients and 185 controls was performed by Real-Time PCR. The GST P1
 hypermethylation was studied by methylation-specific PCR in 40 of the aEbSoHveG ca 2se0s 1a4nd | 1M5 IcLonAtrNol,s I. TTAheL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 263ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P12
.130-M Discordant molecular breakpoints in an apparent recurrent translocation (3;12)(q13;p13) disease association of missense mutations. We compared the accuracy of D. Costa1, C. Muñoz1, A. Carrió1, A. Arias1, C. Gómez1, F. Solé2, B. Espinet3, G. Azaceta4, M. six commonly used algorithms (Align-GVGD, SIFT, PolyPhen-2, MAPP-MMR, Calasanz5, E. Campo1, B. Nomdedeu6; SIFT, Grantham Analysis and Condel) using a dataset of 1,118 BRCA1, BR- 1Unitat d‘Hematopatologia. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Recerca CA2, MLH1 and MSH2 variants previously classified as clinically deleterious contra la Leucèmia Josep Carreras, Badalona, Spain, 3Laboratori de Citogenética or benign by our laboratory’s variant classification program. For all algo- Molecular. Hospital del Mar., Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Clinico Universitario de rithms (except Align-GVGD), the false-positive (FP) rate compared to our Zaragoza, Barcelona, Spain, 5Universidad de Navarra, Barcelona, Spain, 6Departament laboratory’s variant classification program was higher than traditionally ac- d‘Hematologia. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. cepted thresholds for clinical confidence, with a range from 30.6% - 58.5% for BRCA1, 27.1% - 40.1% for BRCA2, 17.9% - 67.9% for MLH1 and 17.1% - 56.1% for MSH2. Although the FP rates using Align-GVGD for all four genes Background: The identification of recurrent translocations in neoplasia has were lower, including values of 2.2% for BRCA1 and 7.9% for BRCA2, the been used to identify the genes involved in the neoplastic process in order sample size was too small to provide a robust analysis. The high FP rates for to develop new therapies.The objective of our study was to determine if the Condel, which classifies variants based on a weighted average of scores from breakpoints determined by conventional cytogenetics in two apparently re- five in silico tools, suggests that the use of multiple models is not significant- current translocations (3;12)(q13;p13) were the same at the molecular level. ly more accurate than any of the individual models in isolation. The results Material and Methods. Two patients with myelodysplastic syndrome had a of our study suggest that none of the commonly used in silico tools achieve complex karyotype including a translocation (3;12)(q13;p13). In addition to the traditionally accepted minimum threshold of specificity for the clinical the translocation, both karyotypes shared a deletion of chromosome 5 and a use of predictive tools. trisomy of the chromosome 8. A set of 35 Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes  P12
.133-S (BACs) were used to cover the 3p11.1-q13.32 region and a set of 12 BACs Comparison between splicing reporter minigene assays and patient were used to cover the 12 p11.21-p13.31 region.Results. The breakpoints blood RNA analyses used for the assessment of splicing defects caused were precisely established only for the translocation t(3;12)(q13;p13) in by variants in the DNA mismatch repair genes patient 1, within the BAC R P11
-491D12 at the 3p11.2 region and within the A. M. L. Jansen, H. M. van der Klift, N. van der Steenstraten, E. Bik, C. M. J. Tops, J. T. BAC R P11
-705 C15
 at the 12p13.31 region. A region of 22.458 kbp was dele- Wijnen, P. Devilee; Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. ted including the 12p13.2 - 12p11.21 region. In patient 2 the breakpoints on chromosomes 3 and 12 were not found, but based on the BACs study they should be more centromeric than the breakpoints determined in patient 1. A A fraction of sequence variants found in disease-causing genes induce aber- deleted region of 23.163,9 kbp including the 12p13.2 - 12p11.21 region was rant splicing. At the moment, reliable splice-prediction tools are only avai- found in patient 2. Conclusion: BACs studies revealed that the breakpoints lable for variants in the consensus splice site regions, and even these cannot in two apparently recurrent translocations were different at the molecular predict the exact molecular nature of the aberrant transcription. Wet-lab level. Both translocations showed a deletion of 22.458 kbp - 23.163,9 kbp splicing assays, either RT-PCR analyses of patient RNA or functional splicing near the breakpoint, including the 12p13.2 - 12p11.21 region.  P12
.131-M reporter minigene tests, have to be performed to confirm aberrant splicing. Prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations in triple- Here, we present results of splicing reMpoLrHte1r MmSinHi2geMneS Has6says pPeMrfSo2rmed for negative breast cancer 37 disease-gene variants of unknown significance (VUS), mainly found in M. W. Wong-Brown, K. A. Avery-Kiejda, N. A. Bowden, C. J. Meldrum, R. J. Scott; the four DNA mismatch-repair genes , , and that are University of Newcastle, Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights, associated with Lynch syndrome. Twenty variants are located in the con- Australia. sensus splice site regions, 13 are exonic and 4 are deep-intronic variants. We used a previously described minigene vector, and transfected HEK293 and/or Hela cells with wildtype and variant constructs. For 32 variants also Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast cancer that lacks results from patient RNA analyses were available, either performed by our ER, PR and HER2 expression. TNBCs have a gene expression profile similar laboratory or presented in literature. For comparison with minigene assay to breast tumours BRCA mutations. However, despite this correlation, there splicing data, we especially included variants that showed multiple aberrant have not been many studies showing the prevalence of BRCA mutations in transcripts in patient RNA analysis, or another splice effect than the pre- TNBC patients. It has been proposed that women with TNBCs may be can- valent exon skip. We found 100% concordance between patient RNA ana- didates for genetic screening due to their shared phenotype with breast tu- lyses and minigene assays in terms of showing an effect on splicing or not. mours of BRCA mutation carriers. However, for 6 variants discrepancies in the molecular nature of aberrant The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of germline BRCA transcription were observed. Possible explanations for these discrepan- mutations in TNBC cases unselected for family history of the disease. This cies, and implications for the assessment of pathogenicity of the variant are knowledge could aid in the selection of women who could be candidates for discussed. genetic testing.  P12
.134-M The study cohort comprised of 347 TNBC patients. BRCA genes were ampli- Genetic risk factors in a vulvar cancer cluster among young fied by Fluidigm Access Array. The amplicons were sequenced on Illumina Indigenous women in Arnhem Land, Australia MiSeq. The sequencing data were analysed with NextGENe 2nd Generation R. McWhirter1,2, A. Rumbold3, J. Marthick1, J. Dickinson1,2, J. Condon2; Sequencing Software. MLPA was also performed and the peaks heights were 1Menzies Research Institute Tasmania, Hobart, Australia, 2Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, Australia, 3University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. analysed on GeneMarker® software. 39 (11.2%) pathogenic mutations were detected in our cohort of 347 TNBC patients. 22 of these patients (56.4%) did not have a recorded family histo- Vulvar cancer is usually rare, and occurs most often in postmenopausal wo- ries of breast and/or ovarian cancers. men. Among young (<50 years) Indigenous women living in remote Aborigi- Our study shows that in a large cohort of TNBC patients unselected for fa- nal communities in Arnhem Land, however, the incidence of this malignancy mily history of breast cancer, approximately 11.2% of the patients harbour is more than 70 times the national Australian rate for the same age group. a BRCA mutation. This suggests that there may be an underestimation of Previously, we found that neither excess human papillomavirus (HPV) inci- BRCA mutations in a breast cancer population using current screening cri- dence nor a particularly virulent strain of HPV could explain the very high teria, and TNBCs should be considered as an inclusion criterion for genetic incidence of vulvar cancer in this population. Reports from the Gynaecology testing.  P12
.132-M Outreach Service that cases appeared to cluster in family groups suggested Align-GVGD, SIFT, PolyPhen, MAPP-MMR, Grantham Analysis and that a genetic susceptibility, either to the effects of HPV or another cause Condel are weak predictors of the clinical significance for missense of vulvar cancer, may be involved in this cluster. To investigate the role of variants genetic risk factors, 30 cases and 61 controls, matched on age and commu- I. Kerr, J. M. Eggington, K. Moyes, B. C. Burdett, A. Van Kan, H. McElroy, P. J. Vail, D. B. nity of residence, were recruited to the study. DNA was extracted from sa- Sumampong, N. J. Monteferrante, K. L. Hardman, A. Theisen, E. Rosenthal, R. J. Wenstrup; liva samples, and genotyped to provide information on approximately 2.5 Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. million variants. These data were analysed using both genome-wide asso- ciation and identity-by-descent techniques. We found clear evidence for the involvement of a genetic risk factor predisposing this population to vulvar Non-synonymous missense changes that result in amino acid substitutions cancer, and identified three genomic regions of interest. Bioinformatic ana- represent the majority of variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUSs) lysis prioritised biologically plausible candidate genes within these regions identified by genetic testing. We sought to analyze whether commonly used and functional studies to further elucidate the role of genetic variants in the in silico tools, which assess the phylogenetic conservation of specific ami- n2o6 a4cids throughout evolution, can accurately chE aS raH ctG er i2 ze0 1 th4 e | p M ossI iL bA leN , aITetAioLloYg y| Wof WvulWvar.E cSanHceGr .aOreR cGurrently underway. This is the first geneticABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index study of this population, and these findings continue to inform health care 50% of glioblastomas (WHO grade IV) and 56% of astrocytomas (WHO gra- delivery in Arnhem Land, especially vaccination policy and screening stra- des II and III) showed upregulation of beta-catenin and nuclear localization tegies. was found in 52.1% of glioblastomas. Transcription factors of the wnt pa-  P12
.135-S thway were also upregulated. Strong TCF1 and LEF1 expression was obser- Whole exome sequencing identifies novel mutations from DNA repair ved in 51.6% and 71% of glioblastomas. Analysis of variances performed on pathways in familial esophageal squamous cell carcinoma M. R. Abbaszadegan1,2, M. Nasiri Aghdam2, A. Baranova3, S. Bruskin4, A. Aarabi1; the total sample indicated significant differences in the values of TCF1 weak 1Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, expression (F=2.804; p=0.045), LEF1 weak (F=4.255; p=0.008) and LEF1 Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical strong expression (F=5.498; p=0.002) with regard to malignancy grade. The Genetics Research Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Mashhad University of F-ratios for two variables (LEF1 strong and LEF1 weak) indicated that dif- Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3School of System Biology, George ferences between astrocytomas (II, III) and glioblastomas were statistically Mason University, Fairfax, VA, United States, 4Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, significant (p<0.02). Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. Allelic losses of APC gene were frequent with glioblastomas showing 60% Introduction: and diffuse astocytomas (grade II) 20%. Allelic losses of AXIN1 were found in 10% of glioblastomas. In 31% of glioblastomas and 22% of astrocytomas Esophageal cancer (EC) is the fifth leading cause of cancer downregulation of axin proteins was detected. In 31% of glioblastomas axin death in Iran and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is an aggres- was localized in the nucleus. sive subtype comprises 95% of all Iranian EC cases. High existence of fa- Our findings contribute to understanding of human astrocytic brain tumor milialM aegtghreogdast:i on among ESCC cases necessitates the identification of new genetic profile and suggest that molecular changes of wnt signaling play im- germline mutations for the purpose of surveillance and personalized medi- portant roles in astrocytic tumor etiology. cine. We analyzed the mutation spectra from 100X whole exome  P12
.138-M sequencing (WES) of peripheral blood mononuclear cell‘s DNA extracted Exome sequencing and deep sequencing reveals ,,mutational storm“ from 10 affected probands of familial ESCC using SureSelect target enrich- in xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) patients mReesnut lsty: stem capture process (Agilent, U.S). All family members directly se- P. Bauer1, Y. Kamenisch2, C. Bauer1, M. Sturm1, C. Schroeder1, O. Riess1, M. Berneburg3; 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of quenced for confirmation of targeted mutations in patients. Dermatology, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, Regensburg, Germany. We identified 9 mutated genes from DNA repair pathways including ATM, BRCA1, SLX4, FANCA, FANCB, FANCE, RAD51A P1
, RAD51A P2
, RECQ L5
 with the allele frequencies below 0.01 according to 1000 Genome project Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a rare genetic disorder with molecular de- (Oct 2011). Novel non-synonymous substitution founCdo ninc luFAsiNoCnE: causing fects in the DNA repair machinery. Clinically, patients suffer from increased glutamate to aspartate amino acid change. All mutations identified as da- UV-sensitivity and a skin cancer risk that is increased more than 1000-fold. maging variants using SIFT and PolyPhen softwares. The use It has been postulated that due to the repair defect patients show a mutator of WES identified that familial cases of ESCC harbor mutations from DNA re- phenotype with indicative UV-signature mutations. We have sequenced exo- pair, especially homologous recombination and Fanconi anemia pathways. mes from sun-exposed and sun-protected tissues from three patients with These findings have potential implications on the surveillance and treat- XPC. Moreover, two long-range amplicons covering the whole mitochondrial ment of ESCC patients. Particularly, these patients may benefit from treat- genome and a comparable nuclear DNA fragment have been sequenced at ment with DNA cross-linking chemotherapeutic drugs, such as cis-platin >1.000 x coverage. These three XP-C patients have been compared to young and mitomycin C, or from a PARP [poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase] inhibitor. and old healthy controls. The bioinformatics analysis was tailored towards Additionally, genetic consoling and mutational analysis of the proband‘s re- detection of exposition-specific variants with high sensitivity. A represen- latives will considerably benefit these individuals for their surveillance and tative subset of identified exposure-specific variants has been validated by early diagnosis leading to an improved disease management.  P12
.136-M a subsequent deep-sequencing approach. The number of exposure-specific Whole transcriptome analysis of testicular germ cell tumors variants was very high in the XP-C patients (610, 2.088, and 6528, respec- L. Degoricija1, K. Y. Lee1, S. Patel1, A. J. M. Gillis2, M. Rijlaarsdam2, L. C. J. Dorssers2, L. tively compared to 95%), the third XPC patient had relatively low num- Looijenga2; bers of exposure-specific variants and no predominance for UV signatures 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Erasmus MC- (~75% in 610 variants). Interestingly, all three samples displayed increase University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. variation in the nuclear DNA but not the mitochondrial DNA as expressed by the count of non-consensus bases in amplicon deep sequencing. As ex- pected, XPC hypermutation arises in the nuclear DNA predominantly with Next generation sequencing of the whole transcriptome enables high reso- typical signature mutations. Interestingly, not all XPC patients seem to share lution measurement of gene expression activity in different tissue and cell the signature phenotype although the hypermutation is a common feature. types. This methodology provides an in depth study of known transcripts In contrast, mitochondrial DNA does not show any differences as compared and depending on the data analysis, allows identification of additional tran- with young and old controls. script types such as transcript variants, fusion transcripts, and small and  P12
.139-S long ncRNAs. In this study we performed RNA-Seq using the Ion Torrent YA P1
 acts as oncogenic target of 11q22 amplification in multiple Proton platform to compare the expression profile of testicular germ cell cancer subtypes. tumors (seminoma type, n=3) and normal testis (n=3). Using Partek Flow E. Lorenzetto1, M. Brenca1, M. Boeri2, C. Verri2, E. Piccinin3, P. Gasparini2, F. Facchinetti4, S. and Star or TopHat aligners, we aligned the reads to the human genome and Rossi5, G. Salvatore6, M. Massimino7, G. Sozzi2, R. Maestro1, P. Modena8; 1CRO National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy, 2Milan National Cancer Institute, Milano, mapped sequences to the RefSeq database. We identified a large number Italy, 3Mario Negri Sud, Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy, 4INT National Cancer Institute, of genes that were up and down regulated with high degree of significance Milano, Italy, 5Treviso General Hospital, Treviso, Italy, 6University Federico II, Napoli, p<0.01, >2X FC). These included genes related to testicular tissue type, stem Italy, 7Milan Narional Cancer Institute, Milano, Italy, 8Sant‘ Anna General Hospital, cell pleuripotency (NANOG; POU5F1) and proliferation (KRAS, CCND2). In Como, Italy. addition, a number of differentially expressed noncoding RNAs were iden- tified (SNORD12B, XIST). The method was validated on a small set of ge- nes (>20) using qPCR (TaqMan Assays). We used the Open Array platform The transcriptional coactivator YA P1
 is a critical effector of the human Sal- to quantitatively screen a larger number of differentially expressed genes vador-Warts-Hippo-pathway. Literature data report apparently discrepant (224) across a number of different testicular germ cell tumor types (non- results on the carcinogenic role of YA P1
, which acts as oncogene or tumor s Pe 1m 2i .n 1o 3m 7-a S). suppressor in different in-vitro and in-vivo models. Furthermore, amplifica- Upregulation of key wnt signaling molecules in human astrocytic tion events of 11q22 locus-encompassing YA P1
 gene-have been detected in brain tumors multiple tumor types but there is limited direct evidence about the oncoge- N. Pecina-Slaus, A. Kafka, D. Tomas, B. Kruslin; nic role of endogenous YA P1
 within in the amplicon. Medical School University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. We screened a panel of human tumor samples and cancer cell lines and identified that the YA P1
 amplification event is actually present in up to 23% of the cases. We exploited EKVX, CaSki and RO82 cell lines harboring both The knowledge on molecular profiles of astrocytic brain tumors still needs genomic YA P1
 amplification and YA P1
 protein overexpression, in order to elucidation. In the present study key players of wnt signaling, beta-catenin study the effects of downregulation of endogenous YA P1
 by RNA-interfe- (CTNNB1), TCF1 and LEF1, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and axin rence strategies. Gene expression profiling data identified 707 statistically (AXIN1) were investigated in the set of human astrocytic brain tumors. significantly modulated genes (p-value =0.002) that were functionally an- The investigation of beta-catenin demonstrated 10% of samples with po- notated for cell proliferation and cellular movement ontologies. Mechanistic ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 265 tential activating mutations. The results on protein levels demonstrated that studies of the identified perturbed pathways revealed that YA P1
 silencingABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index significantly decreased cell proliferation and cell cycle perturbation asso- ted in down-regulation of  C1
orf24 at both mRNA and protein levels, when ciated with upregulation of p21 and p27 cell-cycle inhibitors, reduced cell compared to negative control. Mutations made at miR-106-5p binding sites migration (p<0.048) and anchorage-independent growth (p<0.02). In CaSki in the  C1
orf24 mRNA 3’ UTR showed that miR-106b directly interacts with cell line, YA P1
 silencing induced significantly increased sensitivity and cell-  C1
orf24. Additionally, miR-106b overexpression significantly decreased the death response to cisplatin treatment (p=0.011) as well as reduction of in- migration capabilities of cells whilst increased apoptosis rate. Our findings vivo tumorigenic potential (p=0.027). indicate that miR-106-5p may play a role in thyroid carcinogenesis by ne- Overall, these results establish that YA P1
 is a direct oncogenic target of the gatively regulating  C1
orf24 expression and, therefore, by acting as tumor 11q22 amplicon in previously unreported cancer types and support the re- suppressor. However, further analyses are needed to fully demonstrate the levance of such genetic aberration in carcinogenesis in a fraction of multiple role of miR-106b-5p in thyroid carcinogenesis. tumor types. Financial Support: FAPESP (2012/02902-9) and CNPq (470441/2013-5)  P12
.140-M  P12
.143-S No change in the rate of bilateral mammographies after BRCA1/2 SOX2 gene expression and copy number variation in squamous cell testing among true non-carriers lung cancer G. Larouche1,2, J. Chiquette1,2,3, J. Simard1,2,4, M. Dorval1,2,3; E. Sodja, M. Rijavec, A. Koren, I. Kern, P. Korošec, T. Čufer; 1Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada, 2Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec, Québec, University Clinic Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia. QC, Canada, 3Centre des maladies du sein Deschênes-Fabia, Québec, QC, Canada, 4Chaire de recherche du Canada en Oncogénétique, Québec, QC, Canada. Transcription factor SOX2 might have an important oncogenic role in deve- lopment and progression of lung cancer. The aim of our study was to estima- The majority of women who are true non-carriers of the BRCA1/2 familial te copy number variation (CNV) of SOX2 in primary tumours and to analyse mutation may be reassured that they are no longer considered at high risk SOX2 expression in primary tumour tissue and in blood samples in relati- for breast and ovarian cancer. For this reason, most should be encouraged on to CNV status in squamous cell lung cancer patients. 28 patients with to adopt the same cancer screening practices as those recommended to wo- metastatic squamous cell lung cancer were prospectively included between men of the same age in the general population. The aim of this study is to years 2010 and 2013. Total RNA was isolated from whole blood collected in compare the rate of bilateral mammographies after BRCA1/2 testing to that PAXgene Blood RNA Tube before any systemic treatment. For 10 patients prior among true non-carriers of BRCA1/2 mutation. Information from the primary tumour tissue was available from the same time points; for those Quebec Health Insurance Board was used to identify all registered bilateral patients RNA and DNA were extracted from FFPE tumours. SOX2 expression mammographies done between May 1, 1998 and March 31, 2012 among a levels and CNV status were determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Copy num- cohort of 143 French Canadian unaffected true non-carriers. The Cox pro- ber analysis revealed high copy number of SOX2 in 3/10 (30%) tumours and portional hazards model for repeated events, with women’s age as the time gain of function in another 3/10 (30%) tumours. Median SOX2 expression in scale, was used to obtain hazard ratios of bilateral mammographies. The FFPE tumour tissue was 3.9 (0.1-29.1) and in blood samples 5.4 (0.4-17.9). rate of mammographies did not change after BRCA1/2 testing, neither glo- Elevated copy number of SOX2 correlated with higher SOX2 expression in bally (HR=0.93, p=0.22), nor by age (<50 years HR=0.81, p=0.13; ≥50 years tumours (ρ=0.92). Moreover, correlation between SOX2 expression in blood HR=1.01, p=0.84). Although women <50 years had a lower rate of mam- samples and FFPE tumour tissue was observed (ρ =0.60); patients with high mographies than women ≥50 years (HR=0.55; 95% CI = 0.43-0.70) after SOX2 expression in blood tended to have high SOX2 expression in tumour genetic testing, 74% still continued to be screened, which is not generally tissue. According to our observation genetic alterations in SOX2 seem to be recommended to women of the same age group in the general population. common event in squamous cell lung cancer. Furthermore, good correlation In conclusion, genetic testing information did not have a significant effect between SOX2 expression in blood and tumour samples supports the idea of on mammography screening in our cohort of true non-carriers of BRCA1/2 liquid biopsy in lung cancer.  P13
.01-S mutation. Clear-cut recommendations for the follow-up of true non-carriers A French series of 731 patients with 22q11.2 microdeletion of BRCA1/2 mutation are needed.  P12
.141-S C. Poirsier Violle1, J. Besseau-Ayasse2, A. Bazin3, F. Amblard4, M. Deblois5, J. Bresson6, T. EGFR and ALK genes mutation screening in Non-small-cell lung Busa7, A. Moncla7, F. Cartault8, M. Catty9, A. Choiset10, C. Plessis11, N. Drouet Guilbert12, P. carcinoma (NSCLC) specimens Letard13, A. Tabet13, E. Flori14, M. Jimenez15, B. Leheup16, H. Lallaoui17, C. Lecaignec18, J. J. Kasnauskiene1,2, A. Laurinavičiene2, E. Žurauskas1,2, A. Šimbelytė2, A. Laurinavičius1,2; Lespinasse19, D. Martin20, F. Mugneret21, C. Pebrel-Richard22, M. Portnoi23, A. Receveur24, C. 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2National Centre of Pathology, Vilnius, Lithuania. Schluth-Bolard25, J. Toutain26, C. Yardin27, P. Kleinfinger3, F. Vialard2, M. Doco Fenzy1; 1Departement of Genetics, CHU Reims, Reims, France, 2Departement of Genetics, CHI POISSY, Poissy, France, 3Departement of Genetics, Pasteur-Cerba, Saint-Ouen, France, 4Departement of Genetics, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 5Departement of Genetics, BACKGROUND: Testing for genetic abnormalities in epithelial growth factor CHU Necker, Paris, France, 6Departement of Genetics, CHU Besançon, Besançon, receptor (EGFR) and anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK) is France, 7Departement of Genetics, CHU Marseille, Marseille, France, 8Departement of a critical tool in the care of advanced NSCLC. We investigated the incidence Genetics, CHU Saint-Denis, Saint-Denis de la Réunion, France, 9BioLille, Lille, France, of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and anaplastic lym- 10Departement of Genetics, CHU Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France, 11Departement of phoma kinase (ALK) rearrangements in Lithuanian patients with non-small Genetics, CHU Caen, Caen, France, 12Departement of Genetics, CHU Brest, Brest, France, cell lung cancer (NSCLC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: 326 NSCLC paraffin- 13Departement of Genetics, CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, 14Departement of Genetics, CHU Strasburg, Srasbourg, France, 15Departement of Genetics, CHU Tours, Tours, France, embedded, formalin-fixed (FFPE) specimens were collected, DNA extrac- 16Departement of Genetics, CHU Nancy, Nancy, France, 17Cylab, La Rochelle, France, ted, and using real time mutations analysis in EGFR gene and translocation 18Departement of Genetics, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 19Departement of Genetics, CH in AKL gene by IHC following confirmation positive test by FISH analysis. Chamberry, Chamberry, France, 20Departement of Genetics, CHU RLe Mans, Le Mans, RESULTS: We screened 326 consecutive patients with NSCLC for the pres- France, 21Departement of Genetics, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 22Departement of Genetics, ence of concomitant EGFR mutations and ALK rearrangements Mutations CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 23Departement of Genetics, CHU in EGFR gene appeared mutated in 17%; ALK translocation was found in Trousseau, Paris, France, 24Departement of Genetics, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 4% of NSCLC cases. 25Departement of Genetics, CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, 26Departement of Genetics, CHU  P12
.142-M Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 27Departement of Genetics, CHU Limoges, Limoges, France. miR-106b-5p may act as tumor suppressor by down-regulation  C1
orf24 expression in human thyroid carcinoma. G. M. G. Carvalheira, B. H. N. Nozima, J. M. Cerutti; The phenotype of the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is higly variab- UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. le with a wide spectrum of abnormalities. About 90% of patients have a 3Mb deletion spanning LCR22-A to LCR22-D in the 22q11 region containing four low copy repeats (LCR22). We have previously shown that the  C1
orf24 gene is highly expressed in Methods : On behalf of the ACLF, 27 French Cytogenetics laboratories col- follicular thyroid carcinomas while is not expressed in benign thyroid le- laborated to collect data of 731 patients with 22q11DS diagnosed between sions. However, little is known about the molecular mechanism involved in 1996 to 2013.  C1
orf24 expression. It is widely demonstrated that microRNAs (miRs) are Results : potent regulators of gene expression. The miRs expression varies in accor- Clinical data: On average over the years 2010-2012, at least 70 patients ding of tissue, development stage, and tumor types. We therefore, investi- were annually diagnosed postnatally. The symptomatology that led to gene- gated whether miRs could modulate  C1
orf24 expression in thyroid cancer. tic analysis changes with patient’s age, eg : In this study, we show that the miR-106b expression is lower in thyroid Heart defect, facial dysmorphism, hypocalcemia and thymus hypoplasia or carcinomas, than in benign thyroid lesions (p<0,01). Functional analysis agenesis in newborns was performed in follicular thyroid carcinoma cell line (WRO), which highly Developmental and speech delay with facial dysmorphism and velopharyn- e2x6pr6ess  C1
orf24 gene. The ectopic expression of mEiR S1
H06Gb 2in0to1 W4 R|O M reIsLuAl-N, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG geal insufficiency in childrenABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.04-M New splicing mutation in SERPINA1 gene causing severe alpha-1 Variable phenotype in adults : some had intellectual disability with typical antitrypsin deficiency gestalt, some had psychiatric disorders, and a minority was almost asympto- B. Lara1, M. T. Martínez2, I. Blanco3, I. Ferrarotti4, F. Rodriguez-Frias5, E. A. Velasco6, L. matic parents when the diagnosis was first made in their children. Perez7, J. Alonso8, M. Posada8, B. Martinez-Delgado7; Molecular data: Thirteen cases were diagnosed with array-CGH. The majo- 1Servicio de Neumología. Hospital Universitario Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain, rity of these patients were referred for intellectual disability (n=10/13) and 2Servicio de Neumología. Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 3Alpha1-Antitrypsin Deficiency Spanish Registry, Lung Foundation Breathe, Spanish only 3 had heart defect. The size of the deletion was variable: 745 - 2904 kb Society of Pneumology (SEPAR), Barcelona, Spain, 4Center for Diagnosis of Inherited and surprisingly only 46,2% had deletion between LCR22-A and LCR22-D. Alpha1-antitrypsin Deficiency, Department of Molecular Medicine, Section of The 22q11 deletion was inherited in 22.2% of cases and mainly maternally Pneumology, IRCCS San Matteo Hospital Foundation, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, (86.7%). 5Servicio de Bioquímica. Hospital Universitario Vall d’ Hebron., Barcelona, Spain, 6Grupo Conclusion : We report the largest series of 22q11DS postnatal diagnosis. de Splicing y Cáncer. Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular. Consejo Superior We plan to study more patients using array-CGH to investigate whether the de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC)., Valladolid, Spain, 7Molecular Genetics Unit. size of the deletion or the presence of other CNV may explain the phenotype Instituto de Investigación en Enferemdades Raras (IIER). Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 8Instituto de Investigación en Enferemdades Raras (IIER). variability.  P13
.02-M Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. Transgenerational inheritance of 22q11.2 atypical deletion: instability of LCRs in a family with discordant clinical phenotype R. L. Dutra1,2, É. A. Zanardo3, G. M. Novo-Filho3, A. T. Dias4, M. M. Montenegro4, F. A. S. L. Alpha1-antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency is a common hereditary disorder asso- Souza4, A. M. Nascimento3, C. O. Santos4, T. V. M. M. Costa4, F. B. Piazzon4, J. B. de Melo5, L. ciated with reduced AAT serum level, predisposing to pulmonary emphyse- D. Kulikowski4, C. A. Kim3; ma or liver disease. It is caused by inheritance of mutations in the AAT gene 1University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics/ LIM 36, HC-FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics/ LIM 36, (SERPINA1). Most of the deficiency alleles occur in the coding sequence of HC-FMUSP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Department of Pathology, Cytogenomics Laboratory/ LIM the gene due to aminoacid substitution or deletion resulting in reduced pro- 03, HC-FMUSP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 5Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of tein level or altered functionality. Rarely mutations affecting RNA splicing in Medicine, University of Coimbra,, Coimbra, Portugal. the AAT gene have been described so far. We have identified a new null allele, QOmadrid in two siblings with signi- ficantly reduced serum levels of AAT. QOmadrid allele results from a du- Genomic rearrangements in 22q11.2 region are caused mainly by LCRs plication of a timine in the position +2 of the donor splice site of exon 1C elements or repetitive sequences, leading to different clinical phenotypes (+2dupT). In these patients QOmadrid occurred in combination with ano- including velocardiofacial or DiGeorge syndrome. Most of the deletions en- ther previously described rare null variant, QOporto. These two variants compass the ~3 (LCR A and D) or ~1.5 Mb (LCR A and B), however atypical correspond to splicing mutations in a regulatory region of the gene, both deletions have been described in a few cases. Patients with genomic alterati- causing disruption of the normal splicing of intron 1C. Analysis of tran- ons in 22q11.2 region present a spectrum of phenotypic manifestations and scripts in patients’ samples and in vitro assays using minigenes revealed this condition can be more severe compared with the relatives. We report on abnormal splicing leading to absence of transcription from exon 1C, where a family, including the maternal grandfather, the mother and daughter, with the hepatocytes transcription start site is located. Thus, in these patients discordant clinical phenotype and 22q11.2 atypical deletion using SNP-ar- no normally spliced RNA products are expected to be produced in the liver, ray (Illumina 850K) in order to better delineate the size of deletion. In three causing the AAT deficiency. This mutation constitutes a new null allele, QO- generations we found a difference in the deletion size in the 22q11.2 region, madrid, contributing to explain the disease.  P13
.05-S range of approximately 0.1 Kb to 0.5 Kb, encompassing the A and B LCRs for Upstream open reading frames regulate cannabinoid receptor 1 mother and daughter, and also the A and C LCRs in the grandfather. expression under baseline conditions and during cellular stress Although there are rare, atypical variant deletion endpoints could provides M. Eggert1, M. Pfob1, G. Schelling2, O. K. Steinlein1; important insights related to the role of genomic architecture in chromoso- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, m  P1
a 3l .r 0e 3ar -Srangements, chromosome evolution, and in human disease. Munich, Germany, 2Department of Anesthesiology, University Hospital, Ludwig- Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. A catalog of hemizygous variation in 127 22q11 deletion patients M. S. Hestand1, B. A. Nowakowska1,2, J. K. J. Van Houdt1,3, L. Dehaspe3, A. Swillen1, K. Devriendt1, D. McDonald-McGinn4, B. S. Emanuel5, S. T. Warren6, J. R. Vermeesch1; 1Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Institute of Mother and The endocannabinoid system (ECS) plays a crucial role in the regulation of Child, Warsaw, Poland, 3Genomics Core, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Clinical Genetics, a variety of physiological functions, such as learning and memory proces- The Children‘s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Perelman sing, vegetative control, energy homeostasis, immunity and stress response. School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, It acts through different endogenous endocannabinoids which are able 6Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, to bind to the cannabinoid receptor subtypes 1 and 2 (CNR1 and CNR2). United States. The CNR1 is not only associated with phenotypes such as cognitive perfor- mance, addiction and anxiety, but is also known to be crucially involved in cellular responses to acute and chronic stress conditions. The molecular me- The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) is the most common chro- chanisms leading to altered CNR1 expression under acute or chronic stress mosomal deletion syndrome in humans with an incidence of 1 in 2-4000 exposure are not completely understood so far. It is known that the 5’- and live births. The clinical presentation of 22q11.2DS is extremely variable, 3’untranslated regions (UTRs) of genes can harbor regulatory elements, but the underlying reason for this variation remains unknown. Individuals such as upstream open reading frames (uORFs) that are capable of influen- with 22q11.2DS most often have a classically associated 3 MB or 1.5 MB cing the expression pattern of the main protein coding region. deletion. However, nested deletions as well as atypical deletions also occur In our study, we investigated the influence of putatively functional uORFs that can contribute to the broad spectrum of phenotypic abnormalities. It is present in the five known mRNA variants of the human CNR1 gene on tran- also hypothesized that variations in the remaining allele could underly the scription and translation under baseline conditions and various stress con- phenotypic variability. ditions in vitro. The functional analysis performed with reporter gene assay To investigate variation within the non-deleted allele we performed targe- and quantitative realtime PCR revealed that two of these variants contain ted resequencing of the 22q11.2 region for 127 patients, identifying mul- upstream open reading frames that modulate gene expression both under tiple deletion sizes, including two atypical deletions. We cataloged over 18 baseline condition and conditions of cellular stress. Thus our findings sug- thousand hemizygous variant positions, of which sixty percent were pre- gest that the functionally relevant uORFs found in the 5’UTR variants of viously annotated. As expected, in this gene dense region more variants CNR1 are part of the cellular stress response mechanisms. were intronic (52%) than intergenic (36%). Within the coding regions we  P13
.06-M identified 213 non-synonymous variants, 6 stop gains, and 5 frameshift in- Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular analyses in seven patients with a sertions. In addition, the observed number of variants per gene was higher constitutive autosomal ring chromosome. or lower than expected for some genes in both our data and 1000 genomes A. Cervantes1,2, C. García-Delgado3, F. Fernández-Ramírez1, A. Reyes de la Rosa3, P. data, indicating some genes may tolerate variation more or less than others. Núñez Martínez3, K. Nieto Martínez2, L. Gómez Laguna1, A. Morales Jimenez3, C. Arias Villegas3, L. Muñoz Martínez3, J. Berumen1, S. Kofman1, V. F. Morán-Barroso3; This extensive catalog of hemizygous varaints will serve as a blueprint for 1Hospital General de Mexico Dr. Eduardo Liceaga, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Facultad de future experiments to correlate 22q11DS variation with phenotype and Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 3Hospital Infantil de Mexico Federico Gómez, serve as an analysis model as we extend to whole genome sequencing of Mexico, D.F., Mexico. 22q11DS patients. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |A WutoWsoWma.El rSinHgG ch.OroRmGosomes have a frequency of 1/30,000 to 1/602,06070ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index births. We report 7 patients identified from the cytogenetic registers of the G-CTH involving six breakpoints and a ~108kb deletion within a ~6,4Mb re- HIMFG, who attended during the last 8 years. They corresponded to r(4) gion on 3q22.3-q23. Although six protein-coding genes were affected by the (p16q35), r(5)(p15.3q35.3), r(9)(q24.3q34.3), r(14)(p11?q32.33), r(19) breakpoints the 10 carriers of the G-CTH do apparently not have common (p13.3q13.4), r(21)(p11q22.3) and idic r(21)(p11.2q22.3) (cases1-7, re- associated disorders. However, there are several spontaneous miscarriages spectively). Additional chromosomal analyses with GTG banding were per- in the family records presumably resulting from unbalanced rearrangements formed in all cases, FISH with subtelomeric probes were applied to 4 cases due to G-CTH. Our study is the first report suggesting that G-CTH may not and molecular karyotyping with SNP array were carried out in 2. As cases always be associated with an abnormal phenotype but may also have a neu- 2 and 5 are mosaic with a normal cell line, they should have been origina- tral effect. It is therefore possible that G-CTH may be found not only among ted postzygotically. A dynamic mosaicism was present in all the cases. All individuals with apparently balanced rearrangements but also karyotypi- the rings were originated by breaks on both arms with loss of subtelomeric cally normal asymptomatic individuals. We describe CTH on the cytogene- material and subsequent reunion of free ends with the exception of cases 2 tic level based on recommendations of ISCN-2013 (International System and 5. The r(14) was probably generated by an inv-dup-del mechanism as for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature) as: 46,XX,t(3;5)(q22.3;q23.1).arr there are a deletion and a duplication of 14q. The large dicentric r(21) may ngs[hg19] 3q23.3(137735949-137845370)x1.ngs 3q22.3q23(135827611- have been formed by breakage and reunion of long arms of an isochromoso- 142218722)cth fam. We suggest combining this with a molecular descrip- me. The phenotypes described included short height, microcephaly, variable tion following HGVS (Human Genome Variation Society) nomenclature (see facial dysmorphism and psychomotor developmental delay, corresponding ESHG abstract by Taschner P. et al.). *Shared first-authors  P13
.10-M to autosomal ring syndrome. Some patients showed hirsutism, renal abnor- A family-based genome-wide scan shows 10q25.2, LRFN2, TGFB2 and malities and hypoacusia, data corresponding to monosomy of the specific CRISPLD2 loci associated with cleft lip with or without cleft palate in a chromosomal region implicated. Cases 1 and 7 presented characteristics of high-prevalence cluster in South America Wolf-Hirschhorn and Down syndromes, respectively. Patients 2 and 4 had F. M. de Carvalho1, F. A. Poletta2, R. F. Fonseca1, D. Montaner3, J. Mereb4, M. A. M. Moreira5, difficult control seizures. We consider that the variable clinical data repor- H. N. Seuanez6, A. R. Vieira7, E. E. Castilla2, I. M. Orioli1; ted in these patients are due to the specific chromosomal region involved 1ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) and and to the ring chromosome instability. INAGEMP (National Institute of Population Medical Genetics) at Department of  P13
.07-S Genetics, Institute of Biology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, A new translocation involving 4 and 11 chromosomes in a adult man 2ECLAMC and INAGEMP at CEMIC (Center for Medical Education and Clinical Research) S. Barati, A. Giuffrida, E. Ferro, M. Santagati, C. D. Salpietro, R. Civa; (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Bioinformatics Department Research Center Genetic and Immunology Pediatric Department, AOU Policlinic G.Martino, Messina, Italy. Principe Felipe, Valencia, Spain, 4ECLAMC and INAGEMP at Hospital Zonal El Bolsón, El Bolsón, Argentina, 5Genetics Division, National Cancer Institute, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 6Genetics Division, National Cancer Institute; Department of Genetics, Institute of Chromosomal translocations occurring between the chromosome 11 (regi- Biology, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 7Departments of Oral on q12) and other chromosomes are the most recurrent chromosomal aber- Biology and Pediatric Dentistry and Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. rations observed in some subtypes of leukemia, lymphoma and sarcomas. In many cases, identification of these chromosome abnormalities is crucial to select appropriate treatment protocols. Background: In South America four cleft lip with or without cleft palate To our knowledge we are the first group to describe a new translocation, (CL±P) high prevalence regions was detected, one of them being the Pata- involving 11q12 and 4q21 regions, in a 35 years old man. gonia (Argentina). We aim the identification of independent autosomal seg- The proband came to our observation to perform cytogenetic analysis be- ments containing polymorphic markers that may contribute to CL±P with a cause of a suspected infertility and we found 46,XY t (4;11) (q21;q12) ka- family-based design for genome-wide association scan. ryotype. The man had a cortical dysplasia and seizures from birth. Methods: The study sample included 26 families with isolated CL±P (27 We extended the cytogenetic analysis to the parents and sister of the pro- affected and 99 total individuals).They were genotyped on the Affymetrix band and the same translocation was found only in the father. Genome-Wide 6.0 array. Only „independent“ SNPs were included in the as- It is known that some types of dysplasia are linked to the presence of genetic sociation analysis. We calculated linkage disequilibrium (LD) between each alteration but so far it has not been described any association between dys- pair of SNPs into a window of 50 SNPs, shifting the window 5 SNPs forward plasia and chromosomal aberration. and repeating the procedure to scan all autosomes. Then we pruned the data The region 11q12 is involved in many chromosomal translocations such as removing one SNP of each pair that was in strong LD (r >0.8). We perform t(2;11) (q31; q12), t(11; 17) (q12; p11.2), and t(6; 11) (p21; q12) which are the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT). We identified segments of a all related to tumor development . The common breakpoint region (11q12) maximum length of 250Kb with more than one SNP significantly associated has been delineated by FISH and contains the FOS L1
 gene which has been with CL±P. associated with fibroblast growth or cancer development, such as colorectal, Results: A total of 88 genomic segments with two or more independent SNPs breast, prostate and lung cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. significantly associated with CL±P were identified. An intergenic region of Since the region 11q12 seems to be linked to tumor development, would be 33Kb on 10q25.2 showed the most significant association with CL±P (p< appropriate to perform a follow-up to monitor the subject at risk.  P13
.09-S 0.00007). Furthermore, we found other significant association with 6p21.2 Stable segregation of apparently benign chromothripsis in three including the marker rs4153154 (p<0.00009). Besides, others genomic seg- generations ments including the genes TGFB2 (1.4Kb on 1q41) and CRISPD L2
 (61.3Kb L. Nazaryan*1, B. Bertelsen*1, W. Sun*2, M. Bak3, G. Xie2, W. Chen2, L. E. Hjermind4,5, J. T. d. on 16q24.1) deserve our attention because they have previously been asso- Dunnen6, P. E. M. Taschner6, Z. Tumer1; ciated with oral cleft in others populations. 1Applied Human Molecular Genetics, Kennedy Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Conclusion: Our results suggest 10q25.2 and some genes spread across au- Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Berlin, Germany, 3Wilhelm Johannsen t Po 1s 3o .m 11es -S as candidate loci to CL±P. Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular The FRA14B common fragile site maps to a region of frequent somatic Medicine, Faculty of Health Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, and germ-line rearrangements within the GPHN gene 4Memory Disorders Research Group, Neurogenetics Clinic, Department of Neurology, D. Zheglo1, L. Brueckner2, L. Savelyeva2; Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Department of 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2German Cancer Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Section of Neurogenetics, Panum Institute, University Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Human Genetics, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Common fragile sites (cFS) are heritable chromosomal loci that exhibit Chromothripsis (CTH) is a newly described phenomenon of chromosome non-random breaks on metaphase chromosomes in response to replication shattering where multiple localized breakpoints result in catastrophic geno- stress. Chromosome breakage at cFSs contributes to cancer genome evolu- mic rearrangements. CTH is found both as a somatic (cancer) and germline tion and de novo pathogenic germ-line alterations. Approximately 90 cFSs rearrangement (G-CTH). The limited G-CTH cases (n=16) described so far have been identified at cytogenetic band resolution, but just few of them have all been associated with abnormal phenotype. In this study we pre- have been molecularly characterized. Precise mapping of cFSs can reveal sent a familial G-CTH with 7 breakpoints and a deletion, stably segregating new rearrangement-prone candidate genes critical for the development of in three generations (10 individuals) without an apparent association with cancer and hereditary conditions. a disorder. Initial cytogenetic analysis suggested an apparently balanced We performed FRA14B mapping in cultured lymphocytes treated with a translocation t(3;5)(q22.3;q23.1). Using chromosome array and next gene- replication inhibitor, aphidicoline, using six-color FISH with contiguous r2a6tio8n mate-pair sequencing followed by Sanger seqEuSenHciGng 2 w0e1 d4isc |o MverIeLdA aN , BITAAC LpYro |b eWs Won Wme.EtaSpHhaGse. OchRroGmosomes. FRA14B was restricted to a 765 kb region within 14q23.3, overlapping with a major part of the GPHN gene.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index GPHN encodes a protein involved in molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis and study revealed a ~20% long-term disease-risk of unselected BCRdn, 2-3 fold clustering of postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors. Computational ana- higher than previously assumed, suggesting that a genotype-phenotype re- lysis of the FRA14B sequence revealed a large hairpin-prone motif. Targeted lationship can be obtained for a significant number of the human genes by oligonucleotide array CGH in 160 cancer cell lines and primary tumors de- mapping of BCRs. tected 13 copy number alterations at FRA14B. Sequence analysis of cancer We have initiated clinical reexamination/mapping of all known BCRs in breakpoint junctions indicated an involvement of microhomology-mediated Denmark. Based on a population of just 5.5 mill, this will provide data on repair. In 2 cell lines, exonic deletions resulted in the expression of abberant >1.200 breakpoints. By international expansion, we will extend this at least GPHN transcripts. A survey of publicly available copy number profiles re- 10-fold to reach a proposed first goal of ~10.000 breakpoints. Unlike other vealed that FRA14B is a hotspot of focal losses in cancer cell lines, loss-in- large scale genomic efforts, all countries including undeveloped and develo- size rare CNVs, and rare and de-novo deletions in patients with neurodeve- ping countries can participate. The breakpoint-map will identify and con- lopmental diseases. firm numerous genotype-phenotype associations, saturate the regulatory In summary, intrinsic chromosome instability at FRA14B may account for landscapes around evo-devo genes that specify the vertebrate body plan, pathogenic germ-line and somatic GPHN alterations, providing new insight reveal novel genetic mechanisms, and define genomic regions which can be into the role of cFSs in cancer and neurological disorders. mutated without any direct phenotypic consequence.  P13
.12-M  P13
.14-M Signature of germline chromothripsis in a 14-break complex Insight into the mutational mechanism of the recurrent CREBBP rearrangement associated with deletions at 7q33-q35/11p13 and c.3832G>A p.(Glu1278Lys) mutation in patients with Rubinstein- CNTNA P2
 gene disruption Taybi syndrome A. C. S. Fonseca1,2, S. Antonini2, A. Bonaldi2, M. Mehrjouy1, M. Bak1, N. Tommerup1, A. M. M. J. van Belzen, C. A. C. van der Lans, D. J. M. Peters, C. L. Harteveld; Vianna-Morgante2; Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare disorder affecting approximately 1/100,000 newborns. The syndrome is characterized by mental and grow- th retardation and a particular dysmorphology mainly concerning the face, We report an apparently balanced complex chromosome rearrangement hands and feet. The most frequent cause of RSTS are de novo mutations in (CCR) t(7;10)(q35;p12.1)ins(7;11 )C(Nq3T5N;Ap P124
.1p12) associated with intellec- the CREBBP gene, leading to haplo-insufficiency and found in 30-50% of pa- tual disability, developmental delay, absent speech and aniridia. The break- tients. Furthermore, micro-deletions involving the CREBBP gene have been points were mapped by FISH. The gene was truncated bMyK thXe bre- found in ~10% of patients. akpoint at 7q35 (chr7:146,808,760-146,922,794; hg 19). The BbrDeNaFkpoint Mutations are distributed throughout the gene and most mutations are uni- interval at 10p12.1 (chr10:27,897,058-28,081,590) contains the gene. que. The c.3832G>A p.(Glu1278Lys) mutation in exon 21 is one of the most The distal insertion breakpoint interval at 11p14.1 includes the gene frequent pathogenic sequence variants in the CREBBP gene. We have identi- (chr11:27,718,086-27,929,856), whilst the proximal breakpoint was map- fied this mutation in six independent patients out of a group of 101 RTS pa- ped to a segment devoid of genes at 11p12 (chr11:37,068,735-38,957,367). tients with a CREBBP mutation. Five of these patients were from the Nether- Array-CGH (180K; Agilent) detected four deletions of 2.3Mb, 1.6Mb, 724Kb lands, and another was from Spain. The molecular mechanism underlying and 610kb at 7q33-q35 (chr7:135,994,754-138,315,026; chr7:138,522,186- most Guanine to Adenine substitutions is deamination of Cytosine to Uracil 140,134,404; chr7:140,258,006-140,982,607; chr7:144,738,971-145- and the subsequent replacement of the complementary Guanine for an Ade- , P3
A4X96,495), encompassing 28 genes. The inserted fragment of chromosome nine during DNA replication. However, recurring disease mutations in to- 11 contains a 2.9Mb deletion (chr11:28,964,028-31,926,058), spanning tally independent individuals at the same position within the gene suggests and other nine genes. To characterize this CCR at the nucleotide le- a shared mutation mechanism. By the systematic analysis of known DNA vel mate-paired sequencing is in progress. The der(7) nine breakpoints and mutation mechanisms such as gene conversion, homologous recombination der(11) four breakpoints are, respectively, within 10.9Mb (7q33-q35) and and DNA replication faults involving loop formation one may get insight in 11.2Mb (11p14.1-p12) segments. Considering the breakpoint clustering more general disease causing mutation mechanisms and find an explanati- and chromosome reorganization, we speculate that chromothripsis under- on for recurrent mutations. This may have implications for counseling when lies this CCR formation. Twelve germline chromothripsis were previously hotspots are predictable based on knowledge about mechanisms leading to reported, most of them balanced (Kloosterman et al. Curr Opin Cell Biol disease causing mutations. 2013;25:341). Our case illustrates that localized shattering of chromoso-  P13
.15-S mes and assembly of resulting fragments, signature of chromothripsis, may In vivo and in silico analyses of impact of the p.Val322Ala mutation on result in several fragment losses. Therefore the balanced state of most germ- CFTR protein in a Brittany family line cases might not be a feature of coPnAsXt6itutional chromothripsis, bCuNtT rNeAflPec2t, R. Farhat1, A. El Seedy1,2, A. Sari1, M. Pasquet1,3, C. Adolphe4, A. Kitzis1,3, V. Ladeveze1; 1Université de Poitiers Pôle Biologie Santé, Génétique Moléculaire de Maladies Rares, embryonic viability. Among the deleted/disrupted genes likely contributing Poitiers, France, 2Department of Genetics, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, 3CHU to the patient’s clinical features are explaining aniridia, and de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 4Université de Poitiers, Poitiers, France. implicated in neurodevelopment, and particularly language abilities. Background: Financial support: FAPESP (2011/14293-4;2013/01146-9;2013/08028-1).  P13
.13-S Saturation of the human genome with chromosomal breakpoints Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive severe genetic N. Tommerup1, M. B. Rasmussen1, C. L. Schlechter2, M. M. Mehrjouy1, I. Bache1,3, A. disease. Mutations on CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Lind-Thomsen1, A. Silahtaroglu1, C. Hansen1, S. Kjaergaard3, K. Brøndum-Nielsen4, P. K. A. Regulator) gene could induce CF or CFTR-RD (related disorder). A missense Jensen5, C. Fagerberg6, L. N. Krogh7, J. Hansen5,8, A. C. D. S. Fonseca1,9, A. M. V. Morgante9, mutation detected in a Brittany family (c.965T>C or p.Val322Ala) was stu- K. T. Abe10, C. Halgren1, P. Jacky11, M. Bak1; died since this mutation is present in a family owning ian r sisilkic ¼o to have a child 1University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, United States, 3Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Kennedy Center, carrying this mutation and another severe mutation in trans (p.Phe508del). Glostrup, Denmark, 5Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Vejle Hospital, Vejle, AToim p:r ovide a wise genetic counseling to this family, and biological Denmark, 7Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 8Danish Cytogenetic Central sintu cdeilelusl oo f the impact of the p.Val322Ala on CFTR protein were realized. Registry, Aarhus, Denmark, 9Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 10Rede Sarah This mutation was studied to elucidate its impact on CFTR process de Hospitais de Reabilitação, Brasília, Brazil, 11Northwest Permanente, PC, Emeritus, M(emthatoudrsa:t ion and localization), and in silico (protein structure) as Portland, OR, United States. the prediction of the severity of this mutation is evaluated as “high” by Poly- phen-2. pTCF plasmids containing CFTR-WT, or CFTR-p.Pihne s5il0ic8o- del, or CFRTeRs-upl.tVsa: l322Ala are transfected in eukaryotic cells for western blot Even in the era of exome and full genome sequencing, it will take decades and confocal microscopy. Polyphen 2 and swiss prot were used to and tremendous resources to saturate the human genome with mutations studies. The p.Val322Ala leads to a normal processinCgo anncdl ucsoirornecst: linked to abnormal and normal phenotypes. membrane localization. Both mutated protein and the WT-CFTR structures As a supplement to exome and full genome sequencing strategies, we will are similar, suggesting that this mutation is a mild mutation. use already identified balanced chromosomal reaurnrsaenlegcetmede ndtes n o(BvoCR) to These results emphasise the importance of molecular studies in elucidating establish a first, detailed map of mutations covering a significant fraction the impact of mutations on clinical phenotypes and therapeutic strategies. of the human genome. In the first reexamination of BCRs (BCRdn) detected by 40 years of prenatal diagnosis in Denmark, we have shown that BCRs truncate protein coding genes, ncRNA genes, unannotated transcripts detected by deep sequencing, EasS wHeGll a2s 0d1ev4e l|o pMmIeLnAtaNl r,e IgTuAla-LY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 269 tory genomic landscapes, mimicing random mutagenesis. In addition, ourABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.16-M High frequency of chromosomal anomalies and a novel chromosomal insertion associated with infertility and recurrent lower jaw, hypertrichosis, and pectus excavatum. Cytogenetic analysis has miscarriages(Reproductive Failure) in west Turkey indicated the presence of a deletion at the short arm of chromosome 8 in F. Silan1, S. Yalcintepe1, D. Uysal1, M. Urfali1, E. SIK1, A. Uludag1, E. Cosar2, A. N. Cakir about 60% of cells. SNP/oligonucleotide CGH has confirmed the presence Gungor2, O. Ozdemir1; of mosaic terminal deletion at 8p21.3p23.1 spanning about 11.152 Mb af- 1Canakkale Onsekiz Mart Universty, Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, fecting 178 genes. Molecular cytogenetic analysis showed that 48% of cells Canakkale, Turkey, 2Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University Faculty of Medicine Department are affected by this deletion. Clinically, the index case resembles non-mo- of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Canakkale, Turkey. saic deletions of 8p23. Nevertheless, milder manifestations of intellectual disability, microcephaly and facial dismorphisms were noticed, whereas autistic features were found to be more prominent. Interestingly, genomic Numerical and/or structural chromosomal abnormalities may be a reason of loci flanking the breakpoint of mosaic deletion were regularly deleted. The high infertility rates and recurrent pregnancy losses (RPLs) in humans. Ka- regular deletion spanned three olfactory receptor (OR) genes (OR7 E158
P, ryotype and karyogram profiles of patients with RPLs are presented in cur- OR7 E161
P, OR7 E160
P) and three beta-defensin (DEFB) genes (DEFB137, rent results. A total of 722 patients; 161(44.5%) infertile and 200(55.5%) DEFB136, DEFB134). Since OR gene clusters are known to be involved in RPL couples were included in the study. generation of 8p chromosome rearrangements, we have hypothesized that Karyotype and structural chromosome analyses of both patient groups in at least in the present case DEFB gene cluster is also involved in chromoso- Canakkale population were made between May 2011-December 2013, using me abnormality formation. Finally, to our knowledge this is the first case of peripheral lymphocyte cell culture and GTG banding technique. a mosaic 8p deletion addressed by SNP/oligonucleotide CGH and mediated High frequency of chromosomal abnormalities(%7.45) were detected by OR gene recombination. Supported by the Russian Federation President in 24 patients of the infertility group(n:322). 10 patients(42%) of this Grant (MD-4401.2013.7).  P13
.19-S group(n:24) had numerical and 14 patients(58%) had balanced structural Differential allelic expression of the SO S1
 c.755C activating variant in choromosomal abnormalities. A novel choromosomal insertion was found a Noonan syndrome family in an infertile male, one of the 22th choromosome was totally inserted in 9th S. Moncini1, M. T. Bonati2, I. Morella3, L. Ferrari1, R. Brambilla3, P. Riva1; choromosome [ins(9;22)(9pter-q12::22q11.1-q13.33::9q12-9qter)]. This is 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale - Università degli the first report of germline total inserion of a chromosome. Interestingly, Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 3Istituto this insertion was inherited from father. Balanced structural chromosomal Scientifico San Raffaele, Milano, Italy. abnormalities was also detected in 17 patients (4.25%) of RPL group wit- hout any numerical abnormalities. Current results constitute the first report on the high incidence of struc- Noonan Syndrome (NS) is a genetic condition characterized by congenital tural chromosomal aberrations in RPLs and infertile couples in Canakkale heart defects, short stature and characteristic facial features. We analyzed d Pi 1s 3tr .i 1c 7t. -S a girl with moderate learning disabilities, delayed language development, Combination of molecular techniques in evaluation of de novo craniofacial features and skin anomalies reminiscent of NS. After a mutation chromosome rearrangements involving terminal regions screening of the known NS genes PTPN11, SO S1
, RAF1, KRAS, GRB2, BRAF A. Pavel1, L. Dimos1, V. Plaiasu1,2, O. Mantescu1, F. Nedelea1,3, R. Simion1, D. Stambouli1; and SHO C2
 we found the heterozygous c.755T/C variation in SO S1
 causing 1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, 2Mother and Child Care Institute the I252T substitution, which was considered possibly pathogenetic by bio- “Alfred Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania, 3Filantropia Clinic Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. informatic predictions. The same mutation was present in the proband’s mother and maternal grandfather, both displaying some NS features, but also by a healthy subject on 1000 genomes analyzed. The functional ana- Structural aberrations make a significant contribution to genetic disease. lysis revealed that the SO S1
 c.755T/C activated the Ras effector Erk1, con- Balanced or unbalanced structural abnormalities may be inherited from a firming the predicted pathogenetic substitution. To explain the incomplete carrier parent or may occur as de novo rearrangements. When the abnor- penetrance of the reported mutation we hypothesized that SO S1
 may be mality occurs as a de novo event, the risk for genetic disease or phenotypic subjected to a differential allelic expression (DAE). Interestingly, after se- effects is increased, even when the rearrangement appears balanced. This quencing the cDNA from peripheral blood compared to genomic DNA, we may result from either submicroscopic deletions or duplications at the bre- showed a DAE of some known SO S1
 SNSs in healthy individuals and obser- akpoints. ved the mutated allele C 50% more expressed than the normal allele T in all We report three cases with structural chromosomal abnormalities that were our NS familial carriers. The similar level of SO S1
 mRNA, between mutated detected using a combination of different techniques. Conventional karyo- and control individuals, suggests that the mutation here described does not type revealed the presence of de novo chromosomal rearrangements in all affect SO S1
 expression. We are now evaluating the SO S1
 promoter polymor- three cases. The investigation continued with targeted array CGH (Compa- phisms. This study, providing the first evidence of allelic imbalance of SO S1
, rative Genomic Hybridization) technique, using BAC (Bacterial Artificial pinpoint DAE as a possible mechanism underlying a different penetrance of Chromosome) clones for the identification of chromosome imbalances. Sin- some SO S1
 mutated alleles in unrelated carriers.  P13
.20-M ce the results obtained using cytogenetic analysis and targeted array CGH Association of genetic factors involved in folate metabolism and the revealed the implication of terminal regions of abnormal chromosomes, we occurrence of congenital heart defects in individuals with Down also applied MLPA (Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) for syndrome subtelomeric regions, as an additional detection technique. In two cases ad- C. C. Mendes, I. G. Forte, J. A. Setino, J. M. Biselli-Périco, B. L. Zampieri, D. B. Victorino, E. ditional information regarding the chromosome constitution was provided M. Goloni-Bertollo, É. C. Pavarino; by MLPA. Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto - FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil. Knowing the advantages and limits of each technique, complementary in- vestigations were necessary to detect the architecture of chromosomal im- balances. Down syndrome (DS) individuals with polymorphisms in genes involved in Further investigations for a specific case, although it means additional costs, folate metabolism can have increased risk for developing congenital heart are required by a low genotype-phenotype correlation. Any discrepancy defects, which are the leading cause of death in the first years of life. Moreo- between the clinical picture and the results of genetic testing imposes sup- ver, these polymorphMisTmHsF Rin motherMs TmHaFyR a lso be assMoTciHaFteRd with theM riTsRk p Pl 1e 3m .1e 8nt -a Mry tests for an accurate diagnosis and a proper genetic counseling. for congenRiFtaCl1 heart disMeaTsReR in DS offsTpCr2ing. This sTtuCd2y investiCgBatSed whether Somatic mosaicism for deletion at 8p21.3p23.1: some new twists on tChBeS presenceB oHfM thTe MCT67H7FTD, 1 A12D9H8FCR, T1317CS, HMT generation of terminal 8p rearrangements A2756G, A80G, A66G,  C776
G, A67G, 844ins68, A. D. Kolotii1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, V. Y. Voinova1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2,4; T833C, G742A, G1958A, del 19 bp and 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation,  C1420
T polymorphisms in DS individuals and their mothers is associated 2Institute of Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian with congenital heart defects. We evaluated 86 individuals with free trisomy Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian 21 and their mothers, attended by Genetics Service at Faculdade de Medi- Federation, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate cina de São José do Rio Preto at the period 200R5F- C21008
. The investigation of Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation. polymorphisms was performed by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), Real time PCR and PCR followed by digestion. The BHM T80G polymorphic allele increased the risk for interatrial communication (IAC) (OR=7.92, CI=1.21- Somatic mosaicism for terminal 8p deletions is rare. Here, we report on a 51.84, P=0.03) when in DS individuals. The 742A maternal poly- case of a deletion at 8p21.3p23.1 affecting about 50% of cells addressed morphic allele increased the risk of atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) by SNP/oligonucleotide CGH. An 8 year old girl presented with intellec- t2u7al0 disability, autistic features, microcephaly, largE eS uH pG pe r2 i0 n1 ci4 so | r sM , sI mL aA llN , (ITOAR= L1
Y0 . |5
 0W; WC=W1.3.6E- S81
H.0G6;. OPR=0G.02) and interventricular communicationABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer Hospital, Prague, Czech RF C1
 Republic. (IVC) (OR=1B8H.0M0T; CI=2.0-159.09; P=0.009) in DS offspring. We conclude that the A80G polymorphism in DS individuals is associated with the risk for IAC and G742A maternal polymorphism is associated with risk for Heterochromatin rearrangements are believed to be clinically insignificant A PV 1S 3D .2 a 1n -Sd IVC in DS offspring. variants of the human karyotype. However, several authors have studied Protective action of NADPH oxidase inhibitors and the role of NADPH the possible association of heterochromatin variants with certain clinical oxidase in the pathogenesis of colon inflammation in mice diagnoses, especially with reproduction failure. Variants of heterochroma- V. Salteniene, R. Ramonaite, S. Juzenas, J. Kupcinskas, J. Skieceviciene, L. Kupcinskas; tin area of chromosome 9 are the most common. They involve enlargement Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Institute for Digestive Research, Kaunas, (qh+) or shortening (qh-) of the heterochromatin block as well as the peri- Lithuania. centric inversion - inv(9)(p12q13). More complex variants of this area may include duplication and/or combination of above mentioned rearrange- ments. AIM: To investigate the role of NADPH oxidase in colon epithelial cells in Distinguishing between benign and pathological rearrangement in this area pathogenesis of acute and chronic colon inflammation using mice dextran can be challenging. The classical G and/or C-banding are not very specific sulphate sodium (DSS) colitis model. and array methods like SNP-array/array-CGH are usually not able to ana- METHODS: BALB/c mice were divided into three groups: 8 mice with acute lyse precisely this pericentric region, which is composed mainly of satellite DSS colitis, 8 mice with chronic DSS colitis and 12 mice without DSS sup- DNA. plementation as control group. The primary colonic epithelial cells were For enhanced analysis of heterochromatin area of chromosome 9 we imple- isolated using chelation method. The cells were cultivated in the presence mented a special molecular cytogenetic method using three different FISH of mediators (lipopolysaccharide (LPS), apocynin or diphenyleneiodoni- probes - centromeric alpha-satellite, centromeric III-DNA satellite and a um). Viability of cells was assessed by fluorescent microscopy. Production specific BAC probe (hybridizing on 9p12 and 9q13 homologous sequences). of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by the cells was measured fluorimetrical- The outcomes of this examination in 20 patients with different clinical indi- ly using Amplex Red. Production of tumour necrosis factor- alpha (TNF- α) cations are demonstrated. by the colonic epithelial cells was analysed by ELISA. Nox1 gene expression Although believed to be benign, the heterochomatin variants of chromoso- was assessed by real-time (RT) PCR. me 9 have been repeatedly mentioned as potentially associated with repro- RESULTS: Our study showed that TNF-α level was increased in unstimulated duction failure. Since the majority of these variants are undoubtedly truly primary colonic cells both in the acute and chronic DSS colitis groups, whe- benign, presented molecular cytogenetic examination is able to analyse reas decreased viability, increased ROS production, and expression of Nox1 this region more precisely than standard banding methods and distinguish was characteristic only for chronic DSS colitis mice when compared to the among different (sub)variants of chromosome 9 much better than karyoty- controls. The stimulation by LPS increased ROS generation via NADPH oxi- ping and point out these potentially harmful. dase and decreased cell viability in mice with acute DSS colitis. Treatment This study was supported by the GAUK 523456 grant project.  P13
.25-S with NADPH oxidase inhibitors increased cell viability decreased the levels De novo case of a mosaic small supernumerary marker chromosome of ROS and TNF- α in the LPS-treated cells isolated from mice of both acute leading to proximal partial trisomy 5p and chronic DSS colitis groups. I. Škrlec1, S. Pušeljić2, M. Heffer1, T. Liehr3, J. Wagner1; CONCLUSION: Our study revealed the importance of NADPH oxidase in pa- 1Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, J. J. thogenesis of both acute and chronic inflammation of the colon. Strossmayer University in Osijek, Osijek, Croatia, 2Pediatric Clinics, Clinical Hospital  P13
.22-M Center Osijek, Osijek, Croatia, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Centromere of chromosome 9 presents unusual behavior in Jena, Germany. rearrangements leading to complete 9p duplication R. S. Guilherme1, A. B. A. Perez1, V. A. Meloni1, A. L. Pilla1, M. A. P. Ramos1, A. G. Dantas1, S. S. Takeno1, L. D. Kulikowski2, M. I. Melaragno1; 1University Federal of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are structurally abnor- Brazil. mal parts of the karyotype with unknown origin that may arise de novo or be inherited from parents. ~70% of people with sSMC grow and develop normally, while 30% show different clinical signs and symptoms. Here we Trisomy 9p is one of the most common partial trisomies found in newborn, present the clinical and cytogenetic findings in a 1-year-old female referred possibly because this region is relatively poor in genes resulting in a high for genetic evaluation because of dysmorphic features, including hypotonia, survival rate. We report four different chromosome rearrangements resul- umbilical hernia, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, microretrognathia, low ting in complete 9p duplication, three oinf tshiteum involving 9p centromere al- set ears, and wide spaced nipples. Cytogenetic examination of GTG banded terations. The rearrangements in the patients were characterized byG-ban- metaphases showed a female karyotype with mosaicism of an sSMC. Ad- ding, SNP-array and FISH (Fluorescent Hybridization) with different ditional molecular cytogenetics analysis (cenM-FISH and subcenM-FISH) probes. One presents 9p duplication concomitant to 18p deletion due to an characterized the sSMC to be derived from chromosome 5 including hetero- inherited der(18)t(9;18)(p11.2;p11.31)mat. Two patients present de novo chromatic and euchromatic material. The shape of sSMC was not clearly to dicentric chromosomes: der(9;15)t(9;15)(p11.2;p13) and der(9;21)t(9;21) define; either it is a ring or centric minute. The karyotype can be reported (p13.1;p13.1), respectively. Another patient presents two rearranged chro- as : mos 47,XX,1qh+pat,+der(5)?r(5)(::p1?4→q11.1::)[3]/der(5)?min(5) mosomes: a der(12)t(9;12)(q21.13;p13.33) and concomitant i(9)(p10) (:p1?4→q11.1:)[1]dn[38]/46,XX,1qh+pat[62]. Proband’s twin sister and which showed a FISH centromeric signal smaller than its homologous. Besi- parents have normal karyotypes with respect to the sSMC. According to des the duplication 9p24.3p13.1, array revealed deletion in 9q13q21.13 (7.3 the literature, there are several cytogenetically similar cases described but Mb). This rearrangement may have been originated by a misdivision centric with different clinical features. The most cases of proximal partial trisomy fission resulting in a smaller centromere in i(9p) and part of the 9q long 5p arose in connection with familial translocations, while just five cases are arm being translocated to the distal 12p. The deletion 9q may have been due to a pure sSMC(5). The critical region for trisomy 5p syndrome seems to caused during the rearrangement with the chromosome 12. The chromoso- be located in the distal part of the short arm as the symptoms are similar to me 9 is rich in segmental duplications, especially in pericentromeric region, those seen in cases with pure trisomy 5pter to 5p13. The most common fea- with high degree of sequence identity to sequences in 15p, 18p and 21p, tures are mental retardation, facial dysmorphism and hypotonia according chromosomes involved in our rearrangements. In two patients the dicentric to webpage “Small supernumerary marker chromosomes” (http://ssmc-tl. chromosomes formed may have been converted into stable functional mo- c Po 1m 3./ 2s 6S -M MC.html). nocentric chromosomes by epigenetic centromere inactivation followed by Defining the role of CGGB P1
 protein in FMR1 gene expression heterochromatinization. Thus, we suggest that chromosome 9 is prone to M. Goracci, S. Lanni, G. Mancano, F. Palumbo, P. Chiurazzi, E. Tabolacci, G. Neri; illegal recombination, either intra or interchromosomal, that predispose it Institute of Medical Genetics-Catholic University, Rome, Italy. to rearrangements, frequently involving pericentromeric regions (Financial support FAPESP, Brazil).  P13
.24-M Multiprobe FISH method for enhanced detection of chromosome 9 Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common heritable form of cognitive heterochromatin rearrangements impairment and is caused by the expansion over 200 repeats and subse- A. Sipek jr.1, A. Panczak1, R. Mihalova1, L. Hrckova1, E. Suttrova1, M. Janashia1, P. Lonsky2, quent methylation of the CGG triplets at the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene, leading A. Sipek2,3, M. Kohoutova1; to gene silencing. The epigenetic and molecular mechanisms responsible for 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, FMR1 gene silencing are still unclear. To outline structure-specific proteins Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Pronatal Sanatorium, Prague, that could recruit components of the silencing machinery we investigated ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |t hWe WrolWe o.fE CSGHGBGP.1O inR FGMR1 gene transcription. CGGB P1
 is a highly co2ns7e1r-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.29-S Subtelomeric chromosomal breakages characterization in patients ved protein which binds specifically unmethylated CGG tracts. The role of with intellectual Disabilities/Congenital Anomalies and mechanisms CGGB P1
 on FMR1 transcription is yet to be defined. Sequencing analysis and for formation expression studies through quantitative PCR of CGGB P1
 were performed in G. M. Novo-Filho1,2, E. A. Zanardo1,2, R. L. Dutra1,2, A. T. Dias1, M. M. Montenegro1, F. A. cell lines with different allele expansions (wild-type WT, premutation, me- S. L. Souza1, A. M. Nascimento1, N. A. Fernandes2, C. O. Santos1, T. V. M. M. Moura1, F. B. thylated full mutations FXS and unmethylated full mutation UFM), demon- Piazzon1, C. A. Kim2, L. D. Kulikowski1; strating no differences between them. ChIP assays showed that CGGB P1
 1Department of Pathology, Cytogenomics Laboratory/ LIM 03, HC-FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics/ LIM 36, HC-FMUSP, binds unmethylated CGG triplets of the FMR1 gene proportionally to the São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil. length of the repeats. We also observed that CGGB P1
 binding to the FMR1 lo- cus was restored after pharmacological demethylation with 5-azadC of FXS alleles, suggesting a possible role for CGGB P1
 in FMR1 expression. CGGB P1
 Abnormal CNVs are frequently found in subtelomeres of patients with intel- silencing with siRNA (reaching ~ 85% of CGGB P1
-mRNA depletion) did not lectual disabilities (ID) and congenital anomalies (CA). The subtelomeric re- affect FMR1 transcription in WT and UFM fibroblasts. Although the strong arrangements do not usually present recurrent breakpoints (BPs) and involve binding to the CGG tract could suggest a relevant role of CGGB P1
 on FMR1 several different chromosomes ends. Although these regions encompass ap- gene expression, our results demonstrate that CGGB P1
 is not a direct regu- proximately 30% of pathogenic CNVs, the causes of subtelomeric breakages lator of FMR1 transcription. and repair have not yet been investigated comprehensively. We investigated Supported by Telethon Onlus, FRAXA Foundation and Italian Association for 105 unrelated patients with ID/CA using MLPA, FISH and arrays (BeadChip- fragile X syndrome.  P13
.27-S Illumina/CGH-array-Agilent) in order to characterize the subtelomeric BP. G6PD-Meyer: a new mutation causing compensated chronic Within the set of subtelomeric rearrangement studied, the deleted regions haemolysis ranged from 137 kb to 29 Mb, and the duplicated regions from 155 kb to 32 A. Citana1, D. Leone1, F. Moruzzi1, G. Ivaldi1, T. Casini2, C. Cecchi2, R. Notaro3, M. Berardi3, Mb. We identified 38 BPs, from 19 different regions. Our analysis showed D. A. Coviello1, L. Luzzatto3; repetitive elements in 31 BPs encompassing SINEs (Alu; MIR), LINEs ( L1
; 1E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Laboratorio di Genetica Umana, Genoa, Italy, 2A.O.U. Meyer, U.O.  L2
), and LTRs. We also found six BPs presenting simple tandem repeats and Oncoematologia, Florence, Italy, 3Istututo Toscano Tumori, Florence, Italy. two BPs with interstitial telomeric sequences (ITs). Rearrangements with exclusively deletions are suggested to be caused by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) mechanis- An updated database reports 186 different G6PD mutations. Many of the- ms. Complex rearrangements are likely caused by fork stalling and template se are polymorphic in various populations; many are sporadic, having been switching (FoSTeS) or microhomology-mediated break-induced replication discovered because they cause chronic non-spherocytic haemolytic anemia (MMBIR). Misalignments during replication due the repetitive sequences in (CNSHA) associated with severe enzyme deficiency (WHO class I). these loci can lead to MMBIR and generate the complex dup/del rearran- A little boy with a history of neonatal jaundice treated with phototherapy, gements observed in 7 of our patients. Furthermore, genomic architectural and of anemia (Hb 80-90 G/L) during his first semester, was seen at age 3.4 features, like sequence motifs, non-B DNA conformations, and repetitive ele- years. He is clinically well, with no significant physical findings; Hb 110 G/L, ments may increase the susceptibility for DNA breakage or promote FoSTeS MCV 95, MCH 31, MCHC 33, reticulocytes 271x109/L, bilirubin 22 µmol/L: in these regions. Mapping subtelomeric BPs should help to clarify the muta- indicating a well compensated haemolytic condition. G6PD activity was 0.89 tional mechanisms involved in these genomic rearrangements. IU/GHb (ref values 7-10 IU/GHb). Sequencing the G6PD gene revealed an  P13
.30-M A->G change in exon 7 at nucleotide 655, predicting an Arg->Gly change at Two cryptic duplications detected in an apparently balanced codon 219. The mother was shown to be heterozygous for the same mutati- inversion posing a diagnostic challenge on: her G6PD assay was normal. This mutation is not present in the database P. C. Evangelidou, E. Constantinou, A. Alexandrou, N. Salameh, L. Kokkinou, I. and therefore it is a new sporadic class I mutation. We interpret the CNSHA Papaevripidou, G. Tanteles, C. Sismani; The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. phenotype as related to the fact that Arg->Gly is a rather drastic amino acid change, since it entails a charge change as well as a steric change: such chan- ges are likely to cause decreased stability of the G6PD protein and enzyme deficiency. It is interesting that Arg219 is not a conserved residue: we have Balanced rearrangements in patients with abnormal phenotype are often previously reported that in terms of clinical phenotype the consequences in associated with cryptic copy number changes (CNCs). These CNCs might not such cases would not be so drastic, and this may explain why this child does always be the cause of the phenotype and one must be careful prior to inter- have haemolysis but only mild anemia. pretation especially in aberrations involving the X chromosome. A 22-year  P13
.28-M old female patient was referred for cytogenetic analysis because of certain Large duplication implicating only exon 1 of F8 gene in mild non-specific unusual facial features, a history of hypothyroidism and bilate- hemophilia A phenotype ral hearing loss. Chromosomal analysis revealed a small paracentric inver- N. Lannoy1, C. Bandelier1, B. Grisart2, H. Antoine-Poirel1, C. Hermans3; sion on chromosome X with breakpoints at Xq21.1 and Xq23 delineated by 1Center of Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center of Human Genetics, Charleroi FISH using several BACs. Surprisingly, array CGH analysis with a high reso- (Gosselies), Belgium, 3Hemostasis and Thrombosis Unit, Brussels, Belgium. lution exon specific X-chromosome array (OGT) revealed two cryptic dupli- cations, 116kb and 184kb in size, on each bPreOaFk1pBo,i nZtN. F C7
r1yp1,t iScA dTuLp1l,i cAaPtiOoOnLs asso LcHiaFtePdL 1w.ith apparently balanced inversions are very rare events. The In 98% of mild hemophilia A (HA) patients, a missense mutation spread duplications include coding genes such as throughout the Factor 8 (F8) gene’s 26 exons can be identified using com- and Therefore the duplication was suspecteLdH tFoP bLe1 causative for the plete gene sequencing. In this study, 12 French-speaking Belgian with mild phenotype as some of these genes included in the duplicated regions might HA to whom any mutation could be identified by complete sequencing, mul- partially explain the phenotype of the patient, e.g which has been tiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis was perfor- previously found to be associated with hearing loss. Family studies revealed med as a second step. This gene dosage technique allowed for the detection the same duplication in the father and grandmother of the patient. The fa- of exon 1 duplication of the F8 gene in three apparently unrelated subjects. ther and grandmother have no remarkable clinical features with the excepti- Using array-comparative genomic hybridization, breakpoint analysis deli- on of hypothyroidism in the father, rendering the duplication as coincidental mited the duplication extent to 210 kb in the F8 gene intron 1 and in the rather than pathogenic. This case highlights the need for extended family VB P1
 gene intragenic position. We postulated that the rearrangement re- studies and careful detailed clinical evaluation of other family members car- sponsible for this duplication could have arisen due to symmetrical tandem rying the same aberration prior to interpretation and genetic counselling. inversion duplication resulting in resulting in a large rearrangement of F8  P13
.31-S gene intron 1 of 233 kb. This intron revised should allow the production of Oncogenic splicing switch to the L isoform of the MAP/Microtubule small number of normal mRNA transcripts in relation with mild HA phe- Affinity-Regulating Kinase 4 (MARK4) gene in glioma through PTB notype. Indeed, the F8 gene mRNA from Patient 1 unexpectedly exhibited (Polypyrimidine Tract-Binding protein)-driven pre-mRNA alternative normal amplification of the segment containing exons 1 to 9 and reduced splicing cross-reacting material (CRM), compatible with the patient’s mild disease L. Fontana1, D. Rovina1, C. Novielli1, E. Maffioli1,2, G. Tedeschi1,2, I. Magnani1, L. Larizza1; severity. All patients displayed an identical F8 haplotype, despite not being 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Fondazione Filarete, Milan, Italy. related, which suggests a possible founder effect of a 210 kb-large duplicati- on involving the F8 gene exon 1. The present study will need to be confirmed on a larger cohort of same ge- MARK4, a centrosomal serine-threonine kinase that phosphorylates micro- netic origin/background to evaluate for prevalence of the duplication as a tubule associated proteins, takes part in cell cycle regulation and prolife- c2a7us2e genotype in mild HA patients. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, rITatAioLnY. I n| WgliWomWa w.EeS pHoiGnt.eOd RouGt an imbalance between MARK4 isoforms, proportional to cellular de-differentiation and tumor grade. This imbalanceABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index is triggered by decreased expression of MARK4S, the canonical isoform, as- sis. Pro-apoptotic (p53, Casp3, Tnf, Bax, Fas, Bad) and anti-apoptotic (Bcl2, sociated with overexpression of MARK4L, the alternative isoform with skip- Bcl-W, Bcl-XL, NF-kB) gene expressions and telomerase activity were stu- ping of exon 16. died by Real-Time RT PCR. Having ruled out mutations, CNVs and transcription defects as cause of de- IGF-1 and EPO treated animals showed decreased histological damage and regulated MARK4 expression, we searched alterations in alternative splicing decreased apoptosis which was confirmed by TUNEL test and caspase-3 ac- at the origin of the observed isoforms imbalance. tivity. Telomerase activity increased in these groups in addition to increased Bioinformatic analysis of MARK4 genomic sequence revealed three bin- expression of anti-apoptotic genes (p< 0.01). However pro-apoptotic gene ding sites for the splicing factor PTB in introns flanking MARK4 alternative expressions were not statistically different (p>0.05). In conclusion, the pro- exon 16. A functional role for these sites is suggested by the conservation tective effects of IGF-1 and EPO in H/R damage may be due to increased in mouse and the surrounding polypyrimidine rich context. Since in glioma expressions of anti-apoptotic genes.  P13
.34-M PTB overexpression drives an oncogenic splicing switch favoring exon Phenotype variability in Slovak NF1 patients related to some skipped-isoforms, we performed Western blot on glioma and glioblastoma- mutation characteristics derived cancer stem cell samples and found a significant overexpression of M. Nemethova1,2, A. Bolcekova2, Z. Pysova2, D. Ilencikova2, S. Pozgayova2, L. Kadasi1,3, L. PTB, correlating with MARK4L expression. Splicing assay of the designed Kovacs2, A. Zatkova1; and differently deleted minigenes revealed that IV S15
 contains a functional 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics,Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, intronic splicing silencer (ISS). However, mutagenesis of the PTB binding Slovakia, 22nd Department of Pediatrics, Comenius University Medical School University site in this region does not affect minigene splicing, suggesting PTB binds to and Children´s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. a non-canonical ISS. Electrophoretic mobility shift coupled to mass spectro- metry confirmed the PTB binding to MARK4 IV S15
 and its involvement in MARK4 alternative splicing. Alternative splicing thus emerges as an oncogenic mechanism that through One of the most frequent autosomal dominant disorders is neurofibroma- the PTB-mediated regulation of MARK4 isoforms expression fosters prolife- tosis type 1 (NF1). In NF1 patients are usually found at least two of seven ration and de-differentiation in glioma. consensus clinical features: “café au lait” macules, freckling, Lish nodules,  P13
.32-M bone dysplasia, glioma of optical pathway, different types of neurofibromas Normal and oncogenic proliferation under control of microRNAs: a and the first degree relative with confirmed NF1. Our cohort included 108 functional high content screening unrelated Slovak NF1 patients and we identified in 39% (42/108) patients D. Sastre1,2, I. M. Lima2, J. F. Guerreiro1, D. T. Covas2, M. A. Zago2, R. A. Panepucci2; frameshift, in 13% (14/108) missense, in 18.5% (20/108) splicing, in 17% 1Federal University of Pará, Belém/PA, Brazil, 2University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, (18/108) nonsense mutations, moreover in 4,5% (5/108) deletion of entire Brazil. gene type I, in 6% (7/108) large deletions and in 2% (2/108) small in frame deletions. 23% (25/108) of mutations were located in Ras-GRD (Ras GAP related) domain and 21% (23/108) in CSRD (cystein serine rich) domain. Cancer cells share several characteristics with normal stem cells especially “Café au lait” macules were present in all patients, freckling in 87%, Lish no- those concerning cell cycle regulation. Therefore it is believed that cancer dules in 28%, glioma of optical pathway in 31%, neurofibromas in 56%, and cells might arise from stem cells possessing self-renewal capabilities. Mi- bone dysplasia in 6% of patients. Patients with nonsense mutations show croRNAs (miRs) are small RNA molecules that act regulating gene expressi- the lowest occurrence of Lish nodules (11%) and the highest incidence of on post-transcriptionally by targeting hundreds of mRNAs simultaneously. neurofibromas (72%). There are no significant differences between clinical With this in mind, we hypothesized that significant changes in the cell cycle features of patient with mutations in Ras-GRD and CSRD domains. Complete could be a good indicator for miRs capable of regulating normal and oncoge- mutation analysis in the first-degree relatives was performed in 51 families. nic proliferation. To test this hypothesis, 2.000 BJ foreskin fibroblasts were Interestingly, we showed that 63% (32) of the patients from these families transfected with 50nM of 28 microRNAs mimics (pre-miR) and inhibitors carry de novo NF1 mutation. Age of the patients was from 2 to 69 years, 41% (anti-miR) in 96-well microplates. After 5 days, proliferation was measured patients were younger than 18 years. by XTT assay. Cell cycle classification (EdU assay) and viability (Sytox Green  P13
.35-S staining) following miR transfection were performed in a High-Content In vitro analysis of alternative splicing of OLR1, a gene involved in Screening platform. Nineteen treatments significantly altered the cell pro- atherogenesis and tumorigenesis liferation. Interestingly, while transfection of pre-miR of miR-20b, miR-101 E. Morini1, J. Tejedor2, B. Rizzacasa3, M. Bellocchi4, F. Ferrè5, A. Botta3, D. Caporossi1, J. and miR-181d decreased the proliferation, the corresponding anti-miRs had Valcárcel2, G. Novelli3, F. Amati3; 1Dept. of Movement, Humanities and Health Sciences, Foro Italico University, Rome, the opposite effect. Pre-miR-181d, pre-miR-20b and pre-miR-101 had the Italy, 2Centre de Regulació Genòmica and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, most cytotoxic effect. Pre-miR-181d and pre-miR-101 induced a significant 3Dept. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 4Dept. of reduction in the percentage of cells in S phase. Cyclin D1 expression was Sperimental Medicine and Surgery, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5Dept. of Biology, elevated by anti-miR-101 and by pre-miR-24, indicating that this cell cycle Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. regulator might be the mediator of these miR’s effects. These results indica- te that these miRs can be good candidates for inducing alterations of interest in the cell cycle, such as speeding it up or slowing it down as desired. Also Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1), encoded by miR-101 acts as tumor suppressor in colorectal cancer and this role is under OLR1 gene, is the major endothelial ox-LDL receptor and plays a role in the e Pv 1a 3lu .3a 3ti -o Sn in our lab. pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and tumorigenesis. The evaluation of apoptotic gene expressions, telomerase activity OLR1 is subjected to a physiological alternative splicing. Two different and the effects of insulin like growth factor-I and erythropoietin on isoforms are known: Loxin (NM_001172633.1) lacks exon-5 and encodes apoptosis in an experimental necrotizing enterocolitis mice model for a putative truncated receptor (LOXIN) with impaired binding activity; O. Altun Koroglu1, B. Durmaz2, M. Akisu1, S. Unlubay2, M. Yalaz1, M. Baka3, O. Cogulu2, H. OLR1D4 (NM_001172632.1) lacks exon-4 and the putative protein has a dif- Akin2, U. Ates3, N. Kultursay1; ferent C-terminus domain. Functional role of OLR1D4 is unknown, while LO- 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege XIN is a natural inhibitor of LOX-1-mediated signalling and its up-regulation University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege may have a potential therapeutic effect. University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Izmir, Turkey. We transfected HeLa cells with minigenes (HIGH/LOW-risk) carrying two different haplotypes of the six SNPs regulating OLR1/Loxin splicing. A dose- curve PMA treatment shows that 10nM PMA at 3h up-regulates Loxin ex- Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is a major cause of mortality among prema- pression (F C10
nM=+1.6, p<0.05) in HeLa transfected with H-risk haplotype ture infants. Apoptosis, which occurs after hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R), (Hela-H). Loxin increase was not followed by OLR1 up-regulation and the has an important role in the pathogenesis of NEC. Telomerase activity may OLR1/Loxin ratio after 10 nM of PMA was lowered to 28.1% than HeLa-H. also be important in the recovery process. The aim of this study is to eva- These results suggest a role of PMA in modulating OLR1 splicing in vitro, luate the apoptotic gene expressions and telomerase activity in the H/R- leading to an increase of Loxin isoform. Moreover, we performed a compu- induced intestinal mucosa and to investigate whether pre-treatment with tational analysis from different databases (TargetScan, miRanda, Pita) that insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and erythropoietin (EPO) could protect predicted two microRNAs that bind the 3′UTR of OLR1 gene in nucleotide the intestinal cells from apoptosis or intestinal injury. region in which are located SNPs. So these miRNAs may act as regulators of The study set was divided into 4 groups, each containing 10 young Balb/c OLR1 expression and alternative splicing. mice. Group 1 mice were exposed to H/R. Group 2 and group 3 mice were These are the first evidences of a regulation of OLR1 splicing, and provide pre-treated with IGF-1 and EPO for 7 days respectively before H/R. Group new data addressing a future more selective and personalized therapy for 4 served as a control group. Intestinal injuErSy HwGas 2ev0a1lu4at e| dM byIL hAisNto,lo IgTiAcaLl Y |d WiseWaseWs c.aEuSsHedG by.O ORLRG1 over-expression. 273 scoring. TUNEL test and caspase-3 activity was perfromed to asses apopto-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.36-M Exploring the role of a ceRNA-based regulatory network, involving GBA and GBA P1
, in the pathogenesis of familial Parkinson disease fé-au-lait spots. Array-CGH analysis identified a 1.15 Mb interstitial deletion V. Rimoldi1, N. Tonsi1, L. Straniero1, M. Aureli1, S. Goldwurm2, S. Duga1, G. Soldà1, R. within chromosome 11p11.2 that partially overlaps the proximal interval Asselta1; of the Potocki-Schaffer syndrome (PSS) critical region. This deletion does 11Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli not overlap the EXT2 and ALX4 genes which are associated with the mul- Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, tiple exostoses and parietal foramina phenotypes, respectively, frequently Milan, Italy. observed in individuals with this syndrome. This deletion does, however, overlap a 137 kb region previously identified as the critical region suffici- ent to cause hypotonia in PSS. Furthermore, haploinsufficiency of PHF21A, Parkinson disease (PD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder characte- which is deleted in this patient, has been implicated in the intellectual disa- rized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra, which bility and craniofacial anomalies associated with PSS. Chromosome and causes motor impairment and resting tremor. To date, mutations in the glu- FISH analyses revealed an unanticipated de novo complex rearrangement cocerebrosidase (GBA) gene represent the most frequent cause of genetic involving chromosomes 9, 10 and 11 with at least 8 chromosome breaks: PD. A widespread deficiency of GBA activity was recently demonstrated in 46,XX,der(9)(10qter->10q24.3::11p11.2->11p13::9p23->9qter),der(10) the brains of PD patients carrying GBA mutations. Most interestingly, also (10pter->10q24.3::11p13->11p14::9p23->9p24::11p14->11pter),der(11) PD patients without GBA mutations had lower levels of GBA activity in the (9pter->9p24::11q13.5->11p11.22::11q13.5->11qter)dn. Although the de- brain, suggesting that dysregulated GBA expression could contribute to PD letion within chromosome 11p11.22 was the only clinically significant copy susceptibility. Possible mechanisms modulating GBA expression include number imbalance, it is unclear if the other chromosome breaks and possib- post-transcriptional networks involving microRNA (miRNAs) and compe- le gene disruptions contribute to the patient’s phenotype. Similar to other ting-endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs). ceRNAs are a class of regulators that titra- reported instances of apparent germline chromothripsis, this case showed te away miRNAs from their targets, thus influencing mRNA expression. The minimal DNA loss presumably reflecting a selection against massive copy highly-homologous and expressed GBA pseudogene (GBA P1
), located 16 kb number imbalances. This case highlights the importance of performing both downstream of GBA, is particularly suited to act as a GBA ceRNA. To verify array-CGH and conventional cytogenetic methods as either investigation this hypothesis, we first bioinformatically selected five miRNAs potential- alone would have provided partial information.  P13
.39-S ly targeting both transcripts, and demonstrated that one of them is signi- ‘Unexpected’ finding with QF-PCR. ficantly overexpressed in whole blood from PD cases vs. controls (2-fold in- K. Huijsdens-van Amsterdam, A. van der Kevie-Kersemaekers, A. C. Glas, P. Lakeman, crease, P=0.0028). Then, the miRNA precursor was overexpressed in HeLa/ E. Pajkrt, A. C. Knegt; Hek293/HepG2 cells; in all cases, both GBA and GBA P1
 endogenous mRNA Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. levels were significant decreased (up to 70%). The specific interaction bet- ween the miRNA and its targets was demonstrated by luciferase-based re- +5 porter assays. Finally, preliminary overexpression experiments showed that At 11 weeks of pregnancy, chorionic villus sampling was performed with the GBA P1
 3’-untranslated region is able to act as a molecular “sponge” of referral reason ‘DNA analysis for sickle cell anaemia’. The HbS mutation was the identified miRNA, thus suggesting the actual existence of a ceRNA-based not identified. As is standard in our laboratory a rapid test for aneuploidy regulatory network modulating GBA expression.  P13
.37-S detection, quantitative fluorescence (QF)-PCR. was performed. The QF-PCR Non-coding PAH gene alterations act as new transcription regulators pattern of multiple X/Y specific markers was consistent with the presence M. Stojiljkovic, K. Klaassen, B. Zukic, M. Ugrin, V. Spasovski, N. Novcic, N. Kotur, S. of two X chromosomes, as well as Y-specific sequence (SRY). This suggested Srzentic, G. Nikcevic, S. Pavlovic; that the fetus could have a XX male genotype. FISH showed that SRY was IMGGE, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. located on the derivative X chromosome. Additional karyotyping (46, XX.ish der(X) t(X;Y)(p22.3;p11.2)(SRY+)) confirdmee ndo tvhoe presence of a 46,XX, SRY+ PAH disorder of sexual development. After karyotyping and FISH analysis of both Phenylketonuria (PKU) is rare metabolic disease caused by mutations in parents, the abberation turned out to be . Thus, additional aneuplo- phenylalanine hydroxylase gene ( ). Mutations that abolish structure idy testing resulted in an unexpected finding which complicated the prena- and function of PAH areP mAHain determinant of PKU phenotype. However, phe- tal counselling. notype couldn’t be always predicted precisely. Previously, we found a tran- Approximately 1 in 20,000 individuals with a male appearance have a 46,XX PscArHiption enhancer in intron 8 that could affect genotype-phenotype testicular disorder. The SRY gene, normally located on the Y chromosome, cIno rsrileiclaotion. In this study, we functionally analyzed additional non-coding provides instructions for making the sex-determining region Y protein, gene alterations to propose nePwAH transcription regulatory elements. which causes a fetus to develop as a male. Ultrasound at 18 weeks of ge- prediction for transcription factor binding sites pointed to a popula- station and postnatal inspection and ultrasound showed normal male geni- tion-specific promoter alteration ( : c.-170delC) and VNTR alterations in talia. There were no signs of ambiguous genitalia. Parents felt confused by 3’ rePgAioHn, that have never been analyzed before. We transiently transfected knowing prenatally that their unborn male child will be infertile, because of HepG2 cell line with various CAT reporter constructs to determine the effect absence of the Y-chromosomal AZF regions. It is likely that at puberty hor- of a gene non-coding sequences on transcription. We found that a con- mone treatment is necessary to induce development of male secondary sex struct with additional binding site in promoter and constructs with VNTR3, characteristics with testosterone and to prevent development of gynaeco- VNTR7 and VNTR8 alterations had a 50-60% reduction of CAT activity in masty.  P13
.40-M comparison to pBLCAT5. EMSA supershift showed binding of KLF1 tran- Post-transcriptional control of RET gene expression: implications in scription factor to the analyzed promoter sequence, while the full structPuArHe Hirschsprung Disease and Thyroid Cancer of VNTR3 was needed to obtain binding of C/EBPalfa. A. Lo Sardo, P. Griseri, M. Rusmini, F. Caroli, A. Grossi, R. Ravazzolo, I. Ceccherini; Our study pointed to two new elements in promoter and 3’ region of U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy. gene that could act as transcription silencers and thus influence genotype- based prediction of PKU severity. Given that these non-coding alterations are population specific, further validation of their relevance should be stu- cis Conttrraonls of mRNA half-life plays a central role in normal development and died in different populations. New transcription regulators in non-coding disease. mRNA stability depends not only on -acting sequences, but also regions, like these ones, will contribute to better understanding of PKU on -acting elements able to promote mRNA degradation. phenotype complexity and may become important for optimization of PKU Though the RET gene is the major known gene involved in Hirschsprung di- treatment.  P13
.38-M sease (HSCR), a congenital defect of gut innervation, and in Medullary Thy- Apparent chromothripsis in a child with a complex chromosome roid Carcinoma (MTC), its role in these disorders has not fully been explored rearrangement resulting in an 11p11.2 microdeletion within the yet. To this end, we sought to characterize molecular events leading to post- Potocki-Shaffer syndrome region transcriptional regulation and to identify genetic variants of RET 3’UTR B. Argiropoulos1,2, O. Caluseriu3, K. Bowser2, J. E. Chernos1,2; predisposing to HSCR and MTC development. Starting from a large set of 1University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2Alberta Children‘s Hospital, Calgary, AB, DNA samples from patients affected with either HSCR or sporadic MTC, we Canada, 3University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. focused on RET variants lying in candidate regulatory regions or miRNAs target sequences of the distal gene portion. To this end, a next generation se- quencing approach for the whole RET gene has been undertaken. Alleles of Chromothripsis is a phenomenon of genomic rearrangement arising during variants located in proximity of Poly-Adenylation cleavage sites and putative a single genome-shattering event resulting in multiple chromosome breaks regulatory elements have turned out differently distributed among HSCR, involving one or more chromosomes, followed by imprecise reassembly. We MTC and control samples. Moreover, linkage disequilibrium is apparently r 2e 7po 4rt a case of a 21 month old female presenting wEiSthH gGlo b2a0l d1e4ve |l oMpmILeAn-N, sITtrAonLgYe r| iWn cWaseWs .tEhaSnH inG c.OonRtrGols, thus further suggesting that functional tal delay, hypotonia, minor dysmorphic features, nystagmus and multiple ca-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 3’UTR variants may be responsible for variable susceptibility to RET-related common among children with intellectual disability, congenital malformati- pathologies. Furthermore, to identify AU-rich regions, microRNAs and bin- ons and autism. Supported by the Russian Federation President Grant (MD- ding factors involved in the post-transcriptional control, the RET 3’UTR was 4401.2013.7).  P13
.43-S fragmented in three parts and cloned into a luciferase vector. Preliminary Assessing the impact of exonic variants on splicing regulation by results show different effects on mRNA stability for these fragments both in functional analysis and bioinformatics predictions: BRCA2 exon 18 as RET-positive and RET-negative cell lines.  P13
.41-S a model system Mosaic ring chomosome 17 : a new case P. Gaildrat1, G. Castelain1, O. Soukarieh1, S. Krieger2, S. Caputo3, J. Abdat1, S. Aklil1, D. A. Receveur1, E. Bourel2, J. Andrieux3, M. Barathon4, G. Morin5, F. Amram5, T. Dery1, F. Di Giacomo1, A. Drouet1, C. Houdayer3, M. Guillaud-Bataille4, C. Delnatte5, F. Revillion6, Jobic5, G. Jedraszak5, M. Mathieu-Dramard5, H. Copin1, B. Demeer5; F. Bonnet7, C. Delvincourt8, F. Vaz9, O. Sinilnikova10, M. Leone10, E. Rouleau3, M. Tosi1, T. 1Cytogenetics department, University hospital, amiens, France, 2neuropediatrics Frebourg11, A. Martins1; department, University hospital, amiens, France, 3Medical genetics department, Jeanne 1Inserm U1079 and Rouen University, Rouen, France, 2Centre François Baclesse, Caen, de Flandre Hospital, lille, France, 4pediatrics department, Creil hospital, creil, France, France, 3Institut Curie, Paris, France, 4Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5CHU, 5Genetics department, University hospital, amiens, France. Institut de Biologie, Hôtel Dieu, Nantes, France, 6Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France, 7Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France, 8CHU, Institut Jean Godinot, Reims, France, 9Instituto Portugues de Oncologia, Lisbon, Portugal, 10Hospices civils de Lyon and Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 11Inserm U1079 and Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, Ring 17 syndrome is a rare disorder and only 19 cases have been reported France. so far. Severity of the associated phenotype is influenced by the presence or deletion of the Miller-Dieker critical region (MDCR) with presence of the MDCR being associated with milder phenotypes, including growth delay , in- Sequence changes in exons can alter pre-mRNA splicing either by changing tellectual disability, epilepsy, café au lait skin spots and minor facial dysmor- splice sites or by modifying exonic splicing regulatory elements (ESR). The phism. We report a patient born at 41 gestation weeks after an uneventful effects on ESR are especially difficult to predict by using currently available pregnancy, with normal birth parameters - weight : 3kg350, length : 49 cm-. bioinformatics tools. Here, we used as a model system the exon 18 of BR- The Initial psychomotor development was normal. When he was 3 years old CA2 gene involved in breast-ovarian cancer predisposition, and tested the the patient developed fronto-parietal epilepsy. Cytogenetic investigations impact on splicing of 36 variants identified in patients or reported in public from peripheral blood cells showed a mosaic ring chromosome 17 karyoty- databases. By using a splicing minigene assay, we found that 13 (7 missense, pe :mos 46,XY,r(17)(p13;q25)[42]/45,XY,-17[5]/46,XY[3]. At 6 years of age, 4 synonymous, 1 nonsense and 1 in frame deletion variants) out of these 36 he had generalised epilepsy, developmental delay, school difficulties, and at- variations induce an increase in exon 18 skipping, by potentially modifying tention deficit disorder. Clinical examination showed no facial dysmorphism ESR. When patient blood RNA was available (n=4), the effects of the vari- and no growth delay. Skin changes showed sparse café au lait spots but no ants were confirmed. Recently, we demonstrated the predictive value of ESR axillary or inguinal freckling, and 2 small achromic spots. Cerebral MRI, hexamers’ scores established by Ke et al. (2011) in identifying splicing re- cardiac ultrasound and ophtalmological fundus were normal. Molecular cy- gulatory mutations within BRCA2 exon 7 (Di Giacomo et al, 2013). Here, we togenetic investigations confirmed that no terminal deletion had occurred, show that this approach is also able to predict the effect on splicing regulati- and an array-CGH ( Agilent 44K) did not detect any submicroscopic deletion on of BRCA2 exon 18 variants. Together with segregation data, these results or duplication. Chromosome analysis were also obtained on café au lait skin should contribute to the classification of variants of unknown significance spot and normal skin, and are currently being studied. Data from the patient in BRCA2 exon 18. In addition, this study extends the validation of a new in will be compared to the literature, including the recent reports which raised silico tool for predicting the impact of exonic variants on ESR. This tool may the hypothesis of telomere shortening and telomere position effect in mild have important applications in the filtering strategy allowing the discovery ring 17 syndrome.  P13
.42-M of pathogenic mutations among the large fraction of variants detected by Somatic structural genome variations (chromosome rearrangements) high throughput sequencing.  P13
.44-M are common in children with intellectual disability, congenital „Stress Entropic Load” as a Transgenerational Epigenetic Response malformations and autism Trigger S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, M. A. Zelenova1,2, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, T. Liehr4, A. D. J. Bienertova-Vasku, I. Necesanek, F. Zlamal, A. Vasku; Kolotii1,2, I. A. Demidova1,2,3, V. S. Kravets1,2,3, S. A. Korostelev5, I. Y. Iourov1,2,6; Department of Pathological Physiology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 5The State Educational Epigenetic changes are generally based on the switching of alternative Institution of Professional Training under the Federal Agency of Health Care and Social functional or structural states and result in the adaptation of cellular ex- Development, Moscow, Russian Federation, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Russian pression patterns during proliferation, differentiation or plastic changes in Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian the adult organism, whereas some epigenetic information can be passed on Federation. other generations while other is not. Hence, the principal question is: why is some information reset or resolved during the meiosis process and other is passed from one generation to anohter, or, in other words: what “adaptation Classically, common pathogenic somatic genome variations are attributed trigger” level initiates transgenerationally transmitted epigenome change? to mosaic aneuploidy or polyploidy. However, recent reports on somatic mo- Hereto, we propose a theory which states that stress, or, more specifically, saicism have demonstrated that mosaic structural genomic rearrangements the energy cost of an individual’s adaptation to stress, represents a viable (chromosome abnormalities) are likely to underlie intellectual disability, candidate for the transgenerational transmission trigger of a given acquired congenital malformations and autism as low-level mosaic aneuploidy does. trait. It has been reported recently that the higher lifetime entropy gene- To get further insight into possible role of somatic structural genome varia- ration of a unit’s body mass, the higher the entropy stress level (which is a tions in disease, we have analyzed 202 patients with intellectual disability, measure of energy released by a unit’s organ mass where k = heat) and the congenital malformations and autism using SNP/oligonucleotide array CGH irreversibility within the organ, resulting in faster organ degradation and (two array CGH platforms with a resolution of 1 and 15 kb). Low-level mo- consequent health problems for the entire biological system. saic aneuploidy (additional chromosome Y in about 5% of cells) was found We therefore suggest a new variable: “stress entropic load” actually reflec- in 2 cases (1%). Mosaic structural genomic rearrangements associated with ting the energetic cost of an individual’s adaptation that may be used to esti- a phenotypic outcome (according to an original bioinformatic technolo- mate the probability of inducing transgenerational response and propose gy) were detected in 14 cases (6.9%). These were mosaic duplications at methods for its estimation 1q21.1q21.2 (1.9Mb), 11p15.5 (1.3Mb), 11p14.3 (8.4Mb) and mosaic deleti-  P13
.45-S ons at 1p36.33p36.23 (7Mb), 2q22.1q23.3 (10.2Mb), 2q23.3q24.2 (10.7Mb), Prenatal diagnosis of partial trisomy 14 and partial trisomy 18 due 5q14.3q15 (6.3Mb), 7q35q36.3 (14.6Mb), 8p23.3p23.1 (11.1Mb), 11q23.3 to a 3:1 segregation of maternal reciprocal translocation t(14;18) (0.1Mb), 21q11.1q21.2 (11.4Mb) and Xq28 (MEC P2
) (0.09Mb). Moreover, (q13;q12.2) two cases have demonstrated low-level mosaicsim for isochromosome I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, M. Miklos, S. Huljev Frkovic, L. Letica, R. Lasan, D. Begovic; 12p and small supernumerary chromosome, which represented min(17) Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, (:p11.2->q11.1:) (8Mb). These rearrangements were further confirmed by Zagreb, Croatia. FISH and/or multicolor banding. Additionally, two benign mosaic subchro- mosomal aberrations (deletion at 14q11.2 in 7 cases; duplication at Xq28 in 2 cases) were observed. To our knowledge, such somatic genome variations A 30-year-old woman was a known carrier of a balanced translocation (recurrent and benign) were not reportedE. SOuHrG da 2ta0 e1v4id e|n MceI tLhAatN so, mITaAticL Y  |4
 W6,XWX, Wt(1.4E; S18
H)(Gq1.O3;Rq1G2.2), ascertained prenatally 30 years ago, whe2n 7he5r genome variations manifesting as structural rearrangements are relativelyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P13
.48-M Patterns of X inactivation in abnormal X chromosome mother performed amniocentesis because of advanced maternal age. Karyo- P. S. Fahmy; typing was confirmed by FISH five years ago. The woman with a known ba- National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. lanced translocation between chrom osomal bands 14q13 and 18q12.2 was referred for prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis at 17 weeks of gestation. Cytogenetic analysis of the father‘slymphocytes showed a normal male ka- Background: X inactivation is a dose compensation mechanism which re- ryotype 46,XY. Their first baby had normal karyotype 46,XX, also prenatal- sults in silencing majority of genes on one of the two X chromosomes in ly observed. We present the case of prenatally diagnosed tertiary trisomy every somatic cell of human females. Early in embryonic development, cells with supernumerary derivative chromosome 14, due to a 3:1 segregation of inactivate all their X chromosomes except one. Once an X is chosen, it is maternal reciprocal translocation. The fetal karyotype was 47,XX,+der(14) stably inherited through subsequent somatic mitotic divisions. The process t(14;18)(q13;q12.2)mat, resulting in partial trisomy 14(pter-q13) and par- of X inactivation is under the control of X inactivation center. Purpose: Stu- tial trisomy 18 (q12.2-qter). There was no evidence of fetal malformations dy of X inactivation patterns in cases with abnormal X chromosome and its by ultrasound examination. After the amniocentesis procedure, amniotic correlation with patients phenotype. Methods: 15 selected patients having fluid has leaked and the mother miscarried. In reciprocal translocation car- abnormalities of the X chromosome were subjected to Clinical examination, riers these chromosomes can arise in different segregation modes, such as GTG banding, FISH technique to detect origin of some structural X abnor- alternate, adjacent-1, adjacent-2, 3:1 or 4:0, resulting in the formation of 32 malities and Detection of X chromosome replication pattern (Late Replica- possible zygotes with different chromosome complements. This case sup- ting Chromatin) technique. Results: Cases were classified according to their ports the thesis that the incidence of 3:1 segregation is higher in female than karyotypes into three groups: Cases with numerical X abnormalities, Cases in male carriers, more often occurs when one of the derivative chromoso- with iso X chromosome and Cases with other structural X abnormalities. mes is relatively small, and also suggests that translocation with acrocentric In most of X aneuploidies, each cell has only one active early replicating X, c Ph 1r 3o .m 46o -s Momes tends to produced 3:1 segregation. while other extra or abnormal X chromosomes are inactivated late replica- Mosaic Uniparental Isodisomy (UPD) of 11p, presenting as a regular ting. Regarding the balanced X;autosome translocation, there was a mosaic beta-thalassemia carrier. pattern; in majority of cells translocated X was late replicating inactive, C. L. Harteveld, M. J. v. Belzen, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, M. J. V. Hoffer, M. Phylipsen; while in few cells translocated X was early replicating active X chromosome. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Conclusion: It has been found that at least 30 X-linked genes are expressed on the inactivated X chromosome. The varying degree of phenotypes within each syndrome occurs because the genes that escape X inactivation are ex- Recently we discovered three independent cases of “severe late onset p Pr 1e 3s .s 4e 9d - Sat varying degrees. β-thalassemia”, all presenting with the mild phenotype of beta thalassemia Uncovering the oligomeric structure of the y+LAT1/4F2hc amino acid minor up to adult age and developing a severe transfusion dependent phe- transporter notype in the third and fourth decade of life when a presumed homozygosity M. Tringham1, J. Kurko1, O. Simell2, J. Mykkänen2; for the beta-thalassemia mutation is observed. Affymetrix and/or Illumina 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, SNP-array analysis revealed incomplete homozygosity for SNP’s along al- 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku, most the entire short arm of chromosome 11 containing the beta-globin Finland. gene, indicating mosaicism for a partial uniparental isodisomy of chromo- some 11p. Three patients were born asymptomatic as beta-thal carriers and developed a severe blood-transfusion dependent beta-thalassemia major y+LAT1 and 4F2hc are protein subunits that form a transporter complex for at different ages and with different percentages of mosaicism. Recently we cationic amino acids in the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells, mainly discovered another case showing a similar mosaic UPD of 11p, presenting in the small intestine and proximal kidney tubules. Mutations of y+LAT1, as a regular beta-thalassemia carrier. The fourth patient however did not 56 of which are currently known, cause lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI, develop the clinical severity despite of an almost 50% mosaicism determi- OMIM #222700), a rare metabolic disorder characterised by diminished in- ned from the DNA isolated from leucocytes. The most probable mechanism testinal absorption of the cationic amino acids lysine, arginine and ornithine seems clonal selection for hematopoietic stem cells containing the unipa- and by severe loss of these amino acids into the urine. The more detailed rental isodisomy for the mutant beta-globin gene during life, this may ac- structure of this transport complex has so far been unclear - it has remai- count for the progressive development of the disease. However, there seems ned unelucidated whether the complex is formed as a dimer or a tetramer to be no correlation between the percentage of mosaicism measured in the of the subunits. What has been known, however, is that the y+LAT1 subu- DNA isolated from the white cells and the severity of the clinical phenotype nits cannot reach the plasma membrane without forming a complex with related to the expression in red cells, which strongly suggests hematopoietic 4F2hc. We previously established fluorescence resonance energy transfer tissue heterogeneity for the observed UPD containing cell lineages. This may (FRET) microscopy and FRET-FACS as tools in studying the interactions of have serious consequences for disease prediction and counseling, as this is y+LAT1 and 4F2hc. We have now applied these techniques together with largely dependent upon DNA isolated from leucocytes. immunohistochemistry to the exploration of the heteromerisation status  P13
.47-S of the y+LAT1/4F2hc transporter complex. We discovered that when fused Cryptic genomic imbalances and developmental delay and/or into fluorescent vectors and transfected into the HEK293 cells, the y+LAT1 congenital defects in apparently balanced rearrangement carriers proteins interact together in the presence as well as absence of 4F2hc. Our B. Hernández-Charro, M. Moreno Igoa, A. Bengoa, A. Pérez-Juana, C. Catalli, M. Ramos- initial results therefore suggest that the holotransporter is a multimer of Arroyo; Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. y P+ 1L 4A .0T 11 - Sand 4F2hc subunits. Technical aspects of ALK FISH test to improve therapy selection of lung cancer patients Apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangements (ABCRs) are associated V. Martin1, B. Bernasconi2, P. Balzarini3, W. Vermi3, F. Sessa2, L. Mazzucchelli1, M. G. with an abnormal phenotype in 6% of cases. It has been described that in Tibiletti4; over 40% of cases thie phenotype may be caused by cryptic genomic imba- 1Institute of Pathology, Locarno, Switzerland, 2Department of Surgical and Morphological Sciences, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy, 3Department of Pathology, lances, both at the breakpoints (25%) and elsewhere in the genome (15%). University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 4U.O. Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale di Circolo – However, cryptic genomic imbalances detectable by array-CGH have also Polo Universitario, Varese, Italy. been postulated as the underlying cause of developmental delay and/or Introduction. congenital abnormalities (DD/MCA) in 10-15% of patients with normal ka- ryotype. The aim of this study is to determine if copy number variants are in ALK gene (2p23) rearrangement characterizes a subgroup of fact a major genetic defect associated with DD/MCA in ABCRs carriers, patients affected by lung adenocarcinoma who may benefit from the ALK- We performed CGH-array studies in three groups of patients: G1.1: 21 ABCR inhibitor crizotinib. ALK translocation is principally related to a small para- carriers with DD/MCA; G1.2: 22 ABCR carriers with normal phenotype and centric inversion. FISH with break-apart strategy is considered the gold G2: 45 cases with normal karyotype and DD/MCA. Similar number of patho- standard to investigate ALK. Evidence based studies settled the presence genic imbalances were detected in both groups of patients with DD/MCA, of ≥15% cells with rearrangements as cut-off to classify patients as positive independently of their karyotype (5/21 of cases in G1.1 (24%) and 9/45 in (ALK_FISH+). Recently, same Authors identified a subset of borderline pati- G2 (20%)). Only one of the ABCR carriers (5% of cases) had an imbalance ents that might benefit from therapy, wondering whether this cut-off could at the breakpoints. rMeaflteecrti aal sr &ea Ml beitohloodgsi.c distinction between ALK-positive and ALK-negative Conclusion: Simple ABCR do not seem to confer an independent and signi- tumors. ficantly higher risk for DD/MCA associated with genomic imbalances, We investigated ALK gene status by FISH, using ALK 276 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG LSI Dual-Color Break-Apart (Abbott) and ALK Split-Signal (DAKO) probes, inABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 243 lung adenocarcinomas collected in three Institutions. A series of stan- Hellenic population. Moreover, detection of other variations may associate dardized ALK-negative lung cancer cell lines (Abbott) were used as negative them with heterogeneity of alpha / beta thalassaemia phenotypes.  P14
.04-M cRoensutrltosl.s . A specific scoring system considering not only the splitting of the NGS network for diagnostic of autoinflammatory diseases (AID) signals but also their distance was developed. M. Van Gijn1, I. Ceccherini2, I. Touitou3; We identified 12% ALK_FISH+ patients, with similar rate among the 1Universitair Medisch Centrum, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Gaslini Hospital Center, Genova, three Institution (13%, 12%, 9%). ALK_FISH+ cases showed: 53% inversi- Italy, 3UMAI laboratoire de génétique des maladies rares et autoinflammatoires, on/translocation, 28% deletion and 18% both patterns. Concordance was Montpellier, France. observed between the different operators and between the two probes, both oConn pclautsieionntss and on the panel of negative controls. In this last, the cut-off obtained (by calculating M+3SD) was 14.9%. Hereditary autoinflammatory diseases (AID) are characterized by recur- . Difficulties in interpretation of ALK FISH signals pattern might rent bouts of systemic inflammation caused by dysregulation of proteins of be bypassed using our detailed scoring system, that is reproducible among the innate immunity system. Identification of about 25 genes over the last different operators, probes, and provide experimental evidence that 15% is 17 years rendered possible genetic diagnosis, a major tool to discriminate a reasonable cut-off for patients selection. patients with close phenotype. This genetic heterogeneity and the rarity of  P14
.02-M these conditions motivated an International concerted action for the use of Allelic drop-out in large Iranian Brugada syndrome family revealed next generation sequencing for diagnosis of AID. by new generation sequencing A. Bukaeva1, M. Polyak1, O. Glazova1, S. Saber2, E. Zaklyazminskaya1; A survey among AID experts was conducted in 2013. Twenty laboratories 1Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov declared willing to participate in this network and filled out a questionnaire. Moscow State Medical Univercity, Moscow, Russian Federation. Results were as follows: • Sequencing equipments varied across the laboratories. Illumina MiSeq was the major device (29%), followed by Lifetech PGM (25%), Illumina HiSeq Background: Sanger sequencing is a gold standard of DNA diagnostic cur- (18%), Roche Junior (14%), other (14%). rently used for NGS validation. Nevertheless, it has its own limitations pro- • Sequencing results were analyzed with either a software from the plat- ducing false results. The well-known mechanism of allelic dropout is the form, an in house pipeline, a collaboration (21% each), or a combination presence of SNPs in 3’-region of PCR primers. The early recognition of allelic (37%). dropout prevents diagnostic errors. • The number of AID genes included in the panels varied from the five most Materials and Methods: The DNA samples from Brugada syndrome Irani- frequent to all published genes. an family were extracted from peripheral blood. Sanger sequencing of SC- • Clinical expectations included ethics: develop new informed consent N5A gene coding areas was performed for proband and relatives. Control (53%) and guidelines (47%), and collaboration: sharing experience for va- re-sequencing via semiconductor PGM IonTorrent platform using Ampliseq riant interpretation (31%), access to patients and database (28%), harmo- primer pool encompassing coding area of 10 genes including SCN5A was nization of technology and reports (17%). performed for family members. Through a close collaboration with clinicians, we could connect this project The control group comprised 100 ethnically matched healthy donors. with two existing dedicated patient (Eurofever) and mutation (Infevers) Results: Sanger sequencing has revealed a novel heterozygous genetic va- registries. Integration of clinical and genetic data will help 1) elaborate a riant p. P1506
S in exon 26 of SCN5A gene in proband. Surprisingly, his son consensus for classification criteria and 2) identify new AID genes in orphan carried p. P1506
S variant in homozygous state. Carriage of p.  P1506
S va- p Pa 1t 4ie .0n 5ts -. S riant in mother had been excluded by Sanger sequencing and PCR-RFLP Next Generation Sequencing approach to molecular diagnosis of auto- analysis. We performed control re-sequencing via semiconductor PGM inflammatory diseases: from gene panel design to variant call IonTorrent platform for proband and his son. NGS results showed a discre- M. Rusmini1, F. Caroli1, A. Grossi1, L. Tattini2, A. Magi3, R. Ravazzolo1,4, A. Martini4,5, M. pancy with primary Sanger sequencing results, proving heterozygousity of Gattorno5, I. Ceccherini1; p. P1506
S variant in proband’s son. Sanger re-sequencing using alternative 1U.O.C. Genetica Medica, Istituto G Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, oligonucleotide primers for exon 26 confirmed NGS outcome. Thus, SNP Psicologia, Area del Farmaco e Salute del Bambino, Ospedale Pediatrico Meyer, Firenze, Italy, 3Dipartimento medicina sperimentale e clinica, Università degli Studi di Firenze, rs41315501 was identified in 3’-region of previously used forward primer. Firenze, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Oftalmologia, Genetica e Materno Infantile Prevalence of rs41315501 was assessed by PCR-RFLP in 200 chromosomes (DINOGMI), Università di Genova, Genova, Italy, 5Pediatria II, Reumatologia, Istituto G cohort and MAF (minor allele frequency) accounted 9,4%. SNP was detected Gaslini, Genova, Italy. in proband’s wife and son in heterozygous state. Conclusion: Currently Sanger sequencing is used for validation of NGS tech- niques. But vice versa, NGS technology can be applied for capillary sequen- Auto-Inflammatory Disorders (AIDs) are monogenic diseases caused by cing quality control.  P14
.03-S primary dysfunctions of the innate immune system. However, molecular Scanning Alpha Haemoglobin-Stabilizing Protein (AHSP) gene by High diagnosis performed by Sanger sequencing of known genes fails to detect Resolution Melting Analysis mutations in around 86% of patients recruited to our Unit. Clinical misdia- S. Pappa1, G. Kellaris1, E. Voskaridou1, P. Kollia2, A. Balassopoulou1, E. Boutou1; gnosis, mutations in untested gene regions, genetic heterogeneity and/or a 1Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Athens University, Athens, Greece. complex mode of inheritance are all possible explanations. The Next Generation Sequencing approach has been underTMtaken to improve mutations detection in AIDs. By using the Ion Ampliseq Designer (Life- Alpha-Haemoglobin Stabilizing Protein (AHSP) is involved in the stability, Tech) online tool, we designed a panel of 203 amplicons including the 121 folding and binding of alpha globin to the hemoglobin complex, regulates exons of 11 genes already known to be involved iTnM AID, for a total of 22Kbs. the free alpha globin pool and has been associated with heterogeneity of Eight samples can be sequenced in one Ion PGM 314-chip. The mean co- thalassaemia phenotypes. AHSP is encoded by a relatively small gene and verage has turned out to be 225X, with 93.4% of the target region covered is a good candidate for High Resolution Melting Analysis (HRMA). The aim >20X and 76,5% >100X. The analysis from FastQ to VCFs was carried out of this study was to develop a rapid, specific and sensitive HRMA approach usiTnMg three different workflows: i) Ion Torrent Alignment and Ion Repor- for scanning AHSP gene. Alpha thalassaemia heterozygotes with the same ter 4.0, specific for data generated by PGM ii) in-house pipeline based on underlying mutation (αPA1α/αα) but heterogeneity in haematological in- free-tools like BWA and GATK, iii) CLC Bio software. dices MCV and MCH and no iron deficiency were selected and divided in Focusing on three representative DNA samples already genotyped for the three subgroups. Ten normal samples were used as controls. AHSP gene was respective causative genes, Ion Reporter and CLC allowed to detect all the divided in small sized overlapping amplicons and PCR conditions were op- three expected mutations, while GATK did miss one of these. In order to ma- timized prior to HRMA. Samples presenting distinct derivative plots were ximize sensitivity and specificity for routinely use of the procedure in AIDs Sanger sequenced. Two variations were detected. The variation 12895 G>T diagnosis, we will present data from 50 additional DNA samples carrying ( exon III) was detected in samples regardless group and may represent a mutations at least at one of the 11 genes in the present panel.  P14
.06-M neutral polymorphism as reported previously. The second variation detec- A robust approach for blind detection of balanced chromosomal ted, 12391 G>A, is located in an Oct-1 binding site and was also detected in rearrangements with whole-genome low-coverage sequencing samples from different sub-groups. These results indicate that HRM analysis Z. Dong, W. Wang, H. Jiang, F. Chen, S. Cao; can be used as a fast, cost effective, relatively simple and high-throughput BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. amenable method for scanning AHSP gene. This approach can be incor- porated in order to analyze higher number of samples and strengthen the characterisation of these changes as neutEraSl HorG n o2t0 p1ol4y m| oMrpIhLiAsmNs ,i nIT tAheL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 277 Balanced chromosomal rearrangement (or balanced chromosome abnor-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index mality, BCA) is a common chromosomal structural variation. Next-genera- methylation while our comparison shows which kit is the least harsh and tion sequencing has been reported to detect BCA-associated breakpoints the most efficient.  P14
.09-S with the aid of karyotyping. However, the complications associated with this Molecular testing of BRCA1&2 genes with NGS technology: a three- approach and the requirement for cytogenetics information has limited its step approach application. Here, we provide a whole-genome low-coverage sequencing ap- A. Martayan, A. Antenucci, C. Del Carlo, F. De Bellis, L. Conti; proach to detect BCA events independent of knowing the affected regions Istituto NazionaleTumori Regina Elena Roma, Rome, Italy. and with low false positives. First, six samples containing BCAs were used to establish a detection protocol and assess the efficacy of different library con- struction approaches. By clustering anomalous read pairs and filtering out The aim of our study was to enhance the throughput of mutation detec- the false-positive results with a control cohort and the concomitant mapping tion analysis in order to supply high sensitivity, fast and accurate data on information, we could directly detect BCA events for each sample. Through BRCA1/2 genes’ mutational status of selected breast and/or ovary cancer optimizing the read depth, BCAs in all samples could be blindly detected patients. Starting from June 2012 a panel of 8 selected BRCA1/2 pathogenic with only 120 million read pairs per sample for data from a small-insert mutation–prone cases have been analysed on a GS 454 Junior platform (Ro- library and 30 million per sample for data from non-size-selected mate-pair che) and 6 out of 8 pathogenic variants were successfully identified. One of library. This approach was further validated using another 13 samples that the two unidentified variants was a single nucleotide insertion just adjacent contained BCAs. Our approach advances the application of high-throughput to a homopolymer stretch of 8 Adenines in the coding region of BRCA2. The whole-genome low-coverage analysis for robust BCA detection, especially second unidentified variant was a deletion of the whole exon 14 of BRCA1 f Po 1r 4 c .l 0in 7i -c Sal samples, without the need for karyotyping. gene. The latter two unidentified pathogenic variants were revealed subse- Using biotin-streptavidin interaction for binding plasmid to a cell- quently using the BRCA Homopolymer (BRCA HP) kit from MULTIPLICOM penetrating peptide and MLPA analysis. We then decided to adopt a Three-step mutational scree- D. S. Polyakov; ning approach. As atm first step BRCA1 &2 amplicon libraries were generated Institute of Experimental Medicine of the NorthWest Branch of the Russian Academy of with BRCA MASTR assay from Multiplicon, and sequenced on our GS 454 Medical Science, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. junior platform. Sequencing data are then analysed with Amplicon Variant Analyzer (AVA) software (Roche). The samples with no pathogenic variants identified are then involved in the second step which is the processing with Gene therapy strategies based on plasmid DNA are more preferable than BRCA HP kit in order to uncover insertions or deletions in homopolymeric viral-based gene delivery. Plasmids are more stable in vivo and known to coding regions of both genes. The third step is MLPA analysis to uncover be less immunogenic. Retroviral-based vectors integrate in actively tran- large genomic rearrangements. So far 181 samples were analysed in our scribed genes that can lead to disruption of tumor suppressor genes. Gene laboratory and 29 pathogenic variants were identified with our three step delivery methods based on plasmid DNA do not cause mutagenesis and they testing approach.  P14
.10-M do not integrate in chromosomes providing increased safety. Despite the Efficient sharing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variant and phenotype data potential advantages of using plasmid DNA, delivery issues with plasmid between diagnostic labs vectors exist. One of the ways of plasmid delivery into a cell can be biotin- J. T. den Dunnen1, P. E. M. Taschner1, F. B. V. Hogervorst2, M. P. G. Vreeswijk1, Dutch and streptavidin interaction of the plasmid to a cell-penetrating peptide (CPP). Belgian working group for Breast CancerDNA Diagnostics (LOB); Streptavidin binds the small molecule biotin with femtomolar affinity. We 1Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, have created a biotinylated pEGFP-N3 circular plasmid DNA to further its 2Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. binding to the streptavidin-CPP fusion protein. Few thymines were replaced by biotinylated uracils in the plasmid. The presence of biotinylated uracils in purified plasmid was verified in restriction analysis followed by dot blot The Dutch and Belgian working group for Breast Cancer DNA Diagnostics procedure. Streptavidin-conjugated alkaline phosphatase was used to de- (LOB) has decided to share over 7500 variants detected in the BRCA1 and tect the biotin-uracils. The ability to express green fluorescent protein was BRCA2 genes in breast cancer families since 1997. For this, the data, almost tested in Hela cell culture. We have created a genetic construct for synthesis evenly split among both genes, have been submitted to the LOVD 3 shared of monovalent tetrameric streptavidin, which consists of one WT streptavi- gene variant database installation (1,2). Previously, variants identified in din and three inactive streptavidins. Each inactive streptavidin is fused to Dutch and Flemish (Belgian) DNA diagnostic labs were collected yearly and chain of four HIV TAT-peptides. The resulting chimeric protein binds one stored in an Excel data file. Advantages of the LOVD system include: simple biotinylated circular plasmid DNA due to the biotin-streptavidin interaction. submission of new data in a standardized way, instant updates after curati- T Ph 1i 4s . 0st 8r -u Mcture can be used for gene therapy. on, easy maintenance and automatic backups. Although most data are pu- Methyl-DNA detection: a performance comparison of four commercial blicly accessible online, some data are shared by members only. Others can kits see whether such information is available (password protected file links), C. A. Leontiou, M. D. Hadjidaniel, M. Ioannides, S. P. Stylianou, K. Tsangaras, P. Antoniou, giving them the option to contact the submitter for further details. Mem- P. C. Patsalis; bers can contribute their opinions about variant classification, increasing The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. its consistency, but being aware of potential misinterpretation they have re- servations sharing this information. Data are stored variant-by-variant and connected to each individual patient and submitting diagnostic lab. Using Epigenetic alterations, including DNA methylation, play an important role in existing LOVD functionality, users can perform queries per gene or individu- the regulation of gene expression. Several methods exist for evaluating DNA al, use other linked resources of interest, get genome browser views of the methylation, but bisulfite sequencing remains the gold standard by which data and use web services to access variants stored in other gene variant base-pair resolution of CpG methylation is achieved. The main limitation databases. In addition, LOVD3 has a new access level, designated “collabo- of this method is its harshness to DNA and several commercial kits try to rator”, allowing submitters to share otherwise non-public data with other find a balance between reagent harshness and conversion efficiency. Our submitters, e.g., to share detailed phenotype information with other diagno- study compares four popular kits (Diagenode, Promega, Epigentek, Qiagen) stic labs only. regarding their conversion efficiency and degradation effect. We used in- 1) http://databases.lovd.nl/shared/genes/BRCA1 vitro methylated and unmethylated forms of two λ-phage PCR products to 2) http://databases.lovd.nl/shared/genes/BRCA2  P14
.11-S create various DNA mixtures (spikes), including ratios 1:0, 1:1, 1:3 and 0:1 Validation of a Next Generation Sequencing assay for BRCA1 and methylated to unmethylated DNA. These were bisulfite converted with all 4 BRCA2 kits and then PCR amplified producing templates for Sanger sequencing and C. J. Meldrum, M. Hipwell, S. Dooley, M. McPhillips, D. Mossman, C. Smith, R. J. Scott; NGS. Our Sanger sequencing results showed 100% conversion efficiency of Hunter Area Pathology Service, New Lambton, Australia. cytosines across all kits and there was a correct trend of methylation status at CpG sites which reflected the expected ratios of the spikes. However, the method was limiting in displaying accurately the extent of methylation in Next Generation sequencing (NGS) is rapidly finding a place in routine dia- each case. DNA degradation was compared between kits based on the effici- gnostics although, extensive validation of such platforms and the associated ency of PCR amplification and it was shown that the Diagenode and Prome- bioinformatics is urgently required before they reach equivalent confidence ga kits had the least degrading effect. as Sanger sequencing. Routine testing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 for Breast Can- Our NGS results offered higher resolving power as expected, allowing accu- cer predisposition has resulted in numerous positive and negative controls rate assessment of methylation ratios lower than 1:3. Our results indicate for the rigorous assessment of NGS. A further consideration when imple- b2is7u8lfite-NGS applications are applicable for detecEtiSnHg Gsm 2al0l 1va4ri a| tMionIsL AinN , mITeAnLtiYng | a W neWw tWec.hEnSolHogGy .fOorR roGutine testing is it’s suitability to the diagno-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index stic laboratory which will be discussed. be skewed upwards and requires further adjustment to increase system’s This study examines approximately 400 samples referred for BRCA1 and sensitivity from 67% to 83%, while maintaining specificity of 100%. BRCA2 testing in the context of familial breast cancer and compares the Results show consistency with experts’ evaluation of the “classic” CdLS fa- performance of NGS to Sanger sequencing. The approach used involved cial morphology, validating the system’s ability to discern between CdLS’s microfluidic PCR (Fluidigm Access Array), followed by NGS on an Illumina and other syndromes’ phenotype.  P14
.14-M MiSeq instrument and subsequent bioinformatic analysis with NEXTGENe Profiling circulating miRNAs in plasma samples of celiac disease (SoftGenetics). A single assay is capable of performing 42 BRCA1 and BRCA2 patients screens in less than 5 days. The failure rate for the assay was 4% (17/399), R. C. Almeida1, S. Vriezinga2, V. Kumar1, A. Stachurska1, R. Modderman1, U. Võsa3,4, L. primarily contributed by the initial two assays (N=94) with subsequent as- Mearin2, C. Wijmenga1, S. Withoff1; says providing a 1.6% failure rate (5/305). The sensitivity of the assay com- 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Dept. of Genetics, pared to Sanger sequencing was estimated at 99.7%. Overlapping amplicon Groningen, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, design was the most significant problem encountered with bioinformatic 3Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, analysis, requiring several rounds of optimisation. Validation of the work- Estonia. flow consisted of ~400 samples distributed across retrospective (including a reproducibility component) and prospective arms as well as a blinded/ inter laboratory sample assessment and a concurrent testing period. The Celiac Disease (CeD; “gluten intolerance”) is diagnosed by symptoms, detec- validated assay has been accredited to international standards and is now ting CeD-specific antibodies, and biopsy results. The only available therapy in routine use.  P14
.12-M is a life-long gluten-free diet. Despite the availability of diagnostic tools, as Initial evaluation of the cardiomyopathy-specific content of Illumina’s many as 7 out of 8 adult CeD patients are either not or incorrectly diagnosed, TruSight ONE next generation sequencing assay highlighting the need for novel biomarkers. S. Waldmueller, K. Imbrich, S. Junker, M. Sturm, P. Bauer, O. Riess, M. Bonin; Circulating miRNA profiles have been shown to be disease-specific, even University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. disease-stage-specific, in patients with cancer or gastro-intestinal disease. We examined whether circulating miRNAs in plasma samples of CeD pati- ents can be used as CeD biomarkers. By next generation sequencing we pro- Introduction: The recently launched TruSight ONE panel comprises 4812 filed miRNAs in 95 plasma samples from 12 CeD patients, 5 patients positive genes and is meant to enable a one-for-all-mendelian-diseases test. Objec- for CeD-associated antibodies and 5 control subjects from the Prevent CD tive: To determine whether the cardiomyopathy-specific genes are covered cohort. In this cohort, newborns at risk for CeD were challenged with low sufficiently good enough to justify the use of TruSight ONE in clinical ge- levels of gluten between 4-6 months of age to induce gluten tolerance, and netic testing. Subjects, Materials and Methods: In order to initially analyze plasma samples were taken every 3 months until diagnosis. Comparing data control samples, DNA was obtained from three individuals presenting with from samples taken at diagnosis to samples taken at 3 months of age (first conditions other than cardiomyopathy (CM). TruSight ONE DNA enrichment available sample), we found 62 miRNAs significantly differently expressed and next generation sequencing (NGS) was conducted according to the (FDR<0.05). Of those, 4 miRNAs were previously reported to be associated manufacturer’s instructions using a MiSeq instrument. A proprietary NGS with CeD, 12 were implicated in other autoimmune diseases and 7 miRNAs data processing and filtering pipeline was used. Results: A) Performance have been implicated in immune signaling. One of these immune related characteristics for 46 core CM genes: The fraction of bases covered with less miRNAs is miR-23b, which appears to be downregulated 2-fold in CeD pati- than 20 reads varied between 2.3 and 5.4% (mean: 3.7%). The average read ents at time of diagnosis. This miRNA is known to limit tissue inflammation. depth varied in the range of 84- to 147-fold (mean: 120-fold). A mean of 4 A downregulation of this miRNA would therefore contribute to the pro-in- relevant variants (i.e. missense, nonsense or splicing) was observed (range: flammatory state in active CeD. 2-8). B) Performance characteristics for a set of 288 genes annotated for  P14
.15-S cardiomyopathy by NCBI’s Entrez Gene (including the 46 core CM genes): Northern Lights Assay of cfDNA damage in body fluids A mean fraction of low coverage bases of 4.7% was observed (range: 3.7- J. J. Jonsson1,2, B. Gudmundsson1,2,3, H. G. Thormar1,3, A. S. Sigurdsson1, D. Olafsson1, A. M. Halldorsdottir2, S. Thongthip4, M. Steinarsdottir2, A. Smogorzewska4; 6.6%). The mean average read depth was 118-fold (range: 81-148-fold) 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Landspitali - National University Hospital, and 15-30 (mean: 22) relevant variants were detected. Conclusions: The Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Lifeind/BioCule Inc, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Rockefeller University, New cardiomyopathy-specific genes could efficiently be analyzed using TruSight York, NY, United States. ONE and a MiSeq instrument. The sensitivity and specificity of the test will be determined and compared to that of Illumina’s separate 46 gene cardio- m  P1
y 4o .p 1a 3th -Sy assay. Structural damage in cfDNA molecules in body fluids has been little studied. Computer-aided facial recognition of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Such damage may reflect normal and abnormal cell turnover, genome in- (CdLS): a follow-up study stablity or exporsure to genotoxic agents. We analyzed cfDNA damage in L. Wolf1,2, C. Gervasini3, M. Orin11, L. Basel-Vanagaite1,2,4; plasma, urine and saliva. Standard methods of isolation of cfDNA in plasma 11 FDNA Ltd., Herzlyia, Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, and urine are based on inducing ssDNA with a chaotropic agent and selec- 3University of Milano, Department of, Health Sciences, Milano, Italy,, Milano, Italy, tive cordination binding of lone pair electrons on guanine to silica. These 4Schneider Children‘s Medical Center of Israel, Rabin Medical Center, and Felsenstein methods were not usable. In contrast, we found that selective ion exchange Medical Research Center, Petach Tikwa, Israel. chromatography allowed gentle isolation of DNA without inducing damage. Damage in isolated DNA was assessed with the Northern Lights Assay. This assay is based on Two-Dimensional Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis CdLS is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, exhibiting a wide phenotypic (2D-SDE) in premade microgels. Each sample was run in duplicate i.e. uncut specCtormumpu. tAepr-pariodxeidm faatceialyl r7e0c%og noift tihone colfi nCiocranlelyli ad idaeg nLoasnegde CsydnLdSr pomateie: nat cso amre- and cut with Mbo I, an enzyme which cuts both single- and double-stranded cpoanrifsiromn etod ftohre ar ecocohgensiitni-orne lbayte hdu gmenaen mexuptearttiosn. DNA. Single-stranded breaks, either nicks or gaps, were detected as horizon- In “ FDNA® tal streaks from uncut DNA molecules. Double-stranded breaks generated ” presented at the 2012 DSW an arc in the gel. DNA molecules with interstrand crosslinks (ICL) migrated workshop, the technology successfully recognized facial dysmor- as an arc behind normal dsDNA molecules. DNA with intrastrand crosslinks phology associated with CdLS from 2D photos, producing results comparab- and bulky adducts were bent and migrated in front of that arc. Single-stran- le with those of human experts. ded DNA molecules, too damaged for complementary strand binding, for- In this study, we collected and tested blindly 18 kpahboutoksi, oAfa prsrkoobga,n ddusb wowithit za, med a diagonal line. Patterns of cfDNA in plasma of normal subjects showed metco.lecularly-confirmed or clinical diagnosis of CdLS and 10 with confirmed an apoptosis pattern with single- and double-stranded breaks of nuclesomal diagnosis of various non-CdLS syndromes (e.g., fragments. cfDNA in urine showed composite patterns of apoptosis and non- ). For each photo, the system produced a score above (positive) or below specifc degradation. The most extensive damage and variable patterns were (negative) a threshold, determined from the results of the original study. seen in saliva including prominent single-stranded breaks. 4/5 probands with the NIPBL mutation (including 1 mosaic mutation), 3/4  P14
.16-M with the SM C1
L1  mutation and 5/9 clinically diagnosed by geneticists as A retrospective view on External Quality Assessment of Charcot-Marie CdLS-like, but carrying various genomic imbalances, received positive scores. Tooth disease over 16 years 10/10 non-CdLS probands received a negative score. The 6 false-negatives B. W. Rautenstrauss1, U. Schoen1, A. Benet-Pages1, J. M. Hertz2; 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2Odense Universitetshospital, were reported to have a mild phenotype or not to meet the clinical diagno- Odense, Denmark. stic criteria, of which 3 received a score well below the threshold and 3 a score immediately below the threshold, suEgSgHesGtin 2g 0th1at4 t h| eM thIrLeAshNol,d I TmAayL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 279ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a clinically and genetically heteroge- on the DNA. Detection of BCR-AB
L1  fusion gene is critical for the diagnosis neous disorder of the peripheral nervous system. CMT1A is the most fre- of chronic myeloid leukemia and to follow the disease progress in patients quent autosomal dominantly inherited form caused by a 1.4-Mb tandem under therapy. We applied targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) to duplication in chromosome 17p12. In 1997 the first annual German exter- resolve sequence breakpoints in BCR-AB
L1  fusion gene in CML patients and nal quality assessment (EQA) was performed for CMT1A. At this time the K562 cell line. In conclusion, DNA genomic Q-PCR is a very sensitive and molecular genetic analysis was mainly based on 5 methods: RFLP Southern direct technique to identify quiescent leukemic cells and patients that could blotting, STR markers, PCR for junction fragments within the CMT1A-REP be possible candidates to stop Imatinib therapy. We identified junction se- elements, PFGE and FISH. 10 laboratories in Germany participated. In the quences in all samples using Agilent SureSelect enrichment and Illumina year 2000 the scheme was offered to a wider audience with 22 participating paired-end sequencing. 
P14 .19-S laboratories. Only one genotyping error occurred. Since 2008 the European Rapid Serial PCR Instrument with High Speed Melting (HSM) Analysis Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) has organised the EQA sche- J. Huuskonen1, S. Sundberg1, R. Pryor2, J. Farrar2, C. Wittwer2, R. Palais2, H. Stiles1, L. Xu1, me. In 2012 the number of participating laboratories increased to 66 from R. M. Howell1; 22 countries (198 reports) representing countries from around the globe. 1Canon U.S. Life Sciences, Inc., Rockville, MD, United States, 2University of Utah, Salt Lake Methods like FISH, PFGE and Southern blotting have disapeared; PCR, qPCR City, UT, United States. and MLPA are now used. Next generation sequencing (NGS) allowing simul- taneous sequence analysis as well as gene dosage determination is a future perspective. We have developed a prototype instrument capable of rapid serial PCR/ Currently at least 60 genes are associated with disorders of the peripheral HSM, enabling multiple targets to be tested sequentially. The current system nervous system. Consequently the scheme scope has been extended to se- processes eight samples simultaneously and has a liquid handling system quence analysis of GJB1 (CX32) (CMTX1). In 2012 again only 1 genotyping that delivers PCR reagents to a cartridge with microfluidic channels used for error occured. The efforts that have been made for an EQA in molecular rapid PCR and HSM. A unique feature is that once PCR/HSM is completed genetic diagnosis for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease demonstrate very good (<12min per test), reagents for the next assay are then delivered, tested and laboratory analytical performance. Nevertheless national laws affecting hu- analyzed. F2 F5 MTHFR man genetics are different, thus harmonization in political terms (e. g. pre- We tested 100 blinded clinical blood samples (obtained from ARUP Labo- dictive testing) remains as important task. ratories) for (c.*97G>A), (c.1601G>A), and (c.665C>T and 
P14 .17-S 1286A>C) genotype using this TinMstrument. The samples were also tested Comparative-High Resolution Melting - a novel method of on a LightScanner®32 (Biofire ) using high resolution melting analysis simultaneous screening for small mutations and copy number (HRMA) assays designed by the University of Utah. Data from both instru- variations ments was interpreted using custom Melting Wizard software. Results show P. Borun, A. Plawski; Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland. that all four tests with all 100 samples were genotyped accurately. Follow- up testing was required on 1.4% of the assays for a definitive genotype. The prototype instrument described allows for extremely rapid PCR (each Efficient and cost-effective screening for DNA sequence changes, both small thermal cycle < 15 seconds) and HSM (melting rate up to 2°C/s) due to uni- mutations and copy number variations (CNVs), is a crucial aspect for routine que design of the microfluidic chip. The onboard liquid handling system al- genetic diagnostics as well as for basic research. In this study we present lows multiple tests to be performed sequentially, and adding tests during a development and evaluation of comparative high resolution melting (C- the run. This method facilitates reflex testing, such as exon scanning follo- HRM), a new approach for the simultaneous screening of small DNA changes wed by a reflexive genotyping assay, or a second reflexive genotyping assay. and gene CNVs. In contrast to other methods, relative quantification in C- These features are better aligned with a workflow that requires multiple HRM is based on the results obtained during the melting process and calcu- tests run on a single sample adding flexibility compared to current batch lations of the melting peak height ratio in the multiplex reaction. Validation P PC 1R 4 .w 20o -r Mkflows. of the method was conducted on DNA samples from 50 individuals from Du- Challenges in the interpretation of variants identified in autosomal chenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) families, 50 probands diagnosed with dominant familial nonsyndromic congenital heart defects by targeted familial adenomatous polyposis and a control group of 36 women and 36 next-generation sequencing men. The results of analyses conducted on fragments of the DMD and APC Y. Jia1, J. Louw1,2, J. Breckpot1,3, B. Callewaert4, Y. Snajer5, M. Gewillig2, E. Souche1, L. genes correspond completely (100%) with the results of previous studies. Dehaspe1, J. R. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1, A. Corveleyn1; C-HRM sensitivity in CNV detection was assessed through the analysis of 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Congenital and Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, mixed DNA samples with different proportions of a deletion carrier and 3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Center for wild type control. The results are presented as a linear regression with R2 of Medical Genetics, University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 5Center for Human Genetics, 0.9974 and imply the capability of the method to detect mosaics. C-HRM is Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. an attractive and powerful alternative to other methods of point mutations and CNV detection with 100% accuracy in our studied group. 
P14 .18-M New molecular technique to monitor minimal residual diseased in High throughput sequencing technologies enable efficient large-scale gene- CML tic analysis, dramatically accelerating the genetic research and diagnostics. C. Pirrone1, I. Pagani1, O. Spinelli2, E. Amelotti1, S. Lilliu2, T. Intermesoli2, U. Giussani3, Our study aims to determine the proportion of familial nonsyndromic con- S. Lupoli4, F. D‘Avila4, M. Barcella4, F. Bolda5, R. Baffelli5, F. Pasquali1, F. Lo Curto1, C. genital heart defects (CHD) that can be explained by pathogenic mutations Barlassina4, L. Caimi6, A. Rambaldi2, F. Porta5, A. Lanfranchi6, G. Porta1; in currently known CHD associated genes, by implementing next-generati- 1Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, Insubria University,, on sequencing technologies in genetic diagnosis for familial nonsyndromic Varese, Italy, 2USC Haematology Laboratory, Papa Giovanni XIII Hospital,, Bergamo, Italy, 3USDD Medical Genetic Laboratory, Papa Giovanni XIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy, CHD. Targeted resequencing of known cardiac genes was performed in 36 4Department of Health Sciences; Filarete Foundation, Unimi, Milano, Italy, 5Department patients from 13 nonsyndromic CHD families, using either array-based or of Pediatric Onco-haematology and BMT Unit, Children‘s Hospital, Spedali Civili, Brescia, solution-based method to capture the coding regions of 57 genes associated Italy, 6Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, with CHD. Following variant analysis and Sanger validation, we identified Brescia, Italy. 6 functional deleterious mutations in 3 genes, explaining the defects in 6 families. The genetic heterogeneity of CHD and remarkable variability of expression make it challenging to interpret the large number of identified Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative disorder cha- variants in patients. Thus, setting up a well-defined analysis pipeline is racterized by the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), resulting from the t(9;22) necessary to identify causative mutations. In conclusion, by targeted rese- (q34;q11) balanced reciprocal translocation that generates the BCR-AB
L1  quencing of known CHD associated genes in well selected nonsyndromic fusion protein. The first line therapy of CML is Imatinib Mesylate, which tar- CHD families and cautious variant interpretation, likely causative mutations gets BCR-AB
L1  protein, inhibiting proliferation pathway. Residual leukemia were identified in 6/13 (46%) families. Reduced penetrance and possibili- is assessed by a sensitive molecular quantitative manner evaluating levels ty of phenocopies complicate the interpretation. Targeted next-generation of BCR-AB
L1  transcripts by real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR). sequencing is a powerful tool in genetic testing of familial nonsyndromic Undetectable levels of chimeric transcript, however, can reflect either an CHD, however, variant interpretation remains a major challenge for the dia- effective elimination of leukemia cells, or the presence of a quiescent leuke- gnostic application. mic stem cells transcriptionally silent. We developed a novel highly sensitive method to identify quiescent leukemic cells and possible candidates for dis- c2o8nt0inuation of therapy through quantitative real-tEimSHe PGC R2 (0Q1-
P4 C R| )M baILseAdN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .21-S Whole exome sequencing in congenital myopathies: two case reports A. Armaroli1, C. Scotton1, J. Sigurðsson2, C. Passarelli3, M. Neri1, F. Di Raimo1, F. extended genomic regions. In this frame, we analyzed 24 selected CF pati- Gualandi1, E. Mercuri4, M. Pane4, A. Ferlini1; ents by full CFTR gene resequencing (8 with known CFTR genotype, 11 with 1Dept. of Medical Science, Medical Genetic Section, Ferrara, Italy, 2deCODE Genetics, only one mutation identified, and 5 with no mutations after conventional Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Dept. of screening). A custom capture SeqCapEZ Library (Roche) and an HiSeq 2000 Neurosciences, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 4Dept. of Pediatric platform (Illumina) were used. Multiplexing 6 samples in the capture phase Neurology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy. and 12 in the sequencing step, we obtained a mean depth >1,000X, with a 98% coverage. An in-house developed pipeline was used for variant detec- tion and annotation, which allowed the identification of all 14 previously Congenital myopathies are a heterogeneous group of genetic diseases cha- known mutations. Moreover, 4 genetic lesions undetected by genetic scree- racterized by hypotonia and muscle weakness. Many causative genes have nings were found, including a large heterozygous deletion. Additionally, been identified in the last decade, underlining the high genetic heterogenei- we found new intronic variants, whose possible role on RNA splicing was ty in these pathologies. Sanger molecular diagnosis is an expensive and time excluded by a combination of in-vivo and in-vitro analyses. In conclusion, consuming step-by-step process. In addition some genes involved are very NGS increased the percentage of genetically diagnosed patients, being able large and high demanding in terms of molecular diagnostics. Here we report to disclose mutations escaped to “standard” mutational screening. Moreo- on two “families-of-four” with congenital myopathy in which we performed ver, read alignment also allowed an immediate definition of large deletion whole exome sequencing approach (WES). The analysis was performed by breakpoints at the nucleotide level. Finally, even after this extensive sequen- deCODE Genetics and we analyzed the families applying candidate genes in- cing strategy, 5 probands did not show any mutation in CFTR (nor in the terrogation and autosomal recessive inheritance; identified variations were SCNN1A, SCNN1B, and SCNN1G coding regions), suggesting the intriguing prioritized for the pathogenic prediction and the rare allele frequency under possibility of an additional locus for CF. These subjects are currently being 1% of the population. processed for whole-exome sequencing analysis. In the first family, with one affected child, we found a known pathogenic in- 
P14 .24-M frame deletion of the isoprenoid synthase domain-containing protein gene Performance of the Luminex xTAG Cystic Fibrosis kit (EU) (ISPD). Mutations in this gene are known to be associated to congenital mu- V. Ritchie, C. Dey, L. Lan, D. Himsworth, J. Liu; Luminex Molecular Diagnostics, Toronto, ON, Canada. scular dystrophy phenotypes. In the other family, with two affected sibs, we identified a mutation in RYR1 gene. In both families a previous partial mole- cular diagnosis by Sanger, and not exploring all exons, was performed. The xTAG® Cystic Fibrosis Kit (EU) [herein termed xTAG CFE] is a qualitati- In these two cases WES identified mutations in two known genes “correc- ve genotyping device used to simultaneously detect and identify a panel of ting” a non-exhaustive diagnostic approach. This is an example confirming mutations and variants in the Cystic Fibrosis transmembrane conductance the usefulness of next generation sequencing as an accurate molecular dia- regulator (CFTR) gene in human blood specimens and blood spots. The as- gnostic approach for pathologies with high genetic heterogeneity and/or say identifies the recommended ACMG/ACOG mutations and variations, as large genes. well as some of the world’s most prevalent mutations. Additionally, xTAG The Neuromics EU project is acknowledged. 
P14 .22-M CFE identifies mutations specific to Europe, such as 4016insT, 
L1065 P and Detection of Copy Number Variation by PCR under Limiting 
L1077 P in the French and Italian populations, 2184insA in Central Europe, Conditions T338I in the Italian (Sardinia) population, 712-1G>T in the Spanish popu- L. Zhou1, R. Palais2, C. Wittwer1; lation, and 
E585 X, R1066H, Q552X and G1244E in Southern Europe. DNA 1Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt lake City, UT, samples can be screened for 5 variants and up to 75 CFTR mutations, out United States, 2Department of Mathematics, University of Utah, Salt lake City, UT, United States. of a total pool of 85 available mutations, allowing the user to customize CF testing to a particular region. The assay is comprised of a single multiplex polymerase chain reaction which is then used in three separate Allele Spe- cific Primer Extension (ASPE) reactions (A, B, and C). The limit of detection DNA copy number variation (CNV) is associated with genetic disorders, of the assay is 2 ng/µL with an input genomic DNA range of 10 ng to 1.5 µg. chromosomal rearrangements, and cancer. We present a simple closed- Diagnostic accuracy was assessed for the xTAG CFE assay using the xTAG Cy- tube method based on high-resolution melting that is accurate enough to stic Fibrosis and bidirectional dideoxy-sequencing as comparator methods. reliably determine all common CNV ratios. Target and reference regions of Over four hundred samples were analyzed that included genomic DNA ex- genomic DNA were PCR amplified together using a variety of reagent and tracted from whole-blood specimens, dried bloodspots and Coriell samples. cycling protocols. We found that the ratios of reference and copy number Sensitivity and specificity for the xTAG CFE assay across all mutations was variants were maintained either by limiting PCR cycles, or by limiting quan- 100%. tities of dNTPs or Taq polymerase and allowing PCR to plateau. High-reso- 
P14 .25-S lution melting analysis with the DNA binding dye LCGreen Plus was used to Missing the forest for the trees: integrating traditional and molecular determine CNV ratios from the relative heights of the target melting peak cytogenetics technology in hematological neoplasia after reference melting peaks were equalized. All common CNV ratios may S. Shetty1, K. McDonnell1, R. Smith1, K. S. Theil2, J. Cook2, E. D. Hsi3, G. W. Procop1, J. P. be detected using any of the PCR limiting protocols. The most robust and Maciejewski4, M. A. Sekeres4, R. V. Tiu4, H. J. Rogers2; simplest method uses limiting dNTP concentrations. CNV ratios differing by 1Department of Molecular Pathology, RT-PLMI, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, 2Department of Clinical Pathology and Molecular Pathology, RT-PLMI, Cleveland 10% could be distinguished when dNTPs were limited to 3.25 uM. Trisomy Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, 3Department of Clinical Pathology, RT-PLMI, was easily and accurately typed using duplex PCR, and chromosome X and Y Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, 4Department of Translational Hematology copy number variants were identified using triplex PCR. The method also and Oncology Research and Leukemia Program/ Hematologic Oncology & Blood identified large CFTR exon 2 and exon 3 heterozygous deletions that are dif- Disorders (HOBD), Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United ficult to detect using other approaches. This protocol is simple, closed-tube, States. fast, economical, and is more accurate and less susceptible to contamination than other methods. Assays are easy to design, limiting dNTPs is simple, and the results are stable and reliable. It may also have application to the analy- This retrospective study investigates appropriate utilization of technology sis of gene expression via relative template quantification. for cost effectiveness without compromising patient care in hematological 
P14 .23-S malignancies. Bone marrow aspirates from 409 cases submitted for cyto- Study of the molecular basis of cystic fibrosis by Next-Generation genetics workup of myeloid disease were reviewed. 163 (40%: median age Sequencing L. Straniero1, G. Soldà1, L. Costantino2, D. Rusconi2, M. Seia2, C. Colombo3, R. Asselta1, S. 60 years; M/F=1.6) had a combination of cytogenetics, FISH and SNP array Duga1; testing. Based on morphology, they were classified as non-diagnostic (60), 1Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli MDS (55), MPN (9), MDS/MPN (13) and AML (26). The mean turnaround Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Molecular Genetic Sector, time (day) was 17.4 (range 6-24) for cytogenetics, 7.0 (4-13) for FISH, and Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Cystic Fibrosis 15.0 (7-29) for array. Overall discrepancy between cytogenetics and FISH Center of Milan, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, results was 14.1% (abnormal(+) cytogenetics/normal(-) FISH in 14/99 Milan, Italy. cases; P<0.0001). Discrepancy between cytogenetics and array results was 32.3% (+cytogenetics/-array in 8/65 cases; -cytogenetics/+array in 10/65 cases; +cytogenetics/+array in 3/65 cases; P=0.0020). There was 96% con- Despite extensive genetic screening, 1-5% of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients cordance for clinically relevant copy number changes between cytogenetics still lack a definite molecular diagnosis. Today, next-generation sequencing and array. Array detected cryptic deletion in 4% not seen by cytogenetics. (NGS), combined with target enrichment and multiplexing, is making incre- However, low-level mosaicism for copy number changes was missed by ar- asingly affordable a sequencing-based apEpSroHacGh t2o0 m1u4ta |t iMonI LdeAteNct,i oITnA inL Y | r aW y iW n 1W 1%.E aS nH d 1G 3. %O sR hG owed LOH/-cytogenetics; of these 5% were clin2ic8al1lyABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index relevant. Therapy was initiated before release of results in 27%, after cyto- requests and needs for rapid massively parallel sequencing, (MPS). genetics in 9%, after FISH in 3%, after array in 1% and supportive care in Ion Protonª enables a rapid workflow for human whole exome sequencing. 60%. The preliminary data suggests a tier testing approach does not com- The PCR based whole exome capture (Ion Ampliseq Exome Kit) provides promise patient care if tier testing is completed within 3-4 weeks of initial consistent high coverage across annotated exonic regions, with the PIª chip diagnosis. In presence of unfavorable prognostic abnormalities by cytogene- yielding 50-60.000 SNPs per sample, with ~98% of these overlapping vari- tics, array testing may not be warranted. Based on this data, we would like to ants reported in dbSNP. Sample preparation and sequencing is performed in propose the optimal genetic testing algorithm. less than two days. We are exploring the possibility to scale-up the through- 
P14 .26-M put by loading two PI chips on one initialization and to combine 3 exomes Real-time and Droplet PCR quantification for non-invasive per PI chip. With this set up it will be possible sequence up to 30 exomes per determination of RHD incompatibility between mother and foetus I. Svobodova, S. Pospisilova, E. Pazourkova, A. Horinek, M. Korabecna; week on one Ion Protonª. General faculty hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic. The bioinformatics analysis has been streamlined using an in-house data- base system, based on R and MySQL, where all detected variants from all in house exome-sequencing runs are stored. This system allows for very effici- The aim of this study was to compare two strategies of DNA quantificati- ent and fast filtering of SNPs or indels between any groups of samples and on: Real-Time PCR (qPCR) and Droplet PCR (dPCR). The benefit of dPCR we currently have a success rate of almost 80% of finding disease-causing against qPCR is represented by absolute quantification of target nucleic acid variants in small families or trios with rare Mendelian disorders. molecules without the requirement of calibration curves. The methods were Ion Protonª is also being used for clinical applications such as identification compared by quantification of standard nuclear DNA of known concentra- of fusion transcripts from cancer samples, mutation screening using panels tion. DNA was eightfold diluted (2-0.015 ng/ul) and twelve replicates were of candidate genes. The sample preparation will be simplified and faster realized for each dilution. Concentrations were then measured as levels of when the automated system, Ion Chefª is introduced and established in the amplicons of two genes, housekeeping gene GAPDH and human RHD gene w 
P1 o 4rk .2fl 9o -w S. (exon 10). The same genes were analyzed in plasma cell-free DNA and also Evaluation of three sequence capture platforms for whole exome in cell-free fetal DNA isolated from maternal plasma. Evaluation of these two sequencing methods‘ performance was based on several parameters, such as degree K. Zerjavic1, J. Meienberg1, M. Okoniewski2,3, A. Patrignani2, K. Ludin4, S. Gysi1, B. of linearity (R²), accuracy, detection limit, etc. In case of standard nuclear Steinmann5, T. Carrel6, B. Roethlisberger4, R. Schlapbach2, G. Matyas1; DNA, both methods showed high accuracy and low detection limit, both ge- 1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Foundation for People with nes were detected even in most diluted samples. High linearity degree (R² Rare Diseases, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, 2Functional Genomics Center Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Department of Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research, > 0.99) has been reached by both methods. The correct RHD status of te- Neurology Clinic, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Center for Laboratory sted women was immunologically verified. Regarding analysis of cell-free Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, Aarau, Switzerland, 5Division of Metabolism, fetal DNA in RHD negative maternal plasma, dPCR failed against the qPCR University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 6Department of Cardiovascular to convincingly distinguish RHD positive samples from the negative ones. Surgery, University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. For the purpose of prenatal screening, the qPCR method would be probably the preferable alternative due to very low fetal DNA concentrations (about 0.002 ng/ul) in maternal plasma, which is under the detection limit of dPCR. Whole exome sequencing (WES) can be effective for identifying sequence S Pu 1p 4p .2o 7rt -e Sd by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic RVO VFN64165 variants. Here, we present a comprehensive comparison of the most recent Development and evaluation of a gene panel for the diagnosis of next generation sequencing (NGS) exome enrichment methods of Agilent monogenic epilepsies (SureSelect V5+UTR), NimbleGen (SeqCap V3+UTR), and Illumina (Nextera A. Labalme1, S. Dimassi1,2, A. Campan-Fournier1,2, C. Bardel3, N. Boutry-Kryza4, M. Expanded Exome). Exomes of six human DNAs were captured by these me- Elsensohn3, P. Roy3, R. Lamy4, P. Edery1,2, A. Calender4, D. Sanlaville1,2, G. LESCA1,2,4; thods and sequenced at 100x depth of coverage on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 1Department of Medical Genetics, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Lyon University Hospital, platform by four vendors. Read depth, % of coverage, GC bias, and number Lyon, France, 2CRNL, CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM U1028, Université Claude Bernard Lyon of detected single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and small indels were com- I, Lyon, France, 3Department of Biostatistics, UMR 5558 CNRS UCBL, Centre Hospitalier pared. To examine the methods‘ ability to identify SNVs and small indels, Lyon Sud, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France, 4Department of molecular Genetics, we analyzed heterozygous positions and small indels previously detected Edouard Herriot Hospital, Lyon University Hospital, Lyon, France. by Sanger sequencing (SS). For two DNAs, WES data were also compared to whole genome sequencing (WGS). SureSelect and NimbleGen demonstra- ted highest average read depth in target region. Considering ≥20x for read Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is a great advance in the field of mole- depth, SureSelect covered the largest proportion of its targeted bases. Su- cular genetics, especially for diseases with high genetic heterogeneity, allo- reSelect and NimbleGen showed the highest average read depth as well as wing parallel testing of many disease-causing genes. It will lead to a better detected the highest number of SNVs and small indels in RefSeq. However, access of a larger number of patients to molecular diagnosis. In order to all SNVs identified by SS were accurately called by all three methods. Less improve the diagnostic yield of genetic testing in patients with epileptic di- consistent was the detection of small indels, where a substantial difference seases, we developed a panel including 41 genes causing monogenic form among the platforms and vendors was observed. In addition, all three me- of epilepsy or neurodevelopmental disorders frequently associated with thods showed high GC bias which was not seen in WGS. Our analysis indi- seizures. Until now, only 13 of these genes have been currently screened by cated a considerable variability among exome enrichment methods, DNA Sanger sequencing, on a sequentially basis. In the present study we compa- sequencing laboratories, and even among DNA samples. Our data revealed red two methods: the Haloplex technology (Agilent) and the SeqCap (Roche) that both SureSelect and NimbleGen performed better than Nextera. technology. Sequencing was performed using an Ion Torrent PGM sequencer 
P14 .30-S (Life Technologies). We performed NGS sequencing on DNA samples from The importance of root cause analysis following an external quality 44 patients, including 38 patients in whom a (probably) causative mutation assessment (EQA) to improve the quality and accuracy of a diagnostic had been previously found by sequential Sanger sequencing in our routi- service ne practice, and 6 novel patients who had not been screened. DNA samples R. J. Hastings1, J. C. Cigudosa2, N. Foot3, C. Guiver1, N. de Leeuw4, E. Maher5, S. O‘Connor6, were anonymized and the first steps of the analysis were performed follo- C. Pescucci7, B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, E. van den Berg-de Ruiter8; 1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, wing a blind protocol. DNA from all the patients was analyzed with the Ha- 2Molecular Cytogenetics Group Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, loplex technology and only 24 of them were also analyzed with the SeqCap Spain, 3GSTS Pathology, Guy‘s and St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United technology (they were sorted among the 44 patients). Data analysis will be Kingdom, 4Radboud University, Nijmegan, Netherlands, 5Lothian NHS Trust, Edinburgh, performed with the NextGene Software (Softgenetics) and also with specific United Kingdom, 6St James’s Institute of Oncology, Leeds, United Kingdom, 7University BWA-GATK pipeline based on the recommendations of BroadInsitute. Our Hospital of Careggi, Florence, Italy, 8Academisch Ziekenhuis Groningen, Groningen, analysis will include coverage, sensitivity and false positive rate as well as Netherlands. a cost evaluation. 
P14 .28-M Scaling up whole-exome sequencing on Ion Proton using AmpliSeq EQA is essential to verify the quality and accuracy of the diagnostic service. I. M. Jonasson, C. Lindau, U. Gyllensten, A. Ameur; Uppsala University / IGP, Uppsala, Sweden. When new technologies emerge, EQAs need to be developed to verify the laboratory diagnostic validation process and enable benchmarking of their performance. When laboratories introduce new technologies diagnostically, most critical errors in EQAs are analytical. As laboratories gain more expe- The Ion Protonª and Ion PGMª (Life Technologies) technologies are used in rience in the new technologies, the critical errors usually become limited to t2h8e N2ational Genomics Infrastructure - Sweden (NGEI)S toH hGan 2d0le1 th4e |d iMffeIrLenAtN , ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG the interpretation of results.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index EQA is intended to be educational so if a laboratory receives a poor per- fact that the same result has been found in four unrelated subjects (three formance, they are asked to review their results and perform an audit so Italian and one Israeli) out of 2000 tested, suggests a frequency of about they can identify the root cause of the error. If required, repeat EQA samp- 1/500 individuals. Further characterization of the extra peak is underway to les are made available to exclude the rare instances of a problem with a establish its sequence origin and better understand the nature of what could manufacturer’s kit. In 2013, a thorough root cause analysis by one partici- give new information on the Fragile X region. 
P14 .33-S pating laboratory identified a potential problem with one manufacturer’s Development of a Next-Generation-Sequencing based framework for probe. An independent verification by CEQAS using multiple FISH probes comprehensive genetic analysis of Neurogenetic disorders and arrays confirmed a 967kb deletion of 13q14.2q14.3. There is a discor- R. Chen1,2, J. Duan3, T. Liu1, X. Wei4, X. Yi5, H. Zhang1,2; dant result between the microarray and FISH probes for one of the deletion 1Beijing Genomics Institute, Tianjin, China, 2Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese breakpoints. As a consequence the manufacturer immediately withdrew the Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China, 3Shenzhen Children’s Hospital, Shenzhen, probe and replaced it with a new product to eliminate the likelihood of futu- China, 4Beijing Genomics Institute, Wuhan, China, 5Beijing Genomics Institute, Shenzhen, re false negative results. A second laboratory identified an internal problem China. with their fluorescent microscope filters which they replaced and then veri- fied gave the correct results using validated EQA material. This presentation will give examples of how different approaches to investi- With the advance of sequencing technologies, the capacity to generate ac- gating a poor performance can result in different outcomes including chan- curate genotype data greatly outpaces our ability to analyse it. To facilitate ges to practice. data intrepretation, a framework were developed for estimating the relative 
P14 .31-S pathogenicity of variants. We used Tuberous Sclerosis, an autosomal domi- Identification of point mutations and deletions in Fanconi anemia nant Neurogenetic disorder caused by mutations in either TS
C1  or TS
C2 , using a next generation sequencing approach to test our famework. As all kinds of mutations, including single nucleotide E. Nicchia1, C. Greco2, D. De Rocco1, R. Bottega2, A. D‘Eustacchio2, E. Cappelli3, A. Pallavicini4, L. Torelli5, V. Pecile2, C. Dufour3, A. Savoia2,1; variants (SNVs), small insertions/deletions (indels), and large deletion/du- 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute plication mutations have been reproted in TS
C1  and TS
C2  scattering almost for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Clinical all along the 65 exons of the two genes without any obvious hotspot, the and Experimental Hematology Unit, G. Gaslini Children’s Hospital, Genova, Italy, Neurogenetic disorders panel including 399 genes, in addition to TS
C1  and 4Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 5Department of TS
C2 , was used for the genetic analysis of 276 referred TSC, or probably-TSC Mathematics and Geosciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. patients. All identified variants of potential clinical interest were verified by Sanger sequencing or MLPA in probands and family members whenever available. 137 patients (49.6%) were found to carry known disease-causing Fanconi Anemia (FA) is a bone marrow failure disorder characterized by mutations, 98 (35.5%) patients carried 93 unique highly-likely pathogenic high clinical and genetic heterogeneity (at least 16 genes), which makes variants. Accumulatively, this assay were able to identify the causative mu- diagnosis complex and time-coTnMsuming. Next-generation sequencing tech- tation in 85.1% (237/276) TSC patients. Of note, 23 large structural vari- nologies, such as the Ion PGM System (IPGM; Life Technologies), could ants and 2 cases of somatic mosaicism were identified in our patients which improve the molecular genetic testing in FA. To test IPGM, we sequenced might otherwise be neglected in sanger-sequencing based genetic testing. In 30 DNA samples: 2 from controls and 28 from FA patients, whose mutations conclusion, our framework can be readily used to analyze the gene variant were previously identified by Sanger sequencing in 18 of them. According to profiles of TSC with high sensitivity, fidelity, throughput and speed. This fra- the Ampliseq Designer software, the molecular target has a size of 74.2 kb mework lay the basis for the genetic testing of other complex Neurogenetic covering 96% of the FA coding exons and their flanking regions. After exclu- disorders. 
P14 .34-M sion of one sample for low coverage, we found that the coverage was higher EGFR screening using Gold nanoprobes than expected (>100X in 97% of reads per run) except for one sample that S. Figueiredo1, P. Pedrosa1, C. Clemente2, W. Fritzsche3, J. Greenman4, S. Haswell4, P. was excluded from the analysis. Then, comparing the IPGM and Sanger se- Baptista1; quencing data, we asses sensitivity (100%), specificity (99%) and accuracy 1Nanotheranostics@CIGMH, DCV, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade (100%). In addition to confirming all the mutations (31 alleles) identified Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal, Almada, Portugal, 2STABVIDA, Lda, Caparica, by Sanger sequencing, this study allowed us to characterize another 18 out Portugal, Almada, Portugal, 3IPHT - Institut für Photonische Technologien, Jena, of the 54 FA alleles in our cohort. The remaining 5 are likely to be localized Germany, 4School of Biological, Biomedical and Environmental Sciences, University of in genomic region not covered by the sequencing analyses. Moreover, quan- Hull, Hull, United Kingdom. titative analysis aimed at detecting copy number variations (CNVs) detec- ted complete (n=1) and partial (n=7) deletions of FANCA, or entire removal (n=1) of FANCD2.All the CNVs were confirmed by SNP array or MLPA analy- Targeted chemotherapy directed at epidermal growth factor receptor for sis. Our data suggest that IPGM is suitable for detection of point mutations treatment of non-small cell lung carcinoma patients has been put forward as and large deletion in FA. an alternative to standard chemotherapy. However, the application of EGFR 
P14 .32-M inhibitors therapy is only effective in cancers with mutated and overactive Detection of an extra fragment by PCR amplification of the FMR1 EGFR, requiring preliminary screening to detect EGFR mutations. triplet repeat region in normal range alleles: can it be somatic Typically, diagnostics procedures examine the profile of genetic alterations instability? in tumours removed for biopsy in search for mutations that make them sus- M. Grasso1, R. Polli2, F. Cogliati3, L. Pennese4, L. Galli1, E. Bettella2, S. Russo3, A. MURGIA2; 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genoa, Italy, 2Department of Women’s ceptible to treatment. Usually, DNA mutations are detected by PCR and con- and Children’s Health, University of Padua,, PADUA, Italy, 3Laboratory of Molecolar firmed by sequencing, which are quite expensive and time-consuming. Thus, Biology, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Laboratory of Neurogenetics, the trend in molecular analysis is directed at increasing sensitivity rather Department of Neurosciences, G.Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy. the multi-loci analysis. Therefore, multiplexing and multiparallel strategies may become an alternative to directed analysis of whole spectra of mutati- ons. Genetic testing of Fragile X disorders is now performed with PCR-based me- The LungCARD project aims the development and optimisation of a low cost thods which sensitivity and precision allow detection and accurate sizing of microfluidic chip to assess EGFR mutations directly from immune-captured FMR1 alleles in the entire spectrum of the CGG repeat amplifications. These circulating tumour cells (CTCs). Here, we present the optimisation of a pro- molecular tools, designed to analyze a region of DNA with intrinsic characte- tocol for PCR amplification of EGFR exon 19 and 21 directly from single cells ristics of instability, could lead to new observations that were out of reach of and the subsequent identification of mutations present via a gold nanopar- previous methods. We report the detection of a smaller and less represented ticle based assay. This colorimetric assay is based on the non-cross-linking fragment in PCR amplifications of the FMR1 repeat region in independent approach using a set of gold nanoprobes (thiol-functionalised gold nanopar- samples of unrelated individuals, three males with intellectual disability ticles) that are capable to specifically detect the EGFR variants. Furthermo- and one normal female, with otherwise normal Fragile X alleles and karyoty- re, preliminary results from Ferguson plot analysis revealed that wild-type pe. A smaller fragment present in PCR reactions from different DNA extrac- and mutated samples present distinct rfs and can be discriminated. The as- tions and samples of each identified individual, has been detected by three say is optimised for reduced reaction volumes and short time, in order to be different Italian laboratories with different settings (primers, amplification, compatible with a microfluidic device. electrophoresis). In one of the cases both parents of the proband resulted to not carry the smaller fragment, thereby excluding a rare X-chromosome or autosomal polymorphism as a possible cause. The possibility of random so- matic instability as a cause of such finding in our cases is challenged by the similar size (286-293 bp) and quantitativeE rSeHprGes e2n0ta1ti4on | oMf tIhLeA pNea,k I. TTAheL Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 283ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .35-S Development of a next generation sequencing panel to assess hereditary cancer risk that includes clinical diagnostic analysis of the caused by germline mutations in one of the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes genes (MSH2, MLH1, PM
S2  and MSH6). Although most of the mutations re- K. R. Bowles1, B. Roa1, S. Bhatnagar2, N. Gutin1, A. Murray1, B. Wardell2, M. Bastian2, J. ported in these genes are point mutations, large genomic rearrangements Mitchell2, J. Chen2, T. Tran2, D. Williams2, J. Potter2, S. Jammulapati2, M. Perry2, B. Morris2, in one of the MMR genes occur with a frequency varying from 5 to 20% K. Timms2; depending on the population. Effective methods to identify these types of 1Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Myriad Genetics, mutation should be integrated in current diagnostic procedure to obtain Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. a more comprehensive genetic screening strategy. Molecular Combing is a powerful FISH-based technique for the direct visualization of single DNA molecules which allows exploration of the genome at high resolution in Assessment of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer risk should inclu- a single analysis. We are developing a novel HNPCC genetic test based on de germline sequencing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 as well as additional genes molecular combing, for which specific “genomic Morse codes” (GMC) have with known associations in breast/ovarian cancer patients. Sanger DNA been designed for each MMR genes. These GMC have been validated on com- sequencing has been the gold standard for molecular genetic analysis but bed genomic DNA extracted from the cancer-derived cell lines LoVo and Sk- next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms could provide another sequen- OV-3, which harbor MSH2 and MLH1 large deletion respectively, and from cing alternative. However, optimized assay design and validation are critical HNPCC patients. From these patients, large rearrangements corresponding to maximize the analytical sensitivity and specificity of NGS assays and to to either deletions of one to several exons in one of the MMR genes and with ensure high quality interpretation for clinical decision making. We develo- sizes ranging from 4 kb to 53 kb or the paracentric inversion in the MSH2 ped a 25-gene NGS hereditary cancer panel that uses RainDance PCR tech- gene have been detected. Importantly, the mutations identified by Molecular nology for high-throughput sample preparation, Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq Combing confirm the results previously obtained by Southern Blot analysis NGS technologies, and commercially available and lab-developed informatic on the same patients, with a resolution in the 1-2 kb range. 
P14 .38-M tools. Initial assessment of analytical sensitivity and specificity was perfor- When an allele drops out of amplification: whole exome sequencing med by comparing BRCA1 and BRCA2. NGS was performed on 1864 anony- unmasks a case of false-negative genetic diagnosis mized patient samples, which had previously undergone BRCA1 and BRCA2 C. Kotta1,2, A. Ghidoni1,2, R. Insolia2, E. Mastantuono3, P. Lichtner3, T. Wieland3, T. Strom3, Sanger sequencing. Sanger sequencing identified 15,878 variants, of which T. Meitinger3,4,5, P. J. Schwartz1, L. Crotti1,2,3; 681 were unique and 482 were classified as disease-associated mutations. 1IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin We identified 15,877 variants at an initial sensitivity of >99.99% for BRCA1 and Laboratory of Cardiovascular Genetics, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Molecular and BRCA2. One polymorphic variant was missed due to a variant under the Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz primer. Sensitivity was subsequently optimized through process improve- Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 4Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany, ments. No additional variants were found by NGS, yielding a specificity of 5Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. 100%. This preliminary analysis facilitated assay optimization and validati- Introduction: on of all 25 genes in the NGS panel. This analysis indicates that a NGS gene panel designed to meet rigorous quality standards can be used to provide Sudden cardiac death without an attributable cause after clinical sequencing results equivalent to those obtained from Sanger DNA clinical diagnostic work-up, is defined as idiopathic ventricular fibrillation s Pe 1q 4u .e 3n 6c -i Mng analysis. (MIVeFth).o Mdsu:tations in genes primarily involved in inherited arrhythmia syn- In silico analysis of the effect on splicing of single nucleotide changes dromes underlie some cases of IKVCFN. Q1 KCNH2 SCN5A KCN
E1  KCN
E2  at exon-intron junctions is predictive of pathogenicity. A study on RYR2 An IVF patient underwent routine mutational analysis of 6 ar- rhythmia-susceptibility genes ( , , , , and MYBP
C3  mutations. )through direct sequencing. Afterwards, exome sequencing (Agilent J. B. A. van de Meerakker, M. P. Lombardi, K. van der Lip, M. Alders, M. A. M. M. Mannens; SureSelect) was performed on the proband and his non-affected parents on Dept. Clinical Genetics, Laboratory for DNA-Diagnostics, Amsterdam, Netherlands. an Illumindae HnioSveoq2000 (minimum coverage 20x for 90% of bases, genotype qRueasluitlyts s:core≥40). Identified variants were subjected to a 3-step filtering strategy ( , nonsynonymous, absent from dbSRNYPR-21000Genomes). Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is onMeY oBfP tCh3e most common inherited Traditional mutation scanning failed to identify a pathogenic va- cardiovascular disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1/500. About half riant. When exome sequencing was performed, a candidate variant of the cases are familial and mutations in are among the most fre- was identified (c.12006G>T, p.M4002I) that however could not be validated quent cause of HCM. by Sanger sequencing. This prompted further investigation and all factors Here we report on 14 patients with HCM in which single nucleotide substi- contributing to either a stochastic sampling or a systematic error were eva- tutions potentially affect splicing of the MYBP
C3  gene. Twelve mutations are luated. Previously published primer sequences were inspected. A SNP near located either on the last nucleotide of an exon or within the consensus 3’- the primer’s 3’ site (rs790889, MAF=0.426) was identified and hypothesized and 5’- splice site sequences, while two are situated outside these regions. tCoo cnaculuses itohne: mutant allele to drop out. Targeted screening with redesigned Mutations at the exon-intron junctions can potentially affect splicing. Howe- primers confirmed the presence of the variant. ver, only changes affeinc tsiniligc toh,e invariant AG-GT nucleotides are considered to In routine diagnostics often laboratories use screening con- be certainly pathogenic, while the rest require functional studies. Mutations ditions reported through literature dated at a time when genetic variation were first analysed using a combination of 5 splice site prediction information was not widely available. Allelic dropout or, more precisely, the algorithms, integrated in the Alamut 2.0 Splicing prediction module. For 12 occurrence of a null/false allele due to primer-target mismatch, constitutes mutations splicing prediction analysis indicated an effect on splicing and for an avoidable laboratory error. Our report highlights the need to periodically 2 there were no alterations. Subsequently, all mutations were analysed by r Pe 1e 4v .a 3lu 9a -Ste even previously well established screening conditions. cDNA sequence analysis and these results were compared to the prediction Pyrosequencing Assay Panel For Imatinib Resistance Mutations models. In all patients the results of sequence analysis were consistent with S. Acunalp Erdogan1, G. Inan2, F. Narz3, B. Torun1, D. Ciglidag Dungul1; the predicted effect, namely exon skipinp sinilgic, ointron inclusion, partial exon de- 1ATQ Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 2METU Department of Statistics, Ankara, Turkey, letions and insertions of intronic sequences or no altered splicing at all. In 3Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany. conclusion, this study indicates that splicing analysis can accurately Background: and reliably predict the effect on splicing of mutations occurring at exon/ intron junctions representing a helpful tool in DNA diagnostics for the as- ChronAicB mLyeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized byB CthRe pre- sessment of the pathogenicity of a sequence variant. sence of the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. Ph chromosome results from 
P14 .37-S the translocation of protoonkogene from chromosome 9 and gene Genetic diagnosis of familial colorectal cancer: Detection of large on chromosome 22, which leads to the formation of BCR-ABL chimeric gene rearrangements in the MMR genes by molecular combing with constitutive tyrosine kinase activity. Imatinib (Gleevec) is the first BCR- A. Petit1, H. van der Klift2, J. Abscheidt1, D. El Mahli1, A. Thomas1, A. Bensimon1, J. Wijnen3, S. Barradeau1; ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor used in the treatment of CML. Second genera- 1Genomic Vision, Bagneux, France, 2Department of Human and Department of Clinical tion drugs such as nilotinib and dasatinib, are now considered as alternative Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Human treatments to imatinib. Point mutations the kinase domain of the BCR-ABL and Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the were detected from 40% to 90% of tMhee Gthleoedv:e c-resistance cases. These mu- Netherlands, Leiden, Netherlands. tations disrupt the binding site of imatinib on the tyrosine kinase, resulting in a loss of sensitivity to the drugs. We performed a pyrosequen- cing assay panel for the detection of eleven important mutations in BCR- Hereditary Non Polyposis Hereditary Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) or Lynch ABL kinase domain, which are Y253H, Y253F, 
E255 K, 
E255 V, V299L, T315A, s2y8nd4rome is an autosomal dominantly inheriteE dS cH anG c e2 r 0 s1 u4 sc e| p M tibI iL liA tyN , TIT 3A 15L IY , F | 3 W 17W L, FW 31.E 7VS , H F3G 5. 9O C,R FG 359V. Plasmids coding for respective vari-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index in situ ants were used to study assay performance and precision. Totally 25 RNA chromosomal translocations is growing exponentially. The two main me- sRaemsuplltess: of BCR-ABL positive patients were analyzed by pyrosequencing and thods to identify and monitor translocations, fluorescent hybridiza- samples, which had mutation were also analyzed with sanger sequencing. tion (FISH) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) are challenging, OurC aosnscalyu asliloonw: s flexible, fast and reliable detection of mutations labor intensive, the information obtained is limited, and sensitivity is rather in cDNA from both blood and bone marrow with high concordance to Sanger low. Common sample types for these analyses are biopsies or small tumors, sequencing. Our pyrosequencing assay for imatinib-resistant which are very limited in material making the downstream measurement mutations provides a reliable method for the detection of the mutant BCR- of more than one analyte rather difficult; obtaining another biopsy, using ABL transcripts and also provides a significant value for the follow up of a different section or splitting the sample can raise issues of tumor hetero- CML patients on imatinib. geneity. The ability to study mutation status (DNA) as well as measuring fu- 
P14 .40-M sion transcript expression (RNA) from the same sample is powerful because Next generation tissue profiling O. Söderberg; you’re maximizing the information obtained from a single precious sample Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. and eliminating any sample to sample variation. We isolated DNA and RNA from the same non-small lung adenocarcinoma sample without splitting or dividing the sample, and both mutation analysis, as well as fusion transcript Cancer develops as a consequence of genetic mutations, which results in detection was performed using the Ion Torrent PGM™ platform on the same deregulation of gene expression and/or proteins with aberrant functions. Ion 318™ ™chip. Using 10ng of DNA and 10ng of RNA input, we applied the Ion These changes often interfere with cellular processes such as survival and AmpliSeq Colon and Lung Cancer pane™l to analyze over 500 COSMIC muta- proliferation. The cancer cells evolve and are subjected to natural selection tions in 22 genes and the Ion AmpliSeq RNA Lung Fusion panel to detect 40 through interplay with its microenvironment. As is the case with other eco- d Pi 1ff 4e .r 4e 3n -t S fusion transcripts. systems, also the tissue microenvironment changes and responds to the Development and verification of an Ion Ampliseq RNA gene fusion populations in its niche and to external interference. Communication with panel for lung cancer: an OncoNetwork collaborative research study other cells in the microenvironment will provide input signals that are in- J. L. Costa1, L. Lacroix2, D. Le Corre3, H. Blons3, O. Sheils4, B. Tops5, N. Welker6, R. R. terpreted by the malignant cells, and responded to, based on their altered Bastien6, H. Kurth7, E. Amato8, A. Mafficini8, A. Rachiglio9, C. Noppe7, J. Katayama10, R. genetic programs. Hence, the consequence of a mutation has to be viewed Franco11, P. Park12, H. Feilotter12, A. Reiman13, I. Cree13, J. Schageman10, S. Magdaleno10, in the environmental context of each individual cell. The activity status of A. Chen10, A. Rico14, C. Ainali10, R. Petraroli10, A. Felton10, A. Scarpa8, K. Nishio15, N. Normanno9, M. Ligtenberg5, C. P. Vaughn6, P. L. Puig3, J. C. Machado1; a protein or signaling pathway can be visualized with in situ Proximity Li- 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Institut Gustave Roussy, Paris, France, 3Université Paris gation Assays (in situ PLA) using a pair of antibodies equipped with DNA Descartes, Paris, France, 4Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 5Radboud university oligonucleotides (proximity probes) to target interacting proteins. Proximal medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental binding of such probes template the creation of a circular DNA molecule, Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 7VIOLLIER AG, Basel, Switzerland, 8ARC- which is a surrogate marker for the interaction. We recently developed a NET University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 9Centro Ricerche Oncologiche Mercogliano, multiplexed version of in situ PLA by introducing unique tags as identifiers Mercogliano, Italy, 10Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 11Istituto Nazionale in each different proximity probe. The combinatorial events generating an in Tumori, Napoli, Italy, 12Queen‘s University, Ontario, ON, Canada, 13Warwick Medical School, Coventry, United Kingdom, 14Life Tecnologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 15Kinki situ PLA signal will harbor a set of identifier tags that will be unique for each University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. protein interaction. By combining in situ PLA with padlock probes, analysis of signaling activity can be achieved together with genotyping expressed mRNA in fixed tissue sections, retaining the architectural information while Chromosomal translocations and corresponding gene fusions play an im- providing single-molecule resolution. 
P14 .41-S portant role in carcinogenesis. The recent establishment of ALK, RO
S1 , RET Quantification of donor/recipient chimerism in leukemia samples by and NTRK1 fusion transcripts as predictive biomarkers for lung cancer the- digital PCR rapy has increased the need for a technology that could detect these bio- K. Hayashibara1, A. Jiménez-Velasco2; markers starting from very limited amounts of material. Here we describe 1Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Carlos Haya Hospital, the development and verification of an Ion AmpliSeq RNA fusion panel that Malaga, Spain. can simultaneously detect ALK, RET, RO
S1  and NTRK1 fusion transcripts in a single reaction. For the development of the panel we used previously characterized samples comprising 6 cancer cell lines and 62 FFPE lung tu- During leukemia treatment mixed chimerism occurs in which both recipient mor samples. Upon RNA isolation and amplification using the panel, samp- and donor cells are present in the bone marrow or peripheral blood after les were sequenced on the Ion PGM system. Initially, using serial dilutions transplantation. Chimerism analysis is performed to monitor peripheral of RNA from cell lines in normal RNA a limit of detection of 1% was esta- blood or bone marrow in the recipient after allogenic stem cell transplan- blished. Next, using the FFPE samples a fusion transcript was detected in 21 tation to monitor for leukemic relapse. Observation of increasing mixed of the 24 known positive samples. Two of the non-concordant results were chimerism after transplantation is associated with a higher risk of relapse due to lack of representative tumor material. For the third, although no spe- in acute leukemia. Previously, a quantitative PCR (qPCR) technique, using in- cific fusion transcript was identified, the internal control for ALK expression sertion/deletion polymorphisms, was found to predict relapse in 88.2% vs. revealed the presence of an unknown ALK fusion transcript. Additionally, 44.4% of individuals analyzed by VNTR markers with a median anticipation two new RET fusions were detected in samples not previously tested for period of 58 days and a sensitivity of 0.01% vs. 3%. Here we present results RET translocations. These preliminary results are highly encouraging re- from research experiments performed to determine if a digital PCR (dPCR) garding the possibility of a reliable experimental protocol for the detection method is able to predict relapse earlier and with greater accuracy than the of fusion transcripts in the biological material routinely obtained for the qPCR method using retrospective leukemia samples. Research results sho- diagnosis of lung cancer. An extensive verification is under way within the wed that dPCR using the QuantStudio™ 3D Digital PCR System and the qPCR OncoNetwork. method yielded similar percent recipient chimerism values when recipient 
P14 .46-M DNA was present above the 1% level. Furthermore, dPCR using the system MicroRNA detection by real-time TaqMan® assays for translational was found to be more sensitive than the qPCR method based on the ability research to detect the recipient DNA in a relapsed individual about 2 months earlier L. Wong, T. Gulham, P. Tsang, B. Moy, C. Liu, F. Hu, S. Dong, C. Chen, J. Stevens; Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. where the percent recipient chimerism was 0.2% or less. The false positi- ve rate was close to the complete chimerism value of 0.01% for peripheral blood samples. 
P14 .42-M MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs involved in the multilevel Hotspot mutation and fusion transcript detection from the same non- regulation of gene expression targeting a battery of mRNA genes. Resear- small lung adenocarcinoma sample chers have discovered that miRNAs are efficacious biomarkers for the clas- A. Cheng, V. Bagai, N. Hernandez, M. Li, C. San Jose, J. Schageman, R. Petraroli, A. sification of tumors and prediction of outcome for many diseases because of Vlassov, S. Magdaleno; their evolutionary conservation, unique expression signatures, relative sta- Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austin, TX, United States. bility, and abundance. There has been an increased interest in recent years for the identification of circulating miRNAs in serum, plasma, and other body fluids because it holds great promise for a non-invasive approach to The presence of certain chromosomal rearrangements and the subsequent molecular diagnostic and therapeutics. However, detection of miRNAs in fusion gene derived from translocations has been implicated in a number these clinically relevant samples has been difficult, often requiring greater of cancers. Hundreds of translocations have been described in the literatu- re recently but the need to efficiently deteEctS aHndG f u2r0th1er4 c |h aMraIcLteAriNze, tIhTeAseL Y |s WensWitivWity.E. WSeH hGav.Oe dReGveloped a new method for the detection and qu 2a 8nt 5i- fication of miRNAs that is highly specific and sensitive. The highly efficientABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .49-S The road to next generation molecular diagnostics, when NGS takes upstream chemistry allows synthesis of miRNA template library that is used over Sanger sequencing in the downstream real-time TaqMan qPCR for miRNA-specific detection. K. De Leeneer1, J. Hellemans2, W. Steyaert1, I. Vereecke1, E. Debals1, B. Crombez1, M. The universality of template synthesis simplifies the workflow and provi- Baetens1, M. Van Heetvelde1, F. Coppieters1, A. Dejaegher1, S. Lefever1, E. De Baere1, P. des the flexibility for scalable content (miRNA coverage). Whether applied Coucke1, K. Claes1; to basic or translational research, profiling, screening, or validation, this 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Biogazelle, Zwijnaarde, Belgium. new and robust method allows detection and quantification of miRNAs to address the unmet needs in workflow and sensitivity that exists today with next generation sequencing and other qPCR technologies, especially with clinical samples. Results show miRNA-specific amplification with a 7-log li- In diagnostics, next generation sequencing (NGS) of fixed sequence panels near dynamic range and sensitivity of 60 copies input to meet the needs of of captured genes/exomes is being introduced. Here it was our aim to deve- translational research and clinical/diagnostic application. lop a flexible, cost-efficient and easily expandable NGS-based workflow. 
P14 .47-S For target enrichment, we opted for PCR. Primer design is performed using A new strategy for genetic testing of neurodegeneration with brain an in-house developed primer design software program (Primer XL), allo- iron accumulation (NBIA) using amplicon multiplexing and next wing uniform PCR conditions for >3000 amplicons of >200 different genes. generation sequencing The library preparation is done with a modified version of the Nextera XT S. Moutton1,2, A. De Pindray1, N. Houcinat1, C. Plaisant1, J. Deforges1, D. Lacombe1,2, B. Sample Prep (Illumina) protocol. Our approach allows pooling of up to Arveiler1,2, C. Goizet1,2, P. Fergelot1,2; 15000 amplicons from different genes and patients in a single MiSeq run 1Service de génétique médicale - CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2Laboratoire MRGM : Maladies Rares, Génétique et Métabolisme, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, (2x250bp), resulting in an average coverage of 500x, and guaranteeing a mi- France, Bordeaux, France. nimal coverage of >36x for 99% of the samples. The sensitivity of the data analysis pipeline was evaluated with 387 diffe- rent positive controls. For substitutions and indels < 15 bp, an overall sen- In the expanding field of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation sitivity of 99,99% was obtained, comparable to Sanger sequencing. A lower (NBIA), the development of sensitive brain imaging played a major role to sensitivity was observed for the identification of indels > 15 bp, a known characterize iron-related damages in patients. In parallel, new genes have shortcoming of short read sequencing. Detection of these seems dependent been identified allowing genotype-phenotype correlations. However, over- on the sequence context and can be performed with capillary electrophore- lapping phenotypes and non-informative pedigrees are still sources of de- sis. For analysis of the specificity, the variants detected in 61 patients in 8 layed diagnosis. For these reasons, it would be more rapid and cost-effective different genes (n= 327) were investigated with Sanger sequencing. A posi- to propose a simultaneous analysis of the nine genes identified so far. tive predictive value of 98% was obtained. Here, we propose a Next Generation Sequencing solution, tested in our series. This ISO15189 accredited flexible workflow allows a strong reduction of NBIA genes (AT
P13 A2, CP, 
C19 orf12, DCAF17; FA2H, FTL, PANK2, PLA2G6 cost and turnaround time compared to Sanger sequencing. The hands-on and WDR45) were included in a custom panel of 35 genes dedicated to our t Pi 1m 4e . 5w 0il -l M be further reduced by automation of the upstream PCR set-up. routine molecular diagnosis platform. Two librairies of amplicons were Validation of a next generation sequencing approach for rapid and designed and built with the AmpliSeqTM technology. Sequencing was per- accurate CFTR mutations screening formed according to the semi-conductor technology on a PGM. The Torrent A. Telese1, V. D‘Argenio1,2, I. Postiglione1,2, P. Nardiello1, G. Castaldo1,2, F. Salvatore1,2,3; Suite (Life Technologies) and AlamutTM interface (Interactive Biosoftware) 1CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Molecular Medicine were used for the mapping of reads, the variant calling and the interpreta- and Medical Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3IRCCS- tion. Workflow analysis was validated on known FTL and PANK2 mutations Fondazione SDN, Naples, Italy. previously identified using Sanger sequencing. DNA samples irrelevant for NBIA were used as control to avoid considering recurrent artefacts. In sili- co AmpliSeq design covered 99% of NBIA genes targeted regions, of which Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is one of the most frequent autosomal recessive disease 98% were sequenced at least 40X. Preliminary results obtained from 3 pa- among Caucasians (prevalence 1:2500); it depends on mutations in the Cy- tients showed a perfect match between NGS and Sanger sequencing results. stic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR) gene that encodes a chloride Thirty patients with compatible symptoms and MRI signs of NBIA who were exchanger. More than 1500 causative CFTR mutations have been identified, referred to our laboratory for genetic testing are currently screened. including missense, frameshift, splice site, nonsense and deletion mutations. 
P14 .48-M Their accurate detection is important to improve the clinical management of New generation sequencing dedicated to CFTR genotyping: CF patients and to correctly identify all CFTR carriers. Here, we report the comparison of two kits for multiplexed amplicons resequencing use of a next generation sequencing screening for the identification of CFTR M. Reboul1, E. Lasseaux1, F. Salin2, M. Déalbert1, S. Labatut1, C. Plaisant1, D. Lacombe3,1, germline mutations. The study was performed on 60 subjects, including CF B. Arveiler3,1, P. Fergelot1,3; 1CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 2UMR1202 BIOGECO,INRA, Universite de patients, CFTR carriers and controls, previously analyzed by traditional me- Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 3EA4576 MRGM Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. thods (reverse dot blot and Sanger sequencing). CFTR coding regions (in- cluding their flanking sites) were amplified using the CFTR MASTR Assay kit (Multiplicom) to obtain a library/sample. The subsequent sequencing CFTR NGS is predicted to become the method of choice for fast screening of known reactions were performed with both the GS Junior System (Roche) and the mutations as well as resequencing of the gene. Our diagnosis labo- MiSeq System (Illumina) allowing the simultaneous analysis respectively of ratory, involved in cystic fibrosis testing, is currently developing this new 10 and 60 patients/run. Finally, the downstream data analysis was carried strategy using a PGM C(LFiTfeR Technologies). The aim of this study was to de- out through the SeqNext tool (JSI Medical Systems). All the features and per- fine a NGS workflow for specific resequencing of the coding and flanking formances of the Next Generation Sequencing technologies are discussed intron regions of the gene. We studied the feasability and analytical in the light of results obtained with the two used systems. Comparative se- performance of two kits designed for amplicon library building and sequen- quence analysis highlighted that the proposed method is reliable, since all cing on PGM: the AmpliSeq™ CFTR kit from Life Technologies and the CFTR mutations previously identified were confirmed and the time of analysis is MASTR v2 assay (multiplicom). The latter was used according two different also markedly reduced. Our results assess the feasibility of a next generation PGM protocols, 200 and 400 bp sequencing, due to the length of amplicons. sequencing approach for CFTR mutation detection to be included in a routi- These two kits and two protocols were compared using 20 patients DNA n Pe 1 4d .i 5ag 1n -Sostic workflow. samples that have been previously sequenced by capillary electrophoresis Molecular analysis of mutations in the CFTR gene by Next Generation using a 3500xL Dx Genetic Analyzer for CFTR genotyping (27 exons and® Sequencing exon-i®ntron junctions). Gene rearrangements were searched using SALSA S. Chamayou1, M. Sicali1, A. Covone2, S. Ferrari3, M. D‘apice4, A. Rosatelli5, A. Coiana6, C. MLPA kit (MRC- Holland) or custom array CGH. Mutations were deletions, Mazza7, G. Savoldi7, B. Sobrino Rey8, F. Barros8, S. Fernandez9; duplications, splicing variants and different combinations of T and TG tracts 1Unità di medicina della riproduzione - istituto HERA, Sant‘Agata li Battiati, Italy, in intron 9. All expected mutations were identified by the two kits while it 2Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 3Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, S. Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 4Laboratorio remained difficult to characterize intron 9 homopolymers. We discuss about di Genetica Medica, Policlinico Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy, 5ospedale microcitemico di the reliability of these protocols and of dedicated analysis pipeline in the cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 6Ospedale microcitemico di cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 7Laboratorio context of cystic fibrosis diagnosis. Further improvements of software ana- di Genetica Pediatrica, UO Anatomia Patologica, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy, lysis pipelines would help to allow for automated CFTR mutation detection, 8Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica –SERGAS. Santiago de Compostela, particularly in repetitive and homopolymer sequence regions. Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 9Hospital Sao Joao, Porto, Portugal. 286 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disease in Cau-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index casians, with an Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessi- HHL. NGS-based mutation analysis allows us to detect causative mutations ve disease in Caucasians, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 2500 and in >55% of HHL patients. These results imply consequences for counseling a carrier frequency of 1 in 25. The gene responsible for CF, named the Cystic of patients and families and can also be the foundation for novel gene- or Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator (CFTR), encodes the cy- even mutation-specific treatment options in hearing loss. 
P14 .54-M clic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent chloride channel found Technical challenges towards extended blood group genotyping by in the apical membrane of secretory epithelial cells. The known mutations next-generation sequencing (NGS) of the CFTR gene are 1965 (Cystic Fibrosis Mutation Database). The massi- Y. Fichou1,2, M. Audrézet1,3, P. Guéguen1,3, C. Le Maréchal1,2,3, C. Férec1,2,3; ve sequencing for mutation analysis and copy number variations (CNVs) by 1Inserm, U1078, Brest, France, 2EFS - Bretagne, Brest, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) allows investigating at the second and Moléculaire et d’Histocompatibilité, CHRU Morvan, and Faculté de Médecine et des third level with the scanning of all exons, the flanking regions and the search Sciences de la Santé, UBO, Brest, France. for deletions and/or insertions in a single diagnostic test. To check the reliability of massive sequencing by NGS as many as 100 con- trol cases provided by an European network, were analyzed. All of the mu- Generating libraries by using the AmpliSeq™ strategy (Ion Torrent) for tations previously obtained by Sanger Sequencing were confirmed by NGS next-generation sequencing (NGS) is very convenient in terms of technical that was shown to be highly sensitivity and specific. handling and time. By these means we designed primers and generated li- The massive sequencing offers the possibility to carry out a reliable and braries to investigate exons, flanking introns and UTRs of 18 genes invol- comprehensive analysis for all genetic variants in reduced time (16h) te- ved in 15 human blood systems, for a total of ~57 kilobases. After norma- sting up to 20 cases-samples in a single run. The costs of genetic analysis are lAizBaOtion by two different approaches, libraries were sequenced by the Ion s Pu 1b 4s .t 5a 2n -t Mially decreased. PGM™ Sequencer (Ion ToRrHrDent). WRhHilCeE alGl YcPoAdinGgY PDBNA seqGuYePnEces, except in , exhibited a significant ~90% coverage, data analysis of genotypes in Enabling high-throughput discovery of the RNA transcription homologous genes (i.e., and ; , , and ) resulted in landscape using a directional RNA workflow and a combinatorial discrepancy with what expected due to misassignment of sequencing data multiplexing approach D. B. Munafo1, P. Liu1, C. J. Sumner1, B. Textor2, B. W. Langhorst1, F. J. Stewart1, E. T. to target genes by analysis softwares. That prompted us to specifically PCR- Dimalanta1, T. B. Davis1; amplify the exons in our genes of interest with gene-specific primers. PCR 1New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United States, 2New England Biolabs, Frankfurt, products were subsequently fragmented and sequences from homologous Germany. genes were labeled with different barcodes. All products were mixed with the AmpliSeq™-generated products before sequencing. Sequencing data were finally found to be in accordance with known genotypes. This work Massively parallel next generation cDNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), has allowed actually made the proof of principle that 1/ libraries generated by two dif- many advances in the characterization and quantification of transcriptomes, ferent means can be combined and sequenced together, and 2/ gene-spe- including the detection of non-canonical transcription start sites and ter- cific primers are required to accurately investigate genotypes in homolo- mination sites, and identification of alternative splice isoforms, transcript gous pairs of genes. Meanwhile we also define conditions to reduce both mutations and edits. Additionally, the ability to obtain information on the intra- and intersample variability. Overall this study illustrates that NGS is originating strand is useful for reasons including for example: identification applicable for blood group genotyping, and may be used in a near future for of antisense transcripts, determination of the transcribed strand of nonco- molecular diagnosis at the laboratory level. 
P14 .55-S ding RNAs, and determination of expression levels of coding or noncoding Cardiovascular NGS-Panel testing: design and first experiences overlapping transcripts. However, standard methods for sequencing RNA I. Lafer, A. Gamillscheg, B. Pieske, M. R. Speicher, C. Windpassinger, T. Schwarzbraun; do not provide information on the DNA strand from which the RNA strand Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria. was transcribed, and methods for strand-specific library preparation can be inefficient and time-consuming. To address this challenge we developed a streamlined, low input method for Directional RNA-Sequencing that high- ly retains strand orientation information while maintaining even coverage Syndromes resulting in primary structural heart disease or arrhythmia are of transcript expression. This method is based on second strand labeling characterized by a large clinical variability and a significant genetic hete- and excision after adaptor ligation; allowing differential tagging of the rogeneity. In fact, in a diagnostic setting it is not uncommon to have more first strand cDNA ends. We have also extended the utility of this method than 40 genes as potential targets for an individual patient. For patient care, by developing additional adaptor and primers, including a dual barcoding this situation is often not satisfactory because a precise diagnosis of the un- approach for multiplexing up to 96 samples. As a result, we have enabled derlying cause of the disease directly affects patient treatment and allows highly multiplexed, strand-specific mRNA sequencing, as well as whole tran- counseling on risks for relatives. scriptome sequencing (Total RNA-seq) from ribosomal-depleted samples, To address these issues we designed an enrichment panel covering 97 ge- enabling the discovery of a much broader picture of expression dynamics nes, including all genes currently associated with LQT, SQT, BrS, IVFA, ARVC, including discovery of antisense transcripts. This work presents a streamli- HCM, DCM, RCM and SUDS/SIDS. After targeted enrichment, the DNA is se- ned, fast solution for complete RNA sequencing, with high quality data that quenced on an Illumina MiSeq and subjected to analysis employing our ana- i Pll 1u 4s .t 5ra 3t -e Ss the complexity and diversity of the RNA transcription landscape. lysis pipeline. Our strategy includes an indication specific analysis with an in Highly efficient diagnostic testing in patients with hereditary hearing depth evaluation for highly penetrant genes with a prevalence of >5% where loss using Panel-based Next Generation Sequencing we complement regions with a coverage below 50x by Sanger sequencing. K. Peters, S. Fehr, M. Menzel, T. Scheurenbrand, A. Sprecher, S. Biskup, K. Hoertnagel; For the remaining genes we generate a screening report and usually achie- CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany. ve coverage above 50x for more than 95% of bases. Up to date we applied our cardiovasculaMr YNBGPSC p3anel to more than 25 patients, which allowed us to establish a definite diagnosis in many of these cases. For example, we detec- Genetic heterogeneity complicates the molecular diagnosis of hereditary ted mutations in in 5 out of our 8 patients with suspected HCM. We hearing loss (HHL). Although a multitude of genes are attributed to HHL, will present a summary of interesting cases and our experiences with this patients are routinely tested only for mutations in GJB2, GJB3 and GJB6 interesting diagnostic tool. 
P14 .56-M (~5-10% of HHL). Thus, screening of all known hearing loss genes in par- Is exome sequencing of single patients with intellectual disability an allel by high-throughput sequencing methods (next generation sequencing effective diagnostic strategy? technology) is the most promising tool for a comprehensive detection of C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, M. J. V. Hoffer, M. Kriek, E. Aten, E. K. Bijlsma, A. van Haeringen, M. causative mutations, especially after negative testing for GJB2. Here we pre- H. Breuning, S. A. Kant, W. Arindrarto, M. Losekoot, G. W. E. Santen; sent the methodology of the ‘hearing loss’ diagnostic panel comprising 110 Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. genes associated with non-syndromic and syndromic HL (Target enrich- ment, NGS library preparation and sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq2500 platform, bioinformatic analysis and medical evaluation). A group of 200 pa- Trio-sequencing can be used in all disorders, and has particularly proven its tients with profound hearing loss were analyzed in a clinical setting. Multi- value in finding causes of intellectual disability (ID) or multiple congenital plexed samples were sequenced with high coverage per base and combined anomalies. In contrast, we investigated whether sequencing only the affec- with bioinformatic analyses, single base substitutions, small deletions, and ted patient without parents is sufficient to find the causative mutation, lea- insertions in known genes of genetic hearing loss can reliably be detected. ding to a considerable reduce in costs. In this study, we enrolled 36 patients In conclusion, we have established a panel-based NGS pipeline which is a with unexplained ID, and sequenced the exome. The exome sequences were highly sensitive, fast and cost efficient toEoSl fHorG t h2e0 g1en4e t|i cM dIiLagAnNos,t iIcTsA oLf Y |a WnalWyseWd .wEiSthH aG st.rOinRgeGnt post-sequencing annotation pipeline includi2ng8 a7nABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ID gene panel of ~500 genes for filtering of the data. All remaining variants The study confirms the potential of NGS techniques, indicates caution in in- with a potential clinical consequence were validated by Sanger sequencing terpretation and validation of data and suggests a soft transition between and tested in the parents for inheritance. classical methods and NGS approach in clinical application. 
P14 .59-S After variant filtering we noticed an average of 13 variants per patient (ran- Application of NextGeneDx, a validated NGS based procedure, in the ge 2 to 27) requiring further clinical interpretation. The majority of these clinical practice variants were inherited from one of the parents. Hitherto, we identified 5 de J. Garcia-Planells1, C. Ruiz Lafora1, L. Rausell1, M. Bermejo1, E. Ramirez1, M. Molero1, M. novo mutations in 36 patients (14%). Lazaro1, L. Rausell1, M. Garcia-Hoyos1, M. Perez-Alonso2; Without exome sequencing the parents, a relatively high amount of poten- 1Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna (Valencia), Spain, 2Department of tially pathogenic variants remain. All these variants require clinical inter- Genetics. University of Valencia, Paterna (Valencia), Spain. pretation which is very time-consuming, while most of these variants were c likely benign because they are inherited from one of the parents. With trio- analysis inherited variants can be filtered out suggesting that this strategy, We have developed a NGS based procedure, called NextGeneDx, with the at this moment, is more efficient in identifying the causative variant. In the main objective that it can be used for genetic diagnosis, by using specific future when databases are filled with more and more exome data and con- designs targeted at specific clinical problems. High coverage and represen- sequently with more rare benign variants, exome sequencing single patients tativity (100%) guaranties a sensitivity and specificity comparable to San- will become a more realistic diagnostic approach. ger sequencing. Validation has been performed by an extensive comparison 
P14 .57-S between the results obtained with NextGeneDx and Sanger sequencing. Detection of large rearrangements in the CFTR gene: Comparison Versatility and robustness of NextGeneDx allows to increasing gradually the between custom CGH array and NGS number of genes and diseases analysed. Nine months after the validation M. Audrezet, P. Gueguen, S. Redon, A. Despres, C. Le Maréchal, C. Férec; CHRU BREST, Brest, France. of the whole procedure we have developed more than 46 NextGeneDx ser- vices for multigenic or genetically heterogeneous diseases including more than 180 genes. The application of this technology in the clinical practice 24 years after the discovery of the CFTR gene, more than 1900 anomalies shows a significant reduction of the global costs of sequencing, making ac- are described, mainly single base-pair substitutions or micro-insertions/ cessible the diagnosis of multigenic and heterogeneous diseases, bringing deletions, but many large rearrangements are also described. to an increase in the detection of disease-causing mutations and, definite- Identification of mutations has important implications for genetic counsel- ly, a higher number of patients with a genetic diagnosis. Cost effectiveness ling, prenatal diagnosis, cascade screening in families, and for understan- analyses, from DNA extraction to obtain the final report, bear an important ding the genotype-phenotype relationship. reduction of the costs, especially that related with hands-on and turnaround Classical approaches for gene analysis aim either to look for point mutations time, without compromising the diagnostic accuracy of the analysis. In con- or to identify large deletions or duplications, but no strategy allows, to date, clusion, NextGeneDx provides an analytical accuracy comparable to Sanger to identify both types of mutations. sequencing and permits the analysis of all of the coding region and adjacent Since a few years, NGS technologies enable us to overcome the classical ap- intronic sequences including those refractory to other types of sequencing. proaches of whole coding sequence sequencing at single nucleotide reso- Therefore, NextGeneDx is a cost effective approach for the genetic diagno- lution. sis of multigenic and genetically heterogeneous illnesses, with a negligible The aim of this study is to validate NGS data analysis to detect large rearran- n Pu 1m 4.b 6e 0r - Mof incidental findings or unsolicited genomic information. gements in the CFTR gene. Noninvasive prenatal testing for fetal trisomies: a validation study 23 DNA carrying known large deletions (n=20) or duplications (n=3) pre- using the SOLiD Wildfire platform viously identified by CGH-array or qFM-PCR and two control samples, one M. G. Elferink1, E. de Bruijn2, P. van Zon1, O. Akkermans1, K. A. Kusters1, W. van Haren- complete deletion, and the other corresponding to the wild-type sequence van ‘t Woudt1, G. C. M. L. Page-Christiaens1, K. D. Lichtenbelt1, M. J. A. van Kempen1, I. J. of the gene were included in this study. Nijman1, G. van Haaften1, B. van der Zwaag1, E. Cuppen1,2, J. K. Ploos van Amstel1, G. H. Schuring-Blom1; Analysis was conducted by SeqNext and Nextgene sofwares and by a simple 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands. spreadsheet by comparing the average depths obtained for each amplicon. This method allowed us to confirm all the large deletions/duplications af- fecting more than one exon. Only one short deletion of 1 kb affecting exon Next-generation sequencing of cell-free DNA, isolated from plasma of 17b alone was not detected by both methods. pregnant women, is widely used for noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for In conclusion, NGS technology should be the first technique that allows in a fetal trisomies. Recently, a new upgrade for the SOliD platform was released: single step both the identification of point mutations and large rearrange- the SOLiD Wildfire. The Wildfire has a simplified sample preparation proto- ment in a gene. 
P14 .58-M col removing the laborious and expensive emulsion PCR step, an increased The impact of NGS on gentic services: prioritization criteria and sequencing throughput, and the capability to use individual lanes and reuse accountability unused flowchip lanes. Consequently, run time and costs are reduced si- L. Pennese1,2, M. Castagnetta1, M. Cecconi1, E. Gennaro1, F. Zara2, D. A. Coviello1; gnificantly whilst obtaining equal numbers of mapped reads for statistical 1E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Laboratorio di Genetica Umana, Genoa, Italy, 2IRCCS G. Gaslini, analysis. In this study, we aimed to validate the use of the SOLiD Wildfire Unità di Malattie Muscolari e Neurodegenerative, Genoa, Italy. for NIPT. In total, 154 samples were tested (between 11-20th weeks of ge- station) including sixteen T21, ten T18 and four T13 (validated by karyoty- ping or QF-PCR in chorion villi or amniocytes). Cell-free DNA was extracted Clinical use of Next Generation Sequences (NGS) technologies is appealing, from 1 ml plasma and processed using a NIPT optimized library preparation but requires high accuracy, simple assays, small inexpensive instruments, and multiplexed (up to 16-plex). Libraries were sequenced on the Wildfire flexible throughput, short run times and most importantly, robust data ana- (35bp) targeting > 10 million uniquely mapped reads without mismatches lysis as well as tools for biological interpretation of results. per sample. The in-house developed pipeline CHROMATE (CHROMosomal We have launched a pilot project to assess the clinical value of NGS techno- Aneuploidy TEster) was used for GC-correction, read filtering, and statistical logy according to the following criteria: 1) phenotypes characterized by ge- analysis to calculate Z-scores.To conclude, we demonstrate that the Wildfi- netic heterogeneity; 2) accurate selection of patients in collaboration with a re can be used to reliably detect fetal trisomies and that results are robust clinical team; 3) the informed consent of the patient to perform the test. We between runs and under suboptimal conditions. Low costs, ease of use, de- performed targeted NGS analysis on 38 selected patients with Hypertrophic creased run time, and robustness underline the suitability of the Wildfire for cardiomyopathy (HCM) and Epileptic Encephalopathies (EE) using custom cost-effective and rapid NIPT in clinical practice. panels of candidate genes on PGM (Life Technologies). 
P14 .61-S Our study highlight important issues which have to be considered for the Epigenetic strategies for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis: The power accountability of management and transmission of the results: 1) increased of the fetal methylome identification of new variants with uncertain pathogenic value affecting the E. A. Papageorgiou1,2, G. Koumbaris1,2, E. Kypri1, M. Hadjidaniel2, P. C. Patsalis2; 1NIPD Genetics Ltd, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, expectance of patients, especially in predictive or presymptomatic testing; Nicosia, Cyprus. 2) incomplete representation and coverage of target regions lead to missing clinically relevant mutations. Accordingly, Sanger sequencing seems to be required to analyse specific genomic segment. 3) Our experience indicates Epigenetic modifications have proven to play a significant role in cancer de- that most of identified nonsynonymous missense coding variants are valida- velopment as well as fetal development. Taking advantage of the knowledge ted by standard sequencing techniques. On the other hand small indels are m2o8r8e frequently false positives or miscalled. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, aITcqAuLirYed | dWurWingW th.Ee SlaHstG de.OcaRdeG, great interest has been shown worldwide in deciphering the fetal epigenome towards the development of methylationABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index based non-invasive prenatal diagnostic (NIPD) assays. We hereby highlight check prop®erties of a freeze-dried PCR master mix for molecular diagnostics the different approaches implemented such as sodium bisulphite conversi- (STAT-NAT , Sentinel CH. SpA). on, restriction enzyme digestion and methylated DNA immunoprecipitation, A liquid bulk was prepared as follows: reaction buffer, dNTPs, MgCl2, DNA for the identification of differentially methylated regions (DMRs) between polymerase, primers and probe for detection of human beta-globin gene, free fetal DNA found in maternal blood and DNA from maternal blood cells. preservatives and stabilizers. Prior to freeze-dry, a PCR was performed with Furthermore, we evaluate the use of selected DMRs identified towards the an aliquot of this mix to assure the functionality (Pre-Lyophilization con- development of NIPD for fetal chromosomal aneuploidies. In addition, we trol, Pre-Lyo). The mix bulk was then dispensed in aliquots of 25μL using a perform a comparison analysis; we evaluate the performance of each assay Freedom EVO 100 liquid handler (Tecan) and freeze-dried using an Epsilon and provide a comprehensive discussion on the potential use of different 2-12D freeze-dryer (Martin Christ). A PCR was performed with lyophilized methylation-based technologies in retrieving the fetal methylome, with the mix to check the functionality (Post-Lyophilization control, Post-Lyo). PCR aim to further expand the development of NIPD assays. performances were evaluated on a 7500 Real-time PCR System (Applied 
P14 .62-M Biosystems). Moreover, to inspect the residual moisture in the lyophilized Next-generation variant effect predictions and data integration B. Vroling, T. van den Bergh, T. te Beek, R. Kuipers, H. Joosten; mix, an analysis using 
C20  Compact Karl Fischer Coulometer (Mettler Tole- Bio-Prodict, Nijmegen, Netherlands. do) was performed. Test performances were checked using as template different concentrations of human genomic DNA (hu gDNA; Roche). Similar threshold cycles in Pre- The interpretation of variants flowing out of next-generation sequencing ex- and Post-Lyo controls were obtained with a concentration ranging from 0.1 periments is one of the largest bottlenecks for DNA diagnostics. Frequently to 10 ng of hu gDNA. Moreover, Karl Fischer analysis after freeze-drying sho- used tools like PolyPhen and SIFT are not up to this task, and consequently wed residual moisture content less than 5%. there is an enormous need within the community for novel tools to reliably The described QC procedure assures to control in an effective way the ma- interpret the effects of polymorphisms. In response to the growing demand nufacturing of a freeze-dried molecular biology test in terms of performance for high-quality variant effect predictions we present 3DM; a data integrati- e Pv 1a 4lu .6a 5ti -o Sn and residual moisture content. on & mutation prediction platform for protein families. Phenotype ontology driven gene panel construction in diagnostic next 3DM relieves many of the burdens that researchers face in dealing with the generation sequencing growing amounts and complexity of biomedical data. For each protein fami- A. Maver, B. Peterlin; ly a large amount of information that is extracted from protein structures, Clinical institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. alignments and scientific literature, among others, is available. All this in- formation is integrated and validated, and can be analysed via a number of different methods and tools. Technological advances in determination of human genetic sequence have By intelligently combining all this heterogeneous information 3DM is able to significantly facilitated genetic diagnostics in human disorders at progressi- provide state-of-the-art predictions about the effects of genetic variations. vely diminishing costs. Due to interpretative and ethical challenges faced in Collaborative work with a number of the largest hospitals in the Netherlands medical reporting of findings in whole exome sequencing (WES), sequencing has shown that our solutions represent a major step forward in helping re- of arbitrarily defined gene panels is commonly endorsed in clinical practice. searchers and clinicians making accurate assessments of the pathogenicity Such selection of clinical sequencing target, however, narrows the diagnostic of their variants, both by providing predictions, as well as enabling them to survey to genes directly associated with proposed diagnosis, is not resistant quickly navigate to literature and other relevant data. to ambiguity in determination of patients‘ diagnosis and suffers from large 
P14 .63-S disparity in definitions of gene panels between diagnostic centres. The Israeli experience of the first 300 Panorama™ tests that use The systematization of human phenotype annotation, notably with the 19,488 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) followed by high- Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) project now offers a possibility for for- throughput sequencing for common trisomies risk assessment H. N. Baris1, Z. Weiner2, I. Solt2, M. Shohat3, D. M. Behar4; malized dissection of human phenotypic traits and offers a possibility for 1The Genetic Institute, Rambam Health Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2The Obstetrics and straightforward, systematic and individualised definition of clinical sequen- Gynecology department, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3The Recanati cing target based on distinct patients phenotypic features. We therefore pro- Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 4The Genetic Institute, pose a novel approach to outlining the clinical sequencing target for diagno- Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. stic next generation sequencing, where patient‘s phenotype is first defined Background according to HPO nomenclature and according gene panel is then dynami- cally constructed based on known phenotype-gene associations. Proposed Cell free DNA (cfDNA) has emerged over the lasMt eytehaord ass an algorithm automatically scores genes based on their phenotypic compatibi- alternative for amniocenthesis for diagnosis of the common aneuploidies lity with disease under evaluation and defines a tailored sequencing target looking at trisomy 21, 13, 18, sex chromosomes and triploidy. We based on specific phenotypic characterization of disease. present our experience of the first 300 Panorama™ tests sent from Israel. We demonstrate that such an approach allows for judicious extension of This method is based on massively multiplexed PCR amplification of cfDNA currently established sequencing panels while assuring comparable power isolated from maternal plasma, targeting 19,488 SNPs, followed by high- to establish genetic etiology and controlling for issues in either WES or tar- throughput sequencing. The fetal fraction is determined. The SNP pattern of geted panel sequencing approaches. 
P14 .66-M maternal DNA (from buffy coat) is compared to the SNP pattern of free DNA A new paradigm for prenatal chromosome microarray testing: from maternal plasma, which contains maternal and fetal DNA. Paternal ge- increased resolution without equivocal findings nomic samples, when available, were included in the analysis; in the absence C. Ogilvie1, S. Bint2, S. Mohammed1, J. Ahn1; of a paRteersnuallt ssample, the algorithm considers population allele frequencies. 1Guy‘s & St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2GSTS Pathology, Combining the maximum likelihood ratio with a priori risk generates a risk London, United Kingdom. score. The results of the first 300 sequential tests performed in Is- rael were analyzed. Fifteen samples necessitated redraw, two samples failed analysis. Four samples yielded high risk scores: two cases for trisomy 21, A novel prenatal chromosome microarray testing strategy has been develo- one for Kleifelter syndrome (KS) (47,XXY) and one for trisomy 18. Confir- ped, that moves away from size-based detection thresholds, towards a more mation of both trisomy 21 andD oinsec uKsSs iwoenre done by CVS or amniocenthesis. clinically relevant analysis, providing higher resolution than G-banded chro- The suspected trisomy 18 is in the process of confirmation. There are no mosomes but avoiding the detection of imbalances of unclear prognosis that known false negative results. Panorama™ test is a reliable tool cause parental anxiety. All prenatal samples fulfilling our criteria for karyo- for identification of pregnancies at high risk for fetuses with the common type analysis (n=353) were tested by chromosome microarray; only copy aneuploidies with a high success rate. We recommend confirmation of the number variants of established deletion/duplication syndrome regions and d Pi 1a 4g .n 6o 4s -i Ms for high risk scores pregnancies using invasive tests. any other imbalance >3Mb were detected and reported. A retrospective full- Quality control procedure for assessing good manufacturing of a resolution analysis of 249 of these samples was carried out to ascertain the molecular diagnostics test in freeze-dried format performance of this testing strategy. Using our prenatal analysis, 28/353 A. Moiana, L. Ventura, L. Turner, M. Incandela, M. Gramegna; (7.9%) samples were found to be abnormal. Of the remaining samples, 249 Sentinel CH. SpA, Milan, Italy. were anonymized and reanalyzed at full postnatal resolution; a further 46 regions of imbalance were detected in 44 of these traces (17.7%). None of these additional imbalances was of clear clinical significance. This prenatal Quality Control (QC) procedures are crucial in manufacturing of molecular chromosome microarray strategy therefore detected all CNVs of clear pro- diagnostics tests. The aim of this work is toE SdeHscGri b2e0 Q1
C4  p r|o McedILurAesN u,s IeTdA toL Y |g WnosWticW va.EluSe.H TGhi.sO stRraGtegy avoids the problems associated with inte2rp8r9e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ting imbalances of uncertain prognosis and the parental anxiety that are a are facing with an increasing demand of genomic tests for the most common result of such findings. diseases. Correct information and awareness among public and all stakehol- 
P14 .67-S ders are crucial. Determining the sensitivity of diagnostic methods to maternal cell Since it has not been clearly defined how many genomic tests have enough contamination (MCC) in prenatal diagnosis (PND) M. Ho, E. Pontikinas, M. Vo, N. Lerda, M. Attwell, A. Simsek, C. Nicholls; clinical utility, the investigation of their costs could be a way to establish a SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia. correct public health policy. Activity-Based Costing is the methodology used to assigns the cost of each Background activity. : MCC is a potential risk factor for misdiagnosis in PND. The The systematic analysis of activities needed to perform genetics tests has purpose of this study was to quantify the percentage of MCC that can be identified a number of indicators to assess the workload for every profes- pMreetsheondt in a fetal sample without compromising the fetal genotyping result sional who participates in the process of diagnosis and the proportion of in each of the different assays used for PND in this laboratory. material used for each activity. All these parameters have been incorporated : Maternal DNA carrying X-linked and autosomal recessive disease into a software able to split all the lab costs (personnel, material and gene- was mixed with unaffected fetal DNA (prepared from dissected chorionic ral costs) for each test provided in order to compare costs among different villi) in known proportions. Diagnostic methods examined included primer- laboratories, to compare the performance of the same laboratory in subse- extension assays with detection by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, gap- quent years and to make a priority list of genetic/genomic tests to provide, PCR, MLPA, long range PCR and Sanger sequencing. STR analysis (AmpFlSTR t Pa 1k 4in .7g 0 in -Mto account costs/benefits data. Identifiler kit, Life Technologies) is routinely used in our laboratory to as- Testing homopolymers in pyrosequencing-based next generation sReesssu MltCs Ca nandd d wisacsu srusino nin parallel with each assay to assess the theoretical sequencing chemistry versus the detectable MCC. G. Ivady1, L. Madar1, E. Dzsudzsak1, J. Kappelmayer1, V. Krulisova2, M. Macek2, I. Balogh1; : An unacceptable level of MCC was defined as the 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. percentage of MCC that results in an equivocal or incorrect genotype in the fetus. This percentage of detectable MCC was assay dependent, ranging from 1.0% with the gap-PCR, 10-15% for long range PCR, 15-20 % for Sanger In the human exome, approximately 1.43 million homopolymers exist with Sequencing and 50% for MLPA. A correct genotyping result was obtained the size of 4-mer and up. Majority (97%) of them are in the range of 4-mer to with the primer extension assay up to 20% MCC. STR analysis had a limit 6-mer. To detect indel mutations in homopolymers is of great importance in of detection of 1.0%, providing a useful tool for quantifying MCC. Results of order to implement the corresponding sequencing system into the routine this study have provided a basis for interpreting a PND result when MCC is clinical practice. To test the analytical performance of the pyrosequencing- present and advising requesting clinicians when repeat invasive procedure based GS Junior system in assessing homopolymer sequences, a series of is warranted. plasmid vectors were generated using pcDNA3.1 as template. Altogether 12 
P14 .68-M clones were produced, 4-mer, 5-mer, and 6-mer homopolymers with all four Mutation screening in patients with PCD by a multi-gene panel and nucleotides using site-directed mutagenesis. Mutations were confirmed next generation sequencing technology F. Boaretto1, A. Spalletta1, A. Barbato2, D. Snijders2, S. Quartesan2, M. L. Mostacciuolo1, using Sanger sequencing. For the test system, each homopolymer tract was G. Vazza1; tested using three pairs of PCR/sequencing primers to test the hypothesis 1Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, whether the beginning of the sequencing reaction might provide the neces- Medical Hospital, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. sary signal-to-noise ratio to accurately test the size of the homopolymers. In the first, the forward, in the second, the reverse primer was located (i.e. the primer‘s 3‘ end) just next to the homopolymer to be analyzed, respectively. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare, autosomal recessive genetic dis- In the third, the homopolymer was in the middle of the sequenced product. order characterized by defect in the action of the cilia lining the respiratory Average of the correct genotypings were 95.8% in 4-mers, 87.4% in 5-mers, tract, fallopian tube and also of the flagella of sperm in males. The impaired and 70.0% in 6-mers, respectively. Contrary to the low genotyping accura- ciliary function results in neonatal respiratory distress, chronic oto-sino- cy in 5-mers and 6-mers, acceptable settings could be found in both with a pulmonary disease, infertility, and organ laterality defects in approximate- minimum of 97% in 5-mer and 91% in 6-mer tracts. In conclusion, we have ly 50% of cases. Currently, the diagnosis of PCD involves the study of cilia developed a test system that can be used for the assessment of genotyping morphology, motility and ultrastructure, nasal nitric oxide measurement accuracy of next generation sequencing systems. 
P14 .71-S and, more rarely, genetic analysis. This is mainly due to the high genetic Target Enrichment and Next-Generation Sequencing for Diagnostic heterogeneity of the disease which has been associated to mutations in 26 Testing of RASopathies different genes. S. Ekvall1, E. Falk Sörqvist1, B. Baskin1, B. Jonsson1, O. Karlberg1, M. Zenker2, G. Anneren1, This study aims to improve the genetic diagnosis of PCD that it is routinely M. Bondeson1; limited to a subset of the most frequently mutated genes. This approach is 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Humangenetisches Institut, Erlangen, Germany. expensive, time consuming and ineffective leaving many patients without a molecular diagnosis. Using the AmpliSeq technology we developed a panel which allows comprehensive, rapid and cheap analysis of the 26 PCD-cau- RASopathies are a group of clinically and genetically related disorders, in- sative genes. A total of 160Kb genomic sequence including all the protein cluding Noonan, LEOPARD CFC, Costello, Legius and neurofibromatosis- coding sequences, splice sites and 5’-3’UTRs will be amplified in 1151 am- Noonan syndrome as well as NF1. These disorders result from mutations plicons using two primer pools and sequenced in the Ion Torrent platform. affecting the RAS-MAPK signaling pathway, which explains the clinical over- Twenty PCD patients diagnosed according to the protocol of the European lap within this group of syndromes. In routine diagnostics, RASopathy-asso- Respiratory Society Consensus Statement have been selected for a test study. ciated genes are usually tested sequentially using Sanger sequencing until a T Pe 1c 4h .n 6i 9c -a Sl details, results and cost-effectiveness analysis will be presented. likely causative mutation is identified, which is laborious, time consuming Public Health Genomic and genetic tests. Cost evaluation analysis and and expensive. quality standards as relevant factors in health care planning We have developed a cost-effective multi-gene sequencing panel for RAS- D. A. Coviello1, C. Lanza1, A. Seri1, M. I. Parodi1, S. Casati2, M. Baldi1, P. Casale3, A. Fabbri3, opathies using HaloPlex target enrichment, sample barcoding and sequen- M. Esposto3, P. Giunciuglio3; cing with MiSeq. The panel targets approximately 40kb of the coding se- 1E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Laboratory of Human Genetics, Genoa, Italy, 2UNIAMO, Italian quences of NF1, PTPN11, SO
S1 , CBL, BRAF, RAF1, SHO
C2 , MA
P2 K2, MA
P2 K1 Patient Federation on Rare Diseases, Venice, Italy, 3E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Management , SPRED1, NRAS, HRAS and KRAS. Eleven RASopathy-individuals with pre- Control Unit, Genoa, Italy. viously Sanger-validated variants were sequenced. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using the commercial softwares; NextGENe and BENCHlab NGS, as well as an in-house bioinformatic pipeline for HaloPlex data. The Genomic era has improved a lot molecular diagnosis, but in the last five years results obtained from the two bioinformatic anlaysis pipelines were simi- the new revolution of next generation sequencing has open a new window lar. The gene panel was highly specific; 93% of sequencing reads aligned not only on research but also on diagnostic testing. to the targeted regions. The average read depth in region of interest (ROI) The scientific framework and the laboratory activities are completely was >2000 and ~98% of targeted bases in ROI had at least 30x coverage. All changed: the number of known disease genes has increased exponentially, known variants were identified, including a 4 bp deletion and a splice-site automation is now applied, certification and accreditation procedures are in mutation in NF1. Conclusively, the RASopathy-multi-gene panel presented place in a growing number of laboratories. here enables rapid and cost-effective high-throughput screening of RASopa- B2o9th0 public National Health systems and private laEboSrHatGor i2es0 o1r 4co |m MpaInLieAsN , tIhTiAesL. YTh |e W resWulWts f.uErSthHerGm.oOreR sGhow that NextGENe and BENCHlab NGS areABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index suitable for analyzing HaloPlex data in clinical diagnostics. Data from scree- paration method has added advantage over other methods. The Agilent Su- ning of additional patients will be presented. reSelect strand-specific RNA library preparation kit generates libraries with 
P14 .72-M specific adaptors ligated to each strand enabling the identity of the DNA Next Generation Sequencing: New approach for diagnosis of template strand of origin to be retained in downstream sequencing and data autosomal dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa patients P. Fernandez-San Jose1,2, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, R. Rosa Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, M. A. Lopez- analysis. The high throughput deep-sequencing based RNA-seq studies ge- Martinez1,2, B. Garcia-Sandoval3, I. Sánchez-Navarro1,2, O. Zurita1,2, M. Corton1,2, C. nerate more data compared to RT-qPCR and array based methods yet they Ayuso1,2; are expensive and time consuming study. Proper quality control (QC) steps 1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz within the library preparation process are therefore crucial to ensure suc- (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades cessful sequencing. The Agilent 2200 TapeStation system offers an easy to Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Ophthalmology, IIS-Fundacion use automated electrophoresis system with rapid analysis time as well as Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain. flexible sample throughput capabilities. Here, we compare the performance and capabilities of the RNA and D1000 ScreenTape assays for use on the Agilent 2200 TapeStation system with the respective assays run on the 2100 Introduction: Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited disease clinically and Bioanalyzer system. The results from the QC of the starting total RNA and genetically heterogeneous causing degeneration of photoreceptors. Autoso- final sequencing libraries generated from Agilent’s SureSelect strand-speci- mal dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa (adRP) accounts for 15-30% of cases fic RNA library preparation kit reveal that the RNA and D1000 ScreenTape and mutations in 24 known genes are responsible for 60% of them. The 40% assays are a match to the visual and quantitative results obtained with the of our cohort of 200 adRP Spanish patients has been characterized using RNA 6000 Nano and DNA 1000 Kits. classical tools: different methods of screening (Single Strand Conformation 
P14 .75-S Polymorphism (SSCP), CG-clamped Denaturing Gradient Gel Electropho- Expanded carrier screening tests currently on the commercial market resis (DGGE) and ADRP genotyping microarray (Asper Biotech)) followed B. Peterlin1, L. Vidmar1, P. Borry2, M. Cornel3, C. van El3, F. Fellmann3, F. Forzano4, L. Henneman3, H. Howard5, H. Kayserili6, C. Patch7, A. Maver1; by Sanger sequencing gene by gene. Patients and methods: 66 previously 1Clinical institute of medical genetics; Univeristy medical centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, studied and not characterized adRP families, were analysed by Next Genera- Slovenia, 2Interfaculty Centre for Biomedial Ethics and Law (K.U.Leuven), Leuven, tion Sequencing (NGS) panel of 73 genes associate to RP and other Retinal Belgium, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Community Genetics, EMGO dystrophies (RD). Sequence variants were detected using the sequence DNA Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, capture Haloplex (Agilent) and sequencing with a Miseq platform (Ilumina). Netherlands, 4Galliera Hospital (Genova); Department of Medical Genetics, Genova, Italy, Bioinformatic analysis was performed with a specific DNA Nexus pipeline. 5IQhealthcare, Medical Ethics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Results: potentially pathogenic variants in known adRD genes were found in Netherlands, 6İstanbul University; Medical Faculty; Department of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 7Guy‘s and st.Thomas‘ NHS foundation trust, London, United Kingdom. 42,4 % of families studied: SNRN
P200  (7,6%), PRPF8 (6 %), BEST1 (3 %), PRPF31 (3 %), PRPH (3%), R
P1  (3 %), CRX (1,5 %), FSCN2 (1,5 %), GUCA1B (1,5 %), IMPG1 (1,5 %), KCNJ13 (1,5 %), PROM1 (1,5 %), PRPF3 (1,5 %), There has been a recent rise in the advertising of preconception genetic car- RGR (1,5 %), RHO (1,5 %), R
P2  (1,5 %), and TOPORS (1,5 %). Additionally rier screening tests directly to consumers via internet. We analyzed the of- 7,6% of cases displayed mutations in ABCA4, RPGR and USH2A allowing us fers with particular focus on comprehensiveness, clinical validity and utility a clinical or genetic reclassification. Conclusion: this new approach seems to of the genetic tests proposed. be a fast and reliable tool to detect the disease-causing mutation for adRP We gathered data from the websites of Counsyl, InheriGen, Pathway geno- patients. 
P14 .73-S mics and Recombine in December 2013. Of about 1300 recessively inherited Visualization of XIST expression in a female with structural X diseases listed in OMIM (causative gene known), current offer includes a chromosome abnormality: Single-cell analysis by three-color range of 73 to 206 for a total of 286 diseases of which 30 are included in interphase RNA-FISH the panels of all providers and 92 in at least three providers. According to W. Iha, R. Kawamura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Fukushima, K. Wakui; the ORPHANET catalogue, 31% of screened diseases are more frequent than Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. 1/100,000 in the general population. On the other hand, there are relatively frequent recessively inherited diseases (e.g. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Friedreich ataxia) not covered by any of the screening tests. 52% of screened An X-inactivation (XIA) analysis in females is commonly performed by me- diseases manifest neonatally, 28% during childhood and 3% in adult life(e.g. taphase R-banding or methylation-specific PCR (M-PCR) technique. The Hemochromatosis), while the onset of the others is variable. 34% can be late-replicating X-chromosome can be recognized under a microscope at the treated if diagnosed neonatally. On average, companies test for 4% (2,2% to single cell level by R-banding using BrdU incorporation, but there are limita- 7%) of all known mutations on a particular gene (HGMD). tions: 1) Not so many metaphases can be observed, and 2) Only an abnormal Currently, commercial companies offer screening for around 20% of known X which has deletion or duplication more than 10Mb can be detected. M-PCR recessively inherited diseases. The great diversity of genetic diseases can detect random or non-random XIA pattern in cell population, but the screened suggests a lack of clear incl.u sion criteria. Although advertised as parental samples are needed to identify which is normal or abnormal chro- pan-ethnic, all tests include population specific diseases which are extre- mosome X. A subject was a female with an X-autosome balanced transloDcaMtDi- mely rare in the general population Because of allelic heterogeneity and on; 46,X,t(X;19)(p21.1;q12), and having clinical manifestations of Duchenne relatively poor mutation coverage the tests‘ sensitivity pan-ethnically is muscular dystrophy. The breakpoint of tXhIeS Tderivative X was onto the unknown. gene. We selected three kinds of BAC clonUeTs Xand used simultaneously for our 
P14 .76-M RNA-FISH study; a clone consistent with gene for detecting inactivation Detection of rare variations in a targeted genomic region in a chromHoDsHoDm1eA X, a clone consistent with gene which is escaping XIA as population by NGS analysis using pooled DNAs a reference probe for both normal and abnormal Xs, and a clone cXoInSTsistent T. Kaname1, M. Higa1, A. Ganaha1, K. Teruya2, K. Satou2, T. Hirano2, K. Naritomi1; 1University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 2Okinawa Institute of Advanced with gene which is escaping XIA for distinguishing between nor- Sciences, Okinawa, Japan. mal and abnormal Xs of this subject. We successfully visualized gene expression at the single cell level in this subject. Normal X was inactivated in 67 cells, abnormal X was inactivated in 5 cells, and unclear XIA pattern was It is important to find novel rare variations in a targeted region in some po- in 28 cells. This RNA-FISH results were in concordance with the phenotype pulations to get next resources for elucidation of ‘missing heritability’. We of this subject, as an affected female of X-linked disorder. 
P14 .74-M developed a method to survey variations including low-frequent variations Quality control for SureSelect Strand-Specific RNA library preparation in a targeted region in a specific population by next-generation sequencing protocol using the Agilent 2200 TapeStation system (NGS) analysis using pooled DNAs. E. Schmidt1, A. Padmanaban2, A. Inche3, R. Salowsky1; We present examples to trace variations and to estimate each frequency in a 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Agilent Technologies, Bangalore, India, targeted region in Japanese and Okinawan people. 3Agilent Technologies, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Targeted regions were amplified from each genomic DNA of 100 or 200 in- dividuals by LA-PCR. After measuring the quantity and quality of each am- plicon, equal amount of amplicon was mixed and amplicons for 100 or 200 Transcriptomics reveal global changes in gene expression that may contri- individuals were pooled. Then, pooled targeted region was analysed using a bute to the pathogenesis of a particular disease or help drive a fundamental NGS platform. After mapping of reads to the reference, SNPs and indels were biological process. RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) has emerged as a promi- called and the frequency was estimated by count rate of the reads. Then, we sing and rapidly growing method for studying and characterizing cellular also performed NGS analysis for LA-PCR products from pre-pooled genomic transcripts at single base pair resolution.E ASmHonGg 2di0ff1er4e n|t MapIpLrAoaNch, eIsT fAorL Y |D WNAWs. WNe.xEt,S wHe Gco.nOfiRrmGed each variation and calculated each frequen2cy9 1in generating libraries for transcriptomics study, strand-specific library pre-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index the population by PCR-RFLP, allele specific PCR or direct sequencing in each ning one was stored at −20 °C. In case of confirmation of adenocarcinoma, individual. tumor genomic DNA was extracted from both fresh and fixed material, and Allelic frequency estimated by the NGS analysis using both pooled DNAs al- EGFR and KRAS sequencing was performed. most correlated the real frequency calculated by the individual analysis. For We identified 136 adenocarcinomas; from 134, we could recover enough sensitivity to detection of allelic frequency, less than 0.5% of allele in the material for the study. A full match was demonstrated between EGFR/KRAS population could be detected. mutational prevalences through the two approaches tested. We found EGFR 
P14 .77-S mutations in 13 patients (9.7 %); 7 were females and 11 never or former Increasing the detection rate of genome-wide high resolution smokers. KRAS mutations occurred in 20 (14.9 %) patients. EGFR and KRAS SNP array analysis by using the right follow-up test procedures in mutations were mutually exclusive. constitutional genome diagnostics N. de Leeuw, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, T. K. Rinne, N. F. A. Leijsten, G. C. Machielsen, S. L. J. Mutational screening on fresh cancer cells is an achievable, safe and cost- Kempers-vanGessel, M. Wunderink, M. J. G. Banning, R. van Beek, M. H. A. Ruiterkamp- effective procedure which might allow routinely tumor molecular profiling Versteeg, A. J. A. Kooper, S. Wezenberg, M. del Rosario, B. H. W. Faas, R. Pfundt; as powerful integration of conventional histopathological analysis. 
P14 .80-M Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Identification of structural variation in whole exome sequencing and whole genome data J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, N. de Leeuw1, M. del Rosario1, N. F. A. Leijsten1, M. H. A. Ruiterkamp- We routinely perform genome-wide high resolution SNP array analysis as Versteeg1, S. L. I. van Gessel1, R. de Reuver1, N. Wieskamp1, D. Lugtenberg1, D. T. Thung1, the first-line diagnostic test for patients with intellectual disability and/or I. M. Janssen1, C. Gilissen1, M. van de Vorst1, B. W. M. Bon1, M. H. Willemsen1, M. Kwint1, congenital anomalies and prenatally in case of structural ultrasound ano- A. Hoischen1, R. Leach2, R. Klein2, R. Tearle2, T. Bo1,3, H. G. Yntema1, B. B. A. de Vries1, T. malies or intra uterine foetal death and a normal QF-PCR test result. So far, Kleefstra1, H. G. Brunner1,4, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, J. A. Veltman1,4, R. Pfundt1; a total of 9,471 patient and 3,348 parental samples have been tested by SNP 1Radboud umc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Complete Genomics Inc, Mountain View, CA, United States, 3State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, array in our diagnostic laboratory. A (potentially) causative copy number Changsha, China, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical variant (CNV) was detected in almost 27% of the patients and analysis of Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. SNP genotypes revealed one or more significant stretches of homozygosity in an additional 8% of patients. Follow-up testing by either gene mutation analysis or patient-parent trio information analysis subsequently led to the Whole exome sequencing (WES) allows the detection of a wide range of va- respective identification of pathogenic mutations in recessive disease genes riant types. With one single test it is possible to detect small variants (SNVs), or uniparental disomies (UPD), thereby increasing the diagnostic yield with and structural variation. Whilst the role of copy number variants (CNVs) in at least 1%. Using the SNP genotype information also improved the detec- intellectual disability (ID) is well known, the role of CNVs in other diseases tion of mosaic imbalances and enabled us to detect clinically relevant, mo- is less well studied, although it has been suggested that CNVs can be found saic, copy neutral changes of homozygosity in four patients. A mosaic finding in up to 10% of deafness patients. We have performed read depth WES CNV (CNV, aneuploidy or allelic imbalance) was detected in a further 26 patient analysis on 600 patients across 5 heterogeneous disorders including ID, samples and 10 parental samples, resulting in a dramatically increased re- deafness, blindness, metabolic disorders, movement disorders. This analy- currence risk for these parents. The percentage of mosaicism often differed sis revealed several clinically relevant CNVs exerting a dominant effect, as between tissues samples of mesodermal, ectodermal or endodermal origin well as CNVs unmasking a recessive mutation that lead to pathogenic com- from each of these individuals. Genome-wide high resolution SNP array ana- pound heterozygous events. The cohort of 310 ID patients had previously lysis is a suitable and particularly effective technique in genome diagnostics screened negative for CNV microarray analysis as well as WES SNV analysis. to reliably detect in a single test CNVs, UPDs and mosaic imbalances as well Nonetheless clinically relevCaOnLt 6CAN1V, sE YwSere identified in 2U%S Ho2f Apatients. Sy- as for homozygosity pre-screening. 
P14 .78-M stematic screening of the remaining patient groups identified CNVs in ~4% Classifying variations as de novo without available paternal DNA of individuals, including in and deletions in . To further using SNP-array elaxragme ine pathogenic structural variation, we performed whole genome se- J. Graakjaer, A. Bojesen; quencing on 50 patient-parent trios. In 7 patients we identified pathogenic Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. variants, including two single exon deletions, a tandem duplication, an inter-chromosomal duplication and one complex inversion/duplication/de- letion event. Discordant reads provided positional information for duplica- Inheritance of a variation is often used as a guide for diagnostic classifica- ted sequences identifying an in-frame gene fusion. These results show that tion in microarray analysis. If a variation is inherited from a normal parent, structural variation is not only an important cause of neurodevelopmental morbidity is less likely, compared to a variation that has appeared de novo. diseases but also a much broader range of genetic diseases. 
P14 .81-S Unfortunately paternal DNA is frequently not available for this analysis. Targeted exome sequencing as a molecular diagnostic tool for skeletal Therefore many variations are never properly classified and the morbidi- dysplasias ty of the variation remains unknown. To overcome this problem we have D. L. Polla, M. C. B. Silva, M. T. O. Cardoso, R. W. Pereira, R. Pogue; incorporated a workflow that determines whether a variation is located on Catholic University of Brasilia, Brasilia, Brazil. the maternal or the paternal allele in the patient. The workflow requires SNP-array analysis to be done on maternal and patient DNA samples. If a variation is located on the maternal allele in the patient and the variation is Skeletal dysplasias comprise a large group of more than 450 clinically di- not found in the maternal DNA sample, then the variation can be classified stinct and genetically heterogeneous diseases associated with mutations in as de novo. Utilizing this workflow enhances the diagnostic value of variati- more than 300 genes. Clinical and radiological findings are used to diagnose ons found by SNP-array, when paternal DNA is not available. 
P14 .79-S these diseases. However, due to the genetic heterogeneity of these disorders, EGFR and KRAS mutational profiling in fresh non-small cell lung the diagnostic process is complex. With the advances in molecular genetics cancer (NSCLC) cells and the elucidation of the molecular basis of these diseases, molecular tests M. Zorzetto, R. Scabini, S. Inghilleri, S. Ferrari, P. Morbini, M. Luisetti; have become useful in the diagnosis of these dysplasias. Since many diffe- Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Pavia, Italy. rent genes have been associated with these disorders, standard diagnostic approaches using Sanger sequencing can be expensive and time consuming. To overcome these limitations, we used targeted exome sequencing and de- Knowledge of tumor mutational status has become a priority for effective signed an 1.4Mb panel for simultaneous testing of more than 4800 exons NSCLC-tailored treatment. NSCLC diagnosis is more often reached through in 309 genes involved in skeletal dysplasias, and 28 genomic regions which biopsy; thus, there is a clear need to implement for routine tumor mole- when deleted are associated with these diseases. DNA from 96 individuals cular profiling on small cytological samples. This work aims to screen and with previous clinical diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia was sequenced in 8 compare the EGFR and KRAS mutational prevalence in fresh tumor cells and multiplexed runs using an Illumina MiSeq sequencer. Reproducibility was in corresponding routinely processed samples derived from trans-thoracic tested by repeating the entire procedure for three patients. NGS of the cap- fine-needle aspiration. The latter currently represents the most appropriate tured exons resulted in an average coverage of 140X. Causative mutations diagnostic procedure in case of peripheral lesions, such as adenocarcino- were characterized in 13 patients so far including de-novo mutations in 7 mas, which account for almost 40 % of all NSCLCs and for the highest EGFR cases. Analysis of the rest of the data is ongoing. Confirmation with Sanger mutational rates. sequencing was performed for these variants and all were confirmed. Our Two hundred and forty-four patients carrying peripheral lung masses un- NGS panel provides a fast, accurate and cost-effective molecular diagnostic derwent CT-guided aspiration. The obtained material was split, and a part tool and can assist in the diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous diseases w2a9s2 addressed to conventional histopathological aEnSalHysGis w2h0il1e 4th |e MreImLaAi-N, lI iT kA e sL kY el e| tW al dW isW eas. eE sS .HG.ORGABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .82-M Krüppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) plays a central role in the developmental glo- Molecular diagnosis of hereditary spastic paraplegia: comparison of bin gene switch; carriers of KLF1 mutations have hereditary persistence of enrichment strategies for targeted next-generation sequencing foetal haemoglobin (HPFH) and show variably elevated (10-40%) HbF. This L. Raymond1,2,3, S. Morais1,2,4, A. Rastetter1,2, E. Mundwiller1, G. Banneau3, C. Depienne1,3, M. Mairey1, C. Cazeneuve3, E. Leguern1,3, A. Durr1,3, A. Brice1, Y. Marie1, G. Stevanin1,2,3; variation may be due to differential expression of other modifier genes. The 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 6 KLF1 interactome can be further defined by identifying potential molecular UM75, INSERM U1127CNRS UMR7225, NEB), Paris, France, 2Equipe de Neurogénétique, targets and observing their expression at the cellular level in comparison Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, héSam Université, Paris, France, 3Fédération de with HbF expression and distribution in F-cells. Génétique, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4UnIGENe, IBMC, Porto, Portugal. The mean corpuscular HbF (MCHbF) is normally estimated by dividing the amount of HbF, determined by HPLC, by the number of F-cells, obtained by flow cytometry. Since HbF may be unequally distributed among F-cells, an Hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG) is a group of neurodegenerative dis- imaging cytometry protocol enables quantification of HbF per F-cell by fluo- orders with considerable phenotypic heterogeneity, and mutations in >70 rescent emission measurements. Protocols presented in the literature were genes involved to date. This makes conventional molecular testing arduous. found lacking in efficacy, mostly due to inefficient fixaition and high degree of We decided to develop a targeted next generation sequencing kit for diagno- autofluorescence. A new intracellular anti-HbF antibody-labelling technique sis purpose. was thus optimized for use with the Nikon Eclipse T inverted fluorescence We tested two enrichment approaches of 10 SPG genes: one using amplicons microscope. This technique resulted in imKaLgFe1s of superior quality from (Illumina, TruSeq Custom Amplicon - TSCA) on 48 patients, and the other which the MCHbF could be determined for each F-cell observed. This proto- using capture (Roche NimbleGen, SeqCap EZ) on 60 patients. Sequencing col will be used to study the association of and other genes, obtained was performed on the MiSeq (Illumina). Coverage and variant distribution through NGS data analyses, with MCHbF in normal and HPFH individuals, to were evaluated using the Genomics Workbench software (CLC Bio). identify new therapeutic targets for β-haemoglobinopathies. 
P14 .85-S After read mapping on whole genome (Hg19), the mean coverage per pati- Development and verification of an Ion AmpliSeq™ T
P53  Panel ent varied from 444X (sd 98X) for SeqCap EZ, to 587X (sd 127X) for TSCA. A. Langerød1,2, L. Silwal-Pandit1,2, E. Rødland1,2, A. Dahlsgaard1,2, I. Bergheim1,2, C. Ainali3, However, the percent of regions with minimal coverage <30X was <15% C. Scafe3, F. Hyland3, G. Liu3, C. Van Loy3, M. Andersen3, H. Viernes3, R. Petraroli3, A. with SeqCap EZ, and decreased to <5% when the patient mean coverage re- Børresen-Dale1,2; ached 600X. With TSCA, this value was stable (15-20%). 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital We then compared the variants. Those reported in dbSN
P137  were similar Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2The K.G. Jebsen Center for Breast Cancer Research, on both strategies. Concerning variants unknown in dbSN
P137 , 16-20 vari- Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, ants with TSCA vs 0-3 with SeqCap EZ were obtained per sample. This was 3Thermo Fisher Scientific - Life Sciences Solutions, South San Francisco, CA, United States. explained by an enrichment of variants in some amplicons in TSCA sugge- sting false positives due to Taq polymerase errors. SeqCap EZ was finally chosen to enrich our targets. We designed a new pa- nel with 74 SPG genes, which gave <0.7% of regions with minimal coverage A large amount of data is available on the functional impact of missense mu- <30X. The challenge is now to interpret the variants discovered in our gro- tations in T
P53  and on mutation patterns in many different cancers. T
P53  wing cohort of patient with unsolved HSP. direct sequencing is a time-consuming method with limitations in detection 
P14 .83-S level. Here we describe the development and verification of a Next Gene- Development of a specific and sensitive High Resolution Melting ration Sequencing method based on Ion AmpliSeq™ technology. The panel Analysis for detection of beta globin gene mutations covers T
P53  coding regions comprehensively using optimized primers to C. Chassanidis, T. Tsantzali, G. Kellaris, E. Voskaridou, E. Boutou, A. Balassopoulou; minimize off-target sequencing. It is comprised of 24 primer pairs across Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece. 2 pools requiring only 20 ng of DNA. The design of short amplicons of 125 to 175 bp permits the amplification of DNA starting from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded material. We verified the panel on 30 breast cancer Beta-thalassemia is one of most common autosomal recessive disorders samples previously characterized with Sanger sequencing. Sequencing re- worldwide. The high prevalence (8%) and heterogeneity in molecular level, actions were carried out with the Ion PGM™ Sequencer on Ion 318™ chip. observed in Greece, makes necessary the development of a reliable, cost ef- The average % of mapped reads on target was of 96,8% and average depth fective and rapid scanning method for β globin gene analysis, easily adapted of coverage 20,386X. Loading 10 samples on an Ion 318™ chip 95% of the to a routine laboratory. sequenced amplicons showed coverage higher than 500X. Data analysis Here we describe the development of a beta-thalassaemia specific High Re- was performed on Ion Reporter™ Software 4.0 using optimized T
P53 -panel solution Melting Analysis (HRMA) approach, in order to identify point mu- workflows. We detected all the expected somatic mutations including single tations and small insertions or deletions of the beta globin (HBB) gene and base substitutions, insertions and deletion and only a complex duplication substitute previously applied techniques (DGGE analysis, Sanger sequen- of 18bp was not detected. The overall analytical sensitivity was 95,23%. The cing). same results were obtained using 32 samples on an Ion 318™ chip. These Specific sets of primers were designed to cover eight overlapping regions preliminary data demonstrate that the T
P53  Ion AmpliSeq™ panel workflow of the HBB gene containing the hitherto reported mutations of the Hellenic and Ion Reporter™ Software analysis solution meets the requirements of cli- population. PCR conditions were identical for all amplicons, permitting thus nical research laboratories. multiplexing. Amplicons cover part of the HBB promoter region and the CDS 
P14 .86-M region, except from the central part of IVS-II where practically no mutations Toward rapid identification of coding fusions and structural has been reported up to now. rearrangements in cancer genomes: Multiple Myeloma First Initially, 150 previously genotyped samples were analysed. Different muta- M. R. Rossi1, H. Dai2, H. Cao2, M. Saghibini2, X. Yang2, A. Pang2, H. VanSteenhouse2, M. Reardon2, T. Dickinson2, A. Nooka1, J. L. Kaufman1, S. M. Matulis1, L. Zhang1, D. F. Saxe1, L. tions produced distinct derivative plots when subtracted from the reference H. Boise1, K. P. Mann1, D. L. Jaye1, S. Lonial1; curve of a wild type control, resulting in 100% accurate mutation identifica- 1Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States, 2BioNano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United tion. In addition, HRMA analysis of 48 undefined samples totally matched States. subsequent diagnosis by either Sanger sequencing or DGGE analysis. The described HRMA assay represents a rapid, simple, cost-effective and highly feasible strategy for identifying effectively underlying mutations of Karyotype and FISH have been standard diagnostic tools in monitoring re- beta-thalassemia. The reported method is amenable to high-throughput sy- sponse to treatment and disease progression in hematological disorders, stems and except from being highly specific and sensitive, does not require including multiple myeloma, for over 40 years. However, with the availa- any post-PCR analysis. 
P14 .84-M bility of array and NGS technologies in most clinical diagnostic laboratory Optimization of an imaging cytometry protocol to determine the settings, it is time to consider evaluated the use of more modern methods absolute mean corpuscular haemoglobin F in F-erythrocytes in diagnosing plasma cell dyscrasias. Although we routinely run RNA-Seq, J. Scerri, G. Grech, A. E. Felice; SNP-CN arrays and a deep sequencing cancer panel as a cost effective work- University of Malta, Msida, Malta. flow for clinical trials, we find the validation of translocations and structural rearrangement by PCR and/or FISH cumbersome. More recently, we have identified the BioNano Genomics Irys System which utilizes nanochannel Around birth, a shift from γ- to β-globin gene expression causes a switch technology and high resolution imaging for whole genome mapping of from foetal haemoglobin (HbF) to adult haemoglobin (HbA). Residual translocations and copy number abnormalities. As proof of concept, we have amounts of HbF are synthesized throughout life F-erythrocytes. Increased used the Irys system to analyze the multiple myeloma cell line, KM
S11 , and HbF levels ameliorate symptoms of β-haemEoSgHloGbin 2o0pa1th4i e|s M. ILAN, ITALY |w Will WdeWmo.EnsStrHatGe .tOheR uGltility, speed and accuracy in detecting structur2al9 r3e-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index arrangements in this line compared to whole genome sequencing, RNA-seq the simultaneous analysis of multiple genes, has Aeinmhanced the problem of and SNP-CN datasets. We will also demonstrate the use of the system with variants with unknown clinical significance. For in vitro functional testing of unknown CD138+ enriched bone marrow samples from consented patients UVs we need cells that express the specific gene. The aim of this study currently on clinical trials compared to FISH, G-band karyotype and SNP-CN is to use direct trans-differentiation of skin fibroblasts inMtoe tshmoodosth muscle arrays. We are confident that these data demonstrate that the Irys system cell (SMC) phenotype in order to study the effect of UVs in genes that are is a disruptive innovation with broad applicability to genome research and involved in susceptibility to thoracic aortic aneurysms. We used refinement of normal variation and disease. culture media with horse serum and TGFβ1 to induce trans-differentiation 
P14 .87-S of patients’ fibroblasRtes sinutlots SMCs. Gene expression was tested with RT-PCR. Mutation analysis of triple negative breast cancer patients using next Splice errors were studied on cDNA. Contraction of the cells was studied generation sequencing L. A. Pop1, R. M. Petric1,2, O. Virtic1, I. Berindan-Neagoe1; on collagen matrix. Cells with SMC phenotype, derived from fibro- 1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2“Babes blasts from patients with UV’s in MYH11 were compared to controls. The Bolyai“ University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. differentiated cells expressed SMC markers, including MYH11, confirming successful differentiation. An intronic mutation in MYH11, c.3879+2dup, in a patient with TAA and type B dissection with a positive family history Despite the intense research in the field of breast cancer, this disease still for aortic dissection, does not affect the canonical splice donor site, but was remains the second most common cancer in women worldwide, being the shown in transdifferentiated cells from the patient to result in the use of a first cause of death in women in Romania. Among the different subtypes of cryptic spCliocen csliutes iionn exon 29, resulting in an in frame deletion of 78 bases. breast cancer, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) needs a special attention The contraction of the patient derived cells was disturbed compared to con- due to its limitations in therapy and to its aggressiveness. Several studies trol cells. Trans-differentiation of skin fibroblasts towards SMC have tried to identify different new mutation both in oncogenes and tumor p Ph 1e 4n .9o 0ty -p Me is a powerful tool for the functional analysis of UVs. suppressor gene in order to explain these limitations of TNBC treatment. Targeted re-sequencing and USH syndrome: a robust and accurate The present study was aimed at the identification of mutations in 46 genes protocol overcoming the problem of genetic heterogeneity and involved in cancer in 31 patients with TNBC operated at the Institute of On- leading to the discovery of several new mutations cology ”Prof. Dr. I. Chiricuta”, Cluj-Napoca between 2006-2007, using Next S. Lenarduzzi1, C. Graziano2, P. Castorina3, U. Ambrosetti4, A. Morgan1, E. Rubinato1, G. Generation Sequencing. We used FFPE tissue samples which were sequen- Girotto1, D. Vozzi5, M. Morgutti5; ced using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine and the Ion Reporter 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2U.O. Genetica 1.6 software for data analysis. After data analysis we obtained 103 mutati- Medica, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3U.O.C. ons in 34 genes of the 46 studied. The clinical assessment of the identified Audiologia, U.O.C. Nefrologia e Dialisi Pediatrica e Adulti; Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di mutations showed that three mutations were benign, one was likely benign, Comunità, Università degli Studi di Milano. Milan, Italy; U.O.C. Audiologia, Fondazione 42 were likely pathogenic, 28 were pathogenic and 29 had no assessment. IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milano, Milano, Italy, 5Institute for This study also identified KDR, T
P53 , PIK3CA, FGFR3 and FGFR2 genes as Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy. being the most frequently mutated genes. Our results show that TNBC has specific mutations leading to resistance to therapy and poor outcome of the- s Pe 1 p 4a .8ti 8e -n Mts. Usher Syndrome (USH) is characterized by phenotypic and allelic hetero- Four Decade Old Mummified Umbilicus Making Retrospective geneity requiring a powerful and reliable molecular diagnosis. Thus, a tar- Molecular Diagnosis of Ornithine Carbamoyltransferase Deficiency geted re-sequencing (TS) panel of the 10 USH genes has been developed. It R. Kosaki1, T. Takenouchi2, Y. Tsukahara3, R. Horikawa4, K. Kosaki5; covers 96% of theTM targeted regions being characterized by 872 amplicons 1Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and Development using Ion Torrent technology (Life Technologies). This protocol has been Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, applied to the analysis of 30 USH cases divided as follows: 16 with alrea- Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, National Center dy known mutations were used for a validation step which demonstrated for Child Health and Development Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 4Division of Endocrinology and 100% accuracy, while the remaining 14 were analyzed at diagnostic level. Metabolism, National Center for Child Health and Development Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 5Center fo Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. The combination of systematic data analysis using an establisheUdS Hb2ioAinfor- PmCaDtiHcs1 5p,ipelinMeY fOo7llAowed bCyD HSa2n3ger seGqPuRe9n8cing cUonSHfir1mGation and segrega- tion analysis led to the identification of 15 nionv seill ivcaoriants (1 in , 4 in 1 in , 3 in , 4 in , 2 in ). All these variants were predicted as pathogenic using several predictor tools such as In inborn errors of metabolism, sampling and preservation of viable speci- Mutation Taster, Polyphen-2, SIFT and others. Five known pathogenetic mu- men is critical in reaching the correct diagnosis. Utility of preserved um- tations were also detected. Overall, these 20 alleles explain 12 patients, one bilical cords have been demonstrated in several occasions, but it remains is heterozygous for a mutated allele and the second is lacking, and the last is unclear how long the mummified umbilicus can preserve genomic DNA that completely negative (a new case of genetic heterogeneity or the presence of tolerates sequence-based genetic analysis. We report a Japanese family of mutations in regions not yet analyzed of the USH genes?). In term of molecu- successive early deaths presumably due to clinically diagnosed ornithine lar epidemiology, USH2A characterizes 12 patients (40%) MYO7A 6 (20%), carbamoyltransferase deficiency. The exact molecular pathology, c. 394T>C CDH23 4 (13%), PCDH15 3 (10%), GPR98 2 cases, USH1C and USH1G one (p. 
S132 P), was retrospectively delineated using DNA extracted from the each. In conclusion, this methodology clearly provided a reliable strategy for mummified umbilicus that had been kept in a keepsake wooden box at home routine gene diagnosis of USH. for four decades after the deaths of affected individuals. This observation 
P14 .91-S illustrates the striking stability of DNA preserved in mummified umbilicus, p.Asp59Gly in the RAB40AL gene is a common allelic variant: no and supports an efficient way of genetic sample preservation. From cultu- evidence for a causal relationship with Martin-Probst syndrome ral standpoint, preservation of mummified umbilical cord is a unique but M. Oldak1,2, A. Ścieżyńska1, E. Ruszkowska1, K. Szulborski3, A. Pollak2, M. Mueller- common tradition in Japan for at least several centuries. The exact molecu- Malesińska2, P. Stawiński4, J. P. Szaflik3, R. Płoski5; lar diagnosis of this X-linked inborn error of metabolism of the urea cycle 1Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, had an significant impact on the affected family. Hemizygous female carriers Poland, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, are at risk of hyperammonemic crisis, and this disorder is treatable with Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Immunology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, supplemental dietary interventions. Since naturally mummified umbilicus Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of provides a highly effective way of genetic sample preservation, utilization Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland. such material should be considered in the retrospective genetic investigati- on, particularly in patients with south east Asian cultural backgrounds. 
P14 .89-S Direct trans-differentiation of skin fibroblasts for functional testing of Two adjacent substitutions A to G (rs145606134) and C to A (rs138133927), unclassified variants both affecting codon 59 leading to a missense change p.Asp59Gly (GAC>GGA) J. Pals1,2, K. van der Kuij2, D. Micha1, A. Maugeri1, G. Pals1, M. J. Baars3, V. Everts2, B. in the RAB40AL gene, have been recently reported as a first association of Zandieh Doulabi2; the RAB40AL gene with a human disorder and as the molecular cause of 1VU medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2ACTA, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3AMC, Martin-Probst syndrome (MPS) (Bedoyan et al. 2012). This rare X-linked Amsterdam, Netherlands. disorder is characterized by progressive sensorineural hearing loss, cogni- Introduction tive impairment, facial dysmorphism, variable renal and genitourinary ab- normalities and late onset pancytopenia. Unclassified variants (UVs) are a common finding in DNA dia- The p.Asp59Gly amino acid change resulting from the same two DNA sub- 294 ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG gnostic testing. The introduction of next generation sequencing, allowing stitutions was unexpectedly identified in our 53-year-old male proband,ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index who was diagnosed for a genetic cause of isolated optic atrophy using whole address all afore mentioned topics and prepare an implementation plan for exome sequencing (HiSeq 1500 and TruSeq Exome Enrichment Kit, Illumi- the transition to the future of genetic testing in which WGS is embedded. na). Interestingly, the patient did not present any symptoms of MPS. Trying Substantial investments may be required and the logistic restructuring of to further verify the pathogenicity of the RAB40AL variants, we screened a genetic services will be addressed. Monitoring and harmonization at the Eu- set of control DNA samples representative of the background population of ropean level of all developments is therefore of the utmost importance. Central Poland (n=788, female:male ratio 1:1) using allele-specific PCR and 3Gb-TEST is actively getting in contact with the genetics community and will confirmed suspicious variants by Sanger sequencing (Applied Biosystems). present the initial results and opinions at the ESHG conference. 
P14 .95-S The RAB40AL variants were found in 18 out of 788 subjects. It corresponds Design and evaluation of two novel methods for detection of AT
P7 B to an allele frequency of almost 2.3%. Results of our study have demonstra- gene mutations ted that the p.Asp59Gly amino acid change in RAB40AL gene is present at a M. Poulou1, M. Petropoulou2, M. Amvrosiadou2, P. Ioannou2, E. Kanavakis1,3, M. Tzetis1; high prevalence in the general population that is typical for common poly- 1Athens University, Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2Athens University, morphisms. Our data questions the role of p.Asp59Gly as a disease causing- Department of Chemistry, Athens, Greece, 3Research Institute for the Study of Genetic change for MPS. and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, Athens, Greece. 
P14 .92-M Comparative transcriptome and genome analysis down to the sequence level for individual cells Wilson’s disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of copper metabo- A. Meier, E. Fricke, E. Fisch, H. Wedler, U. Deutsch, N. Neubauer, C. Korfhage; QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany. lism (OMIM#27790) leading to copper accumulation in the liver, brain, kid- neys and cornea. It is caused by mutations in the AT
P7 B gene with a carrier frequency of approximately 1.2%. Cell heterogeneity plays a central role in biological phenomena during nor- We report the design and evaluation of two different screening methods for mal development or disease (e.g., cancer development). As gene regulation the detection of AT
P7 B gene mutations which could be used in conjunction is a fundamental process, the analysis of transcript profiles and genomes of in order to minimize the cost and time for genotyping. single cells to dissect phenotypic variability is of key interest to scientists. 1) A specific mutation detection assay by dry-reagent dipstick biosensors Deep genome and transcriptome analysis of small biological samples using applied for the 10 commonest mutations in the Greek population (H1069Q, next-generation sequencing (NGS) is often limited by the small amount of R969Q, Q289X, 2530delA, 
L936 X, 2299insC, I1148T, 845delT, 1708-1G>A, sample available (6 pg gDNA and 0.5 pg mRNA/human cell). We developed X1466R) covering 80% of disease chromosomes. Fragments flanking the two new methods for whole genome amplification (WGA) and whole tran- 10 AT
P7 B mutations are amplified by multiplex-PCR, followed by multiplex scriptome amplification (WTA), based on Multiple Displacement Amplifica- primer extension (PEXT) reaction using allele-specific primers. The primer tion (MDA) technology, from small samples down to just a single cell. extension products are simultaneously detected by visual multi-allele dip- Parallel WGA and WTA reactions begin with lysis of 25–1000 cells from the stick type DNA biosensor using anti-biotin conjugated gold nanoparticles. same sample. Both reactions include a ligation and multiple displacement Optimization studies on the efficiency and specificity of the PEXT reaction amplification (MDA) reaction. This results in amplification products (WGA- were performed. DNA, WTA-cDNA) of the highest comparability and can be used for compara- 2) A gene scanning protocol using High Resolution Melting (HRM) analysis, tive studies of the genome and transcriptome from the same sample. designed to analyze all coding AT
P7 B regions. The second method (WTA) amplifies RNA from 1–1000 cells directly and The first method was evaluated by analyzing 50 samples of known geno- includes an efficient lysis, cDNA synthesis, and amplification strategy that types (confirmed by sequencing) along with 50 blind samples. The results results in minimal bias and errors. gDNA is effectively removed to prevent were fully concordant with reference methods. HRM was evaluated by te- false-positive results. sting 50 known genotypes and 100 blind samples. We amplified a variety of human cells and checked the resulting genome The proposed methods are simple, rapid, do not require purification of the and transcriptome using NGS or qPCR methods. Discussed are experiments PCR products and could be particularly useful in diagnostic laboratories. on cell-to-cell variation, GC content in comparison to genomic DNA, percen- T Ph 1e 4 .b 9e 6n -e Mfits and drawbacks of each will be discussed. tage and consistency of protein coding transcripts, genome coverage with EAA/EMQN best practice guidelines for molecular diagnosis of r Pe 1s 4p .e 9c 3ti -v Se error rates, and genome-wide real-time PCR analysis. Y-chromosomal microdeletions: state-of-the-art 2013 3Gb-Test: Introduction of Whole Genome Sequencing as diagnostic C. Krausz1, L. Hoefsloot2, M. Simoni3, S. Patton4, F. Tüttelmann5; 1Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, application Firenze, Italy, 2Dept Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3University E. Bakker1, B. Janssen2, G. Matthijs3, S. Patton4, S. van Vooren5, H. Scheffer6, K. Payne7, C. of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 4EMQN, Center for Genomic Medicine, St Mattocks8, A. Cambon-Thomsen9, J. Traeger-Synodinos10, H. Lochmuller11, J. den Dunnen1, Mary‘s Hospital,, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University E. Thomassen1; of Münster, Münster, Germany. 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2ServiceXS, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Catolic University, Leuven, Belgium, 4EMQN, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Cartagenia, Leuven, Belgium, 6UMC St. Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, The molecular diagnosis of Y-chromosomal microdeletions is a common 9INSERM, Toulouse, France, 10University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 11Newcastle routine genetic test that is part of the diagnostic workup of azoospermic University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. and severe oligozoospermic men. Since 1999, the European Academy of Andrology (EAA) and the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) have been actively involved in supporting the improvement of the 3Gb-TEST a two year CSA-EU-F
P7  project, gathers information on the gaps quality of the diagnostic assays by publication of the laboratory guidelines and needs for implementing Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) into the for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromosomal microdeletions and by offering diagnostic service. The aim is to prepare a detailed implementation plan external quality assessment trials. We aim to present an overview on clinical or roadmap for the transition to the future of genetic testing WGS included novelties related to the Y chromosome and provide an update on the results where appropriate and applicable. of the quality control programme. The original basic diagnostic testing pro- As the cost of sequencing is decreasing and the knowledge of our genome tocol based on two multiplex PCRs remains fully valid and appropriate for is increasing we expect that this transition to the future will take off within accurate diagnosis of complete AZF deletions requiring only minor modi- the next 5 years. 3Gb-TEST will define needs and gaps using questionnaires, fication in populations with a specific Y chromosome background. However, expert meetings and literature to shed light on and obtain insights in the in light of novel data on genotype-phenotype correlations, the extension following topics: analysis for the AZFa and AZFb deletions is now routinely recommended. - “Wet lab” innovations Novel methods and kits with excessively high number of markers do not - The bioinformatics improve the sensitivity of the test, may even complicate the interpretation of - Clinical interpretation the results and are not recommended. The routine screening for gr/gr dele- - Personalized medicine and pharmacogenomics. tion, a significant risk factor for impaired sperm production, is under debate - Quality issues and External Quality Assessment and eventually it can be performed in selected populations. Annual partici- - The clinical utility and cost effectiveness pation in an external quality control programme is strongly encouraged. The The 3Gb-TEST project brings stakeholders together and disseminates in- 12-year experience with the EMQN/EAA scheme has shown a steep decline formation with respect to the desirable and undesirable developments. The in diagnostic (genotyping) error rate and a simultaneous improvement on Consortium will inform the healthcare community and make recommen- reporting practice. dations to the European Commission, the European Society of Human Ge- netics, and national organizations relevanE t S toH tG hi s2 f0 ie1 ld4 . T | h M e rI oL aA dmN a, p I T wA ilL l Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 295ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P14 .97-S Introduction of a targeted next generation sequencing gene panel for familial cancer in DNA diagnostics and genetic counselling Eligible patients were treated with Perindopril 4 mg or Hydrochlorothiazide H. H. Lemmink, A. H. van der Hout, Y. J. Vos, B. Sikkema-Raddatz, K. van Dijk-Bos, A. (HCTZ) 12.5 mg. Genetic associations with General Linear Model and chi- Knopperts, B. Leegte, J. ter Beest, H. Westers, R. J. Sinke, R. H. Sijmons; squared; logistic regression analysis for responder/non responder compa- Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. rison after one-month therapy. RESULTS: We derived Genetic profiles for systolic BP (SBP) response to HCTZ or Perindopril as a specific combination of variants selected by pa- Aim: Our aim was to develop a targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) thway-based algorithms associated to greater response to these drugs. Car- gene panel that enables to analyze large numbers of genes in patients with riers of HCTZ genetic profile (215 HT) displayed a SBP fall of -18.21 mmHg familial cancer at relatively low cost. compared to those not having the profile (-5.56 mmHg), with an effect size Methods: A panel of 70 known tumour syndrome genes based on Agilent of -12.6 mmHg (p<0.00001, sensitivity 41%, specificity 96%, PPV 86%, Ne- Sure Select Target Enrichment® for simultaneous mutation detection was gative Predictive Value (NPV) 75%). Perindopril genetic profile (149 HT). developed and validated in two series of twelve patients for variants of the was associated to a SBP fall of -16.3 mmHg compared to all the others (-4.7 MMR or the BRCA genes previously identified through Sanger sequencing. mmHg), with an effect size of -11.6 mmHg (p<0.00001, 94% specificity, 33% In an additional set of twelve patients all genes were analyzed anonymously. sensitivity, 72% PPV, 74% NPV). The samples were sequenced using 151 base pair paired-end reads on an CONCLUSIONS: We developed two pathway-based algorithms for creating Illumina MiSeq® sequencer and analyzed using Softgenetics’ NextGENe® genetic profiles in response to HCTZ and Perindopril. We are currently em- and Cartagenia’s Benchlab NGS® software. Within the NGS panel, three vir- ploying these genetic profiles to a priori choose the first drug in naïve HT tual non-overlapping gene subpanels were designed, based on the levels of p Pa 1t 5ie .0n 3ts -, S as innovative methodology for treating essential HT. preventive options and strength of risk information for the panel genes. In The APOB insertion/deletion polymorphism (rs17240441) influences genetic counselling the genes to be tested were discussed as the 3 subpa- the postprandial triacylglycerol and insulin response in healthy nels rather than individually. For diagnostic purposes NGS with the targeted Caucasian adults - insights from the DISRUPT cohort panel was performed on 75 patients, in whom a pathogenic mutation in the K. S. Vimal1, R. Gill2, A. Minihane3,4, J. A. Lovegrove1, C. M. Williams5, K. Jackson1; MMR and BRCA genes has been excluded. Only results from chosen subpa- 1Hugh Sinclair Unit of Human Nutrition and Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic nels were reported to patients. Research, Department of Food and Nutritional Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, Results and Conclusion: In the validation all pathogenic mutations, unclas- United Kingdom, 2Boston Heart Diagnostics, Framingham, MA, United States, 3Hugh sified variants and neutral polymorphisms detected previously were identi- Sinclair Unit of Human Nutrition and Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Department of Food and Nutritional Sciences,University of Reading, Reading, fied by the NGS panel. In addition, 40 novel variants could all be confirmed United Kingdom, 4Department of Nutrition, Norwich Medical School, University of East by Sanger sequencing. The results of the first 75 patients will be presented. Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom, 5Institute for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Genetic counselling was adopted to discuss genes as groups rather than as University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom. individual genes. 
P15 .01-S Swedegene: Genome-wide association studies of adverse drug reactions The concept of personalized medicine is now being extended to the field M. Wadelius1, N. Eriksson2, Q. Y. Yue3, B. Grundmark3,1, P. K. Magnusson4, E. Eliasson4, H. of nutrigenetics with the ambition of giving personalised/stratified dietary Melhus1, P. Hallberg1; advice with greater efficacy in health promotion and disease prevention. To 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Uppsala Clinical Research center, Uppsala, this end, we investigated the impact of 18 polymorphisms (previously im- Sweden, 3Medical Products Agency, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, plicated in lipid metabolism) on postprandial lipid, glucose and insulin re- Sweden. sponses in up to 262 healthy adults. The participants consumed a standard Objective: sequential mixed test meal, which included a test breakfast (0 min; 49g fat) and lunch (330 min; 29g fat). Blood was collected at baseline (0 min) and on Swedegene (www.swedegene.se) is searching for genetic and 11 subsequent occasions until 480 min after the test breakfast. Plasma total clinical factors that predispose patients Mtoe athdovedr:se drug reactions (ADRs). (TC), low density lipoprotein (LDL-C) and high density (HDL-C) cholesterol, The aim is to minimise the risks of ADRs by finding biomarkers that enable triacylglycerol, insulin and glucose was determined. There was a significant selection of the right drug for a patient. We are assembling a bio- impact of APOB insertion/deletion polymorphism (rs17240441) on fasting bank of patients with selected ADRs that are identified from the nationwide TC (P=0.003), LDL-C (P=0.003), HDL-C (P=0.0004), triacylglycerol (P=0.003) ADR reporting system or referred directly from collaborating physicians. and insulin (P=0.003) with higher concentrations in the deletion allele car- Consenting patients are interviewed concerning medical and drug history, riers. A significantly higher area under the time response curve was evident and supplementary information is collected from medical records. A blood for the triacylglycerol (P=1x10-6) and insulin (P=0.006) response in the de- sample for genomic testing is drawn and kept until a sufficient number of letion allele carriers (n=93) relative to the insertion/insertion homozygotes cases are available for genome-wide analyses. We are collecting generalised (n=52).Our findings indicate that the APOB polymorphism is likely to be an ADRs, e.g. liver reactions, severe skin reactions and agranulocytosis, and important genetic determinant of the large inter-individual variability in the drug-specific ADRs, e.g. angioedema and cough related to ACE-inhibitors or postprandial response to dietary fat intake. Greater understanding of how angiotensin receptor blockers and statintr-einadteudced myopathy. We have 5000 APOB gene influences postprandial lipaemia will advance the prospects for unrelated controls with genome-wide data from the Swedish Twin Registry. personalised nutrition, where the deletion allele carriers may benefit from FRreosmul tths:is cohort it is possible to select controls, i.e. twins that have personalized dietary strategies to reduce the marked lipaemia in response been prescribed a drug without being diagnosed with the ADR in question. to meal ingestion. Swedegene started in 2010 and currenCtolyn chlauss i>o1n6:00 cases with 
P15 .04-M DNA and complete phenotypes. We have promising, but inconclusive, geno- rs37973 in GLCCI1 is associated with asthma treatment response me-wide results for three of the ADR diagnoses. Serious ADRs M. Žavbi1, A. Lopert2, P. Korošec1, M. Fležar1, M. Rijavec1; 1University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia, are too rare to study in a single country, even using a nationwide ADR regi- 2Outpatient practice for pulmonary diseases and allergy, Murska Sobota, Slovenia. ster. It is essential to collaborate internationally to obtain enough samples. We invite new collaborators interested in sampling cases with the aim to investigate genetic and clinical risk factors for ADRs. 
P15 .02-M Asthma treatment response is highGlLyC vCaIr1iable and pharmacogenetic mar- Pharmacogenomics and definition of genetic profiles as predictors of kers that predict treatment response would be onGe LsCteCpI1 closer to persona- blood pressure response to antihypertensive drugs lized treatment. Polymorphisms in could be associated with asthma L. Citterio1, C. Lanzani1, S. Delli Carpini1, M. Simonini1, B. Elena1, S. Pozzoli2, S. Tentori2, treatment response. We genotyped for rs37973 in in 208 adult asth- M. Jankarichova1, P. Manunta3; ma patients treated with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Change in %FEV1 1Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 2Università Vita-Salute, Milano, Italy, 3Ospedale was analysed after 3 months and after at least 3 years of treatment. Treat- San Raffaele, Università Vita-Salute, Milano, Italy. ment success was defined as good when FEV1 decreased less than 30 ml/ year. After 3 months of treatment, change of %FEV1 was higher in patients with GG genotype than in patients with AG+AA genotype (p = 0.049), and OBJECTIVE: In hypertensive population only 1/3 of patients reaches blood this genotype dependent difference was only evident and even higher in pressure (BP) targets with the main classes of antihypertensive drugs, with non-smokers (p = 0.037). Similar results were found after at least 3 years a heterogeneous BP response. of treatment when all patients were analysed (p = 0.041) and in non-smo- METHODS: We enrolled newly discovered and never treated (naïve) HT pa- kers (p = 0.034). Even though, no differences in treatment success (good vs. tients with BP office >140/90 and <160/110 mmHg. SNPs were genotyped poor response) were observed when analysing the entire group of patients, b 2y 9 1 628 SNP array on TaqMan OpenArray system, in EgeSnHesG fo r2 r0en1a4l t |r aMnsIpLoArtN , tIrTeAatLmYe n| tW suWcceWss. EwSasH hGig.hOlyR inGfluenced by genotype and smoking status. of sodium, the dopaminergic and RAAS system, vasodilation, growth factors.ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index 
P15 .07-S The impact of CY
P2 C19
, CY P3
A4, CY P2
B6, ABCB1, ITGB3 and PON1 GG genotype was overrepresented in non-smokers with good response (p gene variants on the antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel in Turkish = 0.030) and on contrast, AA genotype in smokers with good response (p patients with acute coronary syndrome syndrome = 0.015). There were no differences between smokers and noGnL-CsCmI1okers F. Saydam1, I. Değirmenci1, A. Birdane2, M. Özdemir3, T. Ulus2, C. Özbayer1, C. Bal4, N. Ata2, when they were not stratified according to genotype. Our results showed H. V. Güneş1; that treatment response to ICS is associated with rs37973G LinC CI1 , but 1Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, smoking has great influence on genotype dependent treatment response Eskişehir, Turkey, 2Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Eskişehir, Turkey, 3Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, and further studies are warranted to elucidate the role of in treat- Department of Pharmacology, Eskişehir, Turkey, 4Eskişehir Osmangazi University ment response.  P15
.05-S Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Eskişehir, Turkey. Influence of single nucleotide polymorphisms on deferasirox C trough levels and effectiveness. J. Cusato1, S. Allegra1, D. Massano2, S. De Francia2, A. Piga2, A. D‘Avolio1; Clopidogrel is an effective inhibitor of platelet aggregation due to its selective 1University of Turin, department of medical sciences, Amedeo di Savoia hospital, Turin, and irreversible blockade of the  P2
Y12 receptor on platelet cell membranes. Italy, 2University of Turin, department of clinical and biological sciences, S. Luigi Antiplatelet treatment with clopidogrel and aspirin is a recommended pro- Gonzaga hospital, Orbassano (TO), Italy. cedure for the reduction of stent thrombosis and a vital strategy for patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions. It has been demonstrated that clopidogrel does not exert an antiplatelet effect in a certain proportion Deferasirox (DFX) is the only once-daily oral chelator for first-line therapy of of patients in many studies, known as clopidogrel resistance. blood transfusion-related chUroGnTic 1irAo1n over1lAoa3d. DFX pharmacoPk4in5e0t icC YhPas In order to research the exact mechanism of clopidogrel resistance, we ai- b1Aee1n 1rAe2lated w2Dit6h response to therapy. This drug is metabolized in liver by med to determine whether there is the impact of CY P2
C19 , CY
P3 A4, CY
P2 B6, UDP-glucuronyltransferase ( ) and MRP, 2by cytochrome- ( ) ABCB1, ITGB3 and PON1 gene variants on the antiplatelet effect of clopido- , and enzymes, and it is eliminated via biliary-enteric circulati- grel in Turkish patients. We evaluated on 223 Turkish patients with acute on through multidrug resistance protein 2 ( ). coronary syndrome underwent percutaneous coronary intervention with Our aim was to evaluate DFX plasma concentrations according to single stent implantation. Platelet reactivity (PRU) and % inhibition were measu- nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in this drug metabo- red with VerifyNow 
P2 Y12 assay in blood samples collected from patients lism and elimination, in a cohort of non paediatric β-thalassemic patients. that took a standard dose of clopidogrel (75 mg/day) for at least 7 days. 12 Further aim was to define a plasma concentration cut-off value predicting genetic variants were genotyped using the Sequenom MassARRAY system. an adequate response to therapy. The PRU and % inhibition values of the genotypes were compared stati- BD enCF dRX P oc 1o f n dc oe sn intr ga it nio tn ersU v w aG leT (r1 CeA td r1 oue, g t hUe )G r umT s1i in nAe g3d , a Cf nrY o HPm1 P A Lp1 Cla, - s UCm VYP a m 1sA ea2 tm h, p oCl dYe .Ps A 2o lDb le6t la, i ciMn deR idP s c2a rt i mth ie - s st oi cc ia al tl ey. d T whe it hC Y aP 2 reC d1 u9 c* e2 d ( G an6 t3 ip6 lA a) t es li en tg rle e sn pu oc nle seo t (id pe < 0p .o 0l 0y 1m ).o r Cp oh ni vs em rs w ela ys , ta hs e- nation for SNPs in UGT1A1C>T and CY
P2 C19
*17 ( C806
T) single nucleotide polymorphism was associated with DFX Ct rg oue gn h e lCesC Yv Yw PeP 1la s1 As A w2p1 Ce eC >r r>f TeoA r sm ige nd if ib cy a nr te la yl - it nim flue e P nC cR ed. by CY MP R1 PA 22 GA >> AC (rs887829) a fin e nn th da in ffc ee rd na cn et i bp ela twte ele et e tf hfe ec Pt R(p U= a0 n.0 d2 %5) . nT hh ie br ie ow na vs an luo s st a ot fi s tt hi ec a oll ty es rig gn ei -- ca e n i ti e h [p=0.045], (s2606345) [p=0.017], (rs762551) netic variant genotypes. [p=0.014], (rs2470890) [p=0.004] and (rs2273697) Our findings suggest that clopidogrel resistance might be triggered or de- [p=0.032] SNPs. According to Chirnomas and Galanello efficacy definitions, creased by the haplotypes of CY P2
C19 *2 and CY
P2 C19
*17 variants. a DFX plasma cut-off value of 2 C0
Y, P010
A01 nCg>/Am L was identified (ROC curve,  P15
.08-M pCY= P01
.0A028 )C. >AT l ogistic regression analysis was performed to determine factors miR-155 and other miRNAs expression pattern in blood of breast able to predict this value: both rs2606345 AA (p=0.017) and cancer patients and healthy individuals carrying BRCA1 mutation rs2470890 TT (p=0.037) genotypes may forecast drug con- D. Jurkovicova1, M. Magyerkova1, L. Copakova2, M. Krivjanska1, V. Krivjansky1, L. Kulcsar1, A. Gibadulinova3, I. Oveckova3, M. Chovanec4; centrations below 20,000 ng/mL, suggesting a negative predictive role of 1KRD Molecular Technologies, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Institute for Oncology, therapy efficacy. Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Institute of Virology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Our data, the first obtained in non paediatric patients, suggest the feasibility Slovakia, 4Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. of a pharmacogenetic-based DFX dose personalization.  P15
.06-M ADRB1 and ADBR2 gene polymorphisms and the ocular hypotensive response to topical betaxolol in healthy Mexican subjects miR-155 is oncogenic microRNA upregulated in many tumors including bre- O. Messina-Baas1, G. Pacheco-Cuellar2, G. Pacheco-Cuellar2, J. Toral-Lopez3, L. Gonzalez- ast cancer (BC). As potential circulating biomarker, expression pattern of Huerta2, S. Lara-Huerta1, H. Urueta-Cuellar2, M. Rivera-Vega2, I. Babayan-Mena1, I. miR-155 can be determined from blood and may discriminate BC patients Babayan-Mena1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias2; from healthy individuals, report on treatment efficacy and further progno- 1Oftalmologia, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Genetica, Facultad sis. Development of BC may be a consequence of BRCA1 tumor suppressor de Medicina, Hospital General de Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, gene mutations involved in DNA damage response and repair. BRCA1 epi- Mexico D.F., Mexico, 3Genetica, Department of Medical Genetics. Ecatepec Medical Center, ISSEMYM, EdoMex, Mexico D.F., Mexico. genetically controls miR-155 expression and its pro-cancerous potential. In this study, we evaluated expression levels of miR-155 in circulation of indi- viduals carrying BRCA1 mutations with no disease manifestation as well as Background The β adrenergic receptors (ADRB) are expressed in the ci- in BRCA1 BC patients after tumor resection and therapy. liary body and trabecular meshwork, structures involved in aqueous humor We determined miR-155 expression in lymphocytes and plasma from pe- production and outflow, respectively. ADRB are members of the adrenergic ripheral blood. To amplify mature form, we used qRT-PCR with 1 RT and family of G-protein-coupled receptors. Topic β blockers have a good local 2 qPCR specifically designed primers. Similarly, we determined expression and systemic tolerance; they reduce the aqueous humor production and eye levels of miR-17, miR-18a, miR-21 and miR-27a, also known to be involved strain blocking the ADRB of the ciliary body and interfering with adenylate in BC pathogenesis. cyclase. However, the ocular hypotensive response is not the same in all Compared to healthy controls, individuals carrying BRCA1 mutations with patients and could be mediated by the polymorphisms of the ADRB genes. no disease manifestation displayed an increased miR-155 expression in Material and Methods Seventy two healthy subjects were studied after treat- plasma, but not in lymphocytes. In BRCA1 BC patients, we observed signi- ment with topical betaxolol in both eyes. We analyzed ADRB1 and ADRB2 ficantly elevated miR-155 expression in both, separated lymphocytes and gene polymorphisms by PCR and automated DNA sequencing. Results There plasma, a phenomenon that persisted after tumor resection and therapy. was statistically significant difference between baseline IOP and final IOP of Other studied miRNAs were also deregulated. both eyes (Baseline IOP 16.2±1.2 - Follow-up IOP 13.6±2.0 (mean difference Our results point to epigenetic control of miR-155 by BRCA1 in wide time -2.5±1.3, P<0.001). Gly389 had a higher baseline IOP than Arg389 (17.0±1.2 scale. Accurate identification of miRNAs from peripheral blood represents mmHg vs. 16.0±1.2 mmHg; P=0.02) and conversely Arg389 had a greater the key point of development of non-invasive blood-based detection plat- magnitude of response than Gly389 to betaxolol therapy (-2.9±1.1 mmHg forms for BC diagnosis, staging, therapy monitoring and prognosis. vs -0.7±0.4 mmHg; P< 0.001). Gln27 had a higher response than Glu27 Supported by European fond for regional development ITMS 26240220074/ (-2.7±1.3 mmHg vs -1.9±1.0 p=0.02) Conclusion Arg389 polymorphism of OPVaV-2011/4.2/07-SORO. the ADRB1 gene and Gln27 polymorphism of the ADRB2 gene were asso- ciated with the hypotensive response to topic betaxolol in healthy Mexican volunteers. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 297ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P15
.09-S CY P1
A2 gene non-coding region polymorphisms in Roma and Hungarian population samples state of the person. The discrepancy between the metabolic status of the R. Szalai1,2, P. Matyas1, L. Magyari1,2, J. Bene1, B. Duga1,2, Z. Banfai1, A. Szabo1, B. Melegh1,2; patient and definite antipsychotic drug choice and dosage results in various 1University of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary, 2Szentagothai side effects, among which the extrapyramidal disorders (EPD) are the most Research Centre, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary. invalidating. Methods The CY P2
D6*4 genotype ( rs3892097 ) was revealed for 211 patients suffe- CY P1
A2 enzyme contributes to biotransformation of wide range of thera- ring from schizophrenia that were cured with various antipsychotic drugs: peutically important drugs, including caffeine, clopidogrel, clozapine, war- Fluphenazine, Trifluoperazine, Haloperidol, Flupentixol, Zuclopenthixol, farin, procarcinogens and endogenous substrates. The purpose of this study Sulpiride, Risperidone. PCR with specific primers was used for allele esti- was to determine and describe the pharmacogenetic profile and interethnic mation. All the patients from Republican Research and Practice Center for differences of variants of CY P1
A2 gene between Roma and Hungarian popu- Mental Health where cured with definite (one) medicine for 2 weeks and lation. From genomic DNA, 404 Roma and 396 Hungarian healthy subjects then examined once for the presence of (EPD) with the help of Extrapyrami- were genotyped for two non-coding variants of CY P1
A2, namely -163C>A dal Symptoms Rating Scale (ESRS). The analysis of the results was carried (*1F) and out with the WinPepi package of statistical programs for epidemiology. -3860G>A (*1C). Polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length po- Results lymorphism (PCR-RFLP) technique was applied. The minor allele frequency In the process of pharmacotherapy the patients fell into two groups: tho- for CY P1
A2*1C variant was significantly different between Hungarian and se with (99) or without (112) (EPD). The influence of CY P2
D6*4 A allele Roma samples (2.02% vs. 0%, p<0.001). The AA homozygous genotype was as a risk factor for the EPD development was proved for Fluphenazine (P not detectable. For CY P1
A2*1F polymorphism we found a remarkable dif- =0,001), Flupentixol (0,0001). Conclusion We proved the importance of ferences in presence of AA genotype in Roma population compared to Hun- CY P2
D6*4 genotyping for the cohort of the patients we studied that were garians (31.9% vs. 49.5%, p<0.001) and in minor allele frequency (56.9% cured with special antipsychotic medication. The elaboration of informative vs. 68.6%, p=0.025). The following CY P1
A2 genotypes were identified in clinical approaches to the adequate drug choice as well as their dosage must Roma and Hungarian samples, respectively: *1A/*1A (18.1% vs. 12.4%), take into account the patient’s CY P2
D6 genotype.  P15
.12-M *1A/*1F (50% vs. 36.9%), *1F/*1F (31.9% vs. 46.7%). In Hungarian po- Towards personalized medicine in Type 2 Diabetes (T2DM): a genetic pulation we found the *1C/*1F genotype (4.04%), but it was not present risk score for the response to the first line treatment in T2DM, in Roma subjects. In conclusion, analysis of distribution of CY P1
A2 gene metformin variants revealed further pharmacogenetic differences between Roma and N. van Leeuwen1, G. Nijpels2, J. M. Dekker2, L. M. ‚t Hart1; Hungarian population samples. Hungarians have higher chance for rapid 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. metabolism of CY P1
A2 substrates, intensified procarcinogen activation and thereby elevated risk for cancers. T Ph 1i 5s . 1re 0s -e March was supported by TÁMOP-4.2.3-12/1/KONV-2012-0028. T2DM is a common disease characterized by high blood glucose levels. The CY P2
C9 *8 frequency distribution in Puerto Ricans: Implications for goal of T2DM treatment is lowering the blood glucose levels and the pre- warfarin dosing vention of complications. For this a stepwise treatment approach is used in K. Claudio-Campos1, C. Orengo-Mercado1, L. Berrios2, R. Pagan2, J. Renta-Torres1, C. which metformin is the first treatment step. Unfortunately the glycaemic re- Cadilla1, J. Duconge-Soler1; sponse to metformin is highly variable between individuals with a large pro- 1University of Puerto Rico- Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR, United States, portion of patients unable to reach the treatment target, defined as glycated 2University of Puerto Rico at Rio Piedras, San Juan, PR, United States. hemoglobin (HbA1c)<53mmol. Genetic factors app2eared to be involved in the variability in metformin treatment response (h=0.36). At the moment onlyA oTnMe GWAS (n=1024) for metformin treatment response has been pu- Warfarin is an oral anticoagulant that requires individual monitoring sin- blished (Zhou et al) and this revealed a genome wide significant locus near ce serious adverse events are common. CY
P2 C9
 encodes for the enzyme the gene, how-5ever, eleven other loci (MAF>0.05) reached borderline mainly responsible of S-warfarin’s metabolism. Polymorphisms in CY P2
C9  significance (p<10 ). In this study we measured these SNPs in Dutch T2DM have been previously found to be associated with observed warfarin dose patients treated with metformin monotherapy (n=600) and we generated variability in different populations, but not in Caribbean Hispanics. Carib- a genetic risk score of the five SNPs showing a directionally consistent as- bean Hispanics originated as a result of a complex admixture among Cau- sociation in our study (Odds Ratios (OR) for achieving treatment success casians, Africans and Amerindians ancestors-a characteristic that should be ranged between 0.69 and 0.84). In a logistic regression analysis with baseli- considered for warfarin management. The rare loss-of-function CY
P2 C9
*8 ne HbA1c, eGFR and metformin dose as covariates having more risk alleles allelic variant is reportedly more prevalent among individuals with Afri- lowered the OR for achieving treatment success (ORs for 2/3/4, 5/6, 7/8 or can heritage. Since Puerto Ricans has a significant contribution of African 9/10 risk alleles were 1.0, 0.54, 0.45 and 0.30 resp. p=0.027). ancestry in their genetic backgrounds, this cross-sectional study was aimed In conclusion, using a cohort of patients with T2DM, we showed that a ge- to determine the frequency of CY P2
C9 *8 in a cohort of 150 Puerto Rican netic risk score was associated with metformin treatment response. Our re- patients undergoing warfarin therapy. DNA specimens were extracted and sults are a first step towards the introduction of pharmacogenetics in T2DM genotyped for the CY
P2 C9
*8 using a PCR-based Taqman genotyping assay. treatment.  P15
.13-S We found 3 heterozygous for the CY P2
C9 *8 variant in our study cohort, cor- Variant Server in a box responding to a minor allele frequency of 1% (95%CI: 0.0026-0.031). The K. J. van der Velde1, M. de Haan1, P. Neerincx1, J. Paschall2, A. J. Brookes3, P. N. Robinson4, observed frequency met Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Allele frequency in R. H. Sijmons1, R. J. Sinke1, T. J. de Koning1, M. A. Swertz1; our cohort was found to be significantly lower than that from a previous 1UMCG, Dept. of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2European Bioinformatics Institute, report in African-Americans (0.01 versus 0.047, respectively, p=0.045 by Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3University of Leicester, Dept. of Genetics, Leicester, United two-tailed z-test), with a carrier frequency of 1 in 50 (Puerto Ricans) ver- Kingdom, 4Universitätsklinikum Charité, Institute for Medical Genetics, Berlin, Germany. sus 1 in 11 (African-Americans). Due to the CY
P2 C9
*8 prevalence found among Puerto Ricans, we concluded that this variant should be included in any pharmacogenetic-guided algorithm for warfarin dose predictions in this Many groups have implemented annotation and analysis pipelines to asses population. pathogenicity of large numbers of variants observed in next-generation Approved by University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus Institutio- sequencing clinical and research assays. Despite all these efforts only 50- n Pa 1l 5 R .1ev 1i -e Sw Board protocol A4070109. 75% of patients receive a negative or uncertain diagnostic report because Extrapyramidal Disorders while Schizophrenia Therapy - analysis of a small set of time-tested data sources and predictive tools were used and Cyp2D6*4 allele Influence the etiology of many diseases is not known. However, there are hundreds of I. M. Halayenka1, V. G. Objedkov2, N. G. Danilenko1; tools and databases emerging as well as meta-databases and –services that 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology of the National Academy of Sciencies, Minsk, Belarus, have information for millions of variants. Moreover, there are many more 2Belorusian State Medical University, Minsk, Belarus. resources such as drug targets, cellular pathways, tissue specific expression, quantitative trait loci, lab tests and model organism data. Cumulative cost of identification, download, try-out, and quality validation Introduction of all these tools and database is huge and even if new tools can be inte- A lot of clinical investigations of the schizophrenia therapy reveal the de- grated, it is hard to navigate all new information without smart filtering pendence of medicament concentration on the individual metabolism pe- and/or visualization tools, user interfaces for which are not cheap and diffi- c 2u 9lia 8rities. The latter depend to a greater degree EonS HthGe C 2Y0 P21
D46 * |4
 M alIlLelAicN , cITulAt tLoY c r|e WateW. ToW e.nEaSblHe rGap.OidR evGaluation of new annotation resources, theirABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index combination in pipelines, and user interfacing in challenging clinical NGS while depending on the cell type 30 to 40% of the peaks are localized in diagnostics, we have created MOLGENIS Variant Service, an open-source introns. Some of the genes may have several intronic binding sites. Intronic web application that can be installed as virtual machine, on local servers, as binding sites are most likely to regulate their own genes, therefore based on shared resource, and in a cloud. these statistics and the individual assignment of the binding sites to their We envision an NGS data exploration app as well as a sharing platform for genomic locations, we have identified a set of genes that have ER binding si- unified data formats and pipelines, gold standard data sets, well-curated tes in their introns. The number of SNP-s available in the dbSNP database for reference knowledge-bases, and optimal user interfaces, results of which the identified intronic binding sites of the identified genes is relatively high, can disseminate into research institutes, clinical software companies and that is more than one thousand. Based on our investigations a significant individual labs. number of SNP-s could influence directly the estrogen dependent regulation  P15
.14-M of relevant target genes. Personal genomics in Greece: An overview of available direct-to-  P15
.17-S consumer genomic services and the relevant legal framework Circulating levels of FSH in men are genetically determined: study on S. Kechagia1, G. Patrinos2, E. Vayena3; the combined effect of polymorphisms in the FSHR and FSHB genes 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Patras, Patra, Greece, C. Vinanzi, F. Ganz, M. Pengo, M. Menegazzo, C. Foresta, A. Ferlin; 3University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. University of Padova, Padova, Italy. The aim of this study is to provide an overview of the DTC genomic services Recent study have shown that polymorphisms in the FSHR and FSHB ge- available in Greece and the legal framework within which they operate. nes can modulate circulating levels of FSH. FSHR variants Asn680Ser and Based on literature review, a questionnaire that was distributed in a gene- c. -29 G>A have been extensively studied in women, while FSHB variant tics conference in Greece and in-depth interviews with human geneticists -211 G>T seems to influence male serum FSH levels. There are no studies in Greece, we assess the landscape of the DTC genomic testing market and on the combined effect of these three polymorphism. We have studies 365 highlight possible particularities of Greek consumers. subjects: 39 azoospermic, 177 oligozoospermic and 149 normozoospermic. Furthermore, we identify the existing legal framework regarding DTC ge- We evaluated seminal parameters; hormone levels; testicular volume; FSHR netic testing. Our interest is not limited only to issues such as consumer and FSHB polymorphisms. FSHB polymorphism -211 G>T was found signi- protection laws, lab quality accreditation and the provision of genetic coun- ficantly associated to FSH levels. FSHR polymorphism -29 G>A and Asn680- seling. We also explore the role of medical specialties and their respective Ser alone, are not associated to different concentration of FSH. Combined legal responsibilities in the Greek context, since for example the specialty of analysis of the three polymorphisms again highlights that the major deter- Clinical Geneticist does not exist. We also explore the legal authority of the minant in FSH levels is -211 G>T polymorphism, but shows also that this National Organization of Medicines (E.O.F.) regarding the approval of gene- effect is modulated by -29 G>A polymorphism, as subjects with -211 GG/-29 tic tests and specific issues relating to paternity tests. We identify gaps in the GG genotype have higher FSH level. Total sperm count and testicular volu- current regulatory scheme and conclude with recommendations for a more me is also modulated by the genotype: Homozygotes -211 TT are invariably c Po 1m 5.p 1r 5e -h Sensive legal framework. azoo-oligozoospermic with a reduced testicular volume and FSH <8 UI/L. 2020 vision and beyond - educating tomorrow’s clinicians for the Combined effect of Asn680Ser is negligible. This is the first combined study genomic era on the influence of FSHB and FSHR polymorphisms on male reproduction P. Lunt, S. Gay; and shows that -211 G>T FSHB polymorphism plays an important role, only NHS National Genetics & Genomics Education Centre, Birmingham, United Kingdom. slightly modulated by FSHR polymorphisms, on FSH levels, sperm count and testicular volume. FSHB -211 G>T influences transcriptional FSH gene ac- tivity, thus causing an isolated FSH deficiency with azoospermia and thus Genomic technology is opening-out the clinical applications of DNA from r Pe 1p 5r .e 1s 8e -n Mts the best pharmacogenetic marker to FSH treatment. the preserve of clinical geneticists in single-gene disorders, to integration of Evaluation of microarray gene expression profiling as response to genomic information in all clinical care by clinicians in all fields. In the UK, zearalenone exposure on normal intestinal epithelial cell research underpinning this, is spearheaded by current genome sequencing C. Braicu1,2, V. Pileczki1,3, O. Vîrtic1, O. Balacescu3, I. Taranu4, I. Berindan-Neagoe1,2,5; initiatives including GeL and PGP (both 100K genomes), worldwide 1K (now 1Research Center for Functional Genomics, Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, 2.5K), vertebrate 10K, DDD 12K, and cancer 25K. Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Consequently, genomic education requires basic generic training for all, plus 2Department of Functional Genomics and Experimental Pathology, Institute of Oncology tailored higher level focus in each specialty, rooted in present practical ap- „Prof. Dr. I Chiricuta“, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 4National Institute for plication, and preparing for the future. The education must be a continuum Research and Development in Animal Biology and Nutrition (IBNA), Calea Bucuresti, from medical student to trainee to autonomous clinician, and will require Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 5Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Iuliu curricular and CPD learning outcomes (LOs), learning resources (LRs) and Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. equipped educators for each level and specialty. Clinical geneticists may need wider genomic training for laboratory interface and educational roles (a recent snap survey of an ‘interested expert’ audience found only 21% cor- Zearalenone (ZEA) is an estrogenic secondary fungal metabolite produced rectly answered a question based on simple molecular report notation and by several Fusarium species. Several studies presented the cytotoxic or effect interpretation); but each specialty will need genomic champions as clinical of this mycotoxin, but the specific mechanism of action of ZEA still remains and educational leads. unidentified. In order to decipher the molecular changes that occurred du- Key to this is setting genomic LOs and CPD competencies, and identifying ring the exposure ZEA in IPEC cells, we assessed the impact of a single dose and creating appropriate accreditable LRs. At NGGEC, through working with on gene expression profile at 24 h posttreatment. 10 µM ZEA was proved professional groups and educators, we have developed ‘genomics’ LOs for to have no effect on cell viability (as displays MTT and xCELLigence data), medical students and trainees, and generic ‘genomic’ CPD competencies, but the microarray expràession àprofiling data for this dose was lead to the and are in discussion with educational bodies regarding finalisation and im- identification of 790 genes overexpressed and 1164 downregulated, consi- plementation. An audit and evaluation of current on-line genomic LRs will dering a fold change of -1.5or 1.5 with a p-value of <0.05. Gene Ontology be presented including our own website and e-learning modules, and our (GO) analysis of expression microarray data was done to identify the key v Pi 1e 5w .1 fo 6r - Mfurther resources. processed altered. Some of these gene class associations as represented by Functional annotation of Estrogen Receptor binding sites in the light GO terms are as would be predicted (cell proliferation and differentiation, of the 1000 Genomes Project apoptosis or cell cycle), while others are unexpected, like the class of the cell B. L. Balint, L. Ozgyin, E. Barta, A. Horváth, D. Bojcsuk, E. Erdős, K. Trang, L. Nagy; adhesion molecules or cellular invasion. These primarily processes altered University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. are usefully to predict the negative impact of this toxin, by generating an interaction network analysis for the significant statistic genes. The effects of ZEA are much more complex as we observed from the bioinformatics analy- Understanding the person-to-person variability in diseases by using the un- sis of the genes list associated with critical disease pathways for the case of precedented amount of available genomic data may be approached as never a single non-cytotoxic dose of ZEA, being the first step for the acquisition of before. We propose to investigate the impact of individual genetic variations genetic alteration, particularly in the case of mycotoxin co-contamination or in breast cancers. We performed a meta-analysis of all the publicly available continuous exposure. ER ChIP-Seq datasets in four ER positive cell lines: MCF7, T-47D (breast can- cer derived) cell lines and EC C1
, Ishikawa (endometrium cancer derived) cell lines. The number of peaks in intergeE niS c H reG gi o2 n0 s 1 is4 r o| u M ghI lyL A 50N to, I 5T 5A %L Y | WWW.ESHG.ORG 299ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P15
.19-S Taking gene-based diet in real life: a prospective study. P. Gasparini1,2, P. Bianchi3, N. Pirastu1,2; preparing to enroll newborn infants and their physicians from the neonatal 1Università degli Studi di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, intensive care unit and the newborn well nursery. In both projects patients 3Maniago Nuoto, Maniago (PN), Italy. are randomized to receive standard of care with or without GS. Physicians and patients are followed through surveys, interviews and medical record review to examine the behavioral and clinical impacts of GS results. Increased knowledge in the field of nutrigenetics led to the development In the GS arms of both projects, GS is conducted and interpreted in CLIA- of different genetic risk scores and dietary interventions. We have decided approved molecular laboratories and the results, including all medically to test the efficacy of a gene-based diet (gdiet from www.genex.me) on 191 relevant unexpected findings, are being provided in a digestible report to obese (BMI>25) attending the same nutritional center. Participants were the physicians. Reports summarize and present pathogenic variants in rare randomly divided in two groups (87 test and 104 controls). For both groups dominant conditions, variants indicating carrier status for rare recessive a standard nutritional plan was defined subtracting 600 calories from in- conditions, pharmacogenomics variants for commonly used medications dividual need. DNA from the test group was analyzed for 19 genes known and blood group antigens. Interviews, standardized scales and ongoing re- to impact on different metabolic areas and taste. Diet was modulated ac- views of medical records are being used to track physician actions, patient cording to individual genetic profile (i.e. people with a non-favorable lipid (or parent) behaviors and attitudes, health outcomes and health care costs. metabolism profile were given less lipids in their diet) without varying the The MedSeq and BabySeq Projects will help to illuminate the benefits, risks overall amount of calories. Physical activities plans were personalized in the and limitations of GS in the medical care of both adults and infants.  P15
.22-M same way in the two groups. No significant differences in age, sex and BMI Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms of the Glucocorticoid-Receptor distribution were present in the two groups. Follow-up took place every six Gene Influence the Outcome of Cardiac Surgery months for 2y and showed, in both groups, BMI loss over time and similar M. Pfob1, D. Hauer2, R. Toth3, M. Giel2, C. Kowalski2, E. Kilger2, M. Eggert1, O. Steinlein1, G. compliance. Very interestingly, people in the test group (gene-based diet) Schelling2; lost 33% more weight than controls corresponding to 0.47 BMI points for 1Department of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Anaesthesiology, the square-8 root of time (-1.36 in the control group vs -1.83 in the test group, Munich, Germany, 3Gottsegen Gyorgy Institute of Cardiology, Munich, Hungary. p=1.8x10 ). Similarly, the percentage of lean mas-s4 increased more in the test group (+6.2%) than controls (+5.3%) (p=2x10 ). In conclusion, present findings indicate that a gene-based diet might be Cardiac surgery triggers systemic inflammatory response which is asso- more effective in helping people loosing weight as compared to standard ciated with postoperative morbidity and mortality. Glucocorticoid effects nutritional plans. are mediated by glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) for which a number of com-  P15
.20-M mon single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) exist that influence GR sen- Urine-derived human renal progenitor cultures for modeling of sitivity to cortisol. We selected three common SNPs of the GR gene that are genetic kidney disorders in subject studied by Next Generation known to affect GR sensitivity and analyzed these data in relation to early Sequencing B. Mazzinghi1, E. Lazzeri2, E. Ronconi2,3, F. Becherucci4, A. Provenzano1, G. Sansavini4, A. outcome variables in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. We tested the Sisti2, A. Peired2,3, M. Angelotti2, L. Lasagni2, P. Romagnani2,3,4, S. Giglio1,3; effects of the following GR-SNPs: rs4123247 (BcII, increased cortisol sen- 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Excellence sitivity), rs33388 (cortisol hypersensitivity) and rs10052957 (FPB5, corti- Centre for Research, Transfer and High Education for the development of DE NOVO sol resistance). All study personal was blinded with regard to the patients` Therapies(DENOTHE), Florence, Italy, 3Department of Clinical and Experimental genotype. Study endpoints (primary outcome variables) were the required Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 4Nephrology Unit, Meyer dosages of hydrocortisone during surgery and in the Intensive Care Unit. Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy. The study population consisted of 95 patients. Homozygous carriers of al- leles associated with increased GR sensitivity (Bcll *G, n=10 and rs33388 *G, n=25) required significantly lower dosages of hydrocortisone in the In- The advent of high-throughput sequencing has fostered the identification of tensive Care Unit than non-carriers of the respective alleles. Homozygous novel causative genes of kidney disorders, and has allowed the continuous individuals (n=6) for the TT-allele of the FPB5-SNP required significantly discovery of genetic variants of unknown significance often raising the pro- higher dosages of hydrocortisone during surgery and in the Intensive Care blem of the functional testing of their pathogenic role. However, emerging Unit than heterozygous carriers. They also needed significantly higher no- evidence implicates that influence of the genomic background of the patient, repinephrinemax and epinephrinemax dosages in the Intensive Care Unit to as well as epigenetic modifications are critical in determining the clinical achieve hemodynamic stability and showed a significantly longer duration phenotype. Renal progenitor cell (RPC) cultures obtained from the affected of Intensive Care Unit therapy than heterozygous or non-carriers of the T- patient may represent an ideal alternative for personalized disease mode- allele. In summary, hydrocortisone dosages administered according to evi- ling. Since loss of renal cells in urine naturally occurs in patients, urine may dence based algorithm to cardiac patients during and after cardiac surgery represent a potential RPC source. are influenced by SNPs in the GR. In this study, we selected and amplified RPC cultures from the urine of pa-  P15
.23-S tients with renal disease, and we evaluated the possibility to use these cells Genome-wide association study of chemotherapeutic agent-induced for modeling of genetic kidney disorders. Urin-RPC were obtained from five severe neutropenia/leucopenia for patients in Biobank Japan children affected by Nephrotic Syndrome carrying mutations in genes enco- S. Low1, A. Takahashi1, T. Mushiroda2, M. Kubo3; 1Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, ding for podocyte cytoskeleton proteins, identified thought Next Generation Yokohama, Japan, 2Laboratory for Pharmacogenomics, Center for Integrative Medical Sequencing, as well as from children without genetic alterations (five). The Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory for Genotyping Development, Center for first cells exhibited altered synthesis of mutated proteins, abnormal cyto- Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. skeleton structure and functional abnormalities; by contrast, the second ones showed normal phenotype, structure and function. The development of functional assays with Urin-RPC could serve as a fun- Chemotherapeutic agents are notoriously known to have narrow therapeu- damental step for rapid testing of putative pathogenic mutations. In parti- tic range that often results in life-threatening toxicity. Hence, it is of clinically cular, this tool can provide an essential support for the clinical diagnosis of important to identify patients who are at high risk for severe toxicity to cer- nephrotic syndrome in patients carrying variants of uncertain significance tain chemotherapy through pharmacogenomics approaches. In this study, and provide information to optimize an affected individual’s personalized we carried out 17 genome-wide association studies (GWAS) with 13 122 m  P1
e 5d .i 2ca 1l - Scare. cancer patients recruited from the Biobank Japan, who received different The MedSeq and BabySeq Projects: Clinical trials that explore the chemotherapy regimens, including cyclophosphamide- and platinum-based impact of genomic sequencing in adults and newborns (cisplatin and carboplatin), anthracycline-based (doxorubicin and epirubi- R. C. Green1, D. M. Lautenbach1, S. S. Kalia1, K. Splinter1, A. H. Beggs2; cin), and antimetabolite-based (5-fluorouracil and gemcitabine) treatment, 1Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Boston Children‘s Hospital, antimicrotubule agents (paclitaxel and docetaxel), and topoisomerase inhi- Boston, MA, United States. bitors (camptothecin and etoposide), as well as combination therapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin, to identify genetic variants that are associated with the risk of severe neutropenia⁄leucopenia in the Japanese population. Whole exome and whole genome sequencing (genomic sequencing or GS) is In addition, weighted genetic risk score analysis was performed to evalu- becoming increasingly available and used in medical care. We are conduc- ate the cumulative effects of common genetic variants associated with che- ting the NIH-funded MedSeq and BabySeq Projects to examine the imple- motherapeutic agents-induced severe neutropenia/leucopenia. Instead of mentation and outcomes of GS in the practice of medicine. illustrating all 17 GWAS, we will utilize the result from GWAS of paclitaxel- In the MedSeq Project, we are enrolling adult patients and their physicians carboplatin combined therapy for further explanation. Although we failed to i3n 0bo0th primary care and cardiology settings. In theE BS aH byG Se q2  P0
 r1 oj4 ec | t ,M weI L aA reN , iI dT eA nL tiY fy | g eW neW ticW va. rE iaS nH tsG th. aO t R suG rpassed the genome-wide significance levelABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index -8 DAR S2
 (P<5.0x10 ) through GWAS, probably due to insufficient statistical power Leukoencephalopathy with brain c.455G>T and complex clinical features, we were able to shortlist some of the sugge- stem and spinal cord involvement and DHCR7 (Cys152Phe) 0.5% lactate elevation stive associated loci. The current study is at the relatively preliminary stage, GAA c.452G>A but does highlight the complexity and problematic issues associated with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome GALT (Trp151ter) 0.5% retrospective pharmacogenomics studies. However, we hope that verificati- Glycogen storage disease II IV S1
AS-13t>g 0.5% Galactosemia, duarte variant c.-119delGATC 8% on of these genetic variants through local and international collaborations GALT c.1430A>G c Po 1u 5ld .2 i 5m -Sprove the clinical outcome for cancer patients. Galactosemia (Gln188Arg) 1% GJB2 c.855G>T Preventive genetic testing for large spectrum of monogenic disorders (Lys285Asn) using microarray technology in Russian population Deafness, autosomal recessive c.35delG 0.5% HFE M. M. Litvinova1,2, E. A. Pomerantseva1, F. A. Konovalov1, A. A. Isaev1; c.187C>G 1Human Stem Cells Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov First Moscow State (His63Asp) Hemochromatosis, type 1 32.3% Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. LAMB3 с.845G>A (Cys282Tyr) Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, с.1903C>T 0.5% Herlitz type (Lys635ter) MEFV According to current statistics around 5% of newborns have hereditary c.2282G>A disorder or inborn defect. Our work shows that this number is higher in Familial Mediterranean fever (Arg761His) 1.5% c.442G>C reality. Often ill child is born in couple without any health problems. No- (Glu148Gln) wadays the most affordable way to detect carrier status in such couples is PAH c.1208C>T using microarray technology. The content of such screening panels should (Ala403Val) Phenylketonuria 1.5% be ethnically optimized. POLG c.1222C>T (Arg408Trp) To spread preventive personalized approaches in medical practice in 2013 Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndro- c.752C>T the microarray “Ethnogene” was developed based on APEX technology. It me 4B (MNGIE type) PTS (Thr251Ile) 0.5% allows detecting 60 monogenic and 4 multifactor disorders. Its content is Hyperphenylalaninemia, BH4- с.216T>A 1% adapted to characteristics of Russian population. deficient, A SERPINA1 ( cA .1s 0n 97 62 GLy >s A) 9.5% of 213 genotyped patients were diagnosed to have monogenic disease (Glu342Lys) (table 1). 60% appeared to be heterozygous carriers of 1-3 mutations (table Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency 1.5% c.863A>T 2). (Glu264Val) Thus using of microarray “Ethnogene” helps to reveal carrier status among  P15
.26-M couples planning pregnancy and to understand real frequencies of monoge- Assessing the role of known MS genetic variants in the familial nic disorders in general population of Russia. Early detection of disorders in aggregation of MS and other autoimmune diseases asymptomatic patients allows preventing severe complications by prescri- F. Esposito1,2, L. Ferre‘1,2, C. Guaschino1,2, M. Sorosina2, G. Liberatore1,2, F. Clarelli2, B. bing pathogenic therapy. Colombo1, V. Martinelli1, G. Comi1,2, F. Martinelli Boneschi1,2; Table 1. 1Department of Neurology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of genetics of complex neurological disorders, Institute of Experimental Neurology, Division Frequency of detected monogenic disorders in cohort of 213 persons geno- Frequency, of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. tDyipseodrd beyr microarrayG Eetnhenogene Mutation Genotype % CAPN3 Muscular dystrophy, Del/Del Background: The contribution of MS loci on familial aggregation for MS or с.550delA (Thr184fs) 0.5% limb-girdle, type 2A (fs/fs) other autoimmune diseases is still unclear. C/T (Arg/ FLG c.1501C>T (Arg501ter) 0.9% Objective: The aim is to investigate the role of MS associated genetic variants ter) c.2282del4 N/Del 1.5% in explaining the familial aggregation for MS or other autoimmune diseases, Ichthyosis vulgaris Compound heterozygous by comparing sporadic and familial MS cases of Italian origin. Arg/ter; GALT state for c.1501C>T N/Del 0.5% Methods: genetic and familial aggregation data were available on 572 MS (Arg501ter) and c.2282del4 patients (474 sporadic cases and 98 familial cases). A weighted genetic risk Galactosemia, duarte variant HFE c.-119delGATC Del/Del 2.3% score (wGRS), based on 106 SNPs found to be associated to MS according to Hemochromatosis, G/G (Asp/ the Immunochip project, was calculated. c.187C>G (His63Asp) 1.4% type 1 Asp) Results: we did not observe a difference in terms of wGRS between spora- Compound heterozygous His/Asp; dic and familial cases of MS (10.67±0.038 vs 10.62±0.093). However, when state for c.187C>G (His63Asp) 1.4% MEFV Cys/Tyr assessing the impact of the known MS loci on the aggregation for MS and and с.845G>A (Cys282Tyr) Familial Mediterra- MTCYB C/C (Gln/ other autoimmune diseases, we observed that there is a statistically si- nToeatanl fever c.442G>C (Glu148Gln) Gln) 90..55%% gnificant difference between sporadic and familial cases (10.71±0.046 vs Leber optic atrophy m.15257G>A (Asp171Asn) A (Asn) 0.5% 10.56±0.066, p<0.05). Moreover, it appears that males with other cases of Table 2. MS or autoimmune diseases in the family have a higher wGRS compared to Frequency of heterozygous state for recessive disorders in 213 persons geno- females (10.81±0.120 vs 10.45±0.078, p=0.02). typed by microarray Ethnogene Conclusions: our data suggest that known MS genetic variants may have a role in explaining the aggregation for MS and other autoimmune diseases; Frequency, Disorder Gene Mutation this is in agreement with the fact that most of these loci are involved in im- % munological functions. When stratifying by gender, it appears that the ge- netic variants have a stronger impact in males, suggesting that probably in ABCR c.2588G>C females other factors are involved, like hormones or other environmental (Gly863Ala) causes. c.3113C>T  P15
.27-S Stargardt disease 1 3.4% (Ala1038Val) A pharmacogemonic study of long-term response to Interferon-beta c.5882G>A AT P7
B treatment in patients with Multiple Sclerosis (Gly1961Glu) c.3402delC G. Liberatore1,2, F. Clarelli2, F. Esposito1,2, M. Sorosina2, S. Santoro2, M. Rodegher1, V. Wilson disease CAPN3 (Ala1135fs) 0.5% Martinelli1, G. Comi1, F. Martinelli Boneschi1,2; Muscular dystrophy, limb-girdle, с.550delA 1Department of Neurology & INSPE (Institute of Experimental Neurology), Scientific 0.5% type 2A (Thr184fs) Institute and Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of Genetics of Neurological CFTR c.1518delCTT Complex Disorders, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. (Phe508 del) c.3587C>G Cystic fibrosis 2.5% (Ser1196ter) c.621+1G>T Background: Previous pharmacogenomic studies conducted in Interferon- CLCN1 dele2,3 21080bp beta (IFN)-treated Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients explored the influence c.1437_1450del14 of genetic variants on the short-term response to the drug. The aim of this (Ile479fs) Myotonia congenita, recessive c.2680C>T 5.3% study is to perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of long-term (Arg894ter) response to Interferon-beta observed using a follow-up period of 4 years after drug start. ESHG 2014 | MILAN, ITALY |M WetWhodWs:. EThSeH GGW.AOSR stGudy was conducted using the Omni-express Il3lu0m1i-ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index ® na array on a cohort of 329 IFN-beta treated MS patients followed for 4 also be used for other genotyping applications that require translation of years of treatment. We used three different outcome measures of response data from multiple TaqMan assays, including triallelic SNP data analysis and to treatment: a disability criterion, measured as the increase of ≥1 point at blood genotyping.  P15
.30-M Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), and two composite criteria, which ABCB1 haplotype construction in a pharmacogenetic study of take into account measures of disability progression and relapse occurrence cyclosporine treatment response in Greek patients with psoriasis (≥2), on which separate GWAS analyses have been performed. Y. Vasilopoulos1, C. Sarri1, C. Stamatis1, E. Zafiriou1, A. Roussaki-Schulze1, A. Patsatsi2, D. Results: No genome-wide sig-4nificant association signal was detected. When Sotiriadis2, Z. Mamuris1, T. Sarafidou1; using a cut-off p-value of 10 , 42 SNPs emerged as associated according to 1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, the disability criterion, while 28 and 41 SNPs for the two composite criteria. Thessaloniki, Greece. A modest overlap (11.8%) was observed among associations across three phenotypes. Conclusions: Our study showed new targets potentially involved in the mo- Psoriasis is a chronic, inflammatory skin disorder affecting 2-3% of the po- dulation of the response to IFN-beta treatment. An in silico replication ana- pulation worldwide. While there are a large number of effective modalities lyses on identified targets is planned on an independent cohort of treated for treating psoriasis, response to therapy varies among patients which MS patients. could be due to genetic factors. Cyclosporine is considered to be a cost-ef-  P15
.28-M fective first-line systemic therapy for psoriasis, however the response rate Genetic polymorphisms influence the response to adalimumab in is around 60-70%. The aim of the present study, which is based on a Greek Crohn disease patients U. Potočnik1,2, K. Repnik1, S. Koder3, R. K. Weersma4; multi-centre collaboration, was to target ABCB1, which encodes for P-glyco- 1Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Laboratory for Biochemistry, Molecular Biology protein, by selecting polymorphisms that could influence the absorption ang Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor,, and disposition of P-glycoprotein substrate drugs like cyclosporine. In detail, Maribor, Slovenia, 3University Clinical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 4Department T-129C (rs3213619), G1199A (rs2229109),  C1236
T (rs1128503), G2677T of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen and University Medical (rs2032582) and  C3435
T (rs1045642) polymorphisms were selected as Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. candidate markers of response to cyclosporine treatment after 3 months of therapy and genotyped in 84 psoriasis patients under cyclosporine the- rapy. Fifty-two patients (62%) were defined as responders (ΔPASI ≥75%) Biological therapy using fully humanized monoclonal antibodies against and thirty-two (38%) as non-responders (ΔPASI ≤50%). Single-SNP and ha- TNF-α (adalimumab) is efficiently used to induce and maintain remission plotype construction showed that the haplotype for marker  C3435
T could in around 70% of Crohn disease (CD) patients not responding to standard account for the prediction of ~20% of the non-responders to cyclosporine treatment or developing adverse drug effects to corticosteroids. We inve- therapy. Notwithstanding the importance of this finding, there is a remai- stigated if single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) contributing to CD risk ning 80% to be identified, which could be illuminated by systems network could help to predict the response to adalimumab (ADA) treatment in CD analysis, whereby additional pharmacogenetic targets that may be involved patients. We used IBDQ index and biological biomarkers (CRP levels) to mo- in cyclosporine transport, processing or metabolism are identified. Overall, nitor therapy response after 4, 12, 20 and 30 weeks after first treatment systems biology coupled with experimental validation of specific markers with adalimumab. The strongest association between CRP levels and treat- in large independent cohorts could lead in the creation of a molecular al- ment with ADA was found for ATG16 L1
 SNP rs10210302. After 12 weeks of gorithm for the prognosis of psoriasis patients’ response to cyclosporine as treatment 85% of patients with CT or TT genotype in rs10210302 had a po- well as for other therapies.  P15
.31-S sitive response (drop of CRP to normal levels or by more than 25%) to treat- Identification of a new late radiotherapy toxicity locus through a ment with ADA compared to 37,5% of patients with CC genotype (p=8,11E- three stage genome wide association study 04). We also found significant associations between SNP rs10512734 loca- L. Fachal1, A. Gómez-Caamaño2, G. Barnett3, P. Peleteiro2, A. Carballo2, P. Calvo-Crespo2, ted near PTGER4 gene and ADA treatment response measured with both, S. Kerns4, M. Sánchez-García5, R. Lobato-Busto5, L. Dorling3, R. Elliott6, D. Dearnaley7, M. IBDQ index and biological response measured with CRP. Average increase Sydes8, E. Hall9, N. Burnet10, Á. Carracedo1, B. Rosenstein4, C. West6, A. Dunning3, A. Vega1; in IBDQ index (delta IBDQ) after 12 weeks of treatment was higher in the 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS. Grupo de Medicina group of patients with GG genotype for SNP rs10512734 (47,6) compared Xenómica-USC, CIBERER, IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Department of Radiation to those with AA or AG genotype (17,4, p=7,06E-03). Additional SNPs in 6 Oncology, USC University Hospital Complex, SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, out of 33 tested CD associated genes (CASP-9, I L27
, C11
orf30, CCNY, I L13
) 3Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Department of Radiation Oncology, showed suggestive association with ADA response. Our results suggest ADA Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 5Department of response in CD patients in partially genetically predisposed by SNPs in CD Medical Physics, USC University Hospital Complex, SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, r Pi 1sk 5 .g 2e 9n -e Ss. Spain, 6Institute of Cancer Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic AlleleTyper™ Software: a flexible application for mapping SNP Health Science Centre, Christie Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Sutton, Surrey, United genotype and CNV data patterns to pharmacogenomic allele Kingdom, 8Cancer and Other Non-Infectious Diseases, MRC Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, nomenclature London, United Kingdom, 99. Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit, Institute of Cancer T. Hartshorne, N. Mehmet, E. Shelton, H. Leong; Research, London, United Kingdom, 10University of Cambridge Department of Oncology, Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, CA, United States. Oncology Centre, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Pharmacogenomic (PGx) studies require genetic testing of individuals for multiple variants in drug metabolism enzyme (DME) and transporter genes. Increasing evidence supports the role of genetic variants in the develop- For phenotype interpretation purposes, genotyping results must be trans- ment of radio-induced toxicity. Therefore, we performed a three-stage ge- lated to star (*) allele nomenclature. Star alleles are gene level haplotype nome wide association study that involved a Spanish cohort of 741 prostate patterns that are associated with protein activity levels. Genetic variants cancer patients treated with radiotherapy to identify new susceptibility loci. within a haplotype can include SNPs, InDels, and copy number variations The replication cohorts consisted of 633 prostate cancer patients from the (CNVs). Knowing the combination of variants within a given haplotype, and UK, and 368 prostate cancer patients from a North-American Caucasian co- the diploid content in an individual, is of key importance for studying drug hort. metabolism, response and adverse reactions. To facilitate the translation of Standardized total average toxicity (STAT) scores were derived from indivi- results for individuals genotyped in studies using TaqMan® SNP and DME dual toxicity endpoints to assess overall acute and late toxicities. Association Genotyping Assays and TaqMan® Copy Number Assays, we developed a tests of genotype with STAT-acute or STAT-late scores were performed with web-based flexible software tool called AlleleTyper™. This software maps linear regression. Residuals from multivariate linear regression models, in- sample genotyping data to genetic pattern information translation tables to cluding associated non-genetic covariates, were calculated for each patient star allele or other nomenclature. User-defined monoallelic translation ta- to quantify the toxicity not accounted for by the available non-genetic cova- bles containing haplotype genetic information, for the gene variants tested riates. To obtain per allele ORs by logistic regression, patients were dichoto- in a study, are automatically converted by the software to biallelic transla- mized as ≤ or > than 1 standard deviation of the acute and late residuals. tors containing diploid genetic patterns. AlleleTyper™ matches the sample Seven and 42 loci were associated (P-value≤10-5) with overall acute and genotypes in results files from TaqMan® Genotyper Software and/or Copy- late toxicity, respectively. Only one locus associated with overall late toxici- Caller® Software to the patterns in the biallelic translator and reports the ty, 2q24.1 (STATlate P-value =6.85x10-9; OR=6.67, 95%CI: 2.25-19.80) was star allele genotypes determined for each sample. A review of the software replicated in the UK cohort (STATlate P-value=2.08x10-4, OR=6.17, 95%CI: w 3o 0r 2kflow and features will be presented, along wiEthS HdaGta 2an0a1ly4si s| eMxaImLAp-N, 2IT.2A5- L1
Y6 . |9
 5W; mWetWa-.aEnSalHysGis .PO-vRalGue=4.16x10-10). The inclusion of the third les. AlleleTyper™ Software greatly facilitates PGx study data analysis. It canABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index cohort gave a meta-analysis P-value=4.64x10-11. neous manifestations in inflammatory bowel disease. We hypothesized that Although it is biologically possible that this locus is involved in the rege- this gene, involved in immune response and in NF-KB activation, could be neration of muscle previously damaged by radiotherapy, future efforts are also implicated in the SJS/TEN susceptibility. needed to identify the causal variant underlying the observed association To verify our hypothesis we performed a full resequencing of TRAF3I P2
 and determine the molecular mechanisms involved. gene in a population of patients treated with NVP. Twenty-seven patients  P15
.32-M with NVP-induced SJS/TEN and 78 controls, all from Mozambique, were Genetic determinants of methotrexate toxicity in Tunisian patients enrolled. All ten exons of TRAF3I P2
 gene, including the intron/exon boun- with rheumatoid arthritis: a study of polymorphisms involved in the daries, were analyzed by direct sequencing. We performed a case/control folate pathway of methotrexate S. Chaabane1, R. Akrout2, S. MARZOUK3, H. Makni-Fourati2, Z. Bahloul3, A. MAALEJ1; association analysis and a multivariate logistic analysis. 1Faculty of medicine of sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Rheumatology, Sfax, Tunisia, We identified 8 exonic and 3 intronic variants. We did not find any novel 3Department of Internal Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia. variations. The case/control association analysis highlighted an association between the rs76228616 SNP in exon 2 and the SJS/TEN susceptibility. In particular the variant allele ( C ) was more present in SJS/TEN patients than Methotrexate (MTX) is an anti-rheumatic drug used in the treatment of in controls, resulting significantly associated with a higher risk to develop rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, side events are present in 40% of the SJS/TEN (P=0.012 and OR=3.65 [95% CI 1.33-10.01]). A multivariate analy- patients. sis by logistic regression confirmed the significant involvement of TRAF3I P2
 The aim of this study was to determine the impact of genetic polymorphisms (rs76228616) in the susceptibility to SJS/TEN (P=0.027). Of course, further of 5, 10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR  C677
T and A1298C), studies on larger samples and replications in other African populations are Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR 19-base pair deletion allele), thymidylate n Pe 1c 5e .s 3s 5a -r Sy to confirm our results. synthase (TYMS 2R→3R), methionine synthase (MTR A2756G) and methio- Potentially Functional Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (pfSNPs) nine synthase reductase (MTRR A66G) in a group of 143 Tunisian RA pati- associated with Response to Fluorouracil in Metastatic Colorectal ents and evaluate its association with MTX toxicity. Cancer Patients Patients who experienced MTX adverse events were defined “with toxicity”, C. G. Lee1,2,3, J. Wang2, X. Wang2, M. Zhao2, S. Choo1, S. Ong4, I. Tan1, S. Ong1, Y. Teo2, S. S. those who did not, as “without toxicity”. Genotyping was performed using Chong2; PCR and PCR-RFLP method. Demographic and clinical characteristics were 1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of Singapore, obtained and MTX-related adverse effects were recorded. Allele and geno- Singapore, Singapore, 3Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, type association were performed using chi2 test , genotype relative risk 4National Cancer Centre and National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (GRR) and Odds ratio (OR). The regression logistic was also used to inve- stigate the correlation between patient characteristics (MTX dose, duration of treatment, disease duration, age, sex, route of MTX administration) and Colorectal cancer (CRC) is amongst the top three most commonly diagnosed toxicity. cancer in the world. Majority of these patients require treatment for meta- The analysis highlighted a significant genotypic association of MTHFR  C677
T static CRC since a third are at stage IV during diagnosis and another third of polymorphism with increased MTX toxicity [p=0.004], and the strongest as- the ‘curatively’ resected patients (Stages I-III) will relapse. 5-fluorouracil is sociation was shown in the T/T genotype [p=0.006]. However, The MTHFR a common drug used for the treatment of CRC but the response rate to this A1298C , DHFR 19-base pair deletion allele and MTR A2756G polymorphis- drug either alone or in combination is less than 40%. Developing a reliable ms were not associated with increased MTX toxicity. While TYMS 2R→3R biomarker that can predict response can facilitate the appropriate tailoring polymorphism had a protective effect on overall MTX toxicity [p=0.038] of treatment for these patients. Moreover, our results revealed a positive correlation of both dose and route Here we report a novel potentially functional Single Nucleotide Polymor- of administration of MTX with toxicity in RA patients (p=0.027; p= 0.004) phism (pfSNP) approach to identify SNPs predictive of response to 5-FU in respectively. Chinese metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. 1547 pfSNPs and one  P15
.33-S variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) in 139 genes in 5-FU drug (both CY P1
A1 variant in Roma population samples PK and PD pathway) and colorectal cancer disease pathways were exami- L. Magyari1,2, R. Szalai1,2, E. Kovesdi1,2, Z. Banfai1,2, B. Duga1,2, P. Matyas1,2, A. Szabo1,2, B. ned in 2 groups of CRC patients. Shrinkage of liver metastasis measured by Melegh1,2; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary, 2Szentagothai RECIST criteria was used as the clinical end point. We identified a total of Research Centre, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary. 9 novel pfSNPs including 4 non-responder-specific pfSNPs with potential functional significance that may be able to distinguish non-responders from responders to 5-FU. These may thus serve as good biomarkers for response Polycythemia vera is a rare bone marrow disorder that leads to an abnor- t Po 1 5 5- .F 3U 6. -M mal raising in the number of red blood cells, although the numbers of white Semiconductor Next Generation Sequencing (Ion Torrent) of the blood cells and platelets are also on high levels. In the background of the di- ABCB1, CY P3
A5, and CY P3
A4 genes in kidney transplanted patients sease a gene mutation called JAK2V617F can be found, but the cause of this treated with Tacrolimus and other possible disorder-causing mutations is undiscovered. Our goal B. Tavira Iglesias1, C. Diaz-Corte2, D. Coronel2, E. Coto Garcia2; was to examine the rs1048943 polymorphism located in CY P1
A1 gene in 90 1Hospital Universitario Central De Asturias , Oviedo, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Roma (Gipsy) with polycythemia vera versus 95 Roma individuals without Central De Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. this disease. Genotypes were determined with real-time-PCR method, SPSS 20.0 statistical program was applied for evaluating the results. The preli- minary data showed 6.11% G allele frequency in Romas with polycythemia Tacrolimus (Tac; FK-506) is an immunosuppressive drug used to avoid the vera, which it was found to be 3.70% in non-affected Roma controls. The rejection of solid organs. Tac has a narrow therapeutic range and a high in- CY P1
A1 1384 A/G mutation has never been analyzed in Roma population terindividual variability in dose-requirements. Previous studies have linked before, but further extended studies are required to test the clinical relevan- common CY P3
A4-3A5 and ABCB1 (MDR-1) polymorphisms to Tac dose re- ce of CY P1
A1 in different populations. quirements (CY P3
A5*3, CY P3
A4*1B, CY P3
A4*22,  C3435
T). Our aim was to  P15
.34-M identify new rare CY P3
A5, CY P3
A4 and ABCB1 variants that could influence Full resequencing of TRAF3I P2
 gene in Mozambican patients with Tac dose through massive parallel sequencing with the Ion Torrent PGM. We SJS/TEN induced by Nevirapine treatment: a pharmacogenetics study created three pools of 75 patients who differed in Tac dosage. The coding C. Ciccacci1, S. Rufini1, G. Liotta2, L. Palombi2, G. Novelli1, P. Borgiani1; 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Genetics Section, University of Rome „Tor exons of the 3 genes were amplified in only two tubes with a custom Ampli- Vergata“, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Biomedicine and Prevention,Epidemiology Section, seq, and the three pool reactions bar-coded, library amplified, and sequen- University of Rome „Tor Vergata“, Rome, Italy. ced in a semiconductor PGM-318 array. These pooling + multiplex approach would facilitate the rapid screening of the three genes at a low cost and with minimum labor requirements. We identified several rare variants in CY P3
A5 Nevirapine (NVP) is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor, wide- and CY P3
A4 ( P405
T in CY P3
A5, and  S195
P and I193S CY P3
A4 new, non re- ly prescribed for type 1 human immunodeficiency virus infection. A small ported). These missense changes could affect protein function. No missense proportion of individuals treated with NVP experience very severe cuta- ABCB1 variants were found. neous adverse events, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic In conclusion, we identified new variants in CY P3
A5 and CY P3
A4 that could epidermal necrolysis (TEN). have an effect on Tac dose requirements. Our NGS-PGM procedure would In the last years TRAF3I P2
 gene variants were associated with susceptibili- help to uncover the variation in these genes at a population scale. ty to psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, systemiEc SluHpuGs e2r0yt1h4em |a MtosIuLsA aNnd, IcTuAta-LY | WWW.ESHG.ORG 303ABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index  P15
.37-S TGF-B1 -509C>T polymorphism and response to montelukast in childhood asthma may help to predict an individual response to certain drugs or the risk of S. Dragicevic1, K. Milosevic2, A. Nikolic1; developing particular diseases. SNPs are found everywhere and those asso- 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, ciated to complex diseases are found preferentially in non-coding regions. Belgrade, Serbia, 2Department of Allergology and Pulmonology, University Children‘s The recognition and the binding of transcription factors (TF) to specific con- Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia. sensus sequences in the genome are crucial for a successful transcriptional regulation in cells. Therefore, we thought to predict and identify potential causal variants that can alter the binding sites of TF using a database in- Transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-B1) is a key mediator in asthma tegrating SNPs and human genome information. To this frame, we applied airway inflammation and remodelling. Leukotriene receptor antagonists are this approach looking for variants altering the Activator Protein 1 (A P1
) among the most prescribed drugs for asthma management. They decrease binding site and we identified 7518 SNPs capturing approximately 4500 the level of inflammation in asthmatic airways and inhibit the expression genes throughout the whole human DNA sequence. In order to screen for of the TGF-B1. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of the candidates genes to be further analysed with functional studies, predicted most common polymorphism in the TGF-B1 gene, -509C>T, on the response results were grouped and analysed with a large number of bioinformatics to montelukast in childhood asthma. Response to montelukast was tested tools. Overall, these findings will give new insights into the value of SNPs in an ex vivo experiment using induced sputum cells from six children (five in A P1
 consensus sequence and it will provide an innovative approach that girls and a boy, age 7-18 years) previously genotyped for TGF-B1 -509C>T potentially yields additional new candidates genes for several disorders.  P16
.01-S polymorphism. The cells isolated from 1mL of induced sputum were incuba- Searching for circulating epigenetic biomarkers of Alzheimer’s ted with and without montelukast (50nmol) and the levels of TGF-B1 were disease measured by a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit. In all P. Tannorella1, A. Stoccoro1, G. Tognoni2, P. Bongioanni2, G. Siciliano2, U. Bonuccelli2, L. six cases after the treatment with montelukast a decreased TGF-B1 levels in Migliore1, F. Coppedè1; sputum were observed. Although the differences were not statistically signi- 1Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and Surgery, ficant, the decrease in TGF-B1 levels was different in carriers of different ge- University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 2Department of Neuroscience, Pisa University Hospital, notypes: CC - 738±107pg/mL, CT - 1439±616pg/mL, and TT - 397±187pg/ Pisa, Italy. mL. Although preliminary, the results of this study indicate that the TGF-B1 gene promoter polymorphisms may influence response to leukotriene re- ceptor antagonists in childhood asthma. This finding should be confirmed Increasing evidence points to a possible contribution of folate metabolism in a larger cohort of patients and the effect of other polymorphisms should in modulating the methylation profile and the expression of disease-related also be investigated. Ex vivo stimulation of sputum cells may be further de- genes in complex diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Impaired fo- veloped into a test for assessment of individual response to asthma medica- late metabolism could result in altered DNA methylation and expression of tions and potentially used as personalized medicine tool. genes involved in AD pathogenesis.  P15
.38-M Indeed, taking into account the inaccessibility of brain DNA samples until Development of personalised therapeutics for lattice corneal death, there is increasing interest in searching for peripheral epigenetic bio- dystrophy type I D. G. Courtney1, E. Maurizi1,2, S. D. Atkinson1,3, M. Nesbit1, J. E. Moore1, C. Moore1,3; markers of the disease. 1School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Coleraine, United Kingdom, 2Centre In this regard we obtained peripheral blood DNA of 25 AD patients, 25 in- for Regenerative Medicine, Stefano Ferrari, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, dividuals with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and 25 matched controls Modena, Italy, 3Dermatology and Genetic Medicine, Colleges of Life Sciences and and searched for changes in DNA methylation of the promoter/first exon of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom. genes involved in DNA methylation: DNMT1, DNMT3B and MTHFR, and in amyloid beta production: BAC E1
 and PSEN1. DNA methylation analyses were performed by means of Methylation Sensi- Personalised medicine offers the prospect of treating genetic conditions tive-High Resolution Melting (MS-HRM) technique. Moreover, we searched using novel molecular methods, and our current research seeks to establish for correlation between the methylation levels of each of the studied genes a viable treatment for Lattice Corneal Dystrophy Type I (LCDI) using muta- and circulating levels of homocysteine, folate and vitamin B12, all involved tion-specific short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs). in one-carbon metabolism the key pathway for DNA methylation reactions. Corneal dystrophies comprise a group of debilitating hereditary disorders. The MTHFR gene showed an inter-individual variability in methylation pro- Most of these conditions are inherited autosomal dominantly and caused files, and we observed a significant inverse correlation between plasma ho- by deleterious missense mutations. To date our group has focused on two mocysteine levels and the methylation status of the MTHFR gene. To further cornKeRaTl 1d2isordeTrGsF; BMIeesmann’s Epithelial Corneal Dystrophy (MECD) and address the link between one-carbon metabolism and DNA methylation Lattice Corneal Dystrophy type I (LCDI), which are caused by mutations in profiles, we are currently assessing global peripheral DNA methylation bio- the and genes, respectively. The primary focus of this research markers by means of the analysis of long interspersed nuclear elements-1 was to develop a lead siRNA targeting the TGFBI-Arg124Cys mutation, the (LINE-1). most common cause of LCDI. The study was supported by the Italian Ministry of Health (GR-2009- A panel of 19 mutation specific siRNAs was assessed to select lead candi- 1606229; F.C. Principal Investigator).  P16
.02-M date siRNAs using a high-throughput dual-luciferase reporter assay and Not all reference gene annotation is created equal pyrosequencing to determine the lead siRNA. Potency and allele specificity A. Frankish1, J. Mudge1, J. M. Gonzalez1, R. Petryszak2, A. Brazma2, J. L. Harrow1; of the lead siRNA was assessed in corneal epithelial cells isolated from a 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institue, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2European Bioinformatics patient with a TGFBI-Arg124Cys mutation, using pyrosequeexn cviinvgo, qRT-PCR Institute (EMBL-EBI), Cambridge, United Kingdom. and a TGFBI ELISA. Treatment with this siRNA resulted in a 44% reduc- tion (p<0.01) of the endogenous Arg124Cys allele in this model of LCDI, and was without effect on the wild-type allele, demonstrating allele Having a good quality geneset is essential for the interpretation of functio- specificity. This research confirms the potential of siRNA therapeutics as a nal genomic, functional transcriptomic, and variation data. The GENCODE personalised medicine approach for the management of heritable TGFBI- geneset represents the reference human gene annotation for the ENCODE associated corneal dystrophies and opens the prospect for the translation of project and is produced by merging manual annotation and automated En- t Ph 1is 5 .t 3e 9ch -Snique to the treatment of other corneal dystrophies. sembl gene predictions with extensive computational and experimental QC Search for potential causal variants in transcription factor binding and validation. Using different reference genesets will inevitably give diver- sites using a database integrating SNPs and human genome gent results and the absence, truncation or misannotation of a gene, exon, or information alternatively spliced (AS) transcript may hinder analysis. We will highlight V. Zazzu, T. Nutile, R. Sorice, M. Aversano, D. Ruggiero, S. Nappo, M. Ciullo; some significant differences between the GENCODE and NCBI Reference Se- Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, Naples, Italy. quence Database (RefSeq) genesets. Specifically, we will discuss divergence in the annotation of alternative splicing (where GENCODE protein-coding loci have a mean of 7.6 AS transcripts while RefSeq only have 2.1), long non- Human genetic variation underlies a majority of phenotypic differences bet- coding RNAs (GENCODE 2.5 fold more genes and 3.7 fold more transcripts), ween individuals, including susceptibility to disease. pseudogenes (GENCODE 10% more loci), genomic coverage of annotated Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many suscepti- exons (GENCODE 1.7 fold greater coverage), degree of manual curation bility loci/SNPs for complex traits and diseases. The greatest challenge in (GENCODE 4.5 fold more manually curated transcripts), experimental va- the ‘post-GWAS’ era is to understand the functional consequences of these lidation, and functionally descriptive biotypes. We will detail the continued l 3oc 0i. 4 When SNPs occur within a gene or in a reguElaStoHryG r 2eg0io1n4, t |h eMy ImLaAyN , eITxtAenLsYio |n W anWd rWefi.nEeSmHenGt o.Of tRheG GENCODE geneset, including the integrati- play a direct role in disease by affecting the gene function. Therefore SNPs on of RNAseq, CAGE, polyAseq, ribosome profiling and epigenomic data, toABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index I L1
R1 I L1
R2 identify novel loci, define 5’ and 3’ transcript boundaries and identify novel quantified using qRT-PCR in a subsample of 37 individuals. Individuals with translation initiation sites. Finally, we will explain our use of RNAseq data to asthma had higher DNA methylation levels at both and gene determine the expression level of all GENCODE transcripts, allowing us to loci in comparison to controls (without history of asthma and/or atopy) present a reduced, but biologically meaningful, set of transcripts including (15.9±4.1 vs 13.0±2.9, IpL=10R.20 2 and 48.6±13.1 vs 40.8±10.8, p=0.04 respec- e P. 1g. o .0n 3ly Sthose that are highly expressed or expressed in a particular tissue. tively). Higher methylation levels wereIL a1lRso2 observed in individuals with 6 - allergic asthma at two I L1
CRp2G sites (48.4±13.4 vs 40.8±10.8, p=0.03 and Jannovar: A Java library for Exome Annotation M. Jäger1,2, K. Wang3, S. Bauer1, D. Smedley4, P. Krawitz1,2,5, P. Robinson1,2,5; 32.0±9.4 vs 25.5±p8.3, p=0.02). Finally, DNA meItLh1yRla1tion lIeLv1eRls2 were 1Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, negatively correlated with mRNA levels in our subsample of 37 parti- Germany, 2Berlin Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Berlin, Germany, 3Zilkha cipants (r=-I0L.14R52, =0.007). This study highlights that and have Neurogenetic Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, a specific epigenetic signature in the context of allergic asthma and that dif- 4Mouse Informatics group, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, ferences in gene expression might be related to DNA methylation level 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. changes.  P16
.06-M Methylation analysis and molecular diagnostics of Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome in 1000 subjects Transcript-based annotation and pedigree analysis are two basic steps in the A. Ibrahim1,2, G. Kirby3, C. Hardy4, R. Dias3, L. Tee3, D. Lim3,4, J. N. Berg2, F. MacDonald4, P. computational analysis of whole-exome sequencing experiments in genetic Nightingale5, E. R. Maher1; diagnostics and disease-gene discovery projects. Here, we present Jannovar, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, a stand-alone Java application as well as a Java library designed to be used in 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical larger software frameworks for exome and genome analysis. Jannovar uses School, Dundee, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalised Medicine, an interval tree to speed up the identification of all transcripts affected by a School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, given variant, and provides HGVS-compliant annotations both for variants University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4West Midlands Regional affecting coding sequences and splice junctions as well as UTR sequences Genetics Service, Birmingham Women‘s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS and non-coding RNA transcripts. Jannovar can also perform family-based Foundation Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, pedigree analysis with VCF files with data from members of a family segre- United Kingdom. gating a Mendelian disorder. Using a desktop computer, Jannovar requires a few seconds to annotate a typical VCF file with exome data.  P16
.04-M Comparison of GWAS and EWAS results to identify loci and genes of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), a congenital overgrowth disor- interest in asthma der with variable expressivity, results from disordered expression and/or A. Madore1, F. Bonachela-Capdevila1,2,3, A. Morin1,4, L. Liang5, P. De Causmaecker2,3, M. function of imprinted genes at chromosome 11p15.5. There are no gene- Lathrop4, W. O. C. M. Cookson6, M. F. Moffatt6, T. Pastinen4, C. Laprise1; rally agreed clinical diagnostic criteria, with molecular studies commonly 1Département des sciences fondamentales, Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, performed to confirm diagnosis. In particular, methylation status analysis at Chicoutimi, QC, Canada, 2CODeS Group, Department of Computer Science, Katholieke two 11p15.5 imprinting control centres (I C1
 and I C2
) detects up to 80% of Universiteit Leuven, Kortrijk, Belgium, 3iMinds-K.U.Leuven Future Health Department, Leuven, Belgium, 4Departments of Human and Medical Genetics, McGill University cases. In order to evaluate the relationship between the clinical presentation and Génome Québec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Departments of of suspected BWS and I C1
/I C2
 methylation abnormalities we reviewed the Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United results of >1000 referrals for diagnostic testing. States, 6National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom. 507/1091 (46.5%) referrals had a positive diagnostic test. The rate of a po- sitive diagnostic test increased with increasing numbers of clinical features. Previously reported genotype-phenotype correlations with paternal unipa- Asthma is a complex trait with a large phenotypic diversity for which more rental disomy, I C1
, and I C2
 epimutation groups were confirmed and poten- than 300 genes have already been associated. In order to better define the tial novel associations detected. Predictive values of previously described heritability of the disease, “omics” technologies were used in several stu- clinical diagnostic criteria were compared, and although there were diffe- dies to explore genetic and epigenetic factors. The large amount of results rences in sensitivity and specificity, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) obtained with these methods comes with complications for identifying analysis demonstrated that these were not optimal in predicting 11p15.5 true genes of interest. This study aims to compare genome-wide associa- methylation abnormalities. Using logistic regression, we identified clinical tion studies (GWASs) and epigenome-wide association studies (EWASs) of features with the best predictive value for a positive methylation abnorma- asthma and related phenotypes (atopy and allergic asthma) using a well- lity. We developed a weighted scoring system (sensitivity - 75.9% and speci- described asthma familial collection in order to identify loci and genes of ficity - 81.8%) to prioritise patients presenting with the most common fea- interest. GWASs and EWASs were performed on DNA samples extracted tures of BWS, and ROC analysis demonstrated superior performance (area from whole blood and EWASs were also performed on DNA extracted from under the curve - 0.85; 95% CI: 0.83-0.87) compared to previous criteria. isolated eosinophils. GWASs were analyzed using a quasi-likelihood score We suggest that this novel tool will facilitate selection of patients with test performed using the MQLS program and EWASs data were compared suspected BWS for routine diagnostic testing and so improve the diagnosis using a Mann-Whitney analysis implemented in the GenomeStudio software of the disorder.  P16
.07-S by Illumina. Analyses allow identifying 2 common loci between EWAS and Genome-wide methylation analysis on epimutated BWS patients for GWAS analyses for asthma phenotype, 5 common loci for atopy and 3 for all- detection of known and novel imprinted loci multilocus defects ergic asthma. Among them 1 principal locus (including 5 CpG sites or more) L. Calzari1, S. Russo1, S. Guzzetti1, D. Gentilini1, M. Bonati1, A. Mussa2, G. Ferrero3, S. Di was identified in asthma (17q21.2) and 2 principal loci in atopy (5q31.1 and Candia4, C. Gervasini5, L. Larizza1,6; 6p22.1). The three loci identified have already been associated with asthma 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Div of Pediatric Endocrinology, Dpt of in previous studies. Analyses are in progress in order to compare common Pediatrics, University of Turin, Torino, Italy, 3Div Pediatric Endocrinology, Dpt of genes associated in both “omics” methods. These results highlight the po- Pediatrics, University of Turin, Torino, Italy, 4Pediatric Unit (S.D.C., G.C.), Ospedale San tential of the combination of “omics” analyses in order to identify potential Raffaele, Milano, Italy, 5Health Sciences Department, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 6Health Sciences Department, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. loci of interest in complex traits.  P16
.05-S DNA methylation signature of I L1
R1 and I L1
R2 genes in asthma V. Gagné-Ouellet1, A. Boucher-Lafleur1, V. Tremblay-Vaillancourt1, S. Guay2,3, J. Chakir4, Loss of imprinting (LOI) through methylation loss (LOM) or gain (GOM) may L. Bouchard2, C. Laprise1; result in imprinting disorders (IDs). Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome is a 1Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Chicoutimi, QC, Canada, 2Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, 3Ecogene-21 et la Clinique Lipidique, Chicoutimi, QC, Canada, paradigmatic ID, which arises from dysregulated expression of imprinted 4Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie, Ste-Foy, QC, Canada. growth regulatory genes at 11p15.5. We pursued a genome-wide methyla- tion study to investigate our cohort of I C2
 hypomethylated BWS patients for the occurrence of Multilocus Methylation Defects (MMD) at imprinted I L1
R We have previously IrLe1pRo2rted an association between interleukin 1 receptor loci. To this purpose we selected from a cohort of 171 patients with clinical ( ) type 1 and 2 polymorphims and asthma and related phenotypes. We presentation in the spectrum of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome carrying have also reported mRNA level differences in lung tissue of asthma- an 11p15.5 epimutation, 18 cases hypomethylated at I C2
: 14 with a com- tic individuals in comparison to controls. According to these results, this plete phenotype, 2 with isolated hemihyperplasia (IH) and two couples of study aims to assess whether DNA methylation levels at bIoLt1hR l1o ci areIL a1lRso2 monozygous twins with discordant phenotype, but concordant for the I C2
 associated with asthma and allergic asthma and correlate with their mRNA defect in blood tissue. The Processing of genomic DNAs from peripheral levels. We measured leucocyte’s DNA methEySlaHtioGn l2ev0e1ls4 a t| MILAanNd, ITAL Y |b Wloo Wd o Wn .a En S I Hnf Gin .i Oum R GHuman Methylation 450K BeadChip Kit Array 3(I 0llu 5- gene loci for 93 individuals using bis-pyrosequencing. mRNA levels were mina)showed that 7/16 (44%) of I C2
 epimutated BWS and 2/2 IH patientsABSTRACTS POSTERS Back to index had multilocus defects. These comprised hypermethylation at GNAS DMRs The ability to detect low-level genetic variants in heterogeneous populati- and hypomethylation at GNAS, PLAG L1
, DIRA S3
, FAM50B and ZNF331 loci, ons of cells is necessary for identifying postzygotic or somatic mutations confirming the view of a network of imprinting deregulated genes. MMD underlying human diseases such as mosaic birth defects involving the skin. were detected in blood and saliva from both affected twin members, but Existing bioinformatics methods for detecting such variations have been complementary pyrosequencing and MS-MLPA analyses showed that me- mainly developed for cancer genomics and are usually based on the analysis thylation defects were absent/attenuated in the DNA from saliva in the unaf- of paired samples. Furthermore, they have limited sensitivity in detecting fected co-twins. This findings will enhance clinical practice and epigenotype certain types of variants such as insertions/deletions. SomatiCaller was de- phenotype correlations. In conclusion 450K genome approach appears a re- veloped to systematically detect low-level variants in next-generation DNA liable technique to profiling the methylation status of all known imprinted sequencing data. It consists in browsing aligned sequence data (BAM files) loci and unravel their recurrent simultaneous deregulation Supported by of pairs or trios (i.e. index case and parents) to systematically identify posi- 2009MBHZPR_003(to LL). tions with candidate variants. Statistical tests are first performed between  P16
.08-M different samples to measure the sample‘s independence of a candidate po- Comprehensive methylation profiling in Beckwith-Wiedemann sition for a given variation. In a second time, allelic ratios from all candida- syndrome and Silver-Russell syndrome B. Lan-Leung1, R. Dias1, J. Bauer2, E. R. Maher1,2; te sites are compared to a series of negative controls by Student‘s t-test to 1University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2University of Cambridge, discriminate true positive variants from probable sequencing or alignment Cambridge, United Kingdom. errors. Applied to targeted deep sequencing of a gene associated with mo- saic overgrowth syndromes (PIK3CA), SomatiCaller led to identification of variants with allelic fractions as low as 0.01. Experiments from trio-based The investigation of human imprinting disorders has provided important exome sequencing data demonstrated its ability to readily detect variants insights into the role of genomic imprinting in normal health and develop- with allelic fractions as low as 0.05. Compared to standard variant callers, ment. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is a congenital overgrowth SomatiCaller showed increased sensitivity for genetic variants present in disorder associated with abnormal function of 11p15.5 imprinted genes. less than 10% of reads. Potential applications of this tool are numerous in The most common cause of BWS is loss of methylation (epimutation) at the the growing field of the genetics of mosaic diseases, both for research and imprinting centre 2 (I C2
/KvDMR1). We and others have found that a sub- m  P1
o 6le .1cu 1l -a Sr diagnosis purposes. group of BWS patients also harbour epimutations at other imprinting cen- An extensive, interactive variant-centered annotation browser tres (ICs) outside of 11p15.5. This multiple epimutation (ME+) phenotype M. Arnold1, J. Raffler1, G. Kastenmüller1, K. Suhre2; has been associated with assisted reproductive technologies births though 1Helmholtz Zentrum München GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Weill Cornell Medical the clinical significance of these additional epimutations has not been clear- College, Doha, Qatar. ly defined. Another human imprinting disorder, Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is also linked to the 11p15.5 imprinted gene cluster but, in contrast to BWS, is characterized by pre- and postnatal growth retardation and, most Genome-wide association studies and, more recently, next-generation se- commonly, epimutations (loss of paternal allele methylation) at I C1
. In or- quencing studies have created a huge amount of genetic associations with der to comprehensively define potential ME+ epigenotypes in BWS and SRS hundreds of common human traits. A still unsolved problem in this context patients we undertook methylation profiling in 67 and 22 patients respec- is the correct annotation of the gene(s) linked to the mostly small effects tively with the Illumina 450k methylation BeadChip. Analysis of methylati- observed for genetic variants. The current catalog of genomic annotations on status at 37 imprinted differentially methylated regions (DMRs) (31 well is multi-layered and highly complex, the annotation of variants on the other characterized known DMRs (kDMRs) and 6 recently reported novel DMRs hand is often conducted using very basic heuristics. We try to even out this (nDMRs) (PMID:24402520)). The most frequently affected non-11p15.5 imbalance by integrating many different genome-wide annotation datasets kDMRs in ME+ BWS patients were on chromosome 1, 6 and 15. In addition, into a user-friendly web-accessible resource. Our collection of tools com- epimutations at nDMRs located on chromosome 8 and 22 were frequent. bines linkage disequilibrium data, genetic associations, gene annotations, Further analysis of the ME+ epigenotype patterns and clinical correlates in expression data and several layers of regulatory annotations. Besides evi- BWS and SRS patients will be presented in detail. dence-based prediction of variant-to-gene projections, our resource provi-  P16
